                  NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                  MONEY: THEORETICAL ANALYSIS
                    OF THE DEMAND FOR MONEY




                      Bennett T. McCallum

                      Marvin S. Goodfriend




                     Working Paper No. 2157




               NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                     1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                        Cambridge, MA 02138
                           February 1987




Prepared as a contribution for The New Palgrave: A Dictionary of
Economic Theory and Doctrine. The first author is indebted to the
National Science Foundation (SES 84-08691) for financial support.
The research reported here is part of the NBER's research program
in Financial Markets and Monetary Economics. Any opinions
expressed are those of the authors and not those of the National
Bureau of Economic Research.
                                                  NBER Working Paper #2157
                                                  February 1987

     Money: Theoretical Analysis of the Demand for Money
                                ABSTRACT


   This   paper, prepared for the New Palgrave, attempts to summarize
an'ent mairtream views corceniing the theory of money demand. A
model Is sketched in which a representative hotsehold is depicted as
seeking to maximize utility over an infinite planting horizon, with each
period's cionswnptlon and leisure appearing as arguments of the utility
ftrction. The household chooses to hold non-interest-bearing money,
even in the presence of assets with positive pectrtiary yields, becatse it
facilitates transactlors and thereby reduzes the amotmt of time and/or
energy required In the process of "shopping', i.e., acquiring goods to be
consumed. Two distinct types of implied rnoney-demard ftnctlons art
derived: a "proper" demand ftnction with arguments exogernus to the
household aM a N     sJoli,4,alarIl relationship that is more similar in
specification to the type of equation that normally appears in the marty—
demand literature.     One section of    the   paper briefly reviews the
historical evolution of ideas pertaining to morey-dernarxl theory, and
suggests that major contributors have imluied Marshall, Hicks, and
Sidrawki. A firal section cxrsiden ongoing controversies concerning
the role of i.rcertainty, the ire of overlapplng-generatiam and cash-in-
advance approaches, and the Interpretation of empirical results
apparently st&gestlve of extremely slow portfolio adjtstments.
     Bemett T. McCallumn               Marvin S. Goodfriend
     Graduate School of                Research Department
     lrxkstrial Mministraticn          Federal Reserve Bank
     Caniegie-Mellon University           of Richmond
     Pittsbrgh,PA 15213                  Richmôr4VA 23261
      (412) 268-2347                      (804) 643-1250
   MONEY: THEORETICAL ANALYSIS OF THE DEMAND FOR MONEY

   In any discussion of the demand for money it is important to be clear
about the concept of money that is being utilized; otherwise,
misunderstandings can arise because of the various possible meanings that
readers could have in mind. Here the term will be taken to refer to an
economy's medium of exchange, that is, to a tangible asset that is generally
accepted in payment for any commodity. Money thus conceived will also
serve as a store of value, of course, but may be of minor importance to the
economy in that capacity. The monetary asset will usually also serve as the
economy's medium of account--i.e., prices will be quoted in terms of
money--since additional accounting costs would be incurred if the unit of
account were a quantity of some asset other than money. The medium-of-
account role is, however, not logically tied to the medium of exchange
(Wicksell, i906; Niehans, i978).
   Throughout much of Western history, most economies have adopted as
their principal medium of exchange a commodity that would be valuable even
if it were not used as money. Recently, however, fiat money--intrinsically
worthless tokens made of paper or some other cheap material--has come to
predominate. Under a commodity money arrangement, the exchange value of
money will depend upon the demand for the monetary commodity in its non-
monetary, as well as its monetary, uses. But in a discussion of money
demand, as distinct from a discussion of the price level, any possible non-
monetary demand for the medium of exchange--which will be absent anyhow
in a flat money system--can be legitimately ignored.
   The quantity of money demanded in any economy--indeed, the
set of assets that have monetary status--will be dependent upon prevailing
institutions, regulations, and technology. Technical progress in the
payments industry will, for instance, tend to alter the quantity of money
demanded for given values of determinants such as income. This dependence
does not, however, imply that the demand for money is a nebulous or
unusable concept, any more than the existence of technical progress and
regulatory change in the transportation industry does so for the demand for
automobiles, in practice, some lack of clarity pertains to the operational
measurement of the money stock, as it does to the stock of automobiles or
other commodities. But in an economy with a well established national
currency, the principle is relatively clear: assets are part of the money
stock if and only if they constitute claims to currency, unrestricted legal
claims that can be promptly and cheaply exercised (at par). This principle
rationalizes the common practice of including demand deposits in the money
stock of the United States, while excluding time deposits and various other
assets.
   The rapid development during the 1960s and 1970s of computer and
telecommunications technologies has led some writers (e.g., Fama, 1980) to
contemplate economies in which virtually all purchases are effected not by
the transfer of a tangible medium of exchange, but by means of signals to an
accounting network--signals that result in appropriate debits and credits to
the wealth accounts of buyers and sellers. If there were literally no medium
of exchange, the wealth accounts being claims to some specified bundle of
commodities, the economy in question would be properly regarded and
analysed as a non-monetary economy--albeit one that avoids the inefficiencies


                                      2
of crude br:er.           by contrast, the accounting network's credits were
claims to quantities of a fiat or commodity medium of exchange, then
individuals' credit balances would appropriately be included as part of the
money stock (McCallurn, 1985).
Basic Principles
      An overview of the basic principles of money demand theory can be
obtained by considering a hypothetical household that seeks at time t to
maximize
(1)      u(cl) + Pu(c÷il÷j) + ju(c+2,it+2) +

where c and         are the household's consumption and leisure during t and
where 8 = i/(i+6), with 6 > 0 the rate of time preference. The within-
period utility ft..nction u(') is taken to be well-behaved so that unique
positive values will be chosen for c and          The household has access to a
productive technology described by a production Function that is homogeneous
of degree one in capital and labor inputs. But for simplicity we assume that
labor is supplied inelastically, so this function can be written as             =
           where     is production during t and kr_i is the stock of capital held
at the end of period t-i. The Function F() is well-behaved, so a unique
positive value of k will be chosen for the upcoming period. Capital is
unconsumed output, so its price is the same as that of the consumption good
and Its rate of return between t and t+1 is f'(k).
      Although this setup explicitly recognizes the existence of only one good, it
Is intended to serve as a simplified representation--one formally justified by
the analysis of Lucas (1980) —of an economy in which the household sells its
specialized output and makes purchases (at constant relative prices) of a

                                          3
large number of distinct consumption goods. Carrying out these purohass
requires shopping time,    which subtracts from leisure:  = -     where
units are chosen so that there is I unit of time per period available for
shopping and leisure together. (If labor were elastically supplied, then labor
time would have to be included In the expression.) In a monetary economy,
however, the amount of shopping time required for a given amount of
consumption will depend negatively upon the quantity of real money balances
held by the household (up to some satiation level). For concreteness, we
assume that
(2) 5 =
where    p(.r)   has   partial derlvtlves 1j   <0. In (2), m = Mt/Fe.
                                               >   0 and ip2
where M is the nominal stock of money held at the end of t and is the
money price of a consumption bundle. (A variant with Mt denoting the start-
of-period money stock will be mentioned below.) The transaction variable is
here specified as      c rather than c +            to   reflect the idea that only a few
distinct capital goods will be utilized, which suggests that the transaction
cost/expenditure ratio will be much lower for capital than for consumption
goods.
   Besides capital and money, there is a third asset available to the
household. This asset Is a nominal bond, I.e., a one-period security that may
be purchased at the price 1 / (1 +R) in period t and redeemed for one unit of
money in t+1. The symbol Bt will be used to denote the number (possibly
negative) of these securities purchased by the household in period t, while
bt = B/Pt.
   In the setting described, the household's budget constraint for period t

                                           4
       be wr:::en as follows:
(3) 1U)                     kt
                                 -
                                     ktl
            -
      +
                       mj + (1+RY1 b -
Here   v Is the real value of lump-sum transfers (net of taxes) from the
government while 7r is the inflation rate, w = (P - Ptj)/Pj. Given the
objective of maximizing (1), fIrst-order conditions necessary for optirnality
of the household's choices include the following, in which       and A are
Lagrangian multipliers associated with the constraints (2) and (3),
respectively:
(4)       ui(cl-s) - 4*t(ctm)         -        =    0
                                          At

(5)       -u2(cl-s) + 4t = 0

(6)                   - A + $A,..1 (t-I-7rt÷ii = 0
(7)       -At + flA+i[f'(kt) ÷ 1     =C

                                                        =
(8)  -At(1+Ri1 + flA+j(1+7r+ji1 0.
These conditions, together with the constraints (2) and (3), determine
current and planned values of                  s,           kt. bt P   and   At for given time
paths of         RtI arid ir (which are exogenous to the household) and the
predetermined values of k..j, mt_j and bj. (There Is also a relevant
transversallty condition, but It can be Ignored for the issues at hand.) Also,
  values can be obtained from = 1-sand, with                            given, P, Mt, and
values are implied by the 7r. rn. and bt sequences.
      The household's optimizing choice of                  can be described in terms of two
distinct concepts of a money demand function. The first of these is a proper


                                                    5
demand function, that is, a relationship giving t: chcse cantity as a
function of variables that are either predetermined or eogencus to the
economic unit in question. In the present context, the money demand function
of that type will be of the fox-rn
(9)    rn
where the variables dated t-f-1, t-i-2,... must be understood as anticipated
values. Now, it will be obvious that this relationship does not closely
resemble those normally described In the literature as "money demand
functions." There Is a second type of relationship implied by the model,
however, that does have such a resemblance. To obtain this second
expression, one can eliminate 'Xj(l +7r j)1          betweenequations (6) and
(8), then eliminate     and finally   from the resultant by using (4) and (5).
These steps yield the following:

(10) -u2(ctl-s)*2(ctmt) =
                -
       [ui(cl-s) u2(c,l-s) *i(c,mt)] [i-(14-Rt11}.
Then 1p(c,m) can be used in place of       and the result is a relationship that
involves qy              and R. Consequently, (iO) can be expressed in the
form
(ii) f(m,cR) = 0
and if the latter is solvable for m one can obtain
(12) Mt/Pt = L(c,R).
Thus the model at hand yields a portfolio-balance relationship between real
money balances demanded, a variable measuring the volume of transactions
conducted, and the nominal interest rate (which reflects the cost of holding



                                       6
money rather than bonds). i. can be shown, moreover, that for reasonable
specifications of the utility and shopping-time functions, L('O will be
increasing in its first argument and decreasing in the second.
   There are, of course, two problems In moving from a demand function (of
either type) for an Individual household to one that pertains to the economy
as a whole. The first of these Involves the usual problem of aggregating
over households that may have different tastes and/or levels of wealth. It is
well-known that the conditions permitting such aggregation are extremely
stringent in the context of any sort of behavioral relation; but for many
theoretical purposes It is sensible to pretend that they are satisfied. The
second problem concerns the existence of economic units other than
households--firms" being the most obvious example. To construct a model
analogous to that above for a firm, one would presumably posit maximization
of the present value of real net receipts, rather than (1), and the constraints
would be different. In particular, the shopping-time function (2) would need
to be replaced with a more general relationship depicting resources used in
conducting traractIons as a function of their volume and the real quantity of
money held.    The transaction measure would not be c for firms or,
therefore, for the economy as a whole. But the general aspects of the
analysis would be similar, so we shall proceed under the presumption that
the crucial issues are adequately represented in a setting that recognizes
only economic units like the 1households" described above.            -
   The   distinction between the proper money-demand function (9) and the
more familiar portfolio-balance relation (i 2) is important In the context of
certain Issues. As an example, consider the Issue of whether wealth or


                                       I
income should appear as a 's:aie variables (Meltzer, 1963).
From the foregoing, it is clear that wealth is an important determinant of
money demand in the sense that kj5            and          are arguments of the
demand function (9). Nevertheless, formulation (12) indicates that there is
no separate role for wealth in a portfolio-balance relation if appropriate
transaction and opportunity-cost variables are Included.
   An issue that naturally arises concerns the foregoing discussion's neglect
of randomness. How would the analysis be affected if it were recognized
that future values of variables cannot possibly be known with certainty? In
answer, let us suppose that the household knows current values           cf a.
relevant variables including l'     and v when making decisions on m and

    but that Its views concerning variables dated t+1, t+2,... are held in the
form of non-degenerate probability distributions. Suppose also that there is
uncertainty in production, so that the marginal product of capital In t+ 1,
f'(kt), is viewed as random. Then the household's problem becomes one of
maximizing the expectation of (1), with u ('S) a Von Neumann-Morgenstern
utility function, given Information available in period t. Consequently, the
first-order conditions (4)- (8) must be replaced with ones that involve
conditional expectations. For example, equation (7) would be replaced with
(7') -A + E{At+i[f'(k) + 1]} = 0
where E() denotes the expectation of the indicated variable conditional upon
known values of P, R,     etc. With this modification, the nature of the
proper demand function becomes much more complex—indeed, for most
specifications no closed form solution analogous to (9) will exist.
Nevertheless, the portfolio balance relation (12) will continue to hold


                                       8
e'actiy as before, for the steps described in its derivation above remain the
same except that it is E[$ X1               that is eliminated between
equations corresponding to (6) and (8). From this result it follows that,
according to our model, the relationship of Mt/Pt to the transaction and
opportunity-cost variables is invariant to changes in the probability
distribution of future variables.
   A second specificational variant that should be mentioned reflects the
assumption that it is money held at the start of a period, not its end, that
facilitates transactions conducted during that period.     If that change in
specification were made and the foregoing analysis repeated, it would be
found that the household's concern in period t would be to have the
appropriate level of real money balances at the start of period t+ 1. The
portfolio balance relation analogous to (12) that would be obtained in the
deterministic case would relate m+1 to c+1 and        where m÷j =

Mt+I/Pt+i with Mt+j reflecting money holdings at the end of period t.
Consequently, Mt+ i/Pt would be related to R1 planned c+1 and Ptdt/Pt+l.
Thus the theory does not work out as cleanly as in the case considered above
even in the absence of randomness, and is complicated further by the
recognition of the latter. The fundamental nature of the relationships are,
however, the same as above.
   Another point deserving of mention is that if labor is supplied
elastically, the portfolio-balance relation analogous to (12) will include the
real wage rate as an additional argument. This has been noted by Karni
(1973) and Dutton and Cramm (1973). More generally, the existence of
other relevant margins of substitution can bring in other variables. If stocks


                                      9
of commodities held      H :L:       effect shopping-time requ:reme:s, fcr
example, the Inflation rate will annear separately in the counterpart of
(i2)--see Feige and Parkin (1971).
   Finally, it must be recognized that the simplicity of the portfolio-balance
relation (12) would be lost if the intertemporal utility function (1) were not
time-separable. If, for example, the function u(c,i) in (1) were replaced
with u(cJ,ft_j) or u(c1,c ,), as has been suggested in the business cycle
literature, then the dynamic aspect of household's choices would be more
complex and a relation like (12)--i.e., one that Includes only
contemporaneous variables--could not be derived.

Historical Development
   The approach to money demand analysis outlined above, which features
intertemporal optimization qhoices by individual economic agents whose
transactions are facilitated by their holdings of money, has evolved gradually
over time. In this section we briefly review that evolution.
   While the earlier literature on the quantity theory of money contained
many. important insights, its emphasis was on the comparison of market
equilibria rather than individual choice--i.e., on "market experiments" rather
than "individual experiments," in the language of Patinkin (1956).
Consequently, there was little explicit consideration of money demand
behavior in pre-1900 writings in the quantity-theory tradition. Indeed, there
was little emphasis on money demand per se even in the classic
contributions of Mill (1848), Wicksell (1906), and Fisher (1911), despite
the clear recognition by those analysts that some particular quantity of real
money holdings would be desired by the inhabitants of an economy trder any


                                       10
specified set of circumstances. Notable exceptions, discussed by Patnkin
(19S6, pp. 386-417), were provided by Wal.ras and Schlesinger.
   In the English language literature, the notion of money demand came
forth more strongly In the "cash balance" approach of Cambridge
economists, an approach that featured analysis organized around the
concepts of money demand and supply.        This organizing principle was
present in the early Cc. 1871) writings of Marshall--see Whitaker (1975,
pp. i65-8)--artd was laid out with great explicitness by Pigou (1917). The
Cambridge approach presumed that the quantity of money demanded would
depend primarily on the volume of transactions to be undertaken, but
emphasized volition on the part of money holders and recognized
(sporadically) that the ratio of real balances to transaction volume would be
affected by forgone "investment income--i.e., interest earnings. In this
regard Cannan (1921), a non-Cambridge economist who was influenced by
Marshall, noted that the quantity of money demanded should be negatively
related to anticipated inflation--an insight previously expressed by
Marshall in his testimony of 1886 for the Royal Commission on the
Depression of Trade and Industry (Marshall, 1926). In addition, Cannan
developed very clearly the point that the relevant concept is the demand for
a stock of money.
   Although the aforementioned theorists developed several important
constituents of a satisfactory money demand theory, none of them
unambiguously cast their explanation in terms of marginal analysis Thus a
significant advance was provided by Lavington (1921, p. 30), in a chapter
entitled "The Demand for Money," who attempted a statement of the


                                      11
margine           tH: must be satisfied for optiniaiity by an individua
who consumes, holds money, and holds interest bearing securities. But
despite the merits of his attempt, Lavington confused--as Patinkin (1956,
p. 418) points out--the subjective sacrifice of permantly adding a dollar to
     balances with that of adding It for only one period. Thus it was left
for Fisher (1930, p. 216) to provide a related but correct statement.
The discussions of both Lavington and Fisher are notable for identifying the
interest rate as a key determinant of the marginal opportunity cost of holding
money.
   In a justly famous article, Hicks (1935) argued persuasively that
progress in the theory of money would require the treatment of money
demand as a problem of individual choice at the margin. Building upon some
insightful but unclear suggestions in Keynes's Treatise on Money (1930),
Hicks investigated an agent's decision concerning the relative amounts of
money and securities to be held at a point in time. He emphasized the need
to explain why individuals willingly hold money when its return is exceeded
by those available from other assets and--following Lavington and Fisher--
concluded that money provides a service yield not offered by other assets.
Hicks also noted that the positive transaction cost of investing in securities
makes It unprofitable to undertake such investments for very short periods.
Besides identifying the key aspects of marginal analysis of money demand,
Hicks (1935) pointed out that an individual's total wealth will influence his
demand for money. All of these points are developed further in Chapters 13
and 19 of Hicks's Value and Capital (1939). The analysis in the latter is,
some misleading statements about the nature of interest notwithstanding,


                                      12
very close to that outlined in the previous section oF this artizT. HicH
not, however, provide formal conditions relating to money demand in his
mathematical appendix.
   The period between 1935 and 1939 witnessed, of course, the publication
of Keynes's General Theory (1936). That work emphasized the importance
for macroeconomic analysis of the interest-sensitivity of money demand--
"liquidity preference," in Keynes's terminology-- and was in that respect, as
in many others, enormotsly influential. Its treatment of money demand 2L
se was   not   highly original, however, in terms of fundamentals. [This
statement ignores some peculiarities resulting from a presumably
inadvertant attribution of' money illusion; on this topic, again see Patinkin
(1956, pp. 173-4).]
   The importance of several items mentioned above--payments practices,
foregone interest, and transaction costs--was explIcitly depicted in the
formal optimization models developed several years later by Baurnol (1952)
arid Tobin (1956). These models, which were sugested by mathematical
Inventory theory, assume the presence of two assets (money and an interest-
bearing security), a fixed cost of making transfers between money and the
security, and a lack of synchronization between (exogenously given) receipt
and expenditure streams. In addition, they assume that all payments are
made with money. Economic units are depicted as choosing the optimal
frequency For money-security transfers so as to maximize interest earnings
net of transaction costs.
   In Baumol's treatment, which ignores Integer constraints on the number
of transactions per period, the Income and interest rate elasticities of real


                                      13
CTE\ demsnd are          and -,   resse::ively.    Thus the model imn.ies
economies of scale" in making transactions. Tobin's (t956) analysis takes
account of integer constraints, by contrast, and thus implies that individuals
respond in a discontinuous fashion to alternative values of the interest rate.
In his model It appears entirely possible for individual economic units to
choose corner solutions in which none of the interest-bearing security is
held. A number of extensions of the Baurnol-Tobin approach have been made
by various authors; for an insightful survey the reader is referred to Barro
and Fischer (1976).
   Miller and Orr (1966) pioneered the Inventory approach to money demand
theory in a stochastic context. Specifically, in their analysis a firm's net
cash inflow is generated as a random walk and the firm chooses a policy to
minimize the sum of transaction and foregone-interest costs. The optimal
decision rule is of the (S,s) type: when money balances reach zero or a
ceiling, 5, the firm makes transactions to return the balance to the level s.
In this setting there are again predicted economies of scale, while the
interest rate elasticity is -3. For extensions the reader is again referred to
Barro and Fischer (1976).
   The various inventory models of money demand possess the desirable
feature of providing an explicit depiction of the source of money's service
yield to an individual holder.    It has been noted, e.g., by Friedman and
Schwartz (1970), that the type of transaction demand described by these
models is unable to account for more than a fraction of the transaction
balances held in actial economies.          Furthermore, their treatment of
expenditure and receipt streams as exogenous is unfortunate and they do not


                                       14
generahze easily to fully dynamic se:ngz.                    c:Ts imply,
however, only that the inventory models should not be in:erDreted too
literally.   In terms of fundamentals they are closely related to the basic
model outlined in the previous section.
   A quite different approach was put forth by Tobin (1958), in a paper that
views the demand for money as arising from a portfolio allocation decision
made under conditions of uncertainty. In the more influential of the paper's
models, the individual wealth-holder must allocate his portfolio between a
riskiess asset, identified as money, and an asset with an uncertain return
whose expected value exceeds that of money. Tobin shows how the optimal
portfolio mix depends, under the assumption of expected utility
maximization, on the individual's degree of risk aversion, his wealth, and
the mean-variance characteristics of the risky asset's return distribution.
The analysis implies a negative interest sensitivity of money demand,
thereby satisfying Tobin's desire to provide an additional rationalization
of Keynes's (1936) liquidity preference hypothesis. The approach has,
however, two shortcomings. First, In actuality money does not have a yield
that is riskiess in real terms, which Is the relevant concept for rational
individuals. Second, and more seriotsly, In many actual economies there
exist assets "that have precisely the same risk characteristics as money and
yield higher returns" (Barro and Fischer, 1976, p. 139). Under such
conditions, the model implies that no money will be held.
    Another influential item from this period was provided by Friedman's
well-known "restatement" of the quantity theory (1956).             In this
paper, as in Tobin's, the principle role of money Is as a form of wealth.


                                          15
Friedman's analysis emphasized margins of substitution between money and
assets other than bonds--e.g., durable consumption goods and equities. The
main contribution of the paper was to help rekindle interest in monetary
analysis from a macroeconomic perspective, however, rather than to advance
the formal theory of money demand.
   A model that may be viewed as a formalization of Hicks's (1935) (1939)
approach was outlined by Sidrauski (1967). The main purpose of Sidrauski's
paper was to study the interaction of inflation and capital accumulation in a
dynamic context, but his analysis gives rise to optimality conditions much
like those of equations (4)-(8) of the present article and thus Implies money
demand functions like (9) and (12).          The main difference between
Sidrauski's model and ours is merely due to our use of the "shopping time"
specification, which was suggested by Saving (1971). That feature makes
real balances an argument of each individual's utility function only
Indirectly, rather than directly, and Indicates the type of phenomenon that
advocates of the direct approach presumably have in mind. Thus Sidrauski's
implied money-demand model is the basis for the one presented above, while
a stochastic version of the latter, being fundamentally similar to inventory
or direct utility-yield specifications, is broadly representative of current
mainstream views.

Ongoing Controversies
   Having outlined the current mainstream approach to money demand
analysis and its evolution, we now turn to matters that continue to be
controversial. The first of these concerns the role of uncertainty. In that
regard, one point has already been developed, i.e., that rate-of-return


                                      18
uncertainty on other assets cannot           to ex:lain why individuals hod
money in economies--such as that of the U.S. --in which there exist very
short-term assets that yield positive interest and are essentially riskless in
nominal terms. But this does not imply that uncertainty is unimportant for
money demand in a more general sense, for there are various ways in which
it can affect the analysis. In the basic model outlined above, uncertainty
appears explicitly only by way of the assumption that households view asset
returns as random. In that case, if money demand and consumption decisions
for a period are made simultaneously then the portfolio balance relation (12)
will be--as shown above--invariant to changes in the return distributions.
But the same is not true for the proper demand function (9).         And the
arguments c and       of (12) will themselves be affected by the extent of
uncertainty, for it will affect households' saving--as well as
portfolio--decisions. The former, of course, impact not only on c but also
on the economy's capital stock and thus, via the equilibrium real return on
capital, on R. In addition, because         is set in nominal terms, its level
will include a risk differential for inflation uncertainty. (Fama and Farber,
1979).
   Furthermore, the invariance of (12) to uncertainty breaks down if money
must be held at the start of a period to yield its transaction services during
that period. In this case, the money demand decision temporally precedes
the related consumption decision so the marginal service yield of money is
random, with moments that depend on the covariance matrix of forecast
errors for consumption and the price level. Thus the extent of uncertainty,
as reflected in this covariance matrix, influences the quantity of real


                                      17
balances demanded in relation to    and plans for
   There is, moreover, another type of uncertainty that is even more
fundamental than rate-of-return randomness. In particular, the existence of
uncertainty regarding exchange opportunities available at an extremely fine
level of temporal and spatial disaggregation--uncertainties regarding the
"double coincidence of wants" in meetings with potential exchange partners--
provides the basic raison d'etre for a medium of exchange. In addition, the
ready verifiability of money enhances the efficiency of the exchange process
by permitting individuals to economize on the production of information when
there is uncertainty about the reputation of potential trading partners.
Thus uncertainty is crucial in explaining why It is that money holdings help
to facilitate transactions--to save "shopping time" in our- formalization. In
this way randomness is critically involved, even when it does not appear
explicitly in the analysis. [Alternative treatments of uncertainty in the
exchange process have been provided by Patinkin (1956), Brunner and
Meltzer (1971), and King and Plosser (1986).]
   An important concern of macroeconomists In recent years has been to
specify models in terms of genuinely structural relationships, i.e., ones that
are invariant to policy changes. This desire has led to Increased emphasis
on explicit analysis of individuals' dynamic optimization problems, with
these expressed in terms of basic taste and technology parameters. Analysis
of that type is especially problematical in the area of money demand,
however, because of the difficulty of specifying rigorously the precise way--
at a "deeper" level than (2), for example--in which money facilitates the
exchange process. One prominent attempt to surmount this difficulty has


                                       18
featured the appuicatior   a oia c[ overlapping-generations 10C models--
i.e., dynamic equilibrium models that emphasize the differing perspectives
on saving of young and old individuals--to a variety of problems in monetary
economics. The particular class of 00 models in question is one in which,
while there is an analytical entity termed "fiat money," the specification
deliberately excludes any shopping-time or related feature that would
represent the transaction-facilitating aspect of mbney. Thus this approach,
developed most prominently in the work of Wallace (1980), tries to
surmount the difficulty of modelling the medium-of-exchange function of
money by simply ignoring it, emphasizing Instead that asset's function as a
store of value.
   Models developed under this 00 approach typically possess highly
distinctive implications, of which three particularly striking examples will
be mentioned. First, if the monetary authority causes the stock of money to
grow at a rate in excess of the economy's rate of output growth, no money
will be demanded and the price level will be infinite. Second, steady-state
equilibria In which money is va4ued will be Pareto optimal if and only if the
growth rate of the money stock is non-positive. Third, open-market changes
in the money stock will have no effect on the price level. It has been shown,
however, that these implications result from the models' neglect of the
medium-of-exchange function. of money.     Specifically, McCallum (1983)
demonstrates that all three implications vanish if this neglect is remedied
by recognition of shopping-time considerations as above. That conclusion
suggests that the class of 00 models under discussion provides a seriously
misleading framework for the analysis of monetary issues. This weakness,


                                      19
  should be added, results not from the generational structure of the
models, but from their overly restrictive application of the principle that
assets are valued solely on the basis of the returns that they yield; in
particular, the models fail to reflect the non-pecuniary return provided by
holdings of the medium of exchange.
   Recognizing this problem but desiring to avoid specifications like (2),
some researchers have been attracted to the use of models Incorporating a
cash-in-advance constraint. [See, e.g., Lucas (1980) and Svensson (i985).]
In these models, it Is assumed that an individual's purchases in any period
cannot exceed the quantity of money brought into that period.       Clearly,
Imposition of this type of constraint gives a medium-of-exchange role to the
model's monetary asset and thereby avoids the problems of the Wallace-style
00 models. Whether it does so In a satisfactory manner is, however, more
doubtful. In particular, the cash-in-advance formulation Implies that start-
of-period money holdings place a strict upper limit on purchases during the
period. This Is a considerably more stringent notion than that implied by
(2), which is that such purchases are possible but Increasingly expensive in
terms of time and/or other resources. Thus the demand for money will
tend to be less sensitive to Interest rate changes with the cash-in-
advance specification than with one that ties consumption and money holdings
together less rigidly. More generally, the cash-in-advance specification can
be viewed as an extreme special case of the shopping-time function
described in (2), In much the same way as a fixed-coefficient production
function is a special case of a more general neoclassical technology. For
some issues, use of the special case specification will be convenient and not


                                      20
                     :st be exerted to avoid in2pc•:Taate applications. :t
seems   en 'eiy r.wa rranted, moreover, to opt for the cash-in-advance
specification in the hope that it will be more nearly structural and less open
to the Lucas critique (1976) than relations such as (2).       Both of these
specificational devices--and probably any that will be analytically tractable
in a macroeconomic context--should be viewed not as literal depictions of
technological or social constraints, but as potentially useful metaphors that
permit the analyst to recognize in a rough way the benefits of monetary
exchange. [On the general topic, see Fischer (1974) .1
   A final controversy that deserves brief mention pertains to an aspect of
money demand theory that has not been formally discussed above, but which
is of considerable importance in practical applications.           Typically,
econometric estimates of money demand functions combine "long-run"
specifications such as (12) with a partial adjustment process that relates
actual money holdings to the implied "long-run" values. Operationally, this
approach often results in a regression equation that includes a lagged value
of the money stock as an explanatory variable.                (Distributed-lag
formulations are analytically similar.) Adoption of the partial adjustment
mechanism is justified by appeal to portfolio adjustment costs.
Specifically, some authors argue that money balances serve as a
"shock absorber" that temporarily accommodates unexpected variations in
income, while others attribute sluggish adjustments to search costs.
   From a theoretical perspective, however, the foregoing interpretation for
the role of lagged money balances (or distributed lags) appears weak. It Is
difficult to believe that tangible adjustment costs are significant, and in

                            -
                                       21
their absence there is ro role for lagged money balances,
such as (12), when    appropriate transaction and opportunity-cost vaniaKeE
are included. Furthermore, typical estimates suggest adjustment speeds
that are too slow to be plausible.
   These points have been stressed by Goodfriend (1985), who offers an
alternative explanation for the relevant empirical findings. A model in
which there is full contemporaneous adjustment of money holdings to
transaction and opportunity-cost variables is shown to imply a positive
coefficient on lagged money when these determinants are positively
autocorrelated and contaminated with measurement error. Under this
interpretation, the lagged variable is devoid of behavioral significance; it
enters the regression only because it helps to explain the dependent variable
in a mongrel equation that mixes together relations pertaining to money-
demand and other aspects of behavior. (This particular conclusion is shared
with the "buffer stock" approach described by Laid ler (1984), which
interprets the conventional regression as a confounding of money-demand
with sluggish price-adjustment behavior.) Furthermore, the measurement
error hypothesis can account for positive autocorrelation of residuals in the
conventional regression and, if measurement errors are serially correlated,
the magnitude of the lagged-money coefficient typically found in practice.




                                      22
                                rctr L\z.\L
                                n r'-r——- —




Barro, R.J., and Fischer, S. (i976). Recent developments in monetary
   theory, Journal of Monetary Economics, April.
Baurnol, W.J. (1952).    The   transactions demand for cash: an inventory
   theoretic approach, Quarterly Journal of Economics, November.
Brunner, K., and Meltzer, A. (1971). The uses of money: money in the
   theory of an exchange economy, American Economic RevIew, December.
Cannan, E. (1921). The application of the theoretical apparatus of supply
   and demand to units of currency, Economic Journal, December.
Dutton, D.S., and Grarnm, W.P. (1973). Transactions costs, the wage rate,
   and the demand for money, American Economic Review, September.
Fama, ES. (1980). Banking in the theory of finance, Journal of Monetary
   Economics, January.
Fama, ES., and Farber, A. (1979). Money, bonds, and foreign exchange,
   American Economic Review, September.
Feige, E., and Par-kin, M. (1971). The optimal qu4lty of money, bonds,
   commodity inventories, and capital, American Economic Review, June.
Fischer, S. (1974). Money and the production function, Economic Inquiry,
   December.

Fisher, I. (1911). The Purchasing Power of Money, New York, Macmillan.
Fisher, I. (1930). The Theory of Interest, New York, Macmillan.
Friedman, M. (1956). The quantity theory of money: a restatement, in
   Studies In the Quantity Theory of Money, edited by M. Friedman,
    Chicago, University of Chicago Press.
Friedman, M., and Schwartz, A.J. (1970). Monetary Statistics of the
   United States, New York, National Bureau of Economic Research.
Goodfriend, M. (1985).       Reinterpreting money demand regressions,
   Carnegie-Rochester Conference Series on Public Policy, Spring.
Hicks, J.R. (1935). A suggestion for simplifying the theory of money,
   Economica, February.
Hicks, J.R. (1939). Value and Capital, London, Oxford University Press.
Karni, E. (1973). The transactions demand for cash: incorporation of the
   value of time into the inventory approach, Journal of Political Economy,
   September-October.

Keynes, J.M. (1930). A Treatise on Money, 2 vols., London, Macmillan.
Keynes, J.M. (1936). The General Theory of Employment, Interest, and
   Money, London, Macmillan.
King, R.G., and Plosser, CA. (1986). Money as a mechanism of exchange,
   Journal of Monetary EconomIcs, January.
Laidler, 0. (1984). The Thuffer stock notion in monetary economics,
   Economic Journal, supplement.
Lavington, F. (1921). The Enilish Capital Market, London, Methuen.
Lucas, R.E., Jr. (1976). Econometric policy evaluation: a critique,
    Carnegie-Rochester Conference Series on Public Policy.
Lucas, R.E., Jr. (1980). Equilibrium in a pure currency economy, In
    Models of Monetary Economies, edited by J.H. Karaken and N. Wallace,
    Minneapolis, Federal Reserve Bank of Minneapolis.
Marshall, A. (1926). Official Papers by Alfred Marshall, edited by J.M.
    Keynes, London, Macmillan.
McCailum, S.T. (1983}.      7He roje of overiapping-eneratic•ns models in
   monetary economics, Carnegje-Rochester Conference Series on Public
   Policy, Spring.
McCallurn, B.T. (1985). Bank deregulation, accounting systems of exchange,
   and the unit of account: a critical review, Carnegie-Rochester
   Conference Series on Public Policy, Autumn.
Meltzer, A.H. (1963). The demand for money: the evidence from the time
   series, Journal of Political Economy, June.
Mill, J.S. (1848). Principles of Political Economy, 2 vols., London,
    John W. Parker.
Miller, M.H., and Orr, 0. (1966). A model of the demand for money by
    firms, Quarterly Journal of Economics, November.
Niehans, J. (1978). The Theory of Money, Baltimore, Johns Hopkins
    University Press.
Patinkin, D. (1956). Money, Interest, and Prices, New York, Harper and
    Row.
Pigou, A.C. (1917). The value of money, Quarterly Journal of Economics,
    November.
Saving, T.R. (1971). Transactions costs and the demand for money,
    American Economic Review, June.
Sidrauski, M. (1967). Rational choice and patterns of growth in a monetary
    economy, American Economic Review, May.
Svensson, L.E.O. (1985). Money and asset prices in a cash-in-advance
    economy, Joirnal of Political Economy, October.
r
Thbin, 3.    (956). The intereE*e.a
       Review of Economics and Statist:s, Auius.
                                                tracsaon demand for cash.


Tobin, .1. (1958). Liquidity preference as behavior toward risk, Review of
       Economic Studies, February.
Wallace, N. (1980). The overlapping generations model of fiat money, in
       Models of Monetary Economies, edited by .LH. Karaken and N. Wallace,
       Minneapolis, Federal Reserve Bank of Minneapolis.
    Whitaker, .LK. (1975). Editor, The Early Economic Writings of Alfred
        Marshall, 1867-1890, 2 vols., New York, Free Press.
    Wicksell, K. (1906). Lectures on Political Economy, vol. 2, translated by
        E. Classen, London, Rout ledge & Kegari Paul, 1935.
