                                NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                    NEOPHILIA RANKING OF SCIENTIFIC JOURNALS

                                          Mikko Packalen
                                          Jay Bhattacharya

                                        Working Paper 21579
                                http://www.nber.org/papers/w21579


                      NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                               1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                 Cambridge, MA 02138
                                    September 2015




We thank Bruce Weinberg, Vetla Torvik, Neil Smalheiser, Partha Bhattacharyya, Walter Schaeffer,
Katy Borner, Robert Kaestner, Donna Ginther, Joel Blit and Joseph De Juan for comments. We also
thank seminar participants at the University of Illinois at Chicago Institute of Government and Public
Affairs, at the Research in Progress Seminar at Stanford Medical School, and at the National Bureau
of Economic Research working group on Invention in an Aging Society for helpful feedback. Finally,
we thank the National Institute of Aging for funding for this research through grant P01-AG039347.
We are solely responsible for the content and errors in the paper. The views expressed herein are those
of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.

© 2015 by Mikko Packalen and Jay Bhattacharya. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to
exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including
© notice, is given to the source.
Neophilia Ranking of Scientific Journals
Mikko Packalen and Jay Bhattacharya
NBER Working Paper No. 21579
September 2015
JEL No. I1,O3,O31

                                                 ABSTRACT

The ranking of scientific journals is important because of the signal it sends to scientists about what
is considered most vital for scientific progress. Existing ranking systems focus on measuring the influence
of a scientific paper (citations)—these rankings do not reward journals for publishing innovative work
that builds on new ideas. We propose an alternative ranking based on the proclivity of journals to publish
papers that build on new ideas, and we implement this ranking via a text-based analysis of all published
biomedical papers dating back to 1946. Our results show that our neophilia ranking is distinct from
citation-based rankings. Prior theoretical work suggests an active role for our neophilia index in science
policy. Absent an explicit incentive to pursue novel science, scientists under-invest in innovative work
because of a coordination problem: for work on a new idea to flourish, many scientists must decide
to adopt it in their work. Rankings that are based purely on influence thus do not provide sufficient
incentives for publishing innovative work. By contrast, adoption of the neophilia index as part of journal-ranking
procedures by funding agencies and university administrators would provide an explicit incentive
for journals to publish innovative work and thus help solve the coordination problem by increasing
scientists’ incentives to pursue innovative work.


Mikko Packalen
University of Waterloo
Department of Economics
200 University Avenue West
Waterloo, ON N2L 3G1
Canada
packalen@uwaterloo.ca

Jay Bhattacharya
117 Encina Commons
CHP/PCOR
Stanford University
Stanford, CA 94305-6019
and NBER
jay@stanford.edu
1.     Introduction
The ranking of scientific journals is important because of the signal it sends to scientists
about what is considered important in science. The top ranked journals by their
editorial policies set standards and often also the agenda for scientific investigation.
Editors make decisions about which papers to send out for review, which referees to ask
for comments, requirements for additional analysis, and of course which papers to
ultimately publish. These decisions work to check on the correctness of submitted
papers, but they also let other scientists, administrators, and funding agencies know
what is considered novel, important, and worthy of study (e.g. Brown 2014; Frey and
Katja 2010; Katerattanakul et al. 2005; Weingart 2005). Highly ranked journals thus exert
considerable influence on the direction that scientific disciplines move, as well as on the
activity of scientists in each field.
Journal rankings are also important because they provide a filter for scientists in the
face of a rapidly growing scientific literature (e.g. Bird 2008). Given the vast volume of
published scientific work, it is impossible for scientists to read and independently
evaluate every publication even in their field. Since time is limited, as the number of
scientific publications grows, the fraction of published papers that it is possible to read
and carefully evaluate shrinks. Journal rankings provide a way to quickly identify those
articles that other scientists in a field are most likely to be familiar with.
Existing rankings of journals (or individual scientists) almost exclusively rely upon
citation counts to determine the pecking order (e.g. Abbott et al. 2010; Adam 2002;
Chapron and Husté 2006; Egghe 2006; Engemann and Wall 2009; Frey and Katja 2010;
Garfield 1972; Hirsch 2005; Moed 2008; Palacios-Huerta and Volij 2004, 2014; Tort et al.
2012). Citations, of course, are a good measure of the influence of any given paper; a
highly cited paper, almost by definition, has influenced many other scientists. While this
reliance on citations is sensible if the goal of a ranking system is to identify the most
influential journals, there is circularity in the logic. As financial rewards and
professional prestige are tied to publishing in highly cited journals, scientists have a
strong incentive to pursue work that has the best chance of being published in highly
cited journals. Often, this entails work that builds upon and emulates other work that
has been published in such journals. Highly cited journals may thus receive a high
number of citations merely because scientists aim to publish in these journals. That a
journal is highly cited need not tell us anything about what kind of science the journal
promotes.
One important reason for why rankings should consider also what kind of science is
being pursued is that both individual scientists and journals face a coordination
problem in moving to a new area of scientific investigation. As new ideas are often raw


                                             1
when they are first born, they need revision and the attention of many scientists for the
ideas to mature (Kuhn 1962; Marshall 1920). Debate among an emerging community of
scientists who build on a new idea is essential both for the idea to mature and for the
idea to gain the attention of other scientists. If only one scientist, or only a few, try out a
new idea in their work, no new area will open up to broader scientific attention (Kuhn
1962). The presence of this coordination problem — that is, the dependence of scientists
on other scientists to productively engage with their work — implies that even if
citations accurately reflect the ex post value of working in a given area, absent specific
incentives that reward novel science, a suboptimal amount of work takes place in novel
areas. Thus, a journal ranking system that rewards only influence will provide too little
incentive for a scientist to work in a new area.1
Reputable journals also face a similar coordination problem; publishing a one-off paper
in a new area is unlikely to generate many cites unless multiple journals publish papers
in that new area. This exacerbates the coordination problem among scientists who are
considering working in a new area, as they need their articles published in reputable
journals to attract the attention of fellow scientists to their new area.2
Citation-based journal rankings thus provide scientists too little incentive to pursue
work that builds on new ideas, and too little incentive for journals to publish work that
builds on new ideas. Hence, the ranking of scientific journals should instead be based at
least partly on things that measure what type of science is being pursued.
In this paper, we construct a new journal ranking that measures to what extent the
articles published by a given journal build on new ideas. Our neophilia-based ranking
is tied directly to an objective of science policy; journals are ranked higher if they
publish articles that explore the scientific frontier. Our index is thus a useful
complement to citation-based rankings — the latter fail to reward journals that promote
innovative science.
To construct our neophilia ranking of journals, we must first select a set of journals to be
ranked. We rank journals in medicine because of the substantive importance of medical

1 A formal model of coordination failure among scientists is provided by Besancenot and Vranceaunu
(2015). Using a global games model (e.g. Carlsson and van Damme 1993; Morris and Shin 2003; Sakovics
and Steiner 2012), they show that when scientists’ beliefs about the usefulness of a new idea differ even a
little, too little novel science takes place in equilibrium.
2Coordination problems among scientists and among journals are not the only reasons for why reliance
on influence-based rankings alone does not provide sufficient incentives for high-impact journals to
publish novel science. First, because disruptive science implies a decrease in citations to past
breakthroughs, journals that have published those past breakthroughs face a disincentive in publishing
disruptive science. Second, editors of high-impact journals are often people whose ideas disruptive
science seeks to challenge.


                                                     2
science, because this focus builds on our existing work (e.g. Packalen and Bhattacharya
2015a), and because of the availability of a large database on publications in medicine
(MEDLINE).
For our corpus of medical research papers, we must first determine which published
papers are built on new ideas and which are built on older ideas. We determine the
ideas that each paper is built upon from its textual content. To find which ideas each
paper builds upon, we take advantage of the availability of a large and well-accepted
thesaurus, the United Medical Language System (“UMLS”). We allow each term in this
thesaurus to represent an idea, broadly interpreted. Hence, to determine which ideas
each paper builds upon, we search each paper for all 5+ million terms that appear in the
UMLS thesaurus. For each paper we then determine the vintage of each term that
appears in it based the paper’s publication year and the year in which the term first
appeared in published biomedical literature. Next, we determine for each paper the age
of the newest term that appears in it. Based on this age of the newest term that appears
in each paper, we then determine for each journal to what degree it publishes
innovative work — papers that mention relatively new terms. This yields us the
neophilia index that we propose in this paper.
One advantage of the UMLS thesaurus is that it reveals which terms are synonyms,
allowing us to treat synonyms as representing the same idea when we construct our
neophilia index. However, we also show that neophilia rankings change very little
when we employ an alternative approach to constructing the neophilia index, an
approach that does not take advantage of the UMLS thesaurus in any way. In this
alternative approach, we construct the neophilia index by indexing all words and word
sequences that appear in each paper rather than only words and word sequences that
appear in the UMLS thesaurus. This sensitivity analysis shows that the neophilia
ranking can be constructed also for areas of science for which no thesaurus is available.
Besides calculating the new ranking for each journal, we examine the relationship
between the neophilia-based measure and the traditional citation-based impact factor
rankings. We find that impact factor ranking and our neophilia index are only weakly
linked, which shows that our index captures a distinct aspect of each journal’s role in
promoting scientific progress.


2.    Methods
In this section we first present the two sets of medical journals to which we apply the
neophilia ranking procedure that we propose in this paper. We then explain how the
neophilia index is constructed for each journal. Next, we discuss our approach for


                                            3
comparing the neophilia ranking against an influence-based ranking. The section
concludes with methods for four sets of sensitivity analyses.


2.1    Journals We Rank
We analyze two sets of medical journals. The first set of journals is the set of 156
journals that are ranked annually by Thomson Reuters (TR) under the category General
and Internal Medicine. Journals in this category are aimed at a general medical audience;
this set does not include field journals — even highly ranked field journals — that are
aimed at practitioners in a particular medical specialty. The use of this set is
advantageous for two reasons. The general nature of these journals implies that the
rankings will be relevant to a large audience. Moreover, reliance on a journal set used by
TR allows us to examine the relationship between our neophilia index and the widely
used citation-based impact factor ranking — a ranking that is published by TR.
While TR lists 156 journals in the General and Internal Medicine category, we calculate the
neophilia index for only 126 journals. This is for several reasons. Four of the 156
journals are not indexed in MEDLINE. Some of the 156 journals are review journals (e.g.
Cochrane Database of Systematic Reviews) whereas we only rank original research articles
(and thereby exclude not just reviews but also editorials, commentaries, etc.). Moreover,
for some journals MEDLINE has little or no information on article abstracts whereas we
only rank articles for which the database includes sufficient textual information.
The second set of journals that we analyze is the set of 119 journals that are listed as
belonging to the Core Clinical Journals category by MEDLINE (this journal set is also
referred to as Abridged Index Medicus). Core Clinical Journals includes both general
medicine journals as well as well-known field journals from different areas of medicine.
This journal set allows us to examine if either journals aimed at the whole profession or
specialized journals play a dominant role in promoting the trying out of new ideas in
medicine.


2.2    Constructing the Neophilia Index for a Journal
The neophilia index that we propose in this paper measures to what extent articles
published in a given journal build on new ideas; the index reflects a journal’s
propensity to publish innovative articles that try out new ideas. We construct this index




                                             4
based on the textual content of original research articles that appear in a journal.3
We determine the textual content of a journal from the MEDLINE database. MEDLINE
is a comprehensive database of 20+ million biomedical scientific publications.
Comprehensive coverage of this database begins in 1946. For articles published before
1975 the textual information generally includes the title but not the abstract of each
article. For articles published since 1975 the data generally include both the title and the
abstract of each article. For this reason, in our baseline specification we calculate the
neophilia index for a journal based on articles published in it during 1980-2013.
To determine which ideas each paper in MEDLINE builds upon we use this database in
conjunction with the United Medical Language System (UMLS) metathesaurus. The
UMLS database is a comprehensive and widely used medical thesaurus that consists of
over 5 million different terms (e.g. Chen et al. 2007; Xu et al. 2010). The UMLS database
is referred to as a metathesaurus because it links the terms mentioned in over 100
separate medical vocabularies. Each term in the UMLS database is linked to one or
more of 127 categories of terms. Further below we present the name of each of these
categories and for each category a plethora of examples of terms in the category.
An additional curated feature of the UMLS metathesaurus is that terms that are
considered synonyms are linked to one another.4 This feature enables us to treat terms
that are synonyms as representing the same idea. We will thus avoid the mistake of
assigning a high neophilia ranking to a journal that merely prefers to publish articles
that use novel terminology for seasoned ideas.
The construction of the neophilia index for a journal proceeds in four steps. In steps 1-3
we treat original research articles published in any journal the same; only in step 4 do
we focus the analysis on the two journal sets mentioned in section 2.1.
Step 1. Determine when each term was new. For each term in the UMLS thesaurus, we first


3 An alternate approach to ours might measure the vintage of ideas on which a paper is built by the
vintage of the publications that the paper cites. The main disadvantage of this approach is that a citation
is an ambiguous reference. Citations are sometimes signposts for a bundle of ideas that have appeared in
a literature over a long period of time, rather than a pointer to a particular idea in a paper. Thus, it is
problematic to infer that a paper builds on a novel idea simply because it cites recent papers.
Additionally, a citation may instead reflect similarity in the aims of the citing and cited papers, rather
than a citation to any particular idea. To the extent that this is the case, a high propensity to cite recent
articles in a journal would merely be a reflection of publishing papers in areas with many similar papers
rather than a reflection of the authors’ love of trying out new ideas. Citation-based indices are thus best
viewed as measuring a journal’s influence — useful for some purposes — and complementary to the
neophilia-based approach we outline in this paper.
4In UMLS, terms that are synonyms are mapped to one “concept ID”. There are 2 million concept IDs
and 5 million terms. Thus, each UMLS term has approximately 1.5 synonyms on average.


                                                      5
determine the earliest publication year among all those articles in the MEDLINE
database that mention the term (we search all 20+ million MEDLINE articles for each
term). For terms that have no synonyms in the UMLS metathesaurus, we refer to this
year of first appearance in MEDLINE as the term’s cohort year. For a term that has
synonyms, we find the earliest year in which either the term itself or any of its
synonyms appeared in MEDLINE and then assign that year as the cohort year of the
term. Thus, all terms that are considered synonyms receive the same cohort year.
Determining the cohort year of each term allows us to determine in the next steps which
papers mention terms that are relatively new.
Step 2. Determine age of newest term mentioned in each article. For each original research
paper in MEDLINE we then index which of the 5+ million terms in the UMLS database
appear in the article. Having found which UMLS terms appear in each article, we
determine the age of each such UMLS term by calculating the difference between the
publication year of the MEDLINE article in question and the cohort year of the UMLS
term. Next, we determine the identity and age of the newest terms mentioned in each
paper (here we consider all terms in cohorts 1961-2013). This concludes Step 2.
Before proceeding to present Step 3, we now pause to show lists of example terms in
each category. For the sake of presenting these lists and for the sake of several
sensitivity analyses to be discussed further below (section 2.4), we have grouped each of
UMLS’s 127 categories for terms to 8 category groups that we constructed (the number
in parenthesis is the number of UMLS categories we assigned to the group): Clinical
(21), Anatomy (8), Drug (4), Research Tools (3), Basic Science I (11), Basic Science II (31),
Miscellaneous I (27), and Miscellaneous II (22). We constructed two basic science groups
merely to limit the size of each list; the first basic science category includes processes
and functions, the other everything else. The latter of the two “miscellaneous” groups
includes many terms that one may argue do not represent idea inputs to scientific work
in the traditional sense; in a sensitivity analysis we exclude from the analysis the terms
in this category group.
By clicking on one of the following 8 links the reader can open an embedded document
that shows example terms for each UMLS category in a given category group. The
terms listed for decade in each category group are those terms that are the most often
the newest UMLS term for some paper in the MEDLINE database. The purpose of this
popularity ranking is merely expositional.5 In constructing the neophilia index we treat


5 The popularity ranking allows us to limit the size of the embedded files (there are 449,783 UMLS terms
in cohorts 1961-2013 that are at least once the newest term in a MEDLINE paper published during
1971-2013). Focus on less popular terms would obviously put readers not working in those few research
areas where such terms are used at a considerable disadvantage.


                                                    6
all UMLS terms the same irrespective of how many times they are mentioned in the
MEDLINE database and how many times they are the newest term for some paper.

[The links do not access the internet; they open inside Abobe Acrobat and may not work
insider a browser; the documents are also available on the first author’s homepage.]

List 1. Clinical (click here to open an embedded PDF document)

List 2. Anatomy (click here to open an embedded PDF document)

List 3. Drug (click here to open an embedded PDF document)

List 4. Research Tool (click here to open an embedded PDF document)

List 5. Basic Science I (click here to open an embedded PDF document)

List 6. Basic Science II (click here to open an embedded PDF document)

List 7. Miscellaneous I (click here to open an embedded PDF document)

List 8. Miscellaneous II (click here to open an embedded PDF document)

We hope that browsing these lists makes two issues evident to the reader — at least to a
reader with some familiarity with changes in biomedical science in the last 40 years.
First, the terms captured by our approach represent ideas that have served as inputs to
biomedical science in recent decades. Second, the cohort year for most terms is a
reasonable reflection of the time period when the idea represented by the term was a
new idea as an input to biomedical scientific work.
Step 3. Determining which papers mention relatively new terms. Having determine the age of
the newest UMLS term that appear in each article, we next determine which articles
mention relatively new terms. To achieve this, we first order all papers published in any
given year based on the age of the newest UMLS term that mention in it (as mentioned
above, the analysis is limited to all original research papers — we exclude editorials,
reviews, etc. from the analysis). Using this ordering we then construct a dummy
variable Top 20% by Age of Newest Idea Input that is 1 for papers that are in the top 20%
based on the age of the newest term that appears in them and 0 for all other papers.
Thus, this dummy variable is 1 for papers that mention one or more relatively new
terms and 0 for papers that only mention older terms.
In our baseline specification the comparison group for each article is very broad when
the Top 20% by Age of Newest Idea Input dummy variable is constructed: the comparison
group is all other articles published in the same year. However, in sensitivity analyses




                                            7
we employ much narrower comparison groups. Specifically, in these sensitivity
analyses we compare articles to other articles published in the same research area in the
same year (section 2.4.3). We selected the 20% cutoff to allow for such very strict
comparison sets in the sensitivity analyses.6 In our related previous work (Packalen and
Bhattacharya 2015a) we have not found any meaningful differences owing to different
cutoff percentiles.
Step 4. Constructing the neophilia index for a journal. Having constructed for each article
the dummy variable Top 20% by Age of Newest Idea Input, the variable that captures
whether the paper mentions a new term, we calculate the average value of this variable
for each journal during the time period under consideration.7 Next, we perform a
normalization: we divide these journal-specific average values by the average value of
the dummy variable Top 20% by Age of Newest Idea Input for all journals in the journal
set General and Internal Medicine. The resulting variable is our journal-specific neophilia
index. Based on this index, we determine the neophilia ranking of each journal in a
given journal set.
The neophilia index is between 0 and 1 for journals that promote the trying out of new
ideas less than the average article in the journal set General and Internal Medicine. For
example, a neophilia index of 0.75 for a journal implies that articles in that journal
mention a relatively new idea 25% less often than the average article in this journal set.
The neophilia index is greater than 1 for journals that promote the trying out of new
ideas more than the average article published in the journal set General and Internal
Medicine. For example, a neophilia index of 1.5 for a journal implies that articles in that
journal mention a relatively new idea 50% more often than the average article published
in this journal set.


2.3     Comparison of a Neophilia Index and Citation Ranking
To compare our neophilia index against citation based journal rankings, we make use of
the impact factor rankings published by TR for the year 2013 for journals in the journal
set General and Internal Medicine. Analysis of the relationship between our neophilia
index and the citation ranking reveals whether our neophilia index captures an aspect

6A 20% cutoff means the comparison set can be as small as 5 articles. A 1% cutoff would mean that the
comparison set can be as small as 100 articles. When there are fewer than 5 articles in a comparison
group, which only occurs in our sensitivity analyses, we assign the top 20% status to the article at the top
of “age of the newest term” ordering.
7 In our baseline specification this time period is 1980-2013. We weight observations for each decade so
that the total weight of observations for any given decade is the same as the total weight of observations
is for any other decade.


                                                     8
of scientific progress that is distinct from features of scientific progress that are captured
by citation based measures. If a journal with a higher citation ranking than another
journal always has also a higher neophilia ranking than the other journal, the neophilia
index would be of little value. On the other hand, the neophilia index does have value
as an input to science policy if the relationship between the neophilia index and impact
factor rankings is not one-to-one.


2.4     Sensitivity Analyses
We perform four sets of sensitivity analyses.


2.4.1   Sensitivity Analysis I: Time Periods
In our baseline specification we calculate the neophilia index of a journal based on the
8+ million original research articles published during 1980-2013 (for our MEDLINE data
the year 2013 is the last year of comprehensive coverage). To examine how stable the
neophilia index is over time, we also calculate the index separately for four time
periods: 1980s, 1990s, 2000s, and 2010-2013.


2.4.2   Sensitivity Analysis II: Subsets of UMLS Terms
In our baseline specification we construct the neophilia index based on all terms in the
UMLS thesaurus. In one set of sensitivity analyses we calculate the neophilia index
based on narrower sets of UMLS terms.
First, we calculate the neophilia index after excluding mentions of terms in the category
group “Miscellaneous II”. This allows us to examine if the neophilia ranking is robust to
excluding terms which may not reflect traditional idea inputs to scientific work.
Second, we calculate the neophilia index after excluding mentions of terms in the
category groups “Miscellaneous II” and “Drug”. This allows us to examine to what
extent our baseline neophilia ranking is driven by research on novel pharmaceutical
agents.
Third, we calculate the neophilia index by only including in the analysis terms in the
category groups “Clinical” and “Drug”. This allows us to examine how different the
neophilia rankings would be for a decision maker that is only interested in advancing
applied clinical knowledge.
Thus, in each of these sensitivity analyses, we exclude from the analysis terms from
some UMLS categories. However, because in some UMLS terms are appear in multiple


                                              9
categories, some terms that appear in the excluded categories will still be included in
the analysis — provided they also appear in one or more of the still included categories.


2.4.3   Sensitivity Analysis III: Narrower Comparison Groups
In our baseline specification we construct the neophilia index by comparing each article
to all articles published in the same year. In one set of sensitivity analyses we address
the fact that some journals may choose to publish articles that are written on topics that
are from a field where scientists are more inclined to try out new ideas but may at the
same time be less willing to publish articles that use novel terms given the standards of
the field.
Specifically, in these sensitivity analyses, we no longer compare a publication to all
publications published in the same year when we determine a publication’s top 20%
status based on the age of the newest term mentioned in it. Instead, we compare the
publication to other publications published in the same research area in the same year
when we determine a publication’s top 20% status.
For these analyses, we follow our earlier work (Packalen and Bhattacharya 2015a) and
determine research areas based on the 6-digit Medical Subject Heading (MeSH) codes
by which each MEDLINE publication indexed. MeSH is a controlled medical
vocabulary of over 27,000 terms. MeSH terms and corresponding codes are affixed to
each publication by professional coders with a biomedical degree. We consider papers
marked with the same MeSH codes to be in the same research area. In one analysis, we
construct the research areas based on the MeSH Disease terms mentioned in each article;
for our purposes these terms serve as a proxy for clinical research areas In one analysis,
we construct the research areas based on the MeSH Phenomena and Processes terms
mentioned in each article; for our purposes these terms serve as a proxy for basic
research areas.
Having determined the comparison group (based on research area and year of
publication) for each publication, we determine which papers in that comparison group
are in the top 20% based on the age of the newest term mentioned in them. This dummy
variable is then used to construct the neophilia index (analogously to the baseline
specification).


2.4.4   Sensitivity Analysis IV: N-Gram Approach
In our baseline specification, we determine the ideas that each paper builds upon based
on the vintage of any UMLS terms that appear in it. In one sensitivity analysis, we


                                            10
instead follow our earlier work (Packalen and Bhattacharya 2015abc) and determine the
ideas that each paper builds upon based the vintage of words and 2- and 3- word
sequences that appear in it.
In this alternative approach (“n-gram approach”) we first index for each publication all
words and word sequences that appear in it. For all such “concepts” that appear in
MEDLINE, we then determine the cohort year of each such concept as the earliest
publication year among papers that mention the concept in the MEDLINE database.
For each concept cohort we then determine which 100 concepts in the cohort are the
most popular concepts in the cohort. Popularity of each concept is determined based on
the number of publications in which it has appeared since. For each cohort year during
1970-2013, we then cull through the list of the top 100 most popular concepts in the
cohort and exclude concepts that likely do not represent idea inputs in the traditional
sense. The remaining top 100 concepts for each cohort are then used to determine the
vintage of idea inputs in any given publication — in the exact the same way that we
employ the UMLS thesaurus in the baseline specification.
The neophilia index for a journal is then calculated based on the vintage of the newest
idea input in each paper. The only difference to the baseline specification is again that
the curated top 100 concept lists — one list for each concept cohort — are used in place
of the terms that make up the UMLS thesaurus.
One advantage of constructing the neophilia index using the n-gram approach is that it
does not depend on the availability of a thesaurus, which may not not exist for all fields.
One potential disadvantage of the n-gram approach — relative to the baseline
specification which relies on the UMLS thesaurus — is that the n-gram approach may
assign a different cohort year to two words that are synonyms. To the extent that this
occurs, in the present context it would imply that journals that prefer using newer
terminology for old ideas receive higher neophilia scores even though the work
published in these journals is not particularly innovative in any way that genuinely
advances science.


3.     Results
Our results consist of four sets of results: neophilia rankings for 10 highly cited journals
in the General and Internal Medicine journal set (Table 1), neophilia rankings for all
journals in the same journal set (Table 2), a scatterplot and a regression line for the
relationship between the neophilia index and the citation-based impact factor rankings
for the same journal set (Figure 1), and neophilia rankings for the journal set Core
Clinical Journals (Table 3). In each table, columns 1d and 1a, respectively, show the


                                             11
neophilia index and the corresponding neophilia ranking for the baseline specification.
Column 1b shows the journal name (MEDLINE abbreviation) and column 1c shows the
number of original research articles published during 1980-2013 based on which the
neophilia index shown in column 1d was calculated. Columns 2-5 show the results for
the four sets of sensitivity analyses. Entries in each table are color coded, with reddish
hues indicating a high propensity to publish articles that mention novel terms relative
to the average paper and blue indicating the lowest propensity.
We next discuss each of these results in turn.
Table 1 shows the neophilia ranking for 10 highly cited general and internal medicine
journals. To construct this table, we calculated the neophilia index for the 10 most cited
journals that are both ranked by TR in the General and Internal Medicine journal category
and for which data is available in MEDLINE to construct the neophilia index. The
highly cited status is determined based on TR impact factors in 2013.8 These 10 journals
are arguably some of the most prestigious English language medical journals.
Among these 10 highly cited medical journals, the New England Journal of Medicine (N
Engl J Med) ranks at the top of our neophilia index. The number 1.81 in the top row of
column 1d indicates that over the period 1980 to 2013, the New England Journal of
Medicine was 81% more likely to publish articles that mention novel terms compared to
the average article published in the General and Internal Medicine journal set. By contrast,
out of these 10 journals, the British Medical Journal (BMJ) was the least likely to publish
articles that mention new terms during this period.
Overall, several features stand out from the results reported in Table 1.
First, these highly cited journals vary considerably in their propensity to publish articles
that try out new ideas. For the two journals with the highest neophilia indices in
column 1d — the New England Journal of Medicine and BMC Medicine (BMC Med)— the
neophilia index is more than twice as large as the neophilia index is for either of the two
journals with the lowest neophilia index in column 1d— the British Medical Journal and
the Canadian Medical Association Journal (CMAJ). Prestigious high-influence journals are
not equal in terms of their ability to reward innovative science.
Second, while 8 out of the 10 prestigious journals have a higher than average propensity
to publish articles that try out new ideas (that is, for 8 journals in Table 1 the neophilia
index in column 1d is above 1.0), at the same time 2 out of these 10 prestigious journals

8 Two top 12 journals in the TR impact factor rankings are excluded from our analysis. Cochrane Database
of Systematic Reviews is excluded because it does not publish sufficiently many original research articles —
the focus of the journal is on reviews. Journal of Cachexia, Sarcopenia, and Muscle is excluded because
MEDLINE does not have sufficient textual information on this journal. Accordingly, the 10 highly cited
journals in Table 1 are among the top 12 most cited journals in the General and Internal Medicine category.


                                                    12
have a lower than average propensity to publish articles that try out new ideas (the
British Medical Journal and the Canadian Medical Association Journal). Being a prestigious
high-influence journal does not automatically imply that the journal encourages
innovative science.
Third, for most of these journals the neophilia index and the corresponding neophilia
ranking remain relatively stable over time. This is shown by the time-period specific
neophilia indices reported in columns 2a-2d of Table 1. That said, some changes over
time are apparent. For instance, the neophilia index for the New England Journal of
Medicine has increased substantially from 1980s to 2010s (from 1.54 to 2.06). On the other
hand, for Annals of Internal Medicine (Ann Intern Med) the neophilia index has changed
from well-above average to merely average (from 1.81 to 1.04), and the neophilia indices
for the British Medical Journal and the Canadian Medical Association Journal have
plummeted from average to well-below average (from 1.01 to 0.70, and from 0.88 to
0.47, respectively). It is also interesting to note that one relatively new journal, BMC
Medicine, fares so well in the rankings, but another, PLoS Medicine, appears to be
struggling in recent years after initially succeeding in publishing innovative work.
Fourth, for most journals the neophilia index and the corresponding neophilia ranking
remain robust to the other sensitivity analyses that are reported in columns 3a-3c, 4a-4b,
and 5 of Table 1. The neophilia indices reported in columns 3a-3c rely on different
subsets of UMLS terms, such as the set that excludes novel pharmaceutical terms
(column 3b). The neophilia indices reported in columns 4a and 4b in turn control for the
propensity to publish in hot clinical research areas or in hot basic science areas,
respectively. While these adjustments have small effects on the relative rankings of these
top 10 journals in our neophilia index, they do not have a large effect. This consistency
with our main results is not surprising given that these general interest journals tend to
publish papers from a broad set of areas, not just drug trials or particular hot clinical or
basic science fields. Finally, the neophilia indices reported in column 5 show that the
rankings are relatively robust to using the alternative n-gram based approach in place of
the UMLS thesaurus approach used in the baseline specification.
We now turn our attention to Table 2, which lists the neophilia index and the
corresponding ranking for all 126 journals in the General and Internal Medicine category
(for 126 out of 156 journals in this category enough data is available in MEDLINE to
construct the neophilia index). We have indicated in bold text those journals which are
also present in Table 1 (the table on 10 highly cited journals). The top ranked journals in
Table 2 are Current Medical Research and Opinion, the American Journal of Chinese Medicine,
and Translational Research, none of which rank among the top 10 based on citations. This
indicates that our neophilia rankings and citations-based impact factor rankings capture


                                            13
different aspects of science. The fact that journals Translational Research and Journal of
Investigative Medicine are highly ranked in our neophilia rankings (3rd and 13th,
respectively) is reassuring because these journals strive to promote the very thing that
our measure seeks to capture — innovative science that builds on new ideas (the
journals aim to translate new ideas in ways that benefit patient health).
Columns 2a-2d of Table 2 show that also for this broad set of journals the neophilia
index remains relatively stable over time. This persistence in journal neophilia indices
over time implies that the neophilia rankings of these journals during any given time
period are not random; to a significant degree the rankings are the result of variations in
editorial policies across journals.
Columns 3a-3c of Table 2 in turn show that with some exceptions the neophilia rankings
are also relatively independent of the set of UMLS terms that are included in the
analysis. One such exception concerns the exclusion of terms in the “Drug” category
from the analysis (column 3b): unsurprisingly this dramatically lowers the neophilia
index for journals that are mainly focused on research on effects of new pharmaceutical
agents — these journals include Current Medical Research and Opinion and International
Journal of Clinical Practice (rows 1 and 8, respectively).
Columns 4a-4d of Table 2 show that the neophilia rankings are relatively stable to
selecting narrower comparison groups in determining which articles build on new
ideas. Finally, column 5 shows that the neophilia rankings remain relatively robust to
constructing the neophilia index based on appearance of new n-grams rather than based
on the appearance of new UMLS terms.
We now turn to the results shown in Figure 1 on the link between our neophilia index
and the traditional citation-based impact factor rankings. The scatterplot shows for each
journal in the General and Internal Medicine category the journal’s citation based impact
factor ranking in 2013 (horizontal axis) against the journal’s neophilia index for the
1980-2013 period (vertical axis). The figure also shows the least squares regression line
for these observations.
The scatterplot and the regression line shown in Figure 1 demonstrate that more cited
journals generally have also a higher neophilia index (p < 0.01). There is, however,
considerable variation around this regression line, with some less cited journals faring
very well on our neophilia index, and some highly cited journals being relatively averse
to publishing papers that build on fresh ideas. Our earlier results showing the strong
persistence in the neophilia index over time (Table 1 and Table 2) implies that to a
significant degree this variation around the regression line reflects genuine, persistent,
differences in editorial policies across journals. That the relationship between the



                                             14
citation ranking and our neophilia index is not monotonic implies that the neophilia
index captures an aspect of scientific progress that is not captured by citations. The
neophilia index proposed here thus has value as an additional input to science policy.
We next turn our attention to results in Table 3, which reports neophilia rankings for the
journal set Core Clinical Journals. This set includes both general medical journals and
specialized field journals.9 We have again indicated in bold text those journals which are
also present in Table 1.
The most neophilic journals on this list are Blood, the Journal of Immunology, and Medical
Letters on Drugs and Therapeutics, showing that no field dominates over others in terms
of the propensity to try out new ideas. The same observation is supported by scrolling
further down the list; no field appears to have an obvious domination over others in
terms of having more journals closer to the top.
In the rankings of Table 3, there are 17 specialized journals above the most neophilic
general medical journal (the New England Journal of Medicine). And there are even many
more specialized journals above another highly cited general medical journal (the
British Medical Journal, ranked 88th). These observations indicate that, while general
medical journals are usually viewed as more prestigious, field journals too play an
important role in promoting the trying out of new ideas in medicine. Neither field
journals nor general medical journals appear to have a monopoly in this regard.
The results across the different columns of Table 3 follow the pattern that is familiar
from Tables 1 and 2. First, there is a lot of variation in the neophilia index across
journals. Second, the neophilia index is relatively stable over time, though some
variation exists. The journal Hospital Practice (row 83) is an extreme outlier in this
regard. But the sudden change its neophilia index is not unexpected as it published no
articles during 2002-2008; when the journal was brought back to life it likely followed
very different editorial practices compared to its previous incarnation. Third, the
neophilia index is generally robust to employing a different set of UMLS terms in the
analysis. One exception to this robustness is that excluding terms in the “Drug”
category group leads journals such as Medical Letters on Drugs and Therapeutics and
Anesthesia and Analgesia (rows 3 and 33, respectively) to fall quite dramatically in the
rankings. Because these journals focus on research on new drug compounds, this is not
a surprising finding. In fact, it again acts as one validity test for our methods. Fourth,
the neophilia index is relatively insensitive to choosing narrower comparison sets and

9In Table 3 each neophilia index is again normalized relative to journals in the General and Internal
Medicine journal set. This way, the neophilia index does not change from one table to the next for journals
that appear also in Table 1 or Table 2. In principle, of course, in constructing a neophilia index the
normalization can be performed relative to any set of of journals.


                                                    15
to employing the n-gram approach over the UMLS thesaurus approach.


4.     Conclusion
For science to advance, it is important that journals publish articles that are at the
frontier of science. At the same time, papers that are at the frontier — papers that
explore new ideas or new areas within a field — are sometimes difficult to get
published because there is no existing community of scholars to evaluate the idea and
further develop it. This coordination problem leads to a suboptimal rate of publishing at
the frontier. Journals can play an important role in combatting this problem by
publishing papers that try out new ideas, but will be less willing to do so if they are not
rewarded for it. A citation-based ranking system alone will not provide appropriate
incentives because it is tied only to the influence that papers published in a journal has,
rather than directly to the innovativeness of the published papers. By contrast, our
neophilia-based index captures the proximity of each journal to the scientific frontier.
Our primary finding is that, on average, highly cited prestige journals in biomedicine
actually do a good job in promoting innovative science. This is surprising in one regard.
One might think that lower ranked journals would attempt to distinguish themselves
by seeking novelty. One possible explanation for this surprising finding is our focus on
medicine, rather than other scientific disciplines. By focusing on medicine, we have
selected the area of science that may be most disciplined by the practical usefulness of
its findings. This discipline may lead prestige journals to be less likely influenced by
citation-oriented rankings, and to seek out innovative work that will affect the
treatment of patients. Hence, when our neophilia index is exported to other fields, we
might expect different results. Furthermore, we should be careful about what to expect
given the nature of the coordination problem. This problem causes journals to publish
less innovative science than they would absent the problem — it does not necessarily
make less influential journals more likely to publish innovative work.
Nevertheless, knowing the impact factor alone does not automatically predict the
position in the neophilia-based index; there are high impact journals with a low
neophilia score and there are lower impact journals with a high neophilia score. While
the link between citation-based rankings and the neophilia index is positive, it is not a
one-to-one relationship. For example, we found that some prestigious highly cited
medical journals have even a below average neophilia score.
One implication of these results is that focusing on impact factor alone does not provide
appropriate incentives for journals to publish innovative work in biomedicine.
Furthermore, lower ranked journals appear to play an important role in science by


                                            16
serving as an outlet for innovative work that — for whatever reason — is not poised to
draw many citations from others in a field. A complementary finding of ours was that
neither general medical journals nor specialized field journals dominate over one
another in terms of publishing innovative work; both types of journals play an
important role in advancing science in this regard.
One possible critique of taking the neophilia index seriously is that it might lead a
journal to publish work that builds on new ideas simply for the sake of improving its
neophilia score, even when the editors do not view the innovative work as particularly
important in the field. Propagating the neophilia index, under this reasoning, may
create incentives on the part of journals to game the index by distorting publication
decisions in order to improve a journal’s position. In our view, this is a benefit arising
from the neophilia index, rather than an unintended harm. We want journals to
compete to publish work that elaborates on newer ideas because it makes science
healthier: prior theoretical work suggests that absent such an incentive scientists
underinvest in innovative science. Furthermore, one can tweak the index in many ways
depending on the purpose; for instance, one can construct the index only based on ideas
that have stood the test of time or based on ideas that exceed some popularity
threshold.
We close with a proposed agenda for future research in this area. In our view, what is
needed is a suite of indices that are tied to those aspects of science that we want
scientific work to exhibit. Trying out new ideas is one important aspect of a healthy
science. One could easily list others, such as the presence of work that exchanges ideas
across fields, papers that affect real world decisions and outcomes (such as patient
mortality), and so on. Theoretical and quantitative work to develop these metrics is an
agenda that is important for effective science policy.




                                           17
References

Abbott, A., Cyranoski, D., Jones, N., Maher, B., Schiermeier, Q. and R. Van Noorden,
      2010, Metrics: Do metrics matter? Nature 465, pp. 860-2.
Adam, D., 2002, Citations: The counting house, Nature 415, pp. 726–9.
Besancenot D. and R. Vranceaunu, 2015, Fear of Novelty: A Model of Scientific
      Discovery with Strategic Uncertainty, Economic Inquiry, 53(2), pp. 1132-9
Bird, S. B., 2008, Journal Impact Factors, h Indices, and Citation Analyses in Toxicology,
      Journal of Medical Toxicology, 4(4), pp. 261-74.
Brown, J. D., 2014, Citation searching for tenure and promotion: an overview of issues
      and tools, Reference Services Review, 42(1), pp. 70-89.
Frey, B. and R. Katja, 2010, Do rankings reflect research quality? Journal of Applied
      Science, 13(1), pp. 1-38.
Carlsson, H. and E. van Damme, 1993, Global Games and Equilibrium Selection,
      Econometrica, 61(5), pp. 989-1018.
Chapron, G and A. Husté, 2006, Open, Fair, and Free Journal Ranking for Researchers.
      Bioscience, 56(7), pp. 558-9.
Chen, Y., Perl, Y., Geller, J. and J. J. Cimino, 2007, Analysis of a Study of Users, Uses, and
      Future Agenda of the UMLS, Journal of the American Medical Informatics Association,
      14(2) pp. 221-31.
Egghe, L., 2006, Theory and practice of the g-index, Scientometrics, 69(1), pp. 131-52.
Engemann, K. M. and H. J. Wall, 2009, A Journal Ranking for the Ambitious Economist,
      Federal Reserve Bank of St. Louis Review, 91(3), pp. 127-39.
Garfield, E., 1972, Citation analysis as a tool in journal evaluation, Science, 178, pp.
      471-9.
Hirsch, J. E., 2005, An index to quantify an individual’s scientific research output,
      Proceedings of the National Academy of Science, 102, pp. 16569-72.
Katerattanakul, P., Razi, M. A., Han, B. T., and H.-J Kam, 2005, Consistency and Concern
      on IS Journal Rankings, Journal of Information Technology Theory and Application
      (JITTA), 7(2), pp. 1-20.
Kuhn, T. S., 1962, The Structure of Scientific Revolutions. Chicago University Press.
Marshall, A., 1920, Principles of Economics, 8th ed. London: Macmillan and Co.
Moed, H. F., 2008, UK research assessment exercises: Informed judgments on research
      quality or quantity? Scientometrics, 74(1), pp. 153-161.
Morris, S. and H. S. Shin, 2003, Global Games: Theory and Applications, in
      Dewatripont, M., Hansen, L. and S. Turnovsky (eds.) Advances in Economics and
      Econometrics. Cambridge University Press.
Packalen, M. and J. Bhattacharya, 2015a, Age and the Trying Out of New Ideas, NBER
      Working Paper No. 20920.
Packalen, M. and J. Bhattacharya, 2015b, New Ideas in Invention, NBER Working Paper
      No. 20922.


                                             18
Packalen, M. and J. Bhattacharya, 2015c, Cities and Ideas, NBER Working Paper No.
     20921.
Palacios-Huerta, I. and O. Volij, 2004, The Measurement of Intellectual Influence,
     Econometrica, 72(3), pp. 963-77.
Palacios-Huerta, I. and O. Volij, 2014, Axiomatic measures of intellectual influence,
     International Journal of Industrial Organization, 34, pp. 85-90.
Sakovics J. and J. Steiner, 2012, Who Matters in Coordination Problems? American
     Economic Review, 102(7), pp. 3439-61.
Tort A. B., Targino Z. H. and O. B. Amaral, 2012, Rising publication delays inflate
     journal impact factors, PLoS One, 7(12), e53374.
Weingart, P., 2005, Impact of bibliometrics upon the science system: Inadvertent
     consequences? Scientometrics, 62(1), pp. 117-31.
Xu, R., Musen, M. A. and N. Shah, 2010, A Compehensive Analysis of Five Million
     UMLS Metathesaurus Terms Using Eighteen Million MEDLINE Citations, AMIA
     Annual Symposium Proceedings, pp. 907-11.




                                          19
Table 1: Neophilia Rankings for 10 Highly Cited Journals in General and Internal Medicine.


  (1a)                  (1b)              (1c)      (1d)       (2a)     (2b)      (2c)       (2d)           (3a)          (3b)          (3c)          (4a)        (4b)         (5)
                                                                                                                       Exclude
                                                                                                          Exclude    UMLS Terms     Only Include    Compare     Compare
                                                                                                        UMLS Terms in Category      UMLS Terms     Papers Only Papers Only
                                                                                                        in Category    Groups       in Category    within Same within Same
                                         Number                                                            Group     “Miscellaneo      Groups         Clinical     Basic
Neophilia                                   of    Neophilia                                             “Miscellaneo us II” and       “Clinical”    Research    Research      N-Gram
Ranking                Journal           Articles  Index      1980s     1990s    2000s   2010-2013         us II”      “Drug”       and “Drug”         Area        Area      Approach
          1 N Engl J Med                    8765    1.81       1.54     1.78      1.85       2.06           1.87          1.69         1.60           1.69        1.78         1.71
          2 BMC Med                          406    1.76                          1.77       1.75           1.69          1.81         1.25           1.44        1.48         2.17
          3 Ann Intern Med                  4948    1.50       1.99     1.86      1.10       1.04           1.47          1.46         1.50           1.27        1.57         1.67
          4 Lancet                        13518     1.41       1.54     1.37      1.22       1.49           1.41          1.28         1.16           1.31        1.40         1.39
          5 Mayo Clin Proc                  2063    1.22       1.29     1.05      1.28       1.28           1.23          1.23         1.14           1.18        1.24         1.07
          6 PLoS Med                        1021    1.11                          1.44       0.78           1.14          1.18         0.97           1.10        1.00         1.51
          7 JAMA                          11180     1.08       1.21     1.09      1.20       0.81           1.05          1.09         1.00           1.08        1.07         1.12
          8 JAMA Intern Med                 6150    1.04       1.22     1.32      0.94       0.70           1.02          1.02         1.22           1.08        1.10         1.14
          9 CMAJ                            3449    0.76       1.01     0.66      0.63       0.72           0.71          0.74         0.68           0.84        0.73         0.74
         10 BMJ                             7656    0.62       0.88     0.68      0.44       0.47           0.57          0.54         0.64           0.71        0.66         0.51


            Other Journals in “General
            and Internal Medicine”       167772     0.92       0.86     0.89      0.96       0.97           0.92          0.93         0.95           0.92        0.92         0.92

Explanations for the columns:

(1a-1d) Column 1a shows the neophilia ranking; the ranking for each journal is calculated based on original research articles published in
the journal during 1980-2013. Column 1b shows the MEDLINE abbreviation of the journal. Column 1c shows for each journal the number
of publications based on which the neophilia index was calculated (articles on which the database has little or no textual information are
excluded). Column 1d shows the neophilia index based on which the ranking reported in column 1a is determined.

(2a-2d): Columns 2a-2d show the neophilia index for four different time periods: 1980s, 1990s, 2000s, and 2010-2013. Across these columns,
other aspects of the analysis are as in the analysis reported in column 1d.

(3a-3c): Column 3a shows the neophilia index when UMLS terms in category group “Miscellaneous II” are excluded from the analysis.
Column 3b shows the neophilia index when UMLS terms category groups “Miscellaneous II” and “Drug” are excluded from the analysis.
Column 3c shows the neophilia index when only UMLS terms category groups “Clinical” and “Drug” are included in the analysis. Across
these columns, other aspects of the analysis are as in the analysis reported in column 1d.

(4a-4b): Column 4a shows the neophilia index when the relative age of terms mentioned in each article is calculated by comparing the
article to other articles published in the same clinical research area in the same year (as opposed to a comparison of the article to all other
articles published in the same year). Column 4b shows the neophilia index when the relative age of terms mentioned in each article is
calculated by comparing the article to other articles published in the same basic research area in the same year. Across these columns,
other aspects of the analysis are as in the analysis reported in column 1d.

(5): Column 5 shows the neophilia index when calculated using the n-gram approach (Packalen and Bhattacharya 2015abc) as opposed to
using the UMLS metathesaurus approach that was employed to calculate the neophilia indices reported in columns 1-4. The neophilia
index for a journal is calculated based on original research articles published during 1980-2013.

                                                                                           20
Table 2: Neophilia Rankings for Journals in General and Internal Medicine.


  (1a)                     (1b)           (1c)      (1d)      (2a)      (2b)   (2c)      (2d)         (3a)         (3b)          (3c)          (4a)        (4b)         (5)
                                                                                                                  Exclude
                                                                                                     Exclude    UMLS Terms Only Include      Compare     Compare
                                                                                                   UMLS Terms in Category UMLS Terms        Papers Only Papers Only
                                                                                                   in Category    Groups     in Category    within Same within Same
                                         Number                                                       Group     “Miscellaneo    Groups         Clinical     Basic
Neophilia                                   of    Neophilia                                        “Miscellaneo us II” and     “Clinical”    Research    Research      N-Gram
Ranking                  Journal         Articles  Index      1980s    1990s   2000s   2010-2013      us II”      “Drug”     and “Drug”         Area        Area      Approach
          1 Curr Med Res Opin               2865    3.07      2.59     2.20    3.89      3.60         3.20         1.09         2.59           2.67        3.02         1.61
          2 Am J Chin Med                   1584    2.00      1.91     2.24    2.25      1.58         2.13         2.00         1.37           1.82        2.07         1.08
          3 Transl Res                      4065    1.87      1.55     1.68    2.06      2.18         2.05         2.35         1.68           1.67        1.85         2.34
          4 N Engl J Med                    8765    1.80      1.54     1.78    1.84      2.05         1.87         1.69         1.60           1.69        1.77         1.71
          5 BMC Med                          406    1.76                       1.77      1.75         1.68         1.81         1.25           1.44        1.44         2.16
          6 Eur J Clin Invest               3551    1.75      1.36     1.42    2.01      2.20         1.86         2.11         1.59           1.62        1.81         2.26
          7 Int J Med Sci                    438    1.71                       1.63      1.80         1.98         2.24         1.56           1.51        1.44         1.72
          8 Int J Clin Pract                2455    1.69      1.25     1.42    1.94      2.14         1.70         0.80         1.40           1.56        1.73         0.99
          9 Acta Clin Belg                   537    1.64      1.37     1.70    1.76      1.73         1.72         1.26         1.41           1.33        1.58         1.31
         10 Am J Med                        6304    1.47      2.38     1.80    0.88      0.83         1.44         1.29         1.47           1.33        1.50         1.59
         11 Am J Manag Care                 1109    1.46               1.64    1.66      1.08         1.17         0.69         1.08           1.34        1.51         1.16
         12 Ann Intern Med                  4948    1.46      1.81     1.90    1.10      1.04         1.43         1.42         1.46           1.27        1.51         1.66
         13 J Investig Med                   630    1.41      0.35     1.95    1.79      1.55         1.54         2.12         1.47           1.64        1.46         2.00
         14 Lancet                        13518     1.40      1.53     1.37    1.21      1.49         1.41         1.28         1.16           1.31        1.39         1.38
         15 J Korean Med Sci                2497    1.35      1.24     1.35    1.53      1.30         1.43         1.77         1.35           1.19        1.27         1.80
         16 Ann Med                          641    1.32      0.30     1.08    2.34      1.58         1.35         1.59         1.13           1.06        1.45         1.71
         17 Am J Med Sci                    1759    1.27      1.60     1.20    1.03      1.25         1.31         1.33         1.33           1.14        1.30         1.50
         18 Medicine (Baltimore)             545    1.27      1.53     1.29    1.15      1.09         1.23         1.25         1.27           1.06        1.23         1.18
         19 J Intern Med                    2194    1.26      0.99     0.85    1.17      2.03         1.34         1.38         1.19           1.17        1.13         1.75
         20 Tohoku J Exp Med                3686    1.24      1.13     1.14    1.26      1.44         1.32         1.56         1.19           1.12        1.18         1.57
         21 Postgrad Med                    2486    1.24      0.71     0.87    0.90      2.49         1.27         0.78         1.20           1.12        1.28         0.78
         22 Gend Med                         221    1.24                       1.53      0.95         1.05         1.28         0.91           1.14        1.23         1.23
         23 Mayo Clin Proc                  2063    1.22      1.30     1.07    1.28      1.25         1.22         1.22         1.15           1.17        1.23         1.06
         24 Chin Med J (Engl)               8267    1.20      0.40     0.90    1.77      1.72         1.29         1.60         1.20           1.01        1.19         1.47
         25 Eur J Intern Med                 484    1.17                       1.03      1.31         1.16         1.27         1.22           1.11        1.20         1.22
         26 Intern Emerg Med                 240    1.14               0.58    1.34      1.49         1.15         1.29         1.07           0.96        1.01         1.31
         27 Wien Klin Wochenschr            1322    1.13      1.03     1.37    1.08      1.04         1.17         1.15         1.09           0.98        1.13         0.92
         28 PLoS Med                        1021    1.10                       1.43      0.78         1.13         1.18         0.97           1.09        1.01         1.50
         29 Intern Med                      1981    1.09      0.87     1.08    1.12      1.30         1.13         1.25         1.26           1.04        1.06         1.45
         30 Intern Med J                    2064    1.08      1.35     1.19    0.85      0.93         1.10         1.12         1.25           1.05        1.13         1.09
         31 JAMA                          11180     1.06      1.14     1.08    1.19      0.81         1.03         1.07         0.98           1.08        1.05         1.12
         32 JAMA Intern Med                 6150    1.04      1.19     1.32    0.94      0.69         1.01         1.01         1.21           1.08        1.09         1.13
         33 Ann Acad Med Singapore          2529    1.03      1.04     1.05    1.00      1.04         1.03         1.22         1.09           1.11        0.97         1.10
         34 Pain Med                         821    1.03                       1.07      0.99         0.93         0.87         1.09           1.45        1.13         0.63
         35 Minerva Med                     1001    1.00      0.33     0.68    1.61      1.38         1.00         1.18         0.91           0.83        0.93         0.79
         36 J Formos Med Assoc              2997    0.97      0.37     1.21    1.11      1.18         1.01         1.12         1.06           0.93        0.92         1.09
         37 Med Princ Pract                  670    0.93                       0.77      1.09         1.01         1.18         1.09           1.04        0.89         0.83
         38 Postgrad Med J                  2037    0.93      1.77     1.01    0.52      0.39         0.97         0.71         1.06           0.84        0.90         0.82
         39 Dan Med J                        125    0.91                                 0.91         1.01         1.08         0.67           0.91        0.68         0.79
         40 Yonsei Med J                    1899    0.89      0.30     1.15    1.01      1.10         0.94         1.22         1.09           1.01        0.85         1.31
         41 Isr Med Assoc J                 3298    0.89      1.16     0.70    0.88      0.81         0.88         0.97         0.93           0.96        0.88         0.93
         42 Neth J Med                       841    0.84      0.48     1.00    1.02      0.86         0.77         0.52         0.93           0.88        0.86         0.97
         43 Cleve Clin J Med                 642    0.83      0.58     0.55    0.97      1.24         0.88         0.60         0.83           0.66        0.83         0.85
         44 QJM                             1933    0.83      1.05     1.10    0.46      0.70         0.84         0.94         0.98           0.87        0.83         1.06
         45 J Chin Med Assoc                1615    0.79      0.48     0.87    0.83      0.99         0.85         0.92         1.01           0.85        0.73         0.77
         46 Croat Med J                      784    0.79               0.49    1.20      0.68         0.81         1.00         0.88           0.84        0.53         0.95
         47 Swiss Med Wkly                  1043    0.79      0.58     0.70    1.17      0.69         0.81         0.80         0.90           0.77        0.75         0.94
         48 Med J Aust                      4793    0.78      0.98     1.00    0.54      0.62         0.74         0.76         0.80           0.80        0.80         0.73
         49 South Med J                     3295    0.78      0.92     1.01    0.45      0.74         0.77         0.86         0.96           0.85        0.78         0.77
         50 J Am Board Fam Med               596    0.78      1.11     0.94    0.53      0.54         0.68         0.72         0.85           0.80        0.74         0.84
         51 CMAJ                            3449    0.75      1.01     0.67    0.63      0.70         0.71         0.74         0.68           0.83        0.74         0.74
         52 Rev Invest Clin                  314    0.75      0.57     1.10    0.63      0.70         0.75         0.80         0.94           0.74        0.71         0.89
         53 J Pain Symptom Manage           1789    0.74      0.52     0.86    1.07      0.54         0.51         0.44         0.63           1.17        0.68         0.29
         54 J Nippon Med Sch                 771    0.74      0.27     0.70    1.04      0.97         0.77         0.86         0.75           0.54        0.83         1.12
         55 J Travel Med                     511    0.74               1.31    0.73      0.19         0.76         0.38         0.79           0.91        0.76         0.38
         56 S Afr Med J                     4492    0.74      1.04     0.73    0.51      0.68         0.77         0.77         0.96           0.76        0.80         0.72
         57 J Gen Intern Med                1758    0.73      0.52     0.91    0.77      0.71         0.47         0.61         0.74           0.87        0.74         0.86
         58 Ann Saudi Med                    448    0.72                       0.54      0.90         0.75         1.02         1.02           0.64        0.71         0.68
         59 Acta Clin Croat                  671    0.72      0.37     1.01    0.75      0.74         0.76         0.94         0.78           0.68        0.79         0.61
         60 J Hosp Med                       237    0.70                       0.49      0.91         0.71         0.71         0.76           0.60        0.68         0.62
         61 Am J Prev Med                   2118    0.69      0.81     0.93    0.44      0.59         0.55         0.64         0.71           0.93        0.76         0.63
         62 Br J Gen Pract                  1714    0.69      0.92     0.60    0.57      0.67         0.52         0.60         0.53           0.79        0.70         0.42
         63 Pol Arch Med Wewn                420    0.68      0.24     0.00    0.73      1.76         0.74         0.94         0.82           0.58        0.74         0.91
         64 J Natl Med Assoc                2055    0.68      0.79     0.78    0.66      0.48         0.66         0.75         0.86           0.70        0.68         0.75
         65 Indian J Med Res                4977    0.67      0.31     0.66    0.74      0.97         0.70         0.92         0.76           0.62        0.65         0.71
         66 Ups J Med Sci                    661    0.67      0.70     0.30    0.65      1.03         0.70         0.74         0.72           0.74        0.71         0.94
         67 Medicina (Kaunas)                514    0.67                       0.71      0.63         0.69         0.84         0.93           0.64        0.68         0.56
         68 Scott Med J                      899    0.66      0.82     0.49    0.61      0.73         0.58         0.56         0.63           0.62        0.67         0.47
         69 J Eval Clin Pract                625    0.66               0.56    0.64      0.78         0.37         0.51         0.53           0.91        0.73         1.13
         70 Palliat Med                      616    0.66               1.06    0.39      0.53         0.30         0.25         0.52           1.22        0.59         0.17
         71 Saudi Med J                     2765    0.64                       0.48      0.81         0.65         0.88         0.92           0.61        0.62         0.73
         72 Arch Iran Med                    479    0.64                       0.55      0.72         0.68         0.84         1.08           0.65        0.56         0.55
         73 J Womens Health (Larchmt)       1517    0.63               0.62    0.65      0.62         0.57         0.57         0.84           0.74        0.64         0.73
         74 BMJ                             7656    0.62      0.88     0.69    0.44      0.47         0.57         0.54         0.64           0.71        0.66         0.51
         75 Amyloid                          433    0.61               0.61    0.70      0.53         0.66         0.95         1.13           1.18        0.60         1.18
         76 Singapore Med J                 2414    0.61      0.42     0.59    0.68      0.76         0.57         0.64         0.74           0.68        0.59         0.57
         77 Mt Sinai J Med                   902    0.61      0.24     0.81    0.82      0.57         0.59         0.61         0.71           0.72        0.62         0.70
         78 J Urban Health                  1158    0.59      0.29     1.01    0.61      0.45         0.56         0.69         1.04           0.80        0.59         0.80
         79 Am Fam Physician                2238    0.58      0.68     0.68    0.51      0.45         0.58         0.47         0.70           0.61        0.59         0.40
         80 Afr Health Sci                   477    0.58                       0.53      0.62         0.58         0.66         0.72           0.57        0.63         0.43
         81 J Fam Pract                     2268    0.57      0.76     0.70    0.65      0.19         0.54         0.51         0.64           0.74        0.64         0.41
         82 Vojnosanit Pregl                 933    0.57      0.28     0.21    0.54      1.24         0.60         0.65         0.67           0.61        0.63         0.35
         83 Panminerva Med                   875    0.56      0.34     0.40    0.56      0.94         0.61         0.60         0.84           0.62        0.59         0.76
         84 Dan Med Bull                     655    0.55      0.42     0.56    0.58      0.63         0.54         0.66         0.66           0.50        0.55         0.62
         85 J Postgrad Med                   830    0.54      0.19     0.40    0.90      0.69         0.55         0.67         0.79           0.68        0.51         0.48
         86 J R Soc Med                     1606    0.53      0.75     0.54    0.67      0.16         0.47         0.49         0.46           0.64        0.46         0.34
         87 Ann Fam Med                      321    0.49                       0.56      0.42         0.30         0.27         0.50           0.59        0.55         0.40
         88 Br Med Bull                      105    0.49      0.51     0.46                           0.72         0.79         0.45           0.41        0.64         0.66
         89 West Indian Med J               1343    0.48      0.40     0.47    0.51      0.55         0.47         0.59         0.61           0.52        0.48         0.52
         90 Fam Pract                       1154    0.48      0.55     0.43    0.55      0.40         0.29         0.44         0.38           0.64        0.48         0.34
         91 Med Clin (Barc)                  881    0.48      0.23     0.74    0.33      0.61         0.47         0.35         0.42           0.36        0.46         0.43
         92 Ir J Med Sci                    1420    0.47      0.32     0.69    0.40      0.47         0.50         0.63         0.80           0.62        0.48         0.60
         93 Mil Med                         2977    0.47      0.27     0.56    0.57      0.48         0.35         0.42         0.48           0.67        0.48         0.47
         94 Chronic Dis Can                  195    0.46               0.52    0.61      0.24         0.40         0.41         0.19           0.46        0.47         0.33
         95 BMC Fam Pract                    515    0.45                       0.52      0.38         0.27         0.39         0.49           0.55        0.48         0.36
         96 Fam Med                          445    0.45      0.35     0.81    0.40      0.22         0.36         0.41         0.41           0.67        0.48         0.28
         97 J Coll Physicians Surg Pak      1193    0.44                       0.37      0.51         0.47         0.60         0.92           0.62        0.41         0.38
         98 Prev Med                        3071    0.43      0.81     0.44    0.31      0.17         0.38         0.48         0.48           0.60        0.48         0.50
         99 Bratisl Lek Listy               1175    0.43      0.13     0.58    0.49      0.52         0.43         0.48         0.51           0.52        0.41         0.42
     100 Dtsch Arztebl Int                    86    0.42                                 0.42         0.27         0.21         0.64           0.53        0.47         0.08
     101 Prim Care                           370    0.40      0.45     0.34    0.42                   0.37         0.48         0.37           0.59        0.36         0.42
     102 Rev Med Interne                     362    0.40      1.20     0.22    0.17      0.00         0.41         0.16         0.30           0.27        0.39         0.11
     103 J Pak Med Assoc                    2941    0.40      0.28     0.46    0.40      0.45         0.41         0.46         0.54           0.45        0.42         0.31
     104 Med Probl Perform Art                73    0.39                                 0.39         0.43         0.50         0.17           0.62        0.36         0.00
     105 Br J Hosp Med (Lond)               1370    0.39      0.40     0.72    0.32      0.12         0.39         0.34         0.43           0.36        0.40         0.16
     106 Can Fam Physician                  1097    0.38               0.34    0.36      0.44         0.33         0.25         0.52           0.56        0.40         0.34
     107 Natl Med J India                    650    0.38               0.41    0.38      0.34         0.39         0.45         0.60           0.57        0.46         0.57
     108 J R Army Med Corps                  488    0.37      0.43     0.56    0.26      0.24         0.38         0.36         0.31           0.67        0.36         0.14
     109 Scand J Prim Health Care            831    0.37      0.66     0.23    0.29      0.29         0.34         0.37         0.46           0.44        0.36         0.22
     110 Srp Arh Celok Lek                   358    0.36      0.19             0.00      0.90         0.42         0.40         0.49           0.37        0.38         0.47
     111 Aviat Space Environ Med            4150    0.34      0.64     0.27    0.23      0.23         0.34         0.38         0.44           0.77        0.43         0.24
     112 Eur J Gen Pract                     128    0.34                       0.25      0.43         0.27         0.20         0.32           0.59        0.42         0.28
     113 Sao Paulo Med J                     715    0.33      0.00     0.24    0.50      0.58         0.32         0.45         0.52           0.42        0.26         0.41
     114 Dis Mon                             148    0.33      0.66             0.22      0.11         0.21         0.27         0.24           0.25        0.32         0.39
     115 Med Clin North Am                   342    0.33      0.46     0.33    0.20                   0.34         0.50         0.36           0.48        0.28         0.48
     116 Ter Arkh                           1444    0.33      0.19     0.42    0.38                   0.34         0.11         0.32           0.33        0.30         0.19
     117 Dtsch Med Wochenschr               3164    0.31      0.35     0.36    0.27      0.27         0.31         0.26         0.30           0.27        0.32         0.22
     118 Acta Med Port                       133    0.30      0.25     0.35                           0.31         0.72         0.53           0.04        0.32         0.83
     119 Niger J Clin Pract                  480    0.28                       0.25      0.31         0.33         0.40         0.59           0.46        0.29         0.13
     120 Bull Acad Natl Med                  222    0.28      0.18     0.37                           0.27         0.38         0.41           0.16        0.30         0.31
     121 Aust Fam Physician                 2565    0.25      0.25     0.21    0.32      0.22         0.23         0.22         0.35           0.36        0.26         0.12
     122 JNMA J Nepal Med Assoc              207    0.23                       0.22      0.23         0.24         0.26         0.47           0.53        0.22         0.38
     123 Rev Clin Esp (Barc)                 412    0.18      0.20     0.21    0.11                   0.18         0.19         0.22           0.13        0.18         0.33
     124 Aten Primaria                       248    0.13               0.21    0.06                   0.10         0.04         0.12           0.05        0.14         0.18
     125 Gac Med Mex                         482    0.11      0.27     0.05    0.00                   0.10         0.12         0.16           0.18        0.13         0.11
     126 Rev Med Chil                         78    0.08      0.08                                    0.07         0.08         0.17           0.10        0.09         0.16


Explanations for the columns: Please see notes to Table 1.
                                                                                                      21
                                             Relationship between Neophilia Index and Citation Rank
                                                       for Journals in General and Internal Medicine




                                      3.00
  Neophilia Index (Our Proposed Metric)
           1.00          2.00
                      0.00




                                             1                  50                    100              150
                                                             Citation Rank (Thomson Reuters)


Figure 3: Relationship between Neophilia Index and Citation Rank for Journals in General and Internal Medicine.




                                                                         22
Table 3: Neophilia Rankings for Journals in Core Clinical Journals.


  (1a)                     (1b)              (1c)      (1d)      (2a)    (2b)    (2c)      (2d)         (3a)         (3b)          (3c)          (4a)        (4b)         (5)
                                                                                                                    Exclude
                                                                                                       Exclude    UMLS Terms Only Include      Compare     Compare
                                                                                                     UMLS Terms in Category UMLS Terms        Papers Only Papers Only
                                                                                                     in Category    Groups     in Category    within Same within Same
                                            Number                                                      Group     “Miscellaneo    Groups         Clinical     Basic
Neophilia                                      of    Neophilia                                       “Miscellaneo  us II” and    “Clinical”    Research    Research      N-Gram
Ranking                   Journal           Articles  Index      1980s   1990s   2000s   2010-2013      us II”      “Drug”     and “Drug”         Area        Area      Approach
          1 Blood                            29049     3.38      2.92    3.98    3.76      2.85         3.57         4.13          2.24          2.03        3.19         3.61
          2 J Immunol                        48213     3.10      2.80    3.66    3.41      2.52         3.31         3.97          1.81          2.12        3.20         3.66
          3 Med Lett Drugs Ther                1751    3.06      1.56    2.10    4.38      4.19         3.21         0.51          2.22          2.58        2.99         0.85
          4 J Clin Invest                    14724     3.04      2.54    3.19    3.63      2.80         3.23         3.83          1.61          2.35        2.96         3.39
          5 Am J Pathol                      11133     2.90      1.93    3.22    3.71      2.76         3.11         3.88          1.90          2.17        2.86         3.56
          6 Clin Pharmacol Ther                4969    2.86      2.61    2.86    3.46      2.50         2.97         2.17          2.09          2.43        2.90         2.28
          7 Endocrinology                    22876     2.84      1.88    2.95    3.77      2.78         3.05         3.62          1.51          2.33        2.89         3.24
          8 Diabetes                         10222     2.42      1.66    2.21    3.08      2.74         2.59         3.00          1.33          2.02        2.28         3.02
          9 Gastroenterology                 11364     2.30      1.52    2.02    2.95      2.73         2.47         2.84          1.85          1.85        2.11         2.45
         10 J Infect Dis                     14833     2.12      1.75    2.75    2.14      1.82         2.25         2.49          2.13          1.70        2.04         2.53
         11 J Clin Endocrinol Metab          19147     2.07      1.72    2.12    2.35      2.09         2.20         2.46          1.51          1.93        2.04         2.22
         12 J Allergy Clin Immunol             7589    2.01      1.61    1.88    2.35      2.19         2.12         2.24          1.73          1.66        1.96         1.79
         13 Gut                                7354    1.98      1.42    1.85    2.15      2.51         2.10         2.41          1.68          1.70        1.88         2.12
         14 Circulation                      20040     1.97      1.73    1.89    2.37      1.89         2.06         2.24          1.81          1.72        1.95         2.19
         15 Am Heart J                       10000     1.87      1.66    1.29    1.86      2.67         1.94         2.01          1.95          1.68        1.97         2.13
         16 Transl Res                         4065    1.87      1.55    1.68    2.06      2.18         2.05         2.35          1.68          1.67        1.85         2.34
         17 J Am Coll Cardiol                12324     1.85      1.69    1.63    1.96      2.13         1.92         2.15          1.98          1.68        1.96         2.02
         18 N Engl J Med                       8765    1.80      1.54    1.78    1.84      2.05         1.87         1.69          1.60          1.69        1.77         1.71
         19 J Clin Pathol                      5790    1.73      1.31    2.03    1.87      1.71         1.82         2.35          1.47          1.28        1.64         1.95
         20 Cancer                           21480     1.73      1.58    1.46    1.86      2.00         1.75         1.84          1.60          1.23        1.61         2.07
         21 Am J Cardiol                     20983     1.67      1.77    1.17    1.65      2.09         1.72         1.75          1.80          1.48        1.76         1.89
         22 Am J Ophthalmol                    6200    1.59      1.63    1.57    1.56      1.60         1.66         1.66          1.60          1.46        1.49         1.60
         23 Am J Clin Pathol                   5592    1.59      1.55    1.87    1.67      1.27         1.68         2.18          1.67          1.13        1.58         1.71
         24 JAMA Ophthalmol                    5441    1.57      1.84    1.55    1.43      1.48         1.65         1.62          1.46          1.42        1.48         1.12
         25 JAMA Neurol                        4138    1.56      1.24    1.40    1.78      1.82         1.58         1.88          1.52          1.46        1.36         1.55
         26 Am J Respir Crit Care Med        13238     1.52      1.21    1.41    1.74      1.72         1.59         1.87          1.45          1.54        1.61         1.90
         27 Anesthesiology                     8053    1.49      1.16    1.86    1.71      1.23         1.60         1.36          1.73          1.50        1.64         1.27
         28 Am J Med                           6304    1.47      2.38    1.80    0.88      0.83         1.44         1.29          1.47          1.33        1.50         1.59
         29 Ann Intern Med                     4948    1.46      1.81    1.90    1.10      1.04         1.43         1.42          1.46          1.27        1.51         1.66
         30 Dig Dis Sci                        8982    1.46      1.46    1.62    1.30      1.46         1.54         1.56          1.63          1.31        1.48         1.46
         31 Neurology                        13742     1.44      1.38    1.56    1.47      1.36         1.46         1.69          1.46          1.40        1.37         1.23
         32 Brain                              4528    1.44      1.09    1.39    1.57      1.71         1.50         2.00          1.47          1.45        1.52         1.37
         33 Anesth Analg                       9870    1.42      1.48    1.53    1.49      1.16         1.47         1.10          1.73          1.50        1.49         1.07
         34 Lancet                           13518     1.40      1.53    1.37    1.21      1.49         1.41         1.28          1.16          1.31        1.39         1.38
         35 Heart                              5621    1.40      1.67    0.87    1.32      1.73         1.40         1.60          1.55          1.32        1.47         1.55
         36 Surgery                            7120    1.34      1.40    1.47    1.49      0.99         1.42         1.69          1.33          1.17        1.19         1.61
         37 Arch Pathol Lab Med                2981    1.34      1.32    1.42    1.34      1.26         1.37         1.80          1.46          1.12        1.24         1.53
         38 Rheumatology (Oxford)              4682    1.33      1.06    1.26    1.46      1.55         1.35         1.48          1.27          1.17        1.35         1.69
         39 JAMA Dermatol                      2750    1.30      1.63    1.52    1.30      0.73         1.30         1.20          1.29          1.18        1.30         1.01
         40 Am J Med Sci                       1759    1.27      1.60    1.20    1.03      1.25         1.31         1.33          1.33          1.14        1.30         1.50
         41 J Urol                           20274     1.27      1.26    1.24    1.44      1.12         1.27         1.47          1.25          1.13        1.20         0.95
         42 Medicine (Baltimore)                545    1.27      1.53    1.29    1.15      1.09         1.23         1.25          1.27          1.06        1.23         1.18
         43 Radiology                        15005     1.25      1.71    1.17    1.13      0.98         1.08         1.37          1.23          1.27        1.38         1.56
         44 Postgrad Med                       2486    1.24      0.71    0.87    0.90      2.49         1.27         0.78          1.20          1.12        1.28         0.78
         45 Mayo Clin Proc                     2063    1.22      1.30    1.07    1.28      1.25         1.22         1.22          1.15          1.17        1.23         1.06
         46 Anaesthesia                        3762    1.18      1.77    1.29    0.86      0.82         1.17         0.80          1.53          1.38        1.26         0.90
         47 Ann Surg                           6264    1.17      1.40    1.35    1.01      0.91         1.19         1.46          1.21          1.15        1.07         1.27
         48 Crit Care Med                      7796    1.16      1.27    1.31    1.18      0.87         1.16         1.35          1.40          1.40        1.24         1.07
         49 JAMA Psychiatry                    2965    1.13      1.42    1.05    0.95      1.11         1.07         1.26          1.44          1.64        1.10         1.67
         50 Am J Trop Med Hyg                  8181    1.13      1.45    1.44    0.97      0.66         1.19         1.37          1.10          1.18        1.14         1.04
         51 J Thorac Cardiovasc Surg           9593    1.10      1.33    1.05    1.14      0.86         1.11         1.35          1.18          1.09        1.09         1.17
         52 Chest                            13040     1.08      1.05    1.00    1.10      1.17         1.09         1.21          1.20          1.15        1.08         1.07
         53 JAMA                             11180     1.06      1.14    1.08    1.19      0.81         1.03         1.07          0.98          1.08        1.05         1.12
         54 JAMA Intern Med                    6150    1.04      1.19    1.32    0.94      0.69         1.01         1.01          1.21          1.08        1.09         1.13
         55 Am J Obstet Gynecol              15418     1.03      1.25    1.27    0.93      0.66         1.06         1.24          1.17          1.36        1.06         0.96
         56 JAMA Otolaryngol Head Neck Surg
                                          3901         0.98      0.93    1.04    1.03      0.92         0.97         1.09          0.93          1.47        0.90         0.77
         57 AJR Am J Roentgenol              11905     0.97      1.53    0.76    0.71      0.90         0.95         1.18          0.96          1.00        1.00         0.87
         58 Ann Thorac Surg                  13423     0.95      1.06    0.89    1.09      0.77         0.97         1.20          1.03          0.96        0.94         1.03
         59 Am J Psychiatry                    5123    0.95      1.11    0.93    0.90      0.84         0.89         1.06          1.34          1.44        0.95         1.50
         60 J Neurosurg                        7628    0.93      1.25    1.08    0.85      0.56         0.95         1.13          1.19          1.15        0.90         1.08
         61 Radiol Clin North Am                438    0.93      1.22    0.72    0.85                   0.93         1.12          0.77          0.73        0.92         0.86
         62 J Pediatr                          8930    0.93      1.20    1.14    0.73      0.64         0.92         1.02          1.03          1.02        0.95         0.80
         63 Br J Radiol                        4001    0.92      1.20    0.77    0.82      0.87         0.90         1.10          1.00          0.93        0.98         0.93
         64 Obstet Gynecol                     9525    0.90      1.21    1.06    0.67      0.67         0.92         1.10          1.14          1.23        0.97         0.65
         65 Public Health Rep                  1855    0.89      1.29    1.51    0.48      0.29         0.83         0.99          1.03          1.06        0.97         0.89
         66 JAMA Surg                          5318    0.88      1.10    1.27    0.78      0.37         0.91         1.07          1.11          0.99        0.85         0.99
         67 J Gerontol A Biol Sci Med Sci      2543    0.87              0.89    0.83      0.89         0.85         1.12          0.80          0.99        0.87         1.02
         68 Am J Surg                          7776    0.87      1.01    1.09    0.86      0.51         0.87         1.03          0.93          0.89        0.83         0.69
         69 Pediatrics                       11217     0.84      1.09    1.06    0.74      0.49         0.81         0.88          0.95          1.10        0.88         0.64
         70 Clin Toxicol (Phila)               1126    0.84      1.01    0.89    0.84      0.62         0.80         0.68          0.85          1.32        0.87         0.36
         71 BJOG                               5994    0.84      1.06    0.98    0.71      0.61         0.86         0.95          0.99          1.23        0.93         0.53
         72 Plast Reconstr Surg                8714    0.80      1.24    0.69    0.81      0.47         0.85         1.23          0.78          1.06        0.85         0.31
         73 Ann Otol Rhinol Laryngol           3827    0.80      0.89    0.78    0.84      0.69         0.80         0.97          0.78          1.27        0.84         0.52
         74 J Trauma Acute Care Surg           9025    0.78      1.00    0.91    0.65      0.57         0.71         0.85          0.79          1.35        0.74         0.64
         75 South Med J                        3295    0.78      0.92    1.01    0.45      0.74         0.77         0.86          0.96          0.85        0.78         0.77
         76 CMAJ                               3449    0.75      1.01    0.67    0.63      0.70         0.71         0.74          0.68          0.83        0.74         0.74
         77 Am J Clin Nutr                   10212     0.74      0.72    0.49    0.76      0.98         0.73         0.92          0.67          0.88        0.71         0.82
         78 Ann Emerg Med                      3320    0.74      0.98    0.70    0.76      0.50         0.67         0.72          0.84          1.08        0.78         0.57
         79 Br J Surg                          7973    0.71      0.97    0.79    0.60      0.48         0.72         0.87          0.86          0.79        0.68         0.70
         80 Arch Phys Med Rehabil              5926    0.71      0.92    0.82    0.51      0.57         0.52         0.66          0.65          1.07        0.79         0.43
         81 J Am Coll Surg                     5705    0.70      0.82    0.84    0.75      0.39         0.72         0.89          0.84          0.82        0.67         0.64
         82 Am J Public Health                 5678    0.70      0.94    1.03    0.43      0.41         0.67         0.83          0.69          0.78        0.75         0.84
         83 Hosp Pract (1995)                  1172    0.68      0.27    0.53    0.00      1.94         0.72         0.57          0.65          0.62        0.95         0.64
         84 Clin Orthop Relat Res            10324     0.66      0.91    0.55    0.52      0.66         0.66         0.83          0.74          1.08        0.65         0.38
         85 Bone Joint J                       5744    0.65      0.69    0.42    0.61      0.85         0.64         0.81          0.66          1.04        0.64         0.25
         86 Arch Dis Child                     5844    0.64      0.90    0.64    0.44      0.58         0.60         0.69          0.72          0.77        0.69         0.44
         87 J Nerv Ment Dis                    1728    0.62      1.26    0.69    0.38      0.15         0.46         0.56          0.73          1.10        0.67         0.73
         88 BMJ                                7656    0.62      0.88    0.69    0.44      0.47         0.57         0.54          0.64          0.71        0.66         0.51
         89 J Bone Joint Surg Am               6353    0.61      0.77    0.63    0.53      0.51         0.60         0.79          0.73          1.14        0.61         0.39
         90 Phys Ther                          2062    0.59      0.84    0.61    0.57      0.35         0.47         0.69          0.64          0.97        0.67         0.23
         91 Am Fam Physician                   2238    0.58      0.68    0.68    0.51      0.45         0.58         0.47          0.70          0.61        0.59         0.40
         92 JAMA Pediatr                       2100    0.58              0.71    0.58      0.45         0.53         0.62          0.79          0.93        0.63         0.44
         93 J Fam Pract                        2268    0.57      0.76    0.70    0.65      0.19         0.54         0.51          0.64          0.74        0.64         0.41
         94 Am J Phys Med Rehabil              1690    0.57      0.47    1.04    0.34      0.44         0.46         0.52          0.52          0.94        0.67         0.39
         95 CA Cancer J Clin                    334    0.56      0.46    0.56    0.45      0.78         0.57         0.53          0.56          0.40        0.57         0.48
         96 Nurs Outlook                         95    0.56      0.44    0.88    0.35                   0.39         0.52          0.39          0.72        0.77         0.29
         97 J Laryngol Otol                    3754    0.55      0.50    0.58    0.62      0.49         0.56         0.65          0.61          0.95        0.53         0.20
         98 Acad Med                            516    0.53      0.86    0.63    0.32      0.31         0.45         0.54          0.25          0.32        0.42         0.57
         99 J Oral Maxillofac Surg             4855    0.51      0.63    0.45    0.45      0.50         0.53         0.62          0.72          1.14        0.49         0.41
     100 Clin Pediatr (Phila)                  1934    0.49      0.86    0.37    0.45      0.29         0.50         0.55          0.62          0.68        0.53         0.35
     101 Heart Lung                            1253    0.49      0.56    0.50    0.38      0.51         0.41         0.53          0.59          0.57        0.53         0.47
     102 Surg Clin North Am                     601    0.48      0.45    1.01    0.00                   0.50         0.55          0.53          0.70        0.45         0.75
     103 Arch Environ Occup Health             1547    0.46      0.70    0.45    0.41      0.28         0.43         0.57          0.38          0.78        0.45         0.38
     104 J Acad Nutr Diet                      4114    0.42      0.75    0.35    0.34      0.23         0.34         0.45          0.36          0.66        0.56         0.22
     105 Nurs Res                              1004    0.42      0.81    0.38    0.22      0.25         0.35         0.47          0.59          0.77        0.52         0.38
     106 Orthop Clin North Am                   653    0.40      0.76    0.61    0.22      0.00         0.39         0.50          0.34          0.78        0.52         0.29
     107 Nurs Clin North Am                     498    0.37      0.66    0.31    0.41      0.12         0.20         0.32          0.38          0.57        0.41         0.33
     108 Arch Dis Child Fetal Neonatal Ed 1456         0.36              0.57    0.36      0.16         0.37         0.41          0.55          0.69        0.38         0.32
     109 Dis Mon                                148    0.33      0.66            0.22      0.11         0.21         0.27          0.24          0.25        0.32         0.39
     110 Med Clin North Am                      342    0.33      0.46    0.33    0.20                   0.34         0.50          0.36          0.48        0.28         0.48
     111 Pediatr Clin North Am                  415    0.33      0.30    0.20    0.49                   0.26         0.32          0.36          0.46        0.34         0.30
     112 J Nurs Adm                             194    0.28      0.18    0.24    0.52      0.19         0.11         0.24          0.33          0.36        0.27         0.33
     113 Am J Nurs                             1837    0.22      0.29    0.16    0.14      0.29         0.20         0.21          0.23          0.26        0.20         0.12
     114 Hosp Health Netw                       544    0.22      0.34    0.21    0.32      0.00         0.18         0.20          0.11          0.15        0.20         0.15
     115 J Gerontol B Psychol Sci Soc Sci       929    0.09              0.11    0.11      0.03         0.07         0.11          0.15          0.36        0.12         0.10


Explanations for the columns: Please see notes to Table 1.
                                                                                                       23
