                                NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




        IMPROVING RISK EQUALIZATION WITH CONSTRAINED REGRESSION

                                         Richard van Kleef
                                          Thomas McGuire
                                           Rene van Vliet
                                         Wynand van de Ven

                                        Working Paper 21570
                                http://www.nber.org/papers/w21570


                      NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                               1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                 Cambridge, MA 02138
                                    September 2015




We gratefully acknowledge the Dutch Ministry of Health, the Association of Health Insurers and Statistics
Netherlands for providing the administrative and survey data (see section 3). McGuire is grateful to
support from the National Institute of Mental Health (R01 MH094290) and the Laura and John Arnold
Foundation. The views expressed here are not necessarily those of the Foundation’s officers, directors
or staff. We also gratefully acknowledge the valuable comments on previous versions of this paper
by Konstantin Beck, Frank Eijkenaar, Randall Ellis, Laura Hatfield, Timothy Layton, Erzo Luttmer,
Joseph Newhouse, Sharon-Lise Normand, Sherri Rose, Erik Schut, Mark Shephard and Suzanne van
Veen. In addition, we thank Andrew Hicks for creating the figures. The responsibility for the content
of this article rests fully with the authors. The views expressed herein are those of the authors and
do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.

© 2015 by Richard van Kleef, Thomas McGuire, Rene van Vliet, and Wynand van de Ven. All rights
reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission
provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
Improving Risk Equalization with Constrained Regression
Richard van Kleef, Thomas McGuire, Rene van Vliet, and Wynand van de Ven
NBER Working Paper No. 21570
September 2015
JEL No. I10,I11,I13,I18

                                             ABSTRACT

Several countries rely on regulated health plan competition to combine affordability of health plans
with incentives for cost containment and quality improvement. Typically, these policies include premium
regulation supplemented with risk equalization to compensate health plans for predictable variation
in medical spending. An extensive empirical literature shows, however, that even the state-of-the-art
risk equalization models undercompensate some risk groups and overcompensate others, leaving systematic
incentives for risk selection. A natural approach to reducing under or overcompensation for a group
is to include membership in that group as an indicator in the risk equalization model. For several types
of indicators, however, inclusion can be problematic or infeasible. This paper introduces and illustrates
an alternative approach to reducing over or undercompensation in such cases: constraining the estimated
coefficients of the risk equalization model so as to limit over or undercompensation. Our empirical
illustration is based on administrative data on medical spending and risk characteristics of nearly all
individuals with basic health insurance in the Netherlands. We evaluate empirically the benefits of
constraints in terms of reduced under or overcompensation on indicators omitted from the Dutch risk
equalization model and their costs in terms of increased under or overcompensation on indicators included
in the model. Our findings imply that the benefits of introducing constraints can be worth the costs.
Constrained regression adds a tool for developing risk equalization models that can improve the overall
economic performance of health plan payment schemes.


Richard van Kleef                                   Rene van Vliet
Erasus University                                   Erasmus University
PO Box 1738                                         PO Box 1738
3000 DR Rotterdam                                   3000 DR Rotterdam
The Netherlands                                     The Netherlands
vankleef@bmg.eur.nl                                 r.vanvliet@bmg.eur.nl

Thomas McGuire                                      Wynand van de Ven
Department of Health Care Policy                    Erasmus University
Harvard Medical School                              PO Box 1738
180 Longwood Avenue                                 3000 DR Rotterdam
Boston, MA 02115                                    The Netherlands
and NBER                                            vandeven@bmg.eur.nl
mcguire@hcp.med.harvard.edu
1. Introduction



Several countries have adopted elements of Alain Enthoven’s model of regulated health plan

competition (Enthoven, 1993), which combines affordability of health plans with incentives for

cost containment and quality improvement.1 A crucial element of Enthoven’s model is the

adjustment of health plan payments to predictable variation in medical spending, also referred to

as risk equalization (RE). In the absence of premium regulation, RE mitigates incentives for

health plans to risk rate their premiums and thereby improves affordability of health plans for the

sick. In the presence of premium regulation – as is common in practice – RE mitigates incentives

for risk selection and thereby improves incentives for health plans to accept and serve the sick as

well as the healthy (Newhouse, 1996).2



Recent research has shown that even the state-of-the-art RE models – such as those used under

the Affordable Care Act in the United States or those used under the Health Insurance Act in the

Netherlands – systematically undercompensate groups of consumers in relatively poor health and

overcompensate the complementary groups of consumers in relatively good health (Layton et al.

2015; Van Kleef et al., 2013), exposing health plans and consumers to incentives for risk

selection. Risk selection threatens the performance of (regulated) health plan markets since it

may reduce 1) the quality of care (because plans may have a disincentive to meet the preferences

of the sick), 2) the efficiency of care (because risk selection may be a more cost-effective strategy


1
  By ‘health plan competition’ we mean competition among health insurers who offer one or multiple
health plans. A ‘health plan’ refers to a health insurance product. All consumers who have the same
‘health plan’ have an identical contract with the same insurer concerning benefits coverage, cost-sharing,
quality, services, etc. Since objectives and strategies of insurers can differ across health plans, this paper
will speak of health plans instead of insurers as decision makers.
2
  Newhouse (1996) defines risk selection as actions by consumers and health plans to exploit unpriced risk
heterogeneity and break pooling arrangements. Often the term selection is also used to refer to the
outcome of these actions.

                                                                                                            1
for plans to reduce medical spending than improving the efficiency of care), 3) the efficient

sorting of consumers among plans (when market segmentation by risk elevates premiums for

particular plans), and 4) the affordability of health plans to the sick (when the same market

segmentation causes the sick to face higher premiums). To contend with these potential

problems, researchers and policy makers work to improve the properties of health plan payment

schemes.3 In general, three strategies can be applied to reduce incentives for risk selection in

regulated health plan markets: improving RE, increasing risk sharing (e.g. via mandatory

reinsurance or risk corridors) and relaxing premium-rate restrictions. This paper focusses on the

first strategy.



The conventional approach to improving RE adds new/better risk indicators to the RE model,

thereby improving the fit at the individual level, as measured by an R-squared, and improving the

fit at the group level, as measured by the degree of under or overcompensation for particular

groups. If a group of interest (for example, persons with congestive heart failure) is included with

a single yes/no indicator in an ordinary least squares (OLS) RE model, the properties of least

squares ensure that the payment for this group will equal the average medical spending of this

group.4 For some groups, however, it can be problematic to include an indicator of membership

in the RE model. Clear examples are groups based on prior use of medical services: if indicators

for these groups are included in the RE model, increased utilization in one year may increase plan

payment in the following year, which reduces health plans’ incentives for efficiency. In this paper

we study two concrete examples of such groups: users of ‘home care’ in the previous year and


3
  By ‘health plan payment scheme’ we mean the total set of payment features, which can include risk
equalization, reinsurance, risk corridors and premiums among other features.
4
  The expected value of an OLS residual conditional on a dummy variable regressor is zero. The statistical
residual from an OLS model is the individual-level over or underpayment in a RE model based on the
regression coefficients.

                                                                                                        2
users of ‘physiotherapy’ in the previous year. While these groups are known to have relatively

high future spending, inclusion of an explicit indicator for these groups in the RE model may

introduce incentives to overuse these services (Van Vliet and Van Kleef, 2015). Leaving these

indicators out of the model, however, confronts health plans with incentives for risk selection,

e.g. by skimping on the quality of home care and physiotherapy.



In practice, RE models are estimated by OLS regression. If indicators are considered

inappropriate for inclusion in the RE model (hence referred to as omitted indicators),

conventional RE ignores these indicators during model estimation. This paper proposes an

indirect use of these indicators: rather than ignoring omitted indicators, we recognize them by

constraining the estimated coefficients of the RE model to reduce under or overcompensation of

the groups identified by these indicators. This constrained regression can improve compensation

for these groups by exploiting the empirical correlation between omitted and included indicators.

We evaluate the benefits of constraints in terms of reduced under or overcompensation on

indicators omitted from the RE model and their costs in terms of increased under or

overcompensation on indicators included in the model. We argue and illustrate empirically that

the gains from a well-chosen constraint using omitted indicators can be worth the costs in terms

of reduced fit for included indicators. Constrained regressions thus expand the tools available to

researchers and policy makers for modifying the fit of health plan payment schemes.



Our empirical application is the national basic health insurance for curative care in the

Netherlands, a well-established example of a regulated individual health plan market based on

principles of regulated competition (Van de Ven et al., 2013). In spite of a sophisticated RE

model, policy researchers have identified groups that are systematically under or

overcompensated (Van Kleef et al., 2013). The two groups we study in this paper are known to
                                                                                                3
be undercompensated by about 1,200 euro (home care group) and 900 euro (physiotherapy

group) per person per year. While individual-level indicators for membership in these groups are

available in administrative data, inclusion of these indicators in the RE model is problematic due

to incentives to overuse these services. Leaving the indicators out of the model, however, is also

problematic due to incentives for skimping on quality of home care and physiotherapy (Van Vliet

and Van Kleef, 2015). By constraining the coefficients in the RE model selection incentives

against users of home care and users of physiotherapy can be mitigated without introducing

incentives to overuse these services.



The paper is structured as follows. Section 2 discusses the method of constrained regression and

develops measures for empirically evaluating the costs and benefits when using constrained

regressions in the context of RE. In Sections 3 and 4 we apply our approach to the Dutch RE

model of 2015 using data on medical spending and characteristics of nearly all individuals with

basic health insurance in the Netherlands (N=16.5 million). We explore using constrained

regressions to address the undercompensation of the users of home care or physiotherapy in the

previous year. We apply our measures from Section 2 to show that, generally, some reduction in

undercompensation for indicators omitted from the RE model can be worth the increase in under

or overcompensation for indicators included in the model. Section 5 discusses our main findings

and their implications, and identifies possible next steps for making use of constraints to improve

overall performance of RE models.




                                                                                                 4
2. Theory and concepts



Constrained regression



Least squares regression methods choose values for a set of parameters, the estimated

coefficients, to minimize the residual sum of squared differences between the actual and fitted

values from the regression. A researcher may place constraints on the choice of the coefficients in

this minimization for various reasons. One common reason for imposing a constraint is to test a

hypothesis about a set of coefficients. For example, to test the hypothesis that earned and

unearned income has the same effect on household consumption, a constraint can impose the

restriction that the coefficients on these two types of income are the same. The researcher can

compare the model fit with and without the constraint using an F-statistic to test whether the

reduction in explained variance is statistically significant; if it is, the hypothesis of constant

returns is rejected.



Our motivation for introducing a constraint is different, and is akin to methods of constrained

optimization. Health plan payment schemes have multiple objectives subject to tradeoffs. For

example, in the design of a public health insurance program, one objective may be to reduce

financial risk of the population while another objective may be to reduce public expenditures,

with a tradeoff between the two. The locus of efficient policies can be found by maximizing one

objective subject to a given level of attainment of the other, by, for example, maximizing

financial protection for the population for a given level of public expenditures.5 By conducting


5
  A closely related and well-known application of this approach can be found in the Appendix “On
Optimal Insurance Policies” of Kenneth Arrow’s “Uncertainty and the welfare economics of medical
care” (Arrow, 1963).

                                                                                                 5
this maximization for different levels of public expenditure, the researcher can characterize the

tradeoff between spending more public money and reducing population financial risk.



Introducing constraints into a RE model serves a similar purpose. Constrained least squares

regression addresses selection incentives regarding included               and omitted indicators

simultaneously by pursuing the “usual” objective of a RE model – minimizing squared deviations

at the individual level for the included indicators – subject to a maximum value of under or

overcompensation for the omitted indicators. By varying the maximum value of this second

objective, researchers can trace out the tradeoffs between fit on the included indicators and over

or undercompensation on the omitted ones.6



Our approach to constrained regressions in RE is related to some previous literature. Glazer and

McGuire (2002) proposed using constrained regression to address selection problems, where the

constraints were derived from first-order conditions for plan profit maximization, with one

constraint for each service provided by the plan. RE weights were best fitting given a set of linear

constraints that guaranteed a balanced set of incentives for plans to fund all services. This

theoretical approach has never been implemented empirically, probably due to the complexity of

specifying the constraints. In addition, there was no obvious way to “tighten” or “loosen” the

constraints as there is here with the magnitude of undercompensation being the target of the

constraint. McGuire et al. (2013) and Eijkenaar et al. (2014) have used constrained regressions in

the context of RE, though for purposes other than addressing selection incentives.




6
 The form of constraints we use is written out in the Data and empirical methods section of this paper.
See, in particular, equation (2’).

                                                                                                     6
This paper focusses on situations where compensation for omitted variables is desired. This

starting point is distinct from that of Schokkaert and Van de Voorde (2004) who study situations

where compensation for omitted variables is not desired. They argue that when omitted indicators

for which compensation is not desired (which they refer to as R-variables)7 are correlated with

indicators included in the RE model for which compensation is desired (C-variables),

conventional RE leads to biased estimates of coefficients for C-variables since these will (partly)

pick up the variation in spending due to the omitted R-variables. In Schokkaert and Van de

Voorde’s terminology our paper exclusively focusses on C-variables.



Evaluating incentives for selection in RE models



A major purpose of RE models is to mitigate incentives for plans to over or underserve groups

among the population. Incentives to underserve enrollees with a mental illness, for example, are

created if the payments a plan receives for members of this group fall below the costs they bring

to the plan. A RE model that recognizes and pays more for persons with some mental illness

diagnoses can reduce the gap between average costs and average payments. However, if the RE

model recognizes some but not all mental conditions, a plan might seek to deter persons with

mental illness from joining by limiting access to mental health services – an example of the

inefficiency created by selection incentives. Incentives for a plan to “distort” its benefits away

from the efficient mix to attract/deter have been studied theoretically since Rothschild and

Stiglitz (1976),8 and empirically since the beginning of the use of RE in public insurance

programs (Pope et al., 2000). In the U.S. context, empirical evidence confirms that plans respond

7
  An example of an R-variable might be an indicator for smoking. Smoking may predict higher medical
spending but it may be undesirable to “reward” a smoker by higher RE payments.
8
  The Rothschild-Stiglitz model was adapted to managed care health insurance by Glazer and McGuire
(2000). See Breyer et al. (2012) for a recent review.

                                                                                                 7
to this type of incentives in service provision.9 In the Netherlands, several health plans have

reported publicly that the imperfect RE discourages them from improving the quality of care for

groups that are systematically undercompensated (Van de Ven et al., 2015).



Papers and reports concerned with incentives for selection first define the group or groups of

concern and then compare average payment for members of the group to average medical

spending by simulation methods. Evaluations of payment systems in Medicare and in the

Marketplaces in the U.S. commonly employ “predictive ratios”, a ratio with simulated RE

payments for the group in the numerator and medical spending in the denominator.

“Underpayment” is indicated if the predictive ratio is less than 1.0. Evaluating the RE model

proposed for the Marketplaces, Kautter et al. (2014) created subgroups of individuals by

predicted spending and computed predictive ratios for various subgroups ordered by these

predicted spending.10 In an evaluation of the CMS-HCC model used in Medicare, Pope et al.

(2011) report predictive ratios for subgroups defined by disease, numbers of prior

hospitalizations, demographic characteristics, and other factors.11



Other papers difference RE payments and spending to assess selection incentives, with the

difference being referred to as “undercompensation” if payments are less than spending and


9
   Cao and McGuire (2003) in Medicare and Eggleston and Bir (2009) in employer-based insurance find
patterns of spending on various services consistent with service-level selection among competing at-risk
plans. Ellis et al. (2013) rank services according to incentives to undersupply them. Consistent with
service-level selection, they show that HMO-type plans tend to underspend on services (in relation to the
average) just as the selection index predicts. This pattern of spending is not observed among enrollees in
unmanaged plans. See also Carey (2014).
10
   Defining subgroups of the population on the basis of predicted spending can lead to predictive ratios
close to 1.0 even if the prediction model itself is weak, and therefore is not necessarily a mark in favor of
the RE model. Unless the model itself does a good job at differentiating high from low cost individuals, a
predictive ratio according to a ranking by predicted spending is not very informative.
11
   Other measures of individual and group fit have been proposed and applied in the literature (See Van
Veen et al. 2015b for a review.)

                                                                                                           8
“overcompensation” in the opposite case. Van Kleef et al. (2013) merged survey information

with health claims for a subset of people in the Netherlands to calculate undercompensation for

various groups of people, including those with low physical and mental self-rated health status

and those reporting chronic conditions. In the current paper we track over and

undercompensation, both for defining constraints and as a basis for our evaluation metrics.



In empirical research, both forms of measures, predictive ratios and monetary differences, are

primarily applied to groups for whom an indicator is not included in the RE model. The reason is

that under the ordinary least squares approach, RE models eliminate under and overcompensation

for groups with indicators included in the RE model (see footnote 4). Under a constrained least

squares approach, however, over and undercompensation can appear for the latter as well.



Missing from the literature is an accepted method for aggregating group-level measures of under

and overcompensation to the entire population, or, in other words, there is no accepted summary

measure for comparing the comprehensive performance of alternative RE models affecting

multiple groups simultaneously. While we can agree that reducing undercompensation for a

group of interest is an improvement for that particular group, what if a RE alternative decreases

undercompensation for one group but increases it for another? Which RE model is preferred?

These questions are directly relevant for this paper since the type of constraints applied here are

expected to improve compensation for omitted groups but will generally worsen it for included

groups. A weighted sum of under and overcompensations for all groups of concern (both omitted

and included groups) is a natural basis for construction of a summary measure with the weight

being the share of the population in the group of interest. In the next section, we propose a family

of such measures that we apply later to examine empirically the effects of constraining estimated

coefficients in order to modify under and overcompensation by the Dutch RE model.
                                                                                                  9
A summary measure of potential selection inefficiency



A measure of “potential selection inefficiency” should do more than just summarize under and

overcompensations for groups of concern; it should also value the potential inefficiency resulting

from selection actions triggered by these under and overcompensations. Construction of such a

summary measure comes with two challenges. The first is to define groups in the population for

purposes of assessing under and overcompensation, and the second is to choose an appropriate

efficiency weighting for under and overcompensations.



Groups can be defined according to one indicator or a combination of indicators, some of which

may be included and some not included in the RE model. Some research defines groups

according to a single geographic indicator under the thinking that a health plan might favor or

disfavor certain regions because of systematic differences in medical spending, as was done in a

study of Germany by Bauhoff (2012). Other research defines groups according to the services

used, the idea being that a health plan could favor or disfavor primary versus some kinds of

specialty care, for example, to encourage/discourage potential enrollees anticipating making use

of those services.12



To explain our ideas about a summary measure, consider a mutually exclusive grouping of the

population based on one or more sets of discrete indicators.13        The indicator or indicators



12
   See Ellis and McGuire (2007) for implementation of this approach in Medicare and McGuire et al.
(2014) for its application in Marketplaces.
13
   The discussion in this section draws on Layton et al. (2015) who derive a similar summary measure
starting with conditions for profit maximization by a health plan.

                                                                                                 10
partition the population into G mutually exclusive groups indexed by g with g = 1, …, G. We can

then use data to determine:



sg      the share of the population in group g, with             ,

rg      the average plan revenue for a person in group g,

cg      the average plan cost for a person in group g,

rg - cg under/overcompensation for group g.



Given these parameters, under and overcompensations can be summarized by                            , i.e.

the sum of absolute under and overcompensations weighted by the share of the affected

population. We follow standard assumptions (used in calculation of both predictive ratios and

over and undercompensation) by regarding medical spending as plan cost and figuring over and

undercompensation for an average plan.14             With this, in the Dutch context, over and

undercompensation is solely a function of the RE payments.15 Specifically, average plan revenues

equals average predicted medical spending from the RE model and                          boils down to

absolute residual spending for group g from the RE model. Moreover,                               equals

zero.



As a next step, we incorporate the magnitude of the potential inefficiency associated with the

selection incentives by weighting the under or overcompensation for each group. The statistical

14
   By doing so we avoid concern with selection across plans, differential premiums, and differential plan
efficiency.
15
    In many health care schemes multiple payment features may coexist (e.g. risk equalization and
reinsurance). Practical use of our summary measure should incorporate all these relevant features. For
example, reinsurance figures into plan payments in Marketplaces in the US, and a high-cost pool, with
similar effects as reinsurance was operative in the Netherlands. Simulating payments recognizing these
plan payment features can be used in calculating predictive ratios or over/undercompensation (Layton et
al., 2015; Van Kleef and Van Vliet, 2012).

                                                                                                      11
and economic literature contains support for squaring the gap. Individual and group R-squared

measures are obviously based on squared deviations.16 In welfare economics, the efficiency loss

associated with a price distortion (such as a tax) is proportional to the square of the distortion. We

acknowledge, however, that the choice of the weighting function is an open issue, including the

question of whether the same function should be applied to deviations for all groups. We will

come back to these issues in the Discussion section. In our empirical analyses, we apply several

alternative weighting functions, raising under and overcompensations to powers ranging from 1

to 2.17



We thus propose a summary measure of the form:

L=                        with 1 ≤ p ≤ 2.                                (1)



The measure of “loss” L is intuitive, weighting under/overcompensation raised to a power by the

share of the affected population, and is easy to compute. L has a minimum value of 0 and no

upper bound. Comparing L for RE models is meaningful only for comparing models estimated on

the same data with the same definitions of group membership. In our empirical analyses we

estimate all RE models on the exactly the same data with exactly the same group definition.

Under this procedure, RE scheme 1 will be said to be preferred to scheme 2 if L1 < L2.




16
   See Van Veen et al. (2015b) for discussion of the various statistical measures applied to evaluation of
RE schemes.
17
   Layton et al. (2015) propose a metric similar to L with p = 2, squaring the payment-cost gap for each
group, also appealing to the usual form of welfare loss in economics, in which the area of a welfare
triangle is proportional to the square of a discrepancy between the first-best and the actual price. Their
selection metric measures improvement in incentives over a payment system with no premium categories
and no RE, and falls between 0 and 1. Lorenz (2014) considers situations in which over and
undercompensation may impose different magnitude of losses, and estimators that would be appropriate
for minimizing the asymmetric loss functions.

                                                                                                       12
As we noted at the outset of this section the formulation of welfare loss in (1) depends on

stipulation of the groups to study, which is also not a straightforward decision. In principle,

definition of groups should be based on selection concerns like the extent to which groups may

be vulnerable to over or underprovision of services by health plans. Taking these factors into

account would ideally be based on an elicitation of the concerns of regulators and an analysis of

what levers plans have to make discriminatory service decisions. We intend the current paper to

be a “proof of concept” of the idea of using constraints in a RE model, and select a subset of the

groups that are relevant in terms of social welfare. In the Discussion section we return to the

question of how best to choose a grouping to guide design of RE schemes.



As we explain in the Data and empirical methods section, our groups are categorized by a set of

indicators included in the current Dutch RE model and a set of indicators omitted from the

model. The utility of constraints on regression coefficients emerges when at least one indicator is

omitted from the RE model. We will use the included and the omitted indicators jointly to define

mutually exclusive groups for the entire Dutch population, and compute loss L for this partition

of the population. We also will compute the loss for the two sets of included and omitted

indicators separately. These two partial classifications allow us to show the effect of constraints

on groups identified by the included versus the omitted indicators. Tightening the constraint

improves things for the omitted indicators but imposes a cost on fit among the included

indicators.




                                                                                                13
3. Data and empirical methods



Data



The empirical analyses are based on administrative data including individual-level information

on medical spending and risk indicators for almost the entire Dutch population in 2012 (N=16.5

million). These data come from various sources, including health plans, tax authorities and the

registration service for social benefits.18 The resulting merged data are those used to estimate the

RE model for health plan payment in the Netherlands in 2015. As a first step in our analyses we

faithfully replicate the Dutch RE model of 2015, such that our “base model” accurately indicates

expected over and undercompensation for groups for 2015 (Eijkenaar et al., 2014).               Our

alternative RE models and simulations modify this base model and are estimated on the same

data. Here we briefly describe the risk indicators included in the base model and provide some

general statistics.



The Dutch RE model for 2015 is the product of more than twenty years of research and

experience and includes the following risk indicators: 40 risk classes based on an interaction

between age and gender, 25 risk classes based on the use of specified prescription drugs in the

previous year referred to as pharmacy-based cost groups or PCG’s (Lamers and Van Vliet, 2004),

16 risk classes based on diagnostic information from hospital treatment in the previous year

referred to as diagnoses-based cost groups or DCG’s (Prinsze and Van Vliet, 2007; Van Kleef et

al., 2014), seven risk classes for people with high costs in multiple prior years referred to as

18
   In estimating the RE model for 2015, medical spending from 2012 has been adjusted to reflect
mandatory coverage changes in the period 2013-2015. In a second stage coefficients were linearly
adjusted for expected cost inflation. For reasons of simplicity we excluded the second stage from our
analysis.

                                                                                                  14
multiple-year high cost groups or MHCG’s (Van Kleef and Van Vliet, 2012), five risk classes

based on the use of durable medical equipment in the previous year referred to as durable medical

equipment cost groups or DMECG’s (Van Kleef and Van Vliet, 2010), four risk classes based on

an interaction between two age groups and yes/no ‘PCG+DCG+MHCG+DMECG>0’, 12 risk

classes based on an interaction between socioeconomic status and age, 10 risk classes based on

regional characteristics and 19 risk classes based on an interaction between source of income and

age. All risk indicators have been carefully developed in research programs sponsored by the

Dutch Ministry of Health. For further details on these risk indicators, see Van Kleef et al.

(2013).19



The RE model of 2015 was estimated by a least-squares regression with medical spending in

2012 as the dependent variable and the risk classes described above as 138 independent dummy

variables.20 Medical spending includes the expenses on primary care, pharmaceuticals, hospital

inpatient and outpatient care, maternity care, obstetrics and medical devices among other

categories, but excludes expenses on mental health care and home health nursing care.21

Although the latter two categories of spending are included in the mandatory benefit package of

2015, they are omitted from the main RE model, with funds allocated for them using a separate

RE model. In this paper we will be concerned with the primary RE model used to allocate more


19
   A complete description of the Dutch payment system would include some subsidiary (and less well-
developed) RE models for some small cost categories, and description of some of the regional adjustments
built into the main model. These details are not important for our simulations. Readers are referred to
Eijkenaar et al. (2014) for full details on the RE models.
20
   Analogous to the RE methodology in the Netherlands, medical spending in 2012 (dependent variable) is
annualized by dividing actual individual-level costs of 2012 by the fraction of the year an individual was
enrolled in the basic health insurance in 2012. Subsequently, this ‘fraction’ is included as a weight in the
estimation model and computation of means. For example, an individual who was enrolled for 6 months
and had 1,000 Euros expenses is given annualized costs of 2,000 Euro (1,000/0.5) and a weight of 0.5.
21
   Since medical expenses for home care itself are excluded, the undercompensation of about 1,200 Euro
on users of home care implies that prior use of home care has predictive value for other types of medical
expenses. A possible explanation is that users of home care have a relatively high probability of dying.

                                                                                                         15
than 80 percent of health care costs among health plans in the Netherlands in 2015 (Eijkenaar et

al., 2014). We refer to the RE model of 2015 as the base model.



Table 1 provides some univariate information on the prevalence of risk characteristics and the

distribution of medical spending in our data. For simplicity of presentation we report aggregated

risk categories instead of all 138 explanatory variables separately. Average spending in the

population equals 1,848 Euro per person per year. Not surprisingly, average spending is relatively

high for people age 65 years or older, those who receive a disability benefit, people living at an

address with more than 15 residents (which approximates being in an institution for long-term

care) and those in a PCG, DCG, DMECG and/or MHCG. The latter four are the most direct

indicators of morbidity; nearly 23 percent of the population is classified by at least one of these

morbidity indicators.



[Table 1]



In addition to the administrative data, we use health survey information to assess how constraints

on undercompensation for one omitted group affect estimates of over and undercompensation for

a series of other omitted groups of interest.     The survey was conducted in 2011 among a

representative sample of the Dutch population and includes a broad range of questions on general

health status, physical impairments, mental health problems, particular chronic diseases and prior

utilization of medical care. A unique, anonymous person identifier allows merging the survey

information with the administrative data. We calculate under and overcompensations for survey

groups as the predicted expenses from an RE model estimated on the administrative data (N=16.5

million) minus the actual expenses. In contrast to the administrative data, the survey data are

available only for a small sample (N=14,310) of the population, implying that under or
                                                                                                16
overcompensation for groups identified from the survey may be vulnerable to random variation.

We report on groups for which under or overcompensation by the base model is statistically

significant. For the specific definition of these groups see Van Veen et al. (2015a, Appendix 2).



Selecting study indicators to include and omit from the RE model



We select a set of indicators included in the base RE model and a set omitted from this model in

order to study how constrained regression methods affect fit for the two types of indicators. We

select the DCG grouping as our included indicator since it is one of the most direct indicators of

morbidity in the Dutch RE model and because it is already mutually exclusive (contrary to

PCG’s).    The Dutch DCGs are a hierarchical categorization of persons based on selected

diagnostic information from inpatient or outpatient hospital treatment in the previous year.22

Persons are classified in a DCG if they received at least one of these selected treatments in the

previous year. The Diagnostic Cost Group (DCG) categorization partitions the population into

16 mutually exclusive groups, from 0 to 15. As shown in Table 2, the “0” group, those with none

of the selected treatments in the previous period, account for 91% of the population. Where the

“0” group has below average medical expenses, the higher DCGs have above average expenses.

Since all DCGs are explicitly included as dummy regressors in the Dutch RE model, average

predicted spending for these groups perfectly fits average actual spending (see footnote 4),

implying that for all DCGs the average under/overcompensation is zero (see Table 2).


22
  The DCG classification was developed in several steps. First, a team of medical experts carefully
determined whether or not diagnoses refer to a chronic condition. Diagnoses referring to a chronic
condition were categorized in 144 more or less clinically homogeneous groups, which – in a next step –
were clustered into 15 DCGs based on residual cost (according to a prediction model including
explanatory variables based on age, gender and PCGs) using Ward’s hierarchical clustering method. If
enrollees have multiple diagnoses that would fall into different DCGs, they are classified in only one
DCG, i.e. the one with the highest estimated coefficient. For further details about the Dutch DCG’s see
Van Kleef et al. (2014).

                                                                                                    17
Our omitted indicators are ‘yes/no use of home care in the year t-1’ and ‘yes/no use of

physiotherapy in the year t-1’.23 Given the zero-sum principle of the Dutch RE model (and the

constrained models estimated in our empirical analyses), reductions in undercompensation for the

“yes” groups imply corresponding reductions in overcompensation for the complementary “no”

groups. For example, if the undercompensation for users of home care reduces by 40 percent, the

overcompensation for the complementary group of non-users will reduce by 40 percent too. For

simplicity of presentation we primarily focus on the two “yes” groups. As shown in Table 2,

these two groups comprise 2.7% and 2.4% of the population in year t, respectively. Both groups

are systematically undercompensated by the current Dutch RE model, but inclusion of these

indicators in the RE model is regarded as problematic since this would introduce incentives to

overuse these services (Van Vliet and Van Kleef, 2015). For some analyses we convert the two

yes/no indicators into four mutually exclusive categories by crossing the indicators and

classifying the population as having none, home care only, physiotherapy only, or both indicators

in the previous year.



[Table 2]



Constraining coefficients in the RE models



We introduce a series of constraints to the base RE model that limit the under/overcompensation

for one or more omitted indicators to a fixed amount.            Undercompensation is limited by


23
  These indicators are based on the use of home care and physiotherapy as far as covered by the Dutch
basic benefit package of 2015. This benefit package fully covers the use of home care. Physiotherapy is
only covered for treatment of certain chronic conditions and above a threshold of 20 visits.

                                                                                                    18
specifying in a constraint that the average payment for an omitted group is equal to certain value.

For any person i, the RE payment is                   where xij is the value of the included 0/1

indicator j for person i, and bj is the weight on the indicator in the RE formula. If the number of

people in the group of interest g is ng the average payment for a member of group g is:



                                             (2)




This can be rewritten as:



                                             (2’)



Where       is the mean value of indicator variable j for group g. This group mean must be

calculated on an initial pass through the data. The constraints then take the form of setting

equal to a target value which can be easily implemented with the RESTRICT statement in the

PROC REG procedure in SAS. This constraint is simply an equation linear in the coefficients of

the RE model, resulting in coefficient estimates that maximize the fit of the model as measured

by an R-squared given that the compensation for g equals the specified value. The target value

for   can be chosen as any amount; here, we reduce undercompensation for the omitted group(s)

by a fixed percentage in relation to the base model.         Since the constraint will bind, the

constrained models will always yield a lower R-squared than the unconstrained base RE model.




                                                                                                19
Empirical analyses



As shown in Table 2, the Dutch RE model of 2015 (our “base model”) leads to an average per

person undercompensation of 1,231 Euro for users of home care in the previous year and 922

Euro for users of physiotherapy in the previous year.         Given these undercompensations, we

begin by estimating a series of constrained regressions, where in each case there is just one

constraint. For each of the two omitted indicators we reduce the undercompensation in series by

20%, 40%, 60%, 80% and 100%. For each model we calculate measures of overall fit (R-

squared and Cummings Prediction Measure (CPM)) as well as measures for group fit (under or

overcompensation for included and omitted groups).24 To summarize overall potential selection

inefficiency, we track a series of loss measures based on the expression in (1). We measure loss

for the mutually exclusive set of four groups identified by the omitted indicators, the mutually

exclusive set of the 16 included DCG’s, and for the cross-product of the two sets (64 groups).

We also consider a range of powers to apply to the payment gap for each group of interest in

order to check the sensitivity of results to the form of the loss function.



In a next step, guided by the results for the single constraints, we try several combinations of

constraints for the two omitted indicators to check if two constraints can produce better overall

model performance than any single constraint. We find a superior two-constraint specification

that performs better than any model with a single constraint.




24
     R-squared is computed as =              . CPM is computed as             .


                                                                                              20
4. Results



Table 3 shows results for the base RE model and for the same model supplemented with a series

of single constraints to reduce undercompensation for the group with use of home care in year t-

1. As expected, the R-squared is lower for the constrained models than for the base model. The

incremental loss in R-squared goes up as the constraint is more binding, but the absolute

magnitude of the reduction in R-squared is always very small: the most binding constraint in

which the undercompensation for users of home care in year t-1 is completely eliminated

decreases the R-squared by only 0.3 percentage points. Thus, in terms of the R-squared, the costs

of the constraint appear to be very low. In terms of the CPM (not bound to fall in a “least-

squares” regression) the constrained model even leads to better fit than the base model, though

the actual improvement is relatively minor.



[Table 3]



To assess group-level fit, Figure 1 presents results for the sets of included and omitted groups.

The capital letters H and P represent the undercompensation in year t for users of home care and

physiotherapy in year t-1, respectively. By design, the undercompensation for users of home care

in year t-1 is smaller for the constrained models than for the base model. More interesting is the

reduction of undercompensation for users of physiotherapy in year t-1, showing that reducing

undercompensation for one omitted group can also improve compensation for another omitted

group. Apparently, certain risk indicators in the RE model are positively correlated with both the

home care group and the physiotherapy group. When weights on these risk indicators are altered

by the constraint, undercompensation for the physiotherapy group is reduced as well.


                                                                                               21
Figure 1 also shows that, as expected, the constraint for the omitted group introduces over and

undercompensation for the group indicators included in the RE model. The small numbers

represent the overcompensation for the 15 DCGs while the large ‘0’ represents the

undercompensation for those without a DCG.              For the latter group the constrained models

introduce an undercompensation up to 40 Euros per person per year; for the DCGs the models

with constraints introduce overcompensation up to 1,280 Euro per person per year. The direction

of these under and overcompensations can be explained by the positive correlation between the

omitted groups and the DCG’s: since the home care and physiotherapy groups have relatively

high proportions of people in a DCG (not shown here), the constrained model overcompensates

the DCG’s in order to move funds to these omitted groups.25 Like the reduction in

undercompensation for users of home care, the change in under or overcompensation for the

other groups in Figure 1 is also linear, a consequence of constrained least-squares estimators with

linear constraints.26



[Figure 1]



Figure 2 reports the analogous results for the base model supplemented with a series of single

constraints reducing the undercompensation for users of physiotherapy in the previous year.


25
    Payment weights emerging from a constrained regression hear some similarity to the finding in Glazer
and McGuire (2000) that optimal risk adjusted weights should reflect the correlation between indicators
part of the risk equalization and omitted factors affecting health care expenses.
26
    This can be shown by writing out the formula for the estimated coefficients in constrained least squares.
Suppose we seek to estimate a vector β of regression coefficients on j variables X subject to q linear
constraints of the form QT where Q is a jxq matrix of full rank and the superscript T indicates the
transpose of a matrix. Y is a qx1 vector of constants. One of these q equations could be interpreted in our
context as a constraint that the average payment for a target group is equal to an amount “y.” The
constrained estimator is
  c
    = – (XTX)-1Q(QT(XTX)-1Q)-1(QT - y).
From this it is clear that d c/dy is constant.


                                                                                                          22
Patterns are similar to those in Figure 1, with the difference that the constraint regarding

physiotherapy leads to bigger changes in under or overcompensation for other groups (both the

included groups and the other omitted group).



[Figure 2]



Introduction of a constraint involves a trade-off between a reduction of undercompensation for

omitted groups and an increase in under or overcompensation for the included ones. When it

comes to incentives for risk selection, however, it is not only the under or overcompensation that

matters, but also the size of the affected group.27 Figure 3 combines these two aspects, showing

selected results for three of the RE models from Figures 1 and 2. The height of the bars indicates

the average under or overcompensation for a group and the width indicates the relative size of the

group. The product of height and width, as represented by the area of the bars, indicate the total

under or overcompensation for a group. The right side of Panel A shows the undercompensation

for the two omitted indicators in the base model. The left side of the panels tracks the

overcompensation for the larger of the included groups (DCGs with at least 1% of the population

included). With no constraint, least-squares estimators eliminate over or undercompensation in

the base model for the included groups. Panel B shows results for the restriction of reducing the

undercompensation for the home care group by 80% compared to the base model.

Undercompensation for both omitted groups falls as was reported in Figure 1, and

overcompensation appears for the DCGs shown in the Figure. Panel C shows the same set of

results for one of the models in Figure 2.          Overall, Figure 3 illustrates that constraining

27
   Next to incentives for risk selection, another relevant aspect of the trade-off between a reduction of
undercompensation for omitted groups and an increase in under or overcompensation for the included
groups may be the potential effects of selection actions (that may differ across these groups). We will
elaborate on this in the Discussion section.

                                                                                                      23
undercompensation for one omitted group pushes funds towards that specific group as well as to

the other omitted group, and to “sick people” in general, at least as indicated by a DCG. For the

DCGs in Figure 3 this appears as an overcompensation for members of these groups.



[Figure 3]



Though the group results in Figures 1, 2 and 3 are informative, they cannot evaluate trade-offs

between the improvement for omitted groups and the worsening for included groups. As argued

in Section 2 of this paper, evaluating the trade-off can be based on a mutually exclusive grouping

of individuals and a weighting of under and overcompensation, as is done by our loss measure

proposed in Section 2.    The essence of the loss measure in (1) is that weighted under or

overcompensations are computed and aggregated for mutually exclusive groups.



Figure 4 illustrates application of our loss measure to the base model and to the same model with

a single constraint for reducing the undercompensation for the home care group. The measure is

computed according to formula (1) with p=2, separately for two sets of mutually exclusive

groups: the four combinations of yes/no home care use and yes/no physiotherapy use in the

previous year (solid line) and the 16 DCG-groups (dotted line). In the case of p = 2, we refer to

our loss measure as the weighted mean squared deviation (WMSD). The results clearly show the

trade-off between the improvement for the omitted groups and the deterioration for included

groups.



[Figure 4]




                                                                                               24
Whereas Figure 4 illustrates application of the loss measure separately for omitted and included

groups, Figure 5 integrates the losses on omitted and included groups in a single measure. As in

Figure 4, the measure is calculated according to formula (1) with p=2, but this time for all 64

mutually exclusive combinations of the four omitted and 16 included groups. Up to an 80 percent

reduction in undercompensation for home care the constraint reduces the overall loss, but further

tightening the restriction for the omitted group increases the overall loss because of deterioration

in the fit of compensation for the included groups. Based on these results we conclude that for

mutually exclusive combinations of the selected included and omitted groups studied in this

paper, a well-chosen constrained model can outperform the base model.



[Figure 5]



To check sensitivity of our results to different assumptions about the loss function, we calculated

the summary measure (as presented in Figure 5) for values of p ranging from 1.0 to 2.0. Figure 6

displays the normalized values of weighted mean absolute deviations (WMAD, a more general

term to describe our loss function for values of p other than 2.0) for the end points of 1.0 and 2.0.

These are normalized so that the WMAD for each set of model comparisons is set at 100 for the

base model. The pattern of loss reduction is similar for p = 1 and p = 2 (also for the intermediate

values of p not shown). In Panel A, loss falls as undercompensation is reduced for users of home

care, but after some point in the 60-80% reduction range, losses go up. The findings for reducing

undercompensation for users of physiotherapy shown in Panel B are similar. For both weights of

the over and undercompensation, although the exact minimum varies slightly, the same U-shape

describes the results. At least in the application we consider here, the finding that a moderate

reduction in undercompensation minimizes losses is insensitive to reasonable weights for the

absolute value of the over and undercompensation.
                                                                                                  25
[Figure 6]



The results presented above clearly show that for a mutually exclusive set of the selected

included and omitted indicators, a single-constraint model can outperform the base model. A

natural next question is whether adding a second constraint to the model can lead to further

improvements. To check this in our case we started with the most effective single constraint for

home care according to our loss function with p = 2: reducing the undercompensation for home

care by 80%. (This is the minimum of the U-shaped dotted line corresponding to p = 2 from

Figure 6 Panel A). We introduced the additional constraint that the undercompensation for

physiotherapy should be reduced 20% from the base model, and then should be reduced by 40%.

The value of the loss function (the WMSD) fell by slightly more than 1% of its value with the

first constraint at a target undercompensation for physiotherapy of 20% less, but then went up as

the second constraint was tightened to the 40% drop in undercompensation.               While the

improvement obtained by introducing the second constraint is considerably less when the first

constraint is roughly optimized, the results show that in terms of the loss measure applied here, a

two-constraint model can outperform a single-constraint model.



As a final step we examined the effects of constraints for modifying undercompensation for home

care and physiotherapy users on a series of other omitted groups of interest identified by health

survey information. As described in the data section, the small sample size (N=14,310) implies

that under or overcompensations for groups can be vulnerable to random variation. Figure 7

shows results for the ten groups for which the initial under or overcompensation by the base




                                                                                                26
model is statistically significant (p ≤ 0.05).28 The results are striking: a single constraint for

reducing the undercompensation for users of home care (or for users of physiotherapy) in the

previous year can also substantially reduce under or overcompensation for other omitted groups.

Apparently, certain risk indicators in the RE model are correlated with both the home care

(physiotherapy) group and the groups presented in Figure 7. When weights on these risk

indicators are altered by the constraint, this reduces under or overcompensation for the groups in

Figure 7 as well.



[Figure 7]



For example, consider the group on the left-hand side of Figure 7, those reporting their health

status to be in the lowest three categories: bad, poor or moderate, composing 19% of the

population. These people are undercompensated by an average of 331 Euros in the base model.

If we impose the constraint eliminating the undercompensation for home care, the

undercompensation for the bad-poor-moderates falls to 118 Euros, and if we impose instead the

constraint that we eliminate the undercompensation for physiotherapy, the undercompensation

disappears altogether (to only 8 Euros). Remarkably, for all eight of the undercompensated

groups, imposing either constraint has a meaningful favorable impact on the undercompensation.

The constraints also improve payments for the groups that were overcompensated, as shown on

the right-hand side of Figure 7.         The 67% of the population with no chronic illness were

overcompensated by 116 Euros in the base model, and this is cut to 32 with the home care

constraint imposed and 16 if the physiotherapy constraint is imposed.



28
  The test is a two-sided t-test that the difference between payment and cost for individuals in each group
equals zero.

                                                                                                         27
The findings in Figure 7 have two important implications. First, the observation that under and

overcompensations for the groups in the figure change substantially as a result of a constraint

implies that an appropriate trade-off between the benefits and costs of a constraint requires

involving all groups of interest. This calls attention to the questions, “What are the groups of

interest?” and, “Are these groups equally relevant or are some more important than others?” We

discuss these issues in the next section. Second, the direction of the changes in under and

overcompensation in Figure 7 implies that the benefits of constrained regression may reach far: a

single constraint intended to improve payment fit for one relevant group can lead to an

improvement for many others.



5. Discussion



This paper proposed and illustrated an innovative approach to reducing selection incentives on

group indicators omitted from a RE model: constraining the estimated coefficients of the RE

model such that the under or overcompensation of the group identified by an omitted indicator

equals a specified amount. This approach is particularly relevant for indicators that are

inappropriate for inclusion in the RE model due to perverse incentives. Two examples of such

indicators are the use of home care or physiotherapy in the previous year. While these are readily

available in administrative data, inclusion in the RE model creates incentives to overuse these

services. Leaving the indicators out of the model, however, creates incentives for skimping on

quality of these services. Constrained regression can mitigate selection incentives against users of

home care or physiotherapy without introducing incentives to overuse these services.



Compared to an unconstrained model, constraints by definition reduce model fit in terms of R-

squared. Our empirical application of constrained regression to the Dutch RE model of 2015,
                                                                                                 28
however, shows that the magnitude of this reduction may be marginal. The Cummings Prediction

Measure (CPM) changes little with the introduction of the constraints considered here. On the

basis of our results, an R-squared or CPM should be supplemented with other measures when

evaluating constrained regression models since R-squared and CPM appear to be insensitive to

changes in group-level fit induced by the introduction of the constraints considered here.



At a group level, a constraint limiting under or overcompensation for an omitted group comes at

the costs of introducing under or overcompensation for included groups. To assess this trade-off,

we proposed a loss measure reflecting potential selection inefficiency. Our empirical application

of this measure to a set of omitted and included groups shows that the improvement for omitted

groups can outweigh the deterioration for included groups. Moreover, multiple constraints can

reduce potential selection inefficiency over a single constraint. Although we study a particular

application of constrained regressions, we have no reason to think these findings are special to

this empirical setting. If an indicator for an omitted group of interest is correlated with variables

already included in the RE model, it should generally be possible to introduce at least a modest

constraint that makes first-order cuts in undercompensation for the group with the omitted

indicator at the cost of only “marginal” over/undercompensation for groups based on included

indicators.   It will be worthwhile to investigate the conditions (if they exist) under which

introduction of a constraint at the margin is associated with an improvement in selection

efficiency, perhaps using envelope-theorem type arguments.             In any case, the practical

performance of constraints in a particular plan payment application is straightforward to assess

systematically for each setting.



This paper is intended to be a “proof of concept.” Ultimately, to be useful in terms of plan

payment redesign, application of constrained regression methods requires defining the groups
                                                                                                  29
that are considered relevant targets for risk selection and valuing under or overcompensation for

these groups in terms of valid measures of potential selection inefficiency. Hence we discuss

possible next steps to guide practical development of constrained regression methods in RE

settings.



Mutually exclusive groups: which and how?



In order to optimize constrained RE models it is important to define the groups that are

considered relevant targets of risk selection. It seems self-evident that there will be a social

concern for some groups with indicators not included in a RE model, as well as groups with

indicators already included. Once the relevant groups are defined, an appropriate method must

be developed for creating mutually exclusive groups. In our empirical illustration such groups

were defined by unique combinations of relevant risk indicators. It is certainly possible to apply

our metric for inefficiency based on equation (1) or some variant of that to any number of groups,

but for real-world applications, a group based on all combinations of indicators may lose

meaning in the presence of a large number of multiple indicators. For example, twenty yes/no

variables each splitting the population in two groups would result in more than a million

combinations. Such a comprehensive set of mutually exclusive groups would be problematic

since numbers of individuals per cell can become too small for approximating systematic under

and overcompensation due to random variation. Moreover, not all mutually exclusive groups will

represent stand-alone targets for risk selection.



While there are practical difficulties in defining groups of interest, we believe our approach

offers an opportunity to expand the role of regulators and public policy makers. Rather than

being reactive to problems identified in empirical study of RE models, regulators can be
                                                                                               30
proactive and take steps to define the objectives that will be maximized by RE model estimation.

Further research is clearly necessary to find a process by which a social consensus can be reached

about defining groups of concern for protection against incentives for selection.



Weighting under and overcompensation: why and how?



After defining the groups that are considered relevant targets of risk selection, another crucial

step for optimizing constrained RE models is to value the potential inefficiency resulting from

selection actions triggered by specific under and overcompensations. Economic and statistical

analysis can supply some initial guidance in this area. Literature on selection incentives provides

at least four arguments why potential selection inefficiency is not necessarily constant across

groups and not necessarily proportional to the size of under or overcompensation. A first

argument comes from Van Barneveld et al. (2000) who contend that small predictable profits and

losses are likely to be irrelevant for a health plan. Selection can be costly and the net benefits are

uncertain, and small incentives may simply not induce a health plan to act. A second argument

derived from standard welfare economics is made by Layton et al. (2015) who show that the

welfare loss from price distortions due to under or overcompensation by a RE model is

proportional to the square of these measures, implying that the inefficiency from selection goes

up more than proportionally with the magnitude of the under and overcompensation. A third

argument can be drawn from the work by Ellis and McGuire (2007) who argue that selection

incentives do not just depend on an indicator’s predictiveness (how well the indicator co-varies

with total health care spending) but also on predictability of that indicator (how well the indicator

can be anticipated) and demand responsiveness of individuals scoring on that indicator. For

example, Ellis and McGuire find that both ‘use of durable medical equipment’ and ‘use of

anesthesia’ are indicators with high predictiveness but that the first indicator is much more
                                                                                                   31
predictable (and therefore much more vulnerable to service level distortion) than the latter. This

point implies that potential selection inefficiency of under or overcompensation for one group

can be larger than that of an equal under or overcompensation for other groups. A fourth

argument comes from Van de Ven et al. (2015) who contend that potential selection inefficiency

depends on the specific selection actions that can occur as a consequence of under or

overcompensation. They distinguish many selection actions, such as selective advertising,

offering choice of deductible, making supplementary insurance (un)attractive for certain groups,

offering group contracts and quality skimping. They argue that of all possible selection actions

‘quality skimping’ is a special threat to the functioning of regulated health plan markets because

it not only reduces market efficiency, but also the quality of medical care. Incentives for quality

skimping, however, are only present when groups with relatively strong preferences for high

quality are undercompensated.29 After all, if these groups would be overcompensated health

plans would have incentives to improve quality of care. Thus, for groups with strong preferences

for high quality – presumably those with a chronic condition – undercompensation may be worse

than overcompensation.30



Once under and overcompensations are valued, a loss function can readily be specified. For

example, based on the idea of Van Barneveld et al. (2000) that small under or overcompensation

can be ignored, the loss function could be rewritten to “count” over and undercompensation

above certain absolute threshold values, as done by Beck et al. (2010). Above the threshold

value, potential effects of different forms of selection can be included by using group-specific


29
   In a zero-sum RE payment scheme, undercompensation of the chronically ill implies overcompensation
of the complementary group of healthy individuals, vice versa.
30
    Note that constrained regression can be a tool for changing undercompensation for groups of
chronically ill into overcompensation. A related argument is made by Lorenz (2014) who also identifies
empirical methods that weight over and undercompensation asymmetrically.

                                                                                                   32
weights. Minimization of the loss function with respect to weights on included indicators,

subject to constraints for modifying under/overcompensation on group indicators omitted from

the model, implies a new way for estimating parameters of a RE model and modifying selection

incentives.31



Although evidence is lacking to be able to definitively fine tune a loss function, the exercise of

specifying a metric for economic inefficiencies caused by under or overcompensation should be a

useful one for both policymakers and researchers. Without a firm consensus on a particular form

of a loss function, some sensitivity analysis will be necessary to bound a reasonable range of

results.



Potential applications



This paper has proposed constrained regression as an instrument for reducing under or

overcompensation of groups defined by prior utilization for which it may be problematic to

include an indicator of membership in the RE model due to incentives for overuse. The extent to

which inclusion of such indicators may actually induce incentives for overuse, however, may

differ from case to case. In general, these incentives depend on the payment weight (i.e. the

regression coefficient) for the indicator in relation to the marginal cost of providing additional

care to enhance higher RE payments. If the payment weight exceeds these marginal costs,

incentives for overuse are present; in the opposite case they are absent. This suggests that an

indicator based on prior utilization can be included in the RE model as long as its estimated

coefficient does not exceed the marginal costs of enhancing higher RE payments. Although not

31
  For optimization of constrained RE models it may be interesting to consider use of inequality-type
constraints (instead of equality-type constraints applied in this paper).

                                                                                                 33
applied in our analyses, such a rule can be easily implemented in a constrained regression:

constrain the estimated coefficients of the RE model such that 1) the coefficient for indicator g

equals a specified value and 2) the predicted spending for group g equals a specified amount. An

advantage of this ‘partial’ inclusion of indicator g in the RE model compared to the modality

applied in this paper (no inclusion of indicator g at all) may be that the constraint is less binding.



In addition to avoiding incentives for overuse, there may be other reasons for using constrained

regression instead of including a risk indicator directly in the RE model. Van de Ven and Ellis

(2000) argue that for inclusion in the RE model indicators should meet criteria such as

“appropriateness of incentives” and “feasibility.” The first does not only concern incentives for

overuse, but also implies that RE indicators should not be “gameable”, that is, not be subject to

discretionary coding by plans or providers seeking to enhance revenues. Recent research finds

substantial “upcoding” in health plans paid by capitation in the US Medicare program (Geruso

and Layton, 2015). Practical considerations such as these led policymakers to prune the number

of disease indicators used in the RE model applied under the Affordable Care Act in the U.S.

(Kautter et al., 2014). In these cases, constrained regression provides a tool for reducing under or

overcompensations without inducing perverse incentives. “Feasibility” means that the

information underlying an indicator should be routinely available at low cost. Information from a

health survey, for example, may identify a group of interest and be a highly informative predictor

of medical spending, but too expensive to collect on a regular basis for everyone in a risk pool.

Also in this case, constrained regression may be an interesting tool, since data requirements are

less stringent than for inclusion of an indicator in the RE model. A constraint for reducing

undercompensation of omitted group g does not require that information on yes/no membership

of g is available for everyone in a risk pool. Instead, it is sufficient to have a good approximation

of the average per person medical spending for g, as well as the mean of all risk indicators in the
                                                                                                    34
RE model conditional on g (see equation 2’). Information on these parameters obtained from a

decent sample of the risk pool could be sufficient.



A striking result of our empirical application is that the constraints do not only reduce

undercompensation for the target groups (i.e. users of home care or physiotherapy in the previous

year), but also for other omitted groups (see Figure 7). It seems doubtful that such reductions can

be achieved when including an indicator for the home care or physiotherapy group directly in the

RE model. The reason is that direct inclusion probably moves fewer funds to the groups in Figure

7 than constrained regression. Whereas constrained regression increases compensation for almost

all morbidity groups in the RE model (here: PCGs, DCGs, DMECGs and MYHCGs, together

representing more than 20 percent of the population), direct inclusion of home care or

physiotherapy indicators in the RE model will only increase compensation for these particular

groups (representing only 2.7 and 2.5 percent of the population respectively). This raises an

interesting question for further research: “Can a constrained regression model (reducing under or

overcompensation for group g) outperform an unconstrained model in which an indicator for g is

included in the RE model?” To answer this question, however, researchers should not only focus

on potential selection inefficiency, but also on other dimensions of market inefficiency such as

the potential for overuse, gaming and upcoding resulting from inclusion of indicator g in the

model. Ideally, all relevant dimensions of market inefficiency are taken into account in the loss

function used for comparing different models.



Though additional conceptual thinking and empirical testing is necessary to guide meaningful

application of constrained regressions in RE settings, this paper shows the method has potential

to improve the overall economic performance of health plan payment schemes.


                                                                                                35
Acknowledgements



We gratefully acknowledge the Dutch Ministry of Health, the Association of Health Insurers and

Statistics Netherlands for providing the administrative and survey data (see section 3). McGuire

is grateful to support from the National Institute of Mental Health (R01 MH094290) and the

Laura and John Arnold Foundation. The views expressed here are not necessarily those of the

Foundation’s officers, directors or staff. We also gratefully acknowledge the valuable comments

on previous versions of this paper by Konstantin Beck, Frank Eijkenaar, Randall Ellis, Laura

Hatfield, Timothy Layton, Erzo Luttmer, Joseph Newhouse, Sharon-Lise Normand, Sherri Rose,

Erik Schut, Mark Shephard and Suzanne van Veen. In addition, we thank Andrew Hicks for

creating the figures. The responsibility for the content of this article rests fully with the authors.



References



Arrow KJ. Uncertainty and the welfare economics of medical care. American Economic Review

1963; 5: 941-973.



Bauhoff S. Do health plans risk select? An audit study on the Germany’s social health insurance.

Journal of Public Economics 2012; 96: 750-759.



Beck K, Trottmann M, Zweifel P. Risk adjustment in health insurance and its long-term

effectiveness. Journal of Health Economics 2010; 29: 489-498.




                                                                                                     36
Breyer F, Bundorf MK, Pauly MV 2012. Health care spending risk, health insurance, and

payments to health plans. In: Pauly MV, McGuire TG, Barros PP (Eds), Handbook of health

economics, vol. 2. Elsevier North Holland: Amsterdam; 2012.



Cao Z, McGuire TG. Service-level selection by HMOs in Medicare. Journal of Health Economics

2003; 22(6): 915-931.



Carey C. Government payments and insurer benefit design in Medicare part D,” Working Paper,

2014.



Eggleston K, Bir A. Measuring selection incentives in managed care:         Evidence from the

Massachusetts state employees insurance program. Journal of Risk and Insurance 2009; 76: 159-

175.



Ellis RP, Jiang S, Kuo T-C. Does service-level spending show evidence of selection across health

plan types? Applied Economics 2013; 45(13): 1701-12.



Eijkenaar F, Van Kleef RC, Van Veen SHCM, Van Vliet RCJA. Research for the Dutch risk

equalization model of 2015: Estimation of risk equalization weights. Research report (in Dutch),

Erasmus University Rotterdam; 2014.



Ellis RP, McGuire TG. Predictability and predictiveness in health care spending. Journal of

Health Economics 2007; 26(1):25-48.




                                                                                             37
Enthoven AC. The history and principles of managed competition. Health Affairs 1993; 12: 24-

48.



Geruso M, Layton T. Upcoding or selection? Evidence from Medicare on squishy risk

adjustment. National Bureau of Economic Research Working Paper, number W21222; 2015.



Glazer J, McGuire TG. Optimal risk adjustment in markets with adverse selection: An

application to managed care. American Economic Review 2000; 90: 1055-1071.



Glazer J, McGuire TG. Setting health plan premiums to ensure efficient quality in health care:

Minimum variance optimal risk adjustment. Journal of Public Economics 2002; 84: 153-173.



Kautter J, Pope GC, Ingber M, Freeman S, Patterson L, Cohen M, Keenan P. The HHS-HCC risk

adjustment model for individual and small group markets under the Affordable Care Act.

Medicare & Medicaid Research Review 2014; 4(3): E1-E11.



Lamers LM, Van Vliet RCJA. The Pharmacy-based cost group model: validating and adjusting

the classification of medications for chronic conditions to the Dutch situation. Health Policy

2004; 68: 113-121.



Layton TJ, Ellis RP, McGuire TG. Assessing incentives for adverse selection in health plan

payment systems, National Bureau of Economic Research Working Paper, number 21531; 2015.



Lorenz, N. Using quantile regression for optimal risk adjustment, University of Trier, Research

Papers in Economics No 11/14. May, 2014.
                                                                                            38
McGuire TG, Glazer J, Newhouse JP, Normand SL, Shi J, Sinaiko AD, Zuvekas S. Integrating

risk adjustment and enrollee premiums in health plan payment. Journal of Health Economics

2013; 32: 1263-1277.



McGuire TG, Newhouse JP, Normand SL, Shi J, Zuvekas SH. Assessing incentives for service-

level selection in private health insurance exchanges. Journal of Health Economics 2014; 35: 47-

63.



Newhouse JP. Reimbursing health plans and health providers: Efficiency in production versus

selection. Journal of Economic Literature 1996; 34: 1236-1263.



Pope GC, Ellis RP, Ash AS, et al. Principal inpatient diagnostic cost group model for Medicare

risk adjustment. Health Care Financing Review 2000; 21(3): 93-118.



Pope GC, Kautter J, Ingber JJ, Freeman S, Sekar R, Newhart C. Evaluation of the CMS-HCC risk

adjustment model. In final report, RTI project number 0209853.006, RTI International, March

2011.



Prinsze FJ, Van Vliet RCJA. Health-based risk adjustment: Improving the Pharmacy-based cost

group model by adding diagnostic cost groups. Inquiry 2007; 44: 469-480.



Rothschild M, Stiglitz J. Equilibrium in competitive insurance markets: An essay on the

economics of imperfect information. The Quarterly Journal of Economics 1976; 90: 629-649


                                                                                             39
Schokkaert E, Van de Voorde C. Risk selection and the specification of the conventional risk

adjustment formula. Journal of Health Economics 2004; 23: 1237-1259.



Van Barneveld EM, Lamers LM, Van Vliet RCJA, Van de Ven WPMM. Ignoring small

predictable profits and losses: A new approach for measuring incentives for cream skimming.

Health Care Management Science 2000; 3: 131-140.



Van de Ven WPMM, Beck K, Buchner F, Schokkaert E, Schut FT, Shmueli A, Wasem J.

Preconditions for efficiency and affordability in competitive healthcare markets: Are they

fulfilled in Belgium, Germany, Israel, the Netherlands and Switzerland. Health Policy 2013; 109:

226-245.



Van de Ven WPMM, Ellis RP 2000. Risk adjustment in competitive health insurance markets. In:

Culyer AJ, Newhouse JP (Eds) Handbook of Health Economics. North-Holland: Amsterdam;

2000. p. 755-845.



Van de Ven WPMM, Van Kleef RC, Van Vliet RCJA. Risk selection threatens quality of care for

certain patients: Lessons from Europe’s health insurance exchanges. Forthcoming in Health

Affairs; 2015.



Van Kleef RC, Van Vliet RCJA, Van de Ven WPMM. Risk equalization in the Netherlands: An

empirical evaluation. Expert Review of Pharmacoeconomics & Outcomes Research 2013; 13:

829-839.


                                                                                             40
Van Kleef RC, Van Vliet RCJA. Prior use of durable medical equipment as a risk adjuster for

health-based capitation. Inquiry 2010; 47: 343-358.



Van Kleef RC, Van Vliet RCJA. Improving risk equalization using multiple-year high cost as a

health indicator. Medical Care 2012; 50: 140-144.



Van Kleef RC, Van Vliet RCJA, Van Rooijen EM. Diagnoses-based cost groups in the Dutch

risk-equalization model: The effects of including outpatient diagnoses. Health Policy 2014; 115:

52-59.



Van Veen SHCM, Van Kleef RC, Van de Ven WPMM, Van Vliet RCJA. Improving the

prediction model used in risk equalization: cost and diagnostic information from multiple prior

years. European Journal of Health Economics 2015a; 16: 201-218.



Van Veen SHCM, Van Kleef RC, Van de Ven WPMM, Van Vliet RCJA. Is there one measure-

of-fit that fits all? A taxonomy and review of measures-of-fit for risk-equalization models.

Medical Care Research and Review 2015b; 72: 220-243.



Van Vliet RCJA, Van Kleef RC. Follow-up research regarding the Dutch risk equalization of

2015: Predictive value of the prior use of district nursing for future healthcare expenses. Research

report (in Dutch). Erasmus University Rotterdam; 2015.




                                                                                                 41
Tables


Table 1 Population frequency and medical spending (in Euros, 2012) at aggregated levels of risk
characteristics (N=16.5 million)

                                                             Population      Medical spending
                                                             frequency      Mean          SD
Men, <65                                                        42%          1,207       5,893
Men, >=65                                                        8%          4,612      11,050
Women, <65                                                      41%          1,487       5,212
Women, >=65                                                      9%          4,123       8,889
Region, clusters 1-5                                            50%          1,979       6,941
Region, clusters 6-10                                           50%          1,719       6,237
Source of income, reference group (age <18 or >64)              38%          2,477       8,235
Source of income, disability benefits                            5%          3,817      10,570
Source of income, social security benefits                       2%          2,321       7,110
Source of income, student                                        3%           588        2,717
Source of income, self-employment                                4%          1,012       3,814
Source of income, other (including employment)                  48%          1,282       4,541
Socioeconomic status, home address >15 residents                 1%          4,507      10,219
Socioeconomic status, income deciles 1-3                        30%          1,842       6,526
Socioeconomic status, income deciles 4-7                        40%          1,869       6,527
Socioeconomic status, income deciles 8-10                       30%          1,721       6,555
Pharmacy-based Cost Group (PCG)                      No         82%          1,212       5,199
                                                     Yes        18%          4,751      10,417
Diagnoses-based Cost Group (DCG)                     No         91%          1,353       4,921
                                                     Yes         9%          6,855      14,530
Durable Medical Equipment Cost Group (DMECG)         No         99%          1,772       6,382
                                                     Yes         1%         10,933      17,099
Multiple-year High Cost Group (MHCG)                 No         94%          1,378       4,957
                                                     Yes         6%          9,536      17,056
PCG, DCG, DMECG and/or MHCG                          No         77%           984        4,106
                                                     Yes        23%          4,784      11,090
Total population                                               100%          1,848       6,597




                                                                                            42
Table 2 Population frequency, medical spending and under/overcompensation by the Dutch RE
model of 2015 (base model) in Euros (2012) for the 4 omitted and 16 included indicators studied
in our empirical analyses (N=16.5 million)

                                             Population      Medical spending      Under/over
                                             frequency      Mean          SD      compensation
                                                                                   base model
Omitted indicators:
Use of home care in t-1         No            97.31%        1,659        5,985          34
                                Yes            2.69%        8,696       16,541        -1,231
Use of physiotherapy in t-1     No            97.62%        1,737        6,313          23
                                Yes            2.38%        6,422       13,124         -922
Included indicators:
No DCG                                        91.00%        1,353        4,921          0
DCG1                                           0.67%        5,573        8,943          0
DCG2                                           1.49%        4,649        8,100          0
DCG3                                           1.11%        4,196        8,243          0
DCG4                                           1.80%        5,058        9,541          0
DCG5                                           1.16%        6,291       11,420          0
DCG6                                           1.26%        7,645       13,461          0
DCG7                                           0.55%        8,832       15,511          0
DCG8                                           0.12%       10,039       15,978          0
DCG9                                           0.30%        9,582       18,583          0
DCG10                                          0.33%       13,175       20,678          0
DCG11                                          0.04%       14,557       25,078          0
DCG12                                          0.07%       17,107       28,243          0
DCG13                                          0.04%       25,105       41,154          0
DCG14                                          0.04%       90,296       42,858          0
DCG15                                          0.01%       62,451      110,800          0
Total population                               100%         1,848        6,597          0




                                                                                               43
Table 3 Results (Euros, 2012) for the base model and for ten single-constraint models

                                                            R-squared (*100%)    CPM (*100%)

Base model                                                       22.5%                  24.8%
Base model + single constraint to limit undercompensation
for users of home care in t-1 by:
20%                                                              22.5%                  24.9%
40%                                                              22.5%                  24.9%
60%                                                              22.4%                  24.9%
80%                                                              22.3%                  24.9%
100%                                                             22.2%                  24.8%
Base model + single constraint to limit undercompensation
for users of physiotherapy in t-1 by:
20%                                                              22.5%                  24.9%
40%                                                              22.5%                  25.0%
60%                                                              22.4%                  25.0%
80%                                                              22.2%                  25.0%
100%                                                             22.0%                  24.8%




                                                                                                44
Figures

                                                  Figure 1: Results (Euros, 2012) for the base model and for the
                                                  same model supplemented with a single constraint to reduce
                                                     undercompensation in year t for users of home care in t-1


                           Small numbers: Those with DCGs                                                                      14
                           Large 0: Those with no DCG
                           P, H: Users of Physiotherapy, Home Care                                                               13
                                                                                                                                 12
Overcompensation




                    1000                                                                                          14

                                                                                                              13 12             11
                                                                                                  14                             89
                                                                                                   13            11
                                                                                                  12                       65 10
                                                                                                                 9 8
                     500                                                     14                  11            6    10          7
                                                                                                                     5
                                                                           13 12                  9 8              7
                                                                                                    10
                                                                                                    6
                                                                             9
                                                                               11
                                                                                8                7 5                        4
                                                               14            67 10
                                                                                 5                                 4
                                                            13
                                                             12                                                               31
                                                                  11                              4                231       215
                                                             57 8 96
                                                              10
                                                                           3       4 1       1        32
                                                                                                      15          15
                                                               1 24315              215
                       0            14
                                     4
                                     72110
                                       113
                                        912
                                          15
                                          10
                                          5638                   0             0                  0             0              H0
                                                                                                                      H
Undercompensation




                    -500                                                                         H                          P
                                                                                                                    P
                                                                          HP                     P
                                                                     P
               -1000
                                             P                 H
                                          H
                                       0%                       20%            40%               60%            80%        100%
                                    Base Model
                                                 Constraint: % reduction in undercompensation on Home Care in prior year




                                                                                                                                 45
                                                  Figure 2: Results (Euros, 2012) for the base model and for the
                                                  same model supplemented with a single constraint to reduce
                                                  undercompensation in year t for users of physiotherapy in t-1

                                                                                                                             13
                    1500   Small numbers: Those with DCGs
                           Large 0: Those with no DCG                                                                             10
Overcompensation




                           P, H: Users of Physiotherapy, Home Care                                            13
                                                                                                                                  7
                                                                                                                   10
                    1000                                                                        13                 7
                                                                                              10                                  8
                                                                                                   7                         4 65
                                                                                13                             64 8           2
                                                                                                                               12 9
                                                                                10                                  5              11
                                                                                                              2       9
                     500                                                    7               65 8 4            12
                                                                                                                11               14
                                                                                                                                15
                                                                                              29 12             1514
                                                                13
                                                                  10           58946
                                                                            2 11
                                                                                                   11
                                                                                                  14
                                                                                                  15                         3
                                                                  7             12                             3                      1
                                                                                 14
                                                                                  15
                                                                 2
                                                              12 15
                                                              14
                                                                     8
                                                                     6
                                                                     4
                                                                    511
                                                                     9       3                 13              1
                                                               31            1
                       0             112
                                      814
                                        19
                                         713
                                          5
                                          11
                                           4
                                           3 0
                                           210
                                            56                  0                  0               0                0                 0P
                                                                                                             P
Undercompensation




                                                                                                   P                              H
                    -500
                                                                              P                                 H
                                                                     P                             H
                                              P                           H
                                                              H
               -1000


                                          H
                                       0%                       20%          40%               60%                 80%        100%
                                    Base Model
                                               Constraint: % reduction in undercompensation on physiotherapy in prior year




                                                                                                                                          46
                  Figure 3
                                                     Over and Under Compensation in
                                                          Year t in Three Models
                                                                           Included Indicators       Omitted Indicators
 Compensation Compensation
                 Over




                              500

                                0
    Under




                             −500

                        −1000                                                                                   −922

                                                                                                     −1231


                                                            A: Base Model Netherlands 2015
Compensation Compensation




                                                                          471          497
                 Over




                              500
                                                                227
                                             134      163

                                0
    Under




                                                                                                    −247
                             −500
                                                                                                                −592

                        −1000


                                      B: Reducing Home Care Undercompensation by 80% Compared to Base Model
Compensation Compensation




                                                                613       594         640
                                            545
                              500
                                                      243
               Over




                                0
                                                                                                                −184
                             −500
                                                                                                   −548
 Under




                        −1000



                                           DCG2      DCG3      DCG4      DCG5        DCG6        Home Care Physiotherapy
                                                                                                  Year t−1    Year t-1
                                    C: Reducing Physiotherapy Undercompensation by 80% Compared to Base Model
                                                                                                              47
                  Figure 4: Base model with constraints on undercompensation for users of
                 Home Care in prior year: Weighted Mean Squared Deviation (WMSD) for two
                 sets of mutually exclusive groups based on included and omitted indicators
          60



          50
                        4 combinations of Home Care and Physiotherapy
                                        yes/no (omitted)

          40
WMSD
(000's)




          30



          20



          10
                      16 DCGS
                      (included)

          0

                0%              20%                 40%              60%              80%                 100%
                          Constraint: % reduction in undercompensation on Home Care in prior year



                Figure 5: Base model with constraints on undercompensation for users of
                Home Care in prior year: Weighted Mean Squared Deviation (WMSD) for one set of
                   mutually exclusive groups based on included and omitted indicators

          120


          115


          110


          105


          100
WMSD
(000's)




          95


          90


          85

                 0%                20%               40%                60%            80%                100%

                           Constraint: % reduction in undercompensation on Home Care in prior year
                                                                                                     48
                                                          Figure 6
                              Normalized Weighted Mean Absolute Deviations (Euros, 2012)
                               for 64 Mutually Exclusive Groups for Weights P=1 and P=2

                                          A: Reducing Undercompensation for Home Care
                  100



                   90

                                                 P=2
Normalized WMAD




                                        P=1
                   80



                   70



                   60



                   50

                           0%           20%             40%               60%            80%        100%
                        Base Model
                                              Percent Reduction in Undercompensation


                                         B: Reducing Undercompensation for Physiotherapy
                  140


                  130


                  120
Normalized WMAD




                  110


                  100

                                                 P=2
                   90

                                        P=1
                   80


                   70

                           0%           20%              40%               60%           80%        100%
                        Base Model              Percent Reduction in Undercompensation

                                                                                               49
                                                    Figure 7
                 Population Frequency (%) and Average Under or Overcompensation (Euros,
                 2012) for Prior-year Survey-based Indicators Not Included in the Base Model
                                        and Not Included in Constraints
                500
Compensation




                                                                                                                                                                         *
   Over




                                                                                                                                                        *
                           19%                9%               33%           7%             9%                3%             39%              8%
                  0
                                                                                                                                                            67%              19%

                                                           *                                                             *
                          *
                                                *
                -500                      *
Compensation
   Under




               -1000
                                                                                             *
                                                                         *
                                                                                                                                                        Base Model
                                                                                                                                          *             Home Care Constraint
                                                                                                                                                        (100% reduction)
                                                                                        *                                                               Physiotherapy
                                                                                                          *                                             Constraint (100%
                                                                                                                                                        reduction)
               -1500
                         Health Status:        Obesity     One or More       Mobility        10% worst         One or        Specialist       DME in        No Chronic    No Recent
                          Bad, Poor,          (BMI > 30)     Chronic         Impaired         score on          More          Contact           Last        Condition      Use of
                         or Moderate                        Condition        by OECD          physical        ADL (age        Last 12           12                       Healthcare
                                                                                              health by        >= 55)         Months          Months
                                                                                               SF−12                                          (age >=
                                                                                            (age >= 12)                                         12)



                       * Statistically significantly different from zero (p<0.05).




                                                                                                                                                                 50
51
