                                NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




 HOUSING BOOMS AND BUSTS, LABOR MARKET OPPORTUNITIES, AND COLLEGE
                            ATTENDANCE

                                        Kerwin Kofi Charles
                                             Erik Hurst
                                       Matthew J. Notowidigdo

                                        Working Paper 21587
                                http://www.nber.org/papers/w21587


                      NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                               1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                 Cambridge, MA 02138
                                    September 2015




A prior version of this paper circulated as “Housing Booms, Labor Market Outcomes and Educational
Attainment”. We thank seminar participants at the Columbia, Maryland, Northwestern, University
of Chicago, the University of Houston, University of Illinois at Chicago, the AEA Annual Meetings,
Yale - SOM, NYU, Princeton, University of British Columbia, UC - Berkeley, and New York Federal
Reserve for helpful comments. We are also grateful to Tom Davidoff, Edward Glaeser, Matthew
Gentzkow , Michael Lovenheim, Ofer Malamud, Atif Mian, Emily Oster, and Amir Sufi for useful
suggestions and to Chris Mayer for sharing his data. We thank Mariel Schwartz, David Toniatti, and
Dan Zangri for excellent research assistance. We gratefully acknowledge the Initiative on Global Markets
at the University of Chicago Booth School of Business for financial support. Hurst thanks the Peter
Wall Institute for Advanced Studies at the University of British Columbia, and Notowidigo thanks
the Einaudi Institute for both financial support and hospitality while working on this project. The views
expressed herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau
of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.

© 2015 by Kerwin Kofi Charles, Erik Hurst, and Matthew J. Notowidigdo. All rights reserved. Short
sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided
that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
Housing Booms and Busts, Labor Market Opportunities, and College Attendance
Kerwin Kofi Charles, Erik Hurst, and Matthew J. Notowidigdo
NBER Working Paper No. 21587
September 2015
JEL No. E24,I21,J24

                                             ABSTRACT

We study how the recent national housing boom and bust affected college enrollment and attainment
during the 2000s. We exploit cross-city variation in local housing booms, and use a variety of data
sources and empirical methods, including models that use plausibly exogenous variation in housing
demand identified by sharp structural breaks in local housing prices. We show that the housing boom
improved labor market opportunities for young men and women, thereby raising their opportunity
cost of college-going. According to standard human capital theories, this effect should have reduced
college-going overall, but especially for persons at the margin of attendance. We find that the boom
substantially lowered college enrollment and attainment for both young men and women, with the
effects concentrated at two-year colleges. We find that the positive employment and wage effects
of the boom were generally undone during the bust. However, attainment for the particular cohorts
of college-going age during the housing boom remain persistently low after the end of the bust, suggesting
that reduced educational attainment may be an enduring effect of the housing cycle. We estimate that
the housing boom explains roughly 30 percent of the recent slowdown in college attainment.


Kerwin Kofi Charles                                 Matthew J. Notowidigdo
Harris School of Public Policy                      Northwestern University
University of Chicago                               Department of Economics
1155 East 60th Street                               2001 Sheridan Road
Chicago, IL 60637                                   Evanston, IL 60208-2600
and NBER                                            and NBER
kcharles@uchicago.edu                               noto@northwestern.edu

Erik Hurst
Booth School of Business
University of Chicago
Harper Center
Chicago, IL 60637
and NBER
erik.hurst@chicagobooth.edu
1. INTRODUCTION

There is an active literature studying the consequences of the massive national boom and bust in housing
that lasted from the late 1990s to the late 2000s, including an emerging body of work studying its effects on
future economic growth. The creation of an “overhang” of debt that dampens future spending and
investment is one possible mechanism by which the housing cycle may have affected future growth (Bhutta
2014; Jorda et al. 2014; Mian and Sufi 2014). Another possibility is that the cycle could have caused labor to
be misallocated towards temporarily booming sectors with poor long-term growth prospects. 1 Curiously,
how the boom and bust may have affected the distribution of schooling in the population has received little
attention in this literature, despite education’s key role in determining future individual economic wellbeing,
and the fact that the level of schooling affects future productivity in the economy overall. This paper
empirically assesses how housing demand shocks over the course of the housing cycle affected overall
college attainment in the U.S, and adjudicates among alternative explanations for the patterns we document.
    Suggestive evidence that the housing boom and bust changed college attainment comes from recent
trends in overall college attainment that have received little attention. Using data from the Current
Population Survey (CPS), the two panels of Figure 1 plot, separately for men and women, the share of
persons aged 18-29 who reported ever having attended college training. The two panels show that while the
share of young adults who have ever gone to college rose slowly and steadily since at least 1980, there was a
noticeable slowdown relative to trend, for both men and women, beginning in the late 1990s – precisely
when the national housing boom is generally agreed to have begun. The slowdown persisted through the
peak of the national housing boom in 2006 and, despite some convergence during the bust period after
2006, attainment among young adult men and women had not fully reverted to trend as of 2013, years after
end of the housing cycle.
    In their seminal work on the much larger slowdown in attainment that occurred before the period we
study, Goldin and Katz (2008) show educational attainment by birth year cohort up through the 1975
cohort. We follow their specification and use CPS data between 1994 and 2014 to examine college-
attainment for year-of-birth cohorts from 1960 to 1990. 2 The year-of-birth effects from the Goldin-Katz-


1 See 85th Annual Report of Bank of International Subsidies (BIS), www.bis.org/publ/arpdf/ar2015e.htm). In the popular press

see “A New Explanation of America’s Slow Productivity Growth,” Huffington Post, August 8th 2015. David Adler. For similar
arguments about misallocation in China see Chen and Wen (2014)
2 These results can be interpreted as extending the Goldin and Katz (2010) results to birth cohorts after 1975, although their

measure of college training is college degree completion rather than our measure of having attended college at all. The “second
slowdown” in attainment that we focus on in this paper is much smaller than the very large slowdown from earlier in the century
identified in earlier work. We pool the 1994 to 2014 waves of the CPS, restricting the sample to persons aged 25-54 in each year.
We then estimate separate regressions for men and women separately on a dummy variable for whether the person has ever
attended college on year-of-birth dummies, a quartic in age, and normalized year fixed effects where the first and last year effect
are set to zero (as in Hall 1968).
                                                                1
style regression models are plotted in the two panels of Figure 2, which measure the predicted fraction of a
birth cohort with any college training by age 25. The figure shows a clear slowdown in attainment
somewhere between the 1970 and 1980 birth cohorts. For men, after steady cross-cohort growth of about
10 percentage points between the 1960 and 1970 cohorts, cohort-specific attainment rates were flat for the
next ten birth cohorts, before starting to rise again, albeit at a much slower rate than before the slowdown.
For women, the slowdown started around the 1975 birth cohort. Growth in cohort-specific attainment rates
for the fifteen cohorts born after 1975 was about one-third the growth in cohort-specific rates for the
fifteen cohorts born before 1975, with the cohorts between 1974 and 1980 essentially experiencing no
growth in college propensity. Although the slowdown in cohort-specific attainment by age 25 roughly lines
up with the start of the boom and bust, the figure also shows that at least some of the slowdown had
nothing to do with the housing cycle since, especially for men, it began with cohorts that had already turned
25 before the boom began.
    Figure 3 provides an initial assessment of whether the housing boom explains at least some of the
slowdown.      We combine the 1990 and 2000 Censuses with the 2005-2013 waves of the American
Community Survey (ACS), and restrict attention to persons in this sample from the 1965-1987 birth cohorts
living in their state of birth who were between the ages of 25 and 54. 3 We then compute the share of the
birth cohort who had ever attended college, separately by whether or not the individual was living in a
metropolitan area (MSA) that was in the top tercile of the increase in housing prices between 2000 and
2006. 4 The figure shows no cohort-specific differences in college attainment across the two groups of MSAs
from the 1965 cohort through the first several cohorts of the slowdown. However, beginning with the 1979
birth cohort, who would have been eighteen when the national boom began and thus at the cusp of making
college-going decisions, rates for persons in MSAs with especially big price increases fell behind rates for
persons from the same birth cohorts in other markets. The difference in the propensity to attend college
grew to a full two percentage points for the 1983 cohort.
    The patterns in Figure 1-3 suggest that the housing boom reduced college attainment among both men
and women. By what mechanism could this have occurred? To answer this question, we develop a simple
conceptual model of college-going which shows that there are several different effects by which a housing
boom might affect educational attainment. Since these effects are not of the same sign, and are differentially
important for different population subgroups, the overall effect of a housing boom is theoretically
ambiguous. We show, however, that a boom will tend to lower attainment if it improves current labor
market opportunities for young adults so much that the labor market opportunity costs of college-going –
3 The 2001-2004 waves of the ACS do not have MSA codes so could not be used for this exercise. As we discuss later, the
restriction that individuals currently live in the state they were born mitigates concerns about endogenous migration.
4 We use data from FHFA to measure local house price growth. As we formalize later, the standard deviation of housing price

growth between 2000 and 2006 across MSAs was 0.36, relative to an average growth across MSAs of 0.40.
                                                            2
the earnings they must forego to acquire a college education instead of working – become large enough to
override any other effect of the boom that might act in the other direction. One such counteracting effect is
the loosening of liquidity constraints that persons from home-owning families might experience if their
rising house values during a boom makes it easier for them to borrow to finance the direct costs of college. 5
       Our conceptual framework shows that, all else equal, if the boom did indeed improve labor market
opportunities for young adults without a college education, then college attendance should have fallen
during the boom, but mostly for the types of students and at the types of colleges where the gains from
college-going are smallest. That is, increases in labor market opportunity costs should have reduced
investment in two-year colleges that offer Associate’s and similar degrees, but should have had little effect
on investment in Bachelor’s level training. Another insight from our framework is that the decision to not
attend college in a given year due to a housing boom may be persistent because the time available to receive
the gains from college-training shrinks while other opportunity costs, such as family obligations, rise
mechanically and monotonically with age.
       Figure 4 plots the massive changes over the housing cycle in three measures that affect labor market
opportunities for persons without college training: housing prices; housing production, as measured by new
residential construction permits; and total housing transactions. 6 Demand for workers providing local non-
tradeable services, like waitresses, gardeners, hairdressers, nannies and retail clerks, has been shown to vary
positively with changes in housing prices, perhaps because household wealth is driven substantially by
changes in the value of housing and these services are normal goods (see Mian and Suf 2014). This suggests
that the boom improved labor market opportunities for these kinds of workers. The increases in housing
production depicted in Figure 4 would not have been possible without a substantial growth in labor market
opportunities in blue-collar construction-related activities. Similarly, the massive surge in the number of
houses bought and sold shown in the figure must have necessitated substantially greater activity in fields like
real estate services, which are also conventionally open to non-college educated adults. These patterns
suggest that the housing demand changes during the boom may have very substantially raised the
opportunity costs of college-going for both young adult men and women, and could possibly partly explain
the overall slowdown shown in Figures 1-3. As hinted at by Figure 3 above, the formal empirical work in
this paper exploits differences across MSAs to assess how local housing demand shocks during the boom
and bust affected educational attainment and labor market conditions. Most previous work on the housing
boom has proxied for the size of housing demand change in a local market using only the size of the
increase in housing prices in the area. We use instead a proxy for local demand that is the sum of changes in


5   As we discuss later, Lovenheim (2011) studies this effect of the boom for home-owning families.
6   We discuss these data sources in detail later in the paper.
                                                                 3
both local prices and quantities, since large housing demand shocks might lead to very small price changes
but large changes in supply in markets where housing is elastically supplied.
    To account for potential measurement error and endogeneity in our measure of local housing demand,
we isolate arguably exogenous variation in local housing demand. Our approach relies on the emerging
consensus that much of the variation in housing prices during the boom and bust derived from a speculative
“bubble” and not from changes in standard determinants of housing values such as income, population, or
construction costs (Shiller, 2008; Mayer 2011; Sinai 2012). Specifically, building on the work of Ferreira and
Gyourko (2011) we estimate structural breaks in the evolution in housing prices in an MSA. We argue that
these “sharp” breaks are plausibly exogenous to latent confounds, such as labor supply shocks or
unobserved changes in labor demand, which are likely smoothly incorporated into price changes. 7 The
estimated breaks are not, in fact, systematically related to any of a large set of observable local
characteristics, and we provide several pieces of evidence consistent with them being the result of
speculative activity. We further show that the size of an MSA’s structural break explains an important
portion of the overall change in housing demand in the MSA over the first decade of the 2000s. We use the
size of structural break in an MSA to instrument for local changes in housing demand in Two Stage Least
Squares (TSLS) first-difference models of the change of educational or labor market outcomes on the
change in local housing demand.
    Beginning with labor market outcomes, we find that increases in housing demand in an MSA during the
2000-2006 boom increased employment and wages for both young adult men and women without college
training, raising their opportunity cost of college-going.                    Among young adult men, much of the
improvements in labor market opportunity occurred in construction, whereas for young women the FIRE
sectors of finance, real estate and insurance accounted for much of the gains. For both men and women, the
remainder of the employment response was in local retail and service sectors. We also find that the boom
either had no effect on or slightly lowered the expected future college/non-college earnings premium.
    We present results for college attainment that are based on a variety of complementary data sources and
different estimation methods. First, using data from Census/ACS, we relate the 2000-2006 change in an
MSA in attainment among young adults aged 18-25. We restrict our analysis to samples where the
individuals currently reside in the state they were born to mitigate concerns about endogenous migration.
Both OLS and TSLS estimates show that the growth in the fraction of young adults with any college
training was lower the larger the MSA’s housing booms. Strikingly, we find that the change in an MSA’s
housing demand during the boom had no effect on the change in the fraction of young adults with a
Bachelor’s degree.         The results suggest that improving labor market opportunities during the boom

7Our approach is similar in spirit to recent work which uses structural breaks to identify economic effects of interest, such as the
work by Card, Mas, and Rothstein (2008) on racial tipping.
                                                                 4
decreased advanced schooling attainment precisely for those persons who our conceptual model suggests
should have been on the margin between obtaining “Associates-level” training and not going to college at all
when the boom began.
    We next turn to the rich, annual administrative enrollment data in the Integrated Postsecondary
Education Data System (IPEDS). After hand-coding each institution in the data set to its MSA, we estimate
TSLS first difference models of change in average annual enrollment from the years immediately before the
start of the boom, to the years immediately before the peak of the boom. We find large and strongly
significantly lower growth in enrollment in two-year colleges and universities the larger the housing demand
growth in the MSA, but no difference in the change in enrolment in four-year, Bachelor-degree-granting
institutions over the same time.
    When estimating the size of the structural break in an MSA (which we use for the TSLS first-difference
results), we also identify the precise date when the break is estimated to have occurred in an MSA. Using
these two pieces of information (the size and timing of estimated structural break) and exploiting the annual
frequency of the IPEDS data, we next estimate difference-in-difference-style regressions that assess whether
enrollment in an MSA changed after the particular year in which the MSA experienced a structural break
compared to enrollment in the years before MSA-specific break, and whether this effect differed by the size
of the structural break. These models control for both MSA and year fixed effects, so they relate within-city,
over-time variation in college enrollment to both the size and timing of the estimated structural break in
housing prices. We estimate that 2-year college enrollment was lower after the specific year when an MSA
had its structural break, and the effect for enrollment in 4 year colleges and universities exhibits no
statistically significant change relative to enrollment during the pre-break period.
    For our third set of education results we obtained permission for the restricted-use version of the
NLSY97, a panel data set which follows a nationally representative sample of young adults who reached late
adolescence and early adulthood during the early 2000s, right around the beginning of the national boom.
With observations on only a few thousand individuals, this data set is very small compared to the other data
sets we study. However, the individual panel feature of the data set allows us to track specific individuals as
they age, with exact information about their MSA at each point of the housing cycle that is simply not
available with other types of data. This data set allows us to better account for the potential bias from
endogenous migration, and the data set also contains a rich set of individual- and family-level controls not
present in the other data sources.
    We find that NLSY97 respondents who, at the start of the housing boom were in MSAs that
experienced especially large housing demand shocks, were much more likely to be employed at age 20
compared to their counterparts from other markets. This direct individual evidence about the opportunity


                                                        5
cost channel is quite reassuring and consistent with the aggregate employment estimates from the
Census/ACS. With respect to college training, respondents from high boom markets were substantially less
likely to have obtained any college training at all by 2006, but did not differ from people in other markets in
their propensity to have obtained a Bachelor’s degree.         Taken together, the results for educational
attainment over the course of the boom are strikingly similar across datasets, specifications, and empirical
methods. We consistently find that the boom lowered attainment at 2-year or Associates’ level training but
not at 4-year or Bachelor’s level. Applying our local labor market estimates nationally, we find that the
housing boom can explain approximately 30 percent of the national slowdown in college enrollment growth
among both men and women.
   We next investigate educational attainment over the housing bust and over the full course of the boom
and bust cycle. Consistent with our conceptual model, we find that the bigger the growth in an MSA’s
housing demand during the boom (and thus the larger its decline during the bust), the larger the increase in
attainment between the generation of young adults who made their schooling decisions at the peak of the
boom to the generation of young people whose college decisions were made after the bust, when market
opportunities for young people without college training had essentially returned to levels from before the
cycle began. Again, we find no statistically significant difference in Bachelor’s degree attainment across
these two generations of young adults. Our final cross-generational difference estimates show that once the
housing cycle had ended, new generations of young adults from boom markets appear to be investing in all
types of college training no differently to young adults elsewhere or to generations of young adults in their
markets from before the boom and bust cycle began.            This, too, is consistent with our conceptual
framework.
   Our empirical work concludes with an assessment of persistence: whether the particular generation of
young adults who obtained less schooling during the boom reversed this pattern by obtaining more
schooling during the bust as labor market opportunities collapsed. Was the reduction in attainment we find
for these particular people during the boom merely a delay, or does their schooling reduction seem to be
permanent?     The evidence from both Census/ACS and from the individual panel NLYS97 data is that
young adults who invested less in college during the nearly ten years of the housing boom did not make up
their lost college going propensity during the bust.       Our evidence suggests that these cohorts have
experienced a sort of “educational scarring”, whereby their rates of attainment are permanently lower than
would have been true had there been no boom. Their reduced educational attainment appears to be an
enduring effect of the boom and bust cycle.
   Existing theoretical work posits a link between labor market conditions and educational attainment
(Mincer 1958; Becker 1964), and previous empirical work has found that different types of labor demand


                                                      6
shocks reduce college enrollment and educational attainment (Black, McKinnish and Sanders 2005; Atkin
2015). 8 Our focus on shocks originating in the housing sector extends this line of research, as does the fact
that we separately identify effects for different types of colleges and universities. Finally, because we
estimate the total effect of changes in local housing demand on college attainment, our estimates capture
both any wealth effects on schooling among home-owning families from changing housing prices
(Lovenheim 2011), and the effects of changing labor market conditions on attainment among all persons in
a market. Indeed, whereas none of the results we estimate for the effect of the boom (or bust) on
Bachelor’s degree attainment is statistically different from zero, some of our point estimates are positive,
consistent with the idea that boom may have eased credit constraints at these more expensive colleges. Our
empirical results imply that the causal pathway operating through housing wealth is overwhelmed by that
operating through labor market conditions.
     The remainder of the paper proceeds as follows. We present the overview of the theoretical and
empirical framework that will guide the analysis in Section 2. Section 2 discusses how we measure and
isolate exogenous variation in local housing demand shocks. In Section 4 assess the effect of shocks on
labor market opportunity costs and the expected future earnings return from college-going. Section 5
present the educations results over the course of the boom. Results for persistence, attainment over the
bust and over the full housing cycle are presented in Section 6. Section 7 concludes.

2. THEORETICAL OVERVIEW

To motivate our empirical work, we present a simple conceptual model that illustrates how housing demand
shocks affect college-going by exploring the key considerations emphasized in existing models of human
capital investment. We highlight, in particular, the effect of shocks on potential students’ opportunity cost
of college attendance (Willis and Rosen 1979; Cameron and Taber 2004).
     The potential students in our framework are young adults, who are aged t in year t and live until age
L.   They have completed the minimum required amount of schooling and now can either participate in the
labor market or attend one of the two type of colleges, c, in the economy: “Associates” colleges (c  A) , or
“Bachelor’s” colleges (c  B ) . Young adults differ in academic ability i , which is distributed according to

some distribution  , over the interval [0,1]. As a college student, a young person incurs psychic costs of

learning each year given by c (1  i ). Training in a type- B college is inherently more difficult, and


8Black, McKinnish, and Sanders (2005) construct plausibly exogenous variation in local labor market conditions by interacting
variation in coal prices (during coal boom and bust) with pre-existing differences in coal reserves. Atkin (2015) finds that sectoral
shocks arising from trade reform affects the distribution of schooling attainment in Mexico.
                                                                 7
especially so for less able students, so B  A . It costs Fc in annual fees and tuition for                    c   colleges, and
students can borrow at an interest rate of                  b.    In any year t , labor market participants with and without
college training receive labor market incomes of Ytc and Yt0 , respectively, which vary from one year to the
next because of macro-economic and other shocks. The college premium in a given year for persons
educated at a given type of college            c   is thus Π tc = Yt c − Yt 0 ≥ 0 .

    Given the model setup above, the lifetime payoff that a person of ability i gets from attending a type- c

college in year t , Ritc  i  , is given by:
                                       L t
                      Ritc (i )       Et  ct k | t   1  b  F  c (1  i )  Yt0.                     (1)
                                       k 1

The first term in (1) is the person’s expected future lifetime income premium from college at date t , or the
sum of their expectation of the college premium for every year of their future working life, given their
current information Λ t . 9 The last three terms in (1) represent, in order, the direct, psychic and opportunity
costs of college-going, with the latter being the labor income the student foregoes in year t by enrolling in
college and not working. Which, if any, college someone of ability i attends in year t is determined by

max[0, RiA(i ), RiB (i )] : he does not attend college if his expected lifetime payoffs from the both types of
colleges are negative, and enrolls in the college where his expected lifetime payoffs are larger otherwise.
    In all that follows, we focus on equilibria where some young adults enroll in each of the two types of
college while others do not attend college at all. Since foregoing college is the preferred choice for some,
the payoff functions for the two types of colleges must both simultaneously be negative for some ability
levels. Similarly, since students attend both types of college there must be a range of ability levels where a
college’s payoff function is both positive and larger than the payoff function for the other type of college.
That is, the payoff functions for the two types of college must cross at some point when both are positive.
The two conditions

              0  RitA  i  0   RitB  i  0  and 0  RitA  i  1   RitB  i  1 

guarantee that the payoffs from both type of college are negative at very low ability levels, and are both
positive for very high levels of ability. These conditions also guarantee that the functions cross, since                    RitB (i )



9 We make several assumptions for expositional simplicity which have no bearing on the main insights of this framework. In
particular: we ignore discounting and assume agents are risk neutral; we assume that enrollees in a given type of college ultimately
receive a degree, thereby ignoring the fact that there are differences across colleges in completion rates; and we do not allow
students to work and attend school simultaneously. We also assume the opportunity cost for going to “Associates” college and
“Bachelors” college is the same. In practice, the opportunity cost of “Bachelors” is likely higher because it takes longer to
complete. Again, this abstraction does not alter the main takeaways of the simple model.
                                                                       8
is smaller than   RitA (i )   at ability 0, the inequality is reversed at ability 1, and both functions are strictly

increasing in i . If the payoff level R is the value at which the two functions cross and               ˆAB   the associated
level of ability, then the final assumption necessary for the baseline equilibrium is that

                                             R  RitA  ˆAB  RitB  ˆAB  0.

    Figure 5 illustrates an equilibrium satisfying the above conditions. The payoff functions for the two
types of colleges are negative at the lowest levels of academic ability, with the lower intercept for the
“Bachelor’s” colleges indicating the greater inherent difficulty of that type of college. The functions strictly
increase with ability, with the steeper slope for the “Bachelor’s” function indicating the larger marginal
benefit for this type of college for individuals with higher academic ability. Both functions eventually
become positive, with the flatter “Associates” function becoming positive at a lower level of ability, A* ,

than the corresponding ability level for the “Bachelor’s” function. The two functions eventually intersect at
the value R  0 at ability level ˆAB .                      A person of ability A* is just indifferent between attending

“Associates” college and not going to college at all; this person is the “marginal college-goer”. Someone
with ability ˆAB is just indifferent between going to “Bachelor’s” and “Associates” college; this is the

“marginal Bachelor’s student”. These two thresholds completely characterize college-going in the population
in our set-up: low ability individuals in the population – those with ability less than A* – do not attend

college; persons with ability between A* and ˆAB attend “Associate” college; and the most able persons,

whose ability is at least ˆAB , enroll in “Bachelor’s” college.
    The effect of any shock on average college-going in the population is determined by how the shock
shifts payoff functions and thus the two threshold ability values. The sign and magnitude of the shift in the
payoff function for type- c colleges from a housing demand shock, dH , is the sum of three separate effects:
                                                     L t

                               dRic  i 
                                                 d    Et  ct k | t        db     dY 0
                                                     k 1
                                                                                     Fc  t .                    (2)
                                    dH                         dH                   dH     dH
The first term in (2) measures how a housing demand shock affects the expected future premium from
having attended college        c.    The second term is the change in borrowing cost from the rising housing wealth
associated with the housing boom. The third term, which is the main focus of our paper, is the effect of
housing shocks on potential students’ opportunity costs.
    Leaving aside for the moment any other effects it might cause, if housing demand shocks increase the
labor market income that a young adult foregoes by enrolling in college in year t , college attendance

                                                                       9
becomes less appealing. This is reflected in the downward shift in the payoff function for both types of
colleges shown in Panel B of Figure 5 from increases in Yt 0 . The ability threshold defining the marginal

college-goer, A* , rises, and some students who would have gone to an “Associates” college now forego
college altogether. 10 By contrast, the marginal “Bachelor’s” student is not changed by a rise in Yt 0 . This
result stems from the fact that a young person in our framework forgoes the same amount in labor market
returns whether he attends a type-A or a type-B school in a given year, which means that the relative
attractiveness of attending one type of college versus another does not depend on the opportunity cost, Yt0
. 11     The two payoff functions shift downwards by the same amount and the threshold for “Bachelor’s”
college-going, ˆAB, is unchanged. 12        The model therefore captures the intuitively appealing idea that an

increase in the opportunity cost of college attendance, all else equal, should have a greater effect on the
propensity of individuals to pursue an “Associates” degree as opposed to a “Bachelor’s” degree. In other
words, if a housing demand shock improves labor market opportunities for persons without any college
education, our conceptual model predicts that the share of the population attending college should fall, with
most of the effect coming from reduced enrollment in “Associates” colleges, and little to no effect in
“Bachelor’s” colleges. 13 We would expect to see these enrollment responses unless there were offsetting
influences from the other two effects in (2). What are the expected signs and magnitudes of these two other
effects?
        How a housing demand shock affects the expected future lifetime earnings gain from college depends in
part on how young adults form expectations. If they believe that the shock will be temporary and produce
no persistent effects on earnings in the future, then their expectations about the future college/non-college
income premium will not change meaningfully. If young adults instead believe that a boom today will have
persistent effects, affecting the labor income of college educated and non-college educated persons in the
future, when today’s young adults are older, the sign of the first term in (2) will depend on people’s beliefs


10     The formal statement of this claim is that d  A* / dH  0 . This is straightforward to prove because if
dRA () / dH  dYt0 / dH  0 , then the statement is true because dRA () is strictly increasing in  .
11In practice, the opportunity cost channel may be larger for “Bachelor’s” colleges since it takes longer to complete such a degree.
Therefore, we will explore empirically the extent to which a housing boom affects the propensity to complete a bachelor’s degree,
as well.
12     The formal statement of this claim is that d ˆAB / dH  0 . This is true because ̂ AB is implicitly defined by
RA (ˆAB )  RB (ˆAB ) and equation (2) implies that dRA () / dH  dRB () / dH  dYt0 / dH .
13   As we show in Online Appendix Figure OA.6, a large enough change in Yt0 could shift the functions down so much that their
new intersection point is negative  R  0  . In this case, “Associates” enrollment falls to zero and, if the shock is big enough,
even some persons who previously attended “Bachelor’s” colleges could forgo college enrollment. As noted above, we ignore
equilibria with corner solutions such as this case.


                                                                10
about the relative size of the effect of the boom on future skilled versus future less-skilled labor income.
Only if it is expected that the boom will increase the future labor income gap between college and non-
college educated people could the first term possibly over-ride the opportunity cost effect. Otherwise, an
expected decline in the future college earnings premium will complement and reinforce the opportunity cost
mechanism.
     The other effect that could, in principle, offset the negative opportunity cost mechanism is if the
positive shock to housing values and family wealth reduces borrowing costs or relaxes liquidity constraints.
The existing evidence of the importance of liquidity constraints is mixed. Work by Cameron and Taber
(2004) suggests that in the U.S. most persons wishing to attend college are not liquidity constrained, which is
consistent with more recent work by Hilger (2014) that estimates very small effects of parental income on
the probability of college enrollment. By contrast, Manoli and Turner (2015) find evidence that tax refunds
have meaningful effects on college enrollment and Lovenheim (2011) finds some evidence of increased
college attendance among person from families experiencing increases in housing wealth during the boom,
with the effects concentrated among low-income families. Lovenheim’s analysis, which uses data from the
Panel Study of Income Dynamics, compares outcomes among homeowners to those of renters within a
given market to capture the liquidity effect, netting any effect of the boom common to both groups in a
market. Since changes in average labor market conditions affect opportunity costs for all potential college
students in an MSA, the effect that is the main focus of our paper could not have been addressed in
Lovenheim’s study.
     Our analysis compares the change in average outcome across different MSA. Our estimates therefore
capture the opportunity cost difference between one MSA and another plus the offsetting
borrowing/liquidity cost effects, if any, among homeowners compared to renters in the different MSAs.
Our estimates thus can provide a measure of relative quantitative importance of two effects on college going
in the aggregate. In particular, if increases in housing demand cause aggregate reductions in college
enrollment, then this would imply that the opportunity cost mechanism was overwhelmingly large compared
to any liquidity relaxation effect the boom might have caused.
     Lastly, our conceptual framework suggests that any reductions in educational attainment from positive
housing demand shocks at a point in time could, for some persons, represent permanent reductions rather
than temporary delays. As in every life-cycle human capital model, young adults in our conceptual model
are less likely to invest in schooling the older they get because their horizon to receive the expected lifetime
earnings premium from college training, L − at , shrinks at each higher age. 14 One implication of this

14This is only one reason for the age effect in human capital models. In addition life events like marriage, the birth of children,
infirmity of parents, expenditure commitments (as for durable goods), and any number of similar events, are all more likely to
have occurred at higher ages, reducing the likelihood of college-going or indeed of any type of human capital investment at every
                                                                11
mechanical effect of aging is that if a share ds of the population decides not to enroll in Associate’s colleges
in a given year as a result of a housing boom, then it is unlikely that the entire mass ds will decide to enroll in
a subsequent year if there is a negative housing demand shock that is equal in size to the preceding boom.
Graphically, this mechanical aging effect causes the payoff functions to shift vertically downward each year
as the person ages. The upward vertical shift in the two payoff functions caused by a housing bust would
move them to a lower intersection point than where they intersected before a preceding boom of equal size.
    In the empirical work below we study how local housing demand shocks during the national boom and
bust cycle in housing affected college attainment. Before turning to the main education results, we offer
direct evidence about how opportunity cost of (and expected future college earnings premium from)
attending college were affected by the shocks. In terms of the education estimates, we assess both effects
during the housing boom and the extent to which those effects persist after the end of the boom.

3. LOCAL HOUSING DEMAND SHOCKS

Our empirical work exploits variation across metropolitan statistical areas (MSAs), k , in the size of the
housing demand shock that the MSA experienced during the national housing boom and bust. Many papers
in the recent literature have concluded that the housing boom during the 2000s was caused primarily by
larger changes in housing demand (see, for example, Shiller 2008). Furthermore, there is an emerging
consensus that different MSAs in the U.S. experienced different house price appreciations during the boom
primarily because of a combination of differences in the magnitude of changes in local housing demand
(Davidoff 2015; Ferreira and Gyourko 2011) and differences across MSAs in the local housing supply
elasticity (Mian and Sufi 2011).
    To create a measure of local housing demand shocks, consider a log linear model of housing demand
and housing supply. Holding local housing supply shocks constant, a local housing demand shock, ∆H kD ,
produces both a price and quantity change given by:

                                                 ∆H kD= η kD ∆Pk + ∆Qk ,                                                 (3)

where ∆Pk is the change in the log of local housing prices in MSA k, ηkD is the price elasticity of housing

demand and ∆Qk is the change in log of new housing produced. 15 Using the fact that existing estimates of

higher age. This would be easy to capture in our framework by allowing the psychic costs of college attendance to vary with age as
well as ability.
15 The equation follows from a log linear housing demand function of the form Q      =D
                                                                                      k    H kD − η kD Pk . In equilibrium, housing
demand is equated to housing supply at the equilibrium level of housing Qk . This equilibrium model is also used to motivate
alternate proxies for changes in housing demand including ∆H kD = (ηkD + ηkS ) ∆Pk , where ηkS is the local housing supply elasticity.

                                                                 12
the elasticity of housing demand in the literature suggest that ηkD ≈ 1, we create a proxy for local housing
                      D , which is simply the sum of the log of price and the log of housing produced in
demand in any period, H k


the MSA. 16 The change in this proxy over any two periods, ∆
                                                            H k D , measures the change in local housing
demand over that interval.
    Our proxy for changes in housing demand is a function of both changes in local housing prices (ΔPk)
and changes in local housing supply (ΔQk). Theory says both changes in housing prices and changes in
housing supply should affect local labor markets. Increases in housing supply can directly stimulate the local
construction industry. Increases in housing prices can stimulate local employment either a housing wealth
effect on consumer spending or through a relaxation of liquidity constraints (Mian and Sufi 2014).
Additionally, both the housing price and housing supply channels can increase the volume of housing
transactions which stimulates sectors associated with the selling and financing of housing (e.g., mortgage
brokers, real estate agents, etc.). This discussion makes clear that it is theoretically ambiguous whether the
housing supply effect on local labor markets is weaker or stronger than the housing price effect on local
labor markets. In our baseline specification, we combine the two effects together in one metric, which
assumes that the labor market effects are similar. We describe evidence below that is consistent with this
assumption being approximately true in our setting.
    We get local housing price information from the Federal Housing Finance Agency (FHFA) annual series
on prices in FHFA metro areas, which we match by hand to Census/ACS MSAs. 17                                We measure local
housing supplied by the number of new privately owned housing units authorized via permits within the
market.     We match information on building permits from the Census Building Permits Survey to
Census/ACS metro areas by hand using the MSA codes in the permits data. Merging the Census/ACS data
with the FHFA and Building Permits Survey data produces 275 MSAs, which constitute our analysis sample
of local labor markets. 18
    Figure 6 plots trends over time at the median, 10th percentile and 90th percentile for our local housing
demand measure (the sum of log permits and log prices in an MSA). The figure shows variation at all three
percentiles points, with particularly dramatic changes at the 90th percentile of MSA over the course of the
boom and bust compared to changes at the median and 10th percentile. It is this large variation across MSAs

Our results are very similar under both specifications. We prefer equation (3) because it does not rely on assuming that the
housing market is always in supply-demand equilibrium, which may be a poor assumption during the housing boom.
15 See the Online Appendix for details of this matching procedure.
16 The assumption of a unitary housing demand elasticity is justified by taking the average of the two most widely-cited estimates

of the housing demand elasticity in the literature: 0.7 from Polinsky and Ellowood (1979) and 1.2 from Houthakker and Taylor
(1970).
17 See the Online Appendix for details of this matching procedure.
18 Of the 283 MSAs with labor market data, 8 of them have missing house price data and/or missing housing permits data during

the 2000-2006 time period.
                                                               13
that our analysis exploits. A 1 log point change in the housing demand measure between 2000 and 2006
corresponds to approximately the 90/10 percentile difference in the distribution of the 2000-2006 log
changes across MSAs. The standard deviation across MSAs in the 2000-2006 changes in 0.57.
     Our empirical work examines how different measures of education attainment and labor market
outcomes are affected by local housing demand shocks. A key problem we face is measurement error in our
housing demand shock which could lead our estimates to be attenuated. There is some unavoidable error in
the dating of the start and end of the boom in an MSA, and the information on prices and permits that we
use to create the measure of housing demand are only noisy proxies of underlying housing demand. A
second challenge is that changes in housing demand in an MSA might be correlated with latent factors, such
as latent amenity shocks, labor demand shocks, or labor supply shocks that could independently affect
education or labor market outcomes. This would cause bias of indeterminate sign in the OLS estimates. To
account for both measurement error and endogeneity problems, we supplement our OLS analyses with Two
Stage Least Squares (TSLS) models that exploit plausibly exogenous variation in local housing demand
arising from speculative activity.
     Our strategy for isolating this exogenous variation draws upon the emerging consensus that much of the
variation in housing prices, production and transactions during the national boom and bust was not the
result of changes in traditional fundamentals like latent productivity, income or population, but rather was
the result of factors specific to the housing market. These explanations include irrational exuberance and
“bubbles” (Shiller 2009, Mayer 2011, Chinco and Mayer 2014, Glaeser and Nathanson 2014), the
introduction of market products like interest-only mortgages (Barlevy and Fisher 2010), and changes in
national lending standards (Favilukis, Ludvigson, and Van Nieuwerburgh 2010). 19 The combination of these
forces caused widespread speculative investment in housing assets, with dramatic increases in housing
prices, production, and sales until the bubble eventually burst.
     To create our instrument, we build on the work of Ferreira and Gyourko (2011) by looking at rapid
changes in housing prices that occurred in the local area between the 2000 and 2006 period. Since it is
usually assumed that underlying fundamentals do not change abruptly, and are smoothly incorporated into
prices when they do change, sharp breaks from the trend in a market’s quarterly housing price arguably
reflects variation that is the result of exogenous speculative activity or other housing specific forces, rather
than unobserved changes in fundamental factors that are the major source of endogeneity concerns in OLS
analysis of labor market and education outcomes. As Ferreira and Gyourko (2011) show, these sharp




19Burnside, Eichenbaum, and Rebelo (2015) also discuss “fads” in beliefs about patterns of future prices as an important force
during the recent housing boom.
                                                             14
changes occurred at different times in different locations, which casts doubt on the extent to which national
shocks can explain the sharp change in prices within local areas. 20
    Figure 7 illustrates how we use this insight to create an instrumental variable for local housing demand
changes. 21 The figure plots quarterly housing prices for six MSAs between the first quarter (Q1) of 2000
and the last quarter (Q4) of 2005. For the three cities on the left side of figure, the smooth evolution of
prices over time suggests that all or most of this change could have been the result of latent unmeasured
fundamental factors, which “smoothly” affect demand. By contrast, for each of the three cities on the right
side of the figure, the price series changed discontinuously (“sharply”) at some point in the 2000s,
suggesting the influence of some factor different from smooth changes in fundamentals, such as the effect
of a speculative bubble.
    Using the quarterly price series of each MSA between 2000Q1 and 2005Q4, we estimate MSA-specific
OLS regressions with a single structural break, and search for the location of the break which maximizes the
R 2 of the following regression:

                                    PkH (t ) = ωk + τ k t + λk (t − tk* )1{t > tk*} + ζ k ,t                     (4)

In equation (4), PkH (t ) represents the log local housing price in MSA k in period t , which is a given year-
quarter; tk* is the date of the structural break in the MSA’s time series, restricted to be between 2001Q1 and
2005Q4; τ k is an MSA-specific linear time trend before the structural break; and λk is the size of the MSA-
specific structural break - the extent to which the growth rate of MSA’s quarterly house price series changed
at the break. Like Ferreira and Gyourko (2011), we find that the structural breaks occurred at different
times for different MSAs. For MSAs whose house prices evolved fairly linearly over the time period, our
estimates of λk will be close to zero.
    Figure 8 shows the very strong positive relationship between the size of an MSA’s estimated structural
break and the 2000-2006 growth in housing demand in the MSA. We conduct of variety of formal
econometric investigations of the “first-stage” relationship shown in the figure, all of which confirm the
pattern evident in the figure. In particular, the structural break strongly predicts the 2000-2006 MSA change
in housing demand after accounting for full set of standard controls. The F-statistic on the structural break
measure in these analyses is always far larger than 20 for housing demand changes, removing any “weak



20 Ferreira and Gyourko (2011) conclude that many of the MSAs that experienced a structural break in housing prices during the

2002-2005 period experienced no contemporaneous jump in income or any other traditional demand shifters when the structural
break in house prices occurred. These “late booming” MSAs – which are the focus of our instrument – have price movements
consistent with a speculative bubble.
21 We are grateful to Edward Glaeser for discussions that encouraged us to formulate this empirical strategy.


                                                                   15
instrument” concerns. 22 The structural break also strongly predicts the housing demand change during the
2006-2012 bust period, a result that follows from the fact that the size of the boom an MSA experienced
was nearly perfectly correlated with the size of its later housing bust. 23
     Our interpretation is that these structural breaks that we identify in the 2000-2005 period are the result
of speculative activity in the local areas. It is natural to wonder if these structural breaks are actually
capturing exogenous shifts in speculative activity, as we argue, or are they instead reflect changes in some
latent confound in the MSA. Formally, our goal is to use these structural breaks as instruments for changes
in housing demand that are orthogonal to other factors that would drive local labor markets and/or
educational choices. The six graphs in Figure 9 plot the relationship between the size of an MSAs structural
break, λk , and pre-existing features of the MSA: average housing prices in the MSA in 1990; lagged
housing price growth in the MSA between 1990 and 1995; average employment and wages in the MSA in
1990; and the growth in per capita enrollment in the MSA in two- and four-year colleges from 1990 to 1995.
Strikingly, the figure shows that the structural break does not systematically vary with any of these pre-
existing MSA-level variables, which is consistent with the findings in Ferreira and Gyourko (2011). Of
course, these patterns obviously do not rule out the possibility that the structural break is related to some
latent confound, but it is reassuring that λk exhibits no association with key pre-existing observable
variables that one would think are likely closely related to latent factors that would raise obvious
endogeneity concerns.
     The two graphs in Figure 10 offer some evidence that the structural breaks indeed capture exogenous
speculative activity rather than sharp changes in the underlying factors that determine labor market or
education outcomes. The first graph relates the size of the structural break to the change in the price/rent
ratio in an MSA, using data on rental price information that we have calculated for each MSA. 24 To
understand what this graph tests for, assume that there is a sudden change in amenities, productivity or
similar latent “fundamental”, which discontinuously raises the desirability of living in an MSA. The current
price of all housing in the MSA, whether to own or rent, should rise discontinuously in this case. In other
words, there should be no relationship between λk and the price-rent ratio in an MSA if the break identified
sudden changes in the latent fundamentals that give rise to endogeneity concerns regarding current
employment, wages and schooling.               By contrast, if the structural break reflects price changes from
speculative investment purchase, based on investors’ (perhaps incorrect) judgments about the likely future

22 We present first stage regression results in Appendix Table A1.
23 Online Appendix Figure OA.1 illustrates this pattern.
24 See the Online Appendix for a detailed description of the construction of rental price data using the Census/ACS data. In the

Online Appendix we report analogous results to the 2SLS results in Table 3 using the change in the price-to-rent ratio as an
instrumental variable (instead of the estimated structural break measure used in the main tables). The results are very similar to
the main results in Table 3.
                                                               16
desirability of the MSA, the price of owning should rise relative to that paid by renters, and an MSA’s
structural break should be positively related to growth in its price to rent ratio. This is precisely what the
graph shows, suggesting that the breaks do not reflect the changes in current amenities or productivity
factors, at least to the extent these effects show up in rents. 25
    More evidence that the structural breaks represent changes from speculative activity comes from the
second graph in Figure 10. In recent work, Chinco and Mayer (2014) have carefully assembled data from
transaction-level deed records to identify purchases in several large housing markets made by “out-of-town
buyers” – individuals with a primary residence in one market who nonetheless buy a house in another
market. By examining differences between local and out-of-town buyers in exit timing and realized capital
gains, they present clear evidence that out of town buyers across most housing markets during the 2000s
were disproportionately misinformed speculators. Using the data they have assembled for twenty-one
markets, the second graph in the last row of Figure 10 shows that, at least for this sub-sample of MSAs with
available data, our structural break variable is strongly correlated with growth in the share of buyers who are
speculative out-of-town buyers.
    Taken together, the evidence in Figures 9 and 10 suggests that the estimated structural breaks identify
plausibly exogenous variation in housing demand. Using TSLS, we estimate first-difference models of the
effect of the 2000-2006 change in housing demand on the change over the same time period in education
and labor market outcomes, using the structural break we estimate (converted to an annualized growth rate)
as an instrumental variable for the change in housing demand. In addition, we exploit the information
provided by the size and precise timing of structural breaks about exogenous changes in housing demand to
estimate other regression models described later in the paper.

4. CHANGES IN OPPORTUNITY COSTS AND EXPECTED LIFETIME PREMIUM
   FROM HOUSING BOOMS

In this section, we assess how young adults’ opportunity cost of (and their expected future lifetime earnings
gain from) college attendance were affected by the boom, before turning to our main analysis studying
different aspects of educational attainment.
    We assume that a young adult who attends college in a given year foregoes the equivalent of the average
labor market income received that year by persons in his MSA of roughly the same age who have no college

25 One concern with rental prices in the Census/ACS data is the fact that the quality of rental units may vary over time within an

MSA, making quality-adjusted comparisons of rental price changes across MSAs difficult. Chico and Mayer (2014) construct
quality-adjusted (residualized) rental price data using richer data that allows them to follow rents for specific properties, though
the data only exist for 43 large MSAs. Using their data, we find that there is a strong relationship between the structural break
instrument and changes in the price-to-rent ratio, similar to what we show for the full sample of 275 MSAs.
                                                                17
training. His best estimate of the future lifetime premium from having gone to college is taken to be the
current mean difference in labor market outcomes between older adults in his MSA with and without a
college education.
     We estimate mean labor market outcomes in an MSA from the 2000 Census and from several years of
data from the American Community Survey (ACS). 26                  We restrict the Census/ACS sample to non-
institutionalized persons living in an MSA in their state of birth. This “same state” sample restriction
partially accounts for any potential confounding from endogenous migration of the type shown to
accompany other types of local demand shocks (Blanchard and Katz 1992; Bound and Holzer 2000;
Notowidigdo 2013). Likewise, this restriction excludes all foreign-born individuals, mitigating the concern
that our results are being driven by compositional changes in the local area due to both international
migration and the intrastate migration of immigrants (Cadena and Kovak 2015). We also always exclude
from Census/ACS samples anyone living in group quarters. Using the Census/ACS samples, we explore
three separate time periods: 2000, 2006, and 2012. Averages for the year 2000 are estimated using the 2000
Census. To compute the labor market and education averages in the years 2006 and 2012, respectively, we
pool ACS data from 2005 to 2007 (and refer to it as 2006) and from 2011 to 2013 (and refer to it as 2012).
We pool the data in the ACS to increase precision given that our analysis is always conducted at the level of
MSA observations. 27 For the Census/ACS analysis, we cannot explore the years between 2000 and 2005
because the ACS does not provide information on the individual’s MSA of residence.
     Using the Census/ACS sample, we estimate first-difference regressions of the form:

                                      ∆Y=          
                                           γ 0 + γ1∆H kt D + X kt Γ + ν kt                                    (5)
                                        kt



      
where ∆ H kt D and ∆Ytk are, respectively, the change in housing demand (defined above) and the change in
the average labor market conditions that proxy for opportunity costs and expected future lifetime college
premium in MSA k between periods t and t+s. The first difference specification in (5) accounts for the
effect of latent fixed MSA-specific factors. The control vector X kt in (5) is designed to control for any
factors that could cause differential trends in labor market conditions across MSAs. This vector includes
controls for the share of employed workers with a college degree, the share of women in the labor force, the
fraction of the MSA that is foreign-born, and the log of the MSA’s total population as measured in 2000. 28

26 We use the Census and ACS individual-level and household-level extracts from the Integrated Public Use Microsamples
(IPUMS) database (Ruggles et al., 2004).
27 When computing house price growth over the boom, we examine the change between 2000 and the relevant measure in the

first quarter in 2005, 2006 and 2007. For the housing supply proxy, we calculate the change between annual average between
2001-2006 and 1998-2000.
28 When calculating these MSA-level control variables, we use the “same state” restriction on our Census/ACS sample and

include all adults between ages of 18 and 55.
                                                           18
Standard errors in all our analyses are clustered by state. Lastly, all regressions are weighted by MSA young
adult population (age 18-33).
    Since we mainly focus on the education choices of 18-25 year olds, we use the average labor market
outcomes of non-college 18-25 year olds to measure opportunity costs. This group includes all individuals
with just a high school degree (or equivalent) and high school dropouts. We measure both the employment
rate and average wages for this group, averaging across individuals in each MSA-year. To compute
individual wages, we divide the individual’s reported annual earnings from the prior year by an estimate of
their reported annual hours worked over the prior year. 29 To compute the skill premium within each MSA
in each period t, we focus on the wages of 26-55 year olds for those with and without any college education.
In the language of our model outlined above, this is our estimate of the individual’s expected future college
premium. 30      The Online Appendix that accompanies this paper provides a further description of the
construction of all variables used in the paper.
    Table 1 presents estimates of the effect of the housing boom on opportunity costs, using two different
measures of what a young adult gives up in terms of labor market rewards by going to college in a given
year. The table presents both OLS and TSLS results. Subsequent tables show only the preferred TSLS
results; all corresponding OLS results for all other tables are presented in the Online Appendix. We show
both sets of estimates in Table 1 to give a flavor of the pattern of results that we consistently find across the
relationships we study: strongly significant TSLS estimates that are larger than their OLS counterparts,
although the latter are consistently relatively large and generally statistically significant across all of our
results.
     The first column of Table 1 presents the results for the average prevailing employment rate among
young adults without a college education. Both the OLS and TSLS results show that 2000-2006 growth in
housing demand in an MSA raised employment among non-college educated young adults overall, and for
men and women separately. The OLS results in the top panel suggest that in an MSA experiencing a 1 log
point larger increase in housing demand between 2000 and 2006, mean employment rate was 3.1 percentage
points higher among all 18-25 year olds and 3.0 and 3.2 percentage points higher among 18-25 non-college
men and women, separately. The corresponding preferred TSLS estimates are 5.1, 5.9 and 4.3 percentage
points. These effects, which are all strongly statistically significant, are relatively large given that the mean

29 Specifically, to compute mean wages in an MSA during a given time period, we start with the same analysis samples described

earlier. We then impose the following restrictions: (1) the individual must be currently working at least 30 hours during a typical
week at the time of the survey, (2) the individual's income in the year prior to the survey must have exceeded $5,000, and (3) the
individual must have worked at least 48 weeks in the prior year. Given these restrictions, our measure of average wages is for full-
time workers with relatively few non-employment spells. To estimate annual hours worked last year, we multiply usual hours
worked per week by the number of weeks worked last year.
30 We also conduct robustness tests where the age range used to calculate opportunity costs is 18-33, and the age range for

expected future returns was either 26-45, 33-45, or 33-55, and we found that our main results are robust to these alternative
definitions.
                                                                19
employment rates for all non-college educated 18-25 year olds and for men and women separately, were
60.6, 64.3 and 56.5 percent, respectively. A one standard deviation change in housing demand across MSAs
was 0.49. As a result, a one standard deviation change in housing demand was associated with a 2.9 and 2.2
percentage point increase in employment rates for 18-25 year old non-college men and women, respectively.
    The estimated effect on housing demand shocks on wages for these young non-college workers are also
relatively large and strongly significant. The TSLS results for log wage in the second column show that in an
MSA experiencing a 1 percentage point larger increase in housing demand, young adults going to college
forego 11.5 percent more in wages, with very similar effects for young men (11.1 percent) and young
women (11.7 percent). Given the large increase in employment that the boom caused among non-college
educated persons, some portion of this estimated wage effect may reflect compositional effects rather than
increased returns from an hour of work. 31 Even with this caveat, both the OLS and TSLS results for
employment and wages suggest that the boom substantially improved labor market opportunities for both
young adult men and young adult women without college educations. In the third column of the table we
present results for a summary measure of labor market conditions that we use elsewhere in the paper: the
product of wages and the probability of employment. The estimates show that that a one standard deviation
change in housing demand results in a 8.8 percent increase in wages adjusted by the probability of finding a
job in the first place, for the pooled sample of men and women (0.179 * 0.49).
    Were certain sectors particularly responsible for the improved labor market opportunities for young
men and women presented in the first three columns? To the extent that people associate the housing
boom with large increases in the building and renovation of houses, construction probably comes naturally
to mind as a sector that ought to have been profoundly affected by the housing boom. As discussed above,
the boom also involved massive changes in the volume of housing transactions – the amount of houses
bought and sold. Many person performing the various tasks necessary for a sale to be consummated –
things like advertising, listing, “showing”, titling, insuring, procuring financing, etc. – would have been
employed in the so-called “FIRE” sector of finance, insurance and real estate. Lastly, a broad set of sectors
in retail and local services likely also responded to changes in housing demand through consumption
increases coming from housing wealth effects or reduction of liquidity constraints (Mian and Sufi 2014).
    Columns 4 and 5 of Table 1 present estimates of the effect of housing booms on the employment rate
in the construction sector and the FIRE sector. The table shows both the point estimates for employment
changes in the two sectors, and the ratio of those estimates divided by the overall employment effect from

31 To assess the importance of composition effects, Online Appendix Table OA.8 reports results which use an MSA-specific wage

growth measure that is residualized for age, race, gender, and marital status, following Shapiro (2006). We find very similar results
with this alternative wage growth measure, which suggests that observable changes in composition do not account for the main
results for average wages. In the same table, we also present estimates which adjust average wages for changes in average rents (to
create estimate of change in real wages rather than nominal wages).
                                                                 20
column 1. These ratios measure how much of the total employment effect from housing demand shocks
for a given type of worker can be accounted for by changes in construction employment (column 4) and
changes in FIRE employment (column 5). 32
     Focusing on the 2SLS results, our estimates show that 58.6% of the employment effect for young non-
college men is concentrated in the construction sector while only 12.8% of the employment effect for young
non-college women is in the construction sector. These results make intuitive sense given that young non-
college men are much more likely to work in the construction sector. Conversely, our estimates show that
40.6% of the increase in employment for young non-college women can be traced to the FIRE sector (real
estate agents, mortgage brokers, etc.). The comparable number for men is only 7.5%. 33
     To assess the robustness of the main 2SLS results, we report results from a wide range of alternative
specifications in the Online Appendix, focusing on alternative control variables, alternative proxies for the
change in local housing demand, and alternative ways of constructing the structural break instrument. We
find similar results across different combinations of controls such as region fixed effects, controls for local
manufacturing employment, routine employment, and local unemployment rate. We also find similar results
using alternative proxies for changes in local housing demand, such as using the elasticity-weighted house
price change instead of the sum of housing prices and housing permits. Lastly, we report results for
alternative ways of constructing the structural break instrument, such as setting the structural break to 0 if
the estimated structural break is not statistically significant. Overall, we find fairly similar results across all of
our main labor market outcomes in all of these specifications.
     In addition to the robustness analysis, we also tried to estimate whether the changes in opportunity costs
were primarily driven by changes in housing prices or by changes in housing supply, since our primary
housing demand measure combines them together, implicitly assuming that the employment and wage
effects are similar. To assess whether this is a reasonable assumption, we carried out two exercises. First, we
included both ΔPk and ΔSk as separate variable in our estimation of (5) and estimated this equation via OLS
since we do not have separate instruments for each component. The coefficients on ΔPk and ΔSk were
fairly similar, suggesting that both higher housing prices and the construction of more homes increased non-
college employment and wages. Second, we explored whether housing demand changes had differential
labor market effects in areas where housing supply is relatively elastic, using the local housing supply
elasticities estimates from Saiz (2010), interacted with both our housing demand proxy and the structural
break measure. Although precision is somewhat limited, we find no evidence that changes in local housing

32 Note that the actual ratios, which are based on the division of the actual point estimates, sometimes differ slightly from the ratio
of the rounded point estimates in the tables.
33 We looked at several other sectors and found no meaningful effect of changes in local housing demand on employment in

manufacturing, mining, and utilities. We therefore conclude that the remaining employment effect outside of construction and
FIRE is accounted for by a broad range of jobs in the local retail and service sectors.
                                                                 21
demand had differential effects in places where housing is inelastically supplied relative to places where
housing is elastically supplied. We therefore conclude that our assumption of similar labor market effects of
ΔPk and ΔQk is a reasonable approximation that we carry through the rest of the analysis.
   The results in Table 1 show clearly that the boom substantially increased the opportunity cost of college-
going for both young men and women, although these increases came in different sectors. Table 2 explores
how the boom changed the expected college earnings premium that a young adult could have expected to
earn in the future. We estimate this by comparing the labor market outcomes of older, prime-aged persons
(age 26-55) with and without any college education. We focus on the same labor market outcomes in the
first three columns of Table 1, but the dependent variable is now the change over time in the *difference* in
labor market outcomes between those with at least one year of college education to those without any
college education.
   Recall from the discussion in Section 2 that if housing booms raised the expected future college/non-
college labor market premium, that effect would tend to offset any negative response to the opportunity
cost changes presented in Table 1. The results in Table 2 argue strongly against this possibility. The TSLS
point estimates indicate that local housing demand shocks lowered the employment rate gap between college
and non-college working adults, strictly reducing the future college/non-college gain that a younger adult
might reasonably have expected from getting a college education.
   The estimates in the second column show that local housing booms did not meaningfully change the
expected future college/non-college wage gains. In contrast to the employment rate results, local booms
did not significantly increase or reduce the college/non-college wage gap among older working adults, with
estimates generally close to zero. The results for the future wages weighted by the probability of finding
employment (shown in Column 3) are similar to the employment rate results. In sum, the results in Table 2
show that a young adult during the boom years, trying to form a conjecture of how increasing housing
demand in his local area would affect his future market returns from different education paths, would have
reasonably concluded that the boom either had no effect on lifetime labor market streams from the college
versus non-college path, or else potentially reduced the earnings and employment gain from becoming college
educated. Nothing about expected future gain would have tended to militate against the effect of rising
opportunity costs.




                                                     22
5. HOUSING DEMAND SHOCKS AND COLLEGE ATTAINMENT                                             DURING THE

   BOOM

In this section, we present the paper’s main results, which assess how local housing demand shocks during
the boom affected young adults’ college-going. We use a variety of methods and information about college-
going from three different data sources. Moreover, as we show below, the particular limitations of each data
source are strengths of at least one of the other two. Combining a range of estimation methods and
different data sources therefore allows us to carry out a comprehensive investigation.



5.1 CENSUS/ACS ESTIMATES

Our first education results use self-reports of schooling attainment in the “same state” Census/ACS sample
combining the 2000 Census and the 2006 ACS. Our primary measure of educational attainment is the
fraction of individuals in a given age range with any college attainment regardless of degree completion. We
refer to this measure as “Any College”. Our second measure of educational attainment is the fraction of
individuals in a given age range who completed at least a bachelor’s degree. We refer to this measure as “At
Least Bachelor’s Degree”. We calculate the mean educational attainment rates in an MSA among 18-25 year
olds in 2000 and among 18-25 year olds in 2006. As we have shown, the latter group faced much higher
opportunity costs of acquiring a college education when they made their college going decisions if they lived
in an MSA experiencing a housing boom, so we would expect their average attainment levels to be lower in
housing boom. We estimate first-difference regressions of the form

                                 ∆S=             
                                      α 0 + β FD ∆H kt D + X kt Γ + ukt ,                           (6)
                                   kt



where ∆Skt is change in average educational attainment among 18-25 year olds in an MSA between periods t
and t+s. The coefficient β FD is the first-difference estimate of how the growth in housing demand in an
MSA affected the change in college attendance among young adults in that MSA.
    Table 3 presents the TSLS results from estimating (6) using the structural break λk as an instrumental
variable. The two columns show the results for the dependent variable defined for “Any College” and “At
Least Bachelor’s Degree”, respectively.      The first three panels show the results where the education
measures are defined for all individuals in the 18-25 range, just males in this range, and just females in this
range. The last panel shows results for a placebo specification where we look at changes in college
attainment for all 26-33 year olds.


                                                       23
     The results indicate that rising local housing demand during the national housing boom sharply lowered
the fraction of 18-25 year olds with “Any College”, with estimated effects that were very similar for men and
women. The strongly statistically significant point estimates imply that a one percentage point increase in
local housing demand reduced the fraction of 18-25 year olds who completed any amount of college training
by about 2 percentage points – 1.8 for men and 2.4 for women. To further help interpret the magnitudes, a
one-standard deviation increase in the local housing demand shock reduced the propensity of any college by
roughly 1 percentage point for both men and women. As a benchmark, roughly 43 percent of men and 51
percent of women between the ages of 18 and 25 had any college attainment in 2000. By contrast, the
second column in the table shows that the growth in local housing demand had no effect on the fraction of
18-25 year olds with at least a Bachelor’s’ degree. It is not only that the effects are statistically insignificant;
the point estimates are tiny compared to the point estimates in column 1.
     The point estimate of 0.021 for “Any College” attainment for me and women represents a 4.5 percent
reduction in the fraction of 18-25 year olds with “Any College” training relative to the rate in 2000. The
difference across the columns suggests that housing booms lower college attainment among 18-25 year olds
almost entirely by decreasing the share of them completing some level of college less than a Bachelor’s
degree, with no effect on the share completing a Bachelor’s degree. Because of the way education is coded in
the Census/ACS, the “Any College” group consists of people who have completed an Associate’s degree
and persons with college training who have not completed any degree, but for whom we do not whether
the college-training they received was at the Associates or Bachelor’s level. 34 We nonetheless believe that is
possible to say something about the likely implied effect of the point estimates in column 1 for just the
portion of “Any College” sample receiving Associates-level training. To do this, we estimate what share of
18-25 year olds with “Any College” in 2006 were likely studying towards a Bachelor’s degree.
     As the table shows, among persons aged 18-25 in 2000, 46.9% of them had completed “Any College”
and 10% had completed at least a Bachelor’s degree. We also report in Table 3 average attainment in 2006
of persons who had been 18-25 in 2000. These means are 61.9 percent for “Any College” and 28.5% for at
least a “Bachelor’s”. These numbers suggest that many 18-25 year olds in 2000 who would ultimately
complete a Bachelor’s degree had done not so as of 2000. Since Bachelor’s degrees can take many years to
complete, many of these people were probably studying at Bachelor’s colleges in 2000 when they were
between 18 and 25. Even though they did not complete the degree by this age, they were engaged in
Bachelor’s training in 2000. Assuming that all those completing Bachelor’s degrees by 2006 had already
started Bachelor’s training by 2000, the share of 18-25 year olds with only Associate’s level training would be

34 In the Census/ACS IPUMS education codes, college-trained persons without degree are either “some college, but less than a
year” (code 065) or “1 or more year of college credit, no degree” (code 071). There is no information about the type of college
training these persons received.
                                                              24
no larger than 18.4% (46.9-28.5). If housing demand shock only affected Associates level attainment as the
results hint might be the case, then the implied magnitude of the -0.021 point estimate relative to the share
of people with Associate’s level training before the boom would therefore represent at least 11.4 percent
decline relative to the share of population studying at Associate’s colleges. This implied effect is likely even
larger since not all people who doing Bachelors’ training in 2000 ultimately go on to complete a degree,
which would reduce the share engaged in Associate’s training even lower. Overall, these calculations suggest
significant declines in Associate’s training as a result of housing boom.
    As a placebo specification, the last panel of results presents estimates for persons aged 26-33. The
conceptual model emphasizes that older households should be less likely to respond to the housing boom.
The results show, reassuringly, that a sample older than our 18-25 age group of interest did not respond to
the housing demand shock. Additionally, the fact that we find no effect of housing boom on Bachelor’s
attainment in this older group suggest that the null effect we find for 18-25 year olds is not simply because
they are too young to have completed their Bachelor’s degrees.
    Our finding that increases in local housing demand during the national boom lowered mean college
attainment, with almost all of the effect coming from schooling that is less than a Bachelor’s degree, is
consistent with the predictions of our conceptual model emphasizing the role of opportunity costs. The
fact that the massive Census samples allow us to precisely estimate means at the start and peak of the boom
for relatively narrow birth cohorts by MSA is a unique advantage of this data source. This notwithstanding,
there are some important limitation of the Census/ACS data.
    One concern is that the Census/ACS education self-reports may be unreliable. This is an especially
important concern because there is some evidence that the errors is self-reported education tend to be non-
classical, with people claiming higher educational attainment than is suggested by other types of evidence
(see Filmore 2014). A second concern, which has been already noted, is that Census/ACS data do not allow
us to determine whether a person with college training but who has not finished a degree had been working
towards a degree at a community college or a four-year university. This makes it very difficult to accurately
characterize the type of college training received by an important part of the sample, calling into question
any firm conclusions about the differential responses across different types of colleges. Third, the fact that
the 2001-2004 ACS samples do not record the MSA of respondents prevents us from doing high frequency
analysis that better allows us to exploit the differential timing of the boom across MSAs.
    Finally, there is the important problem that because the Census/ACS data are pooled cross-sectional
samples, we cannot definitively link people to their MSA at different points during the housing boom. Even
with our sample restricted to persons living in their state of birth, we do not know their MSA at the start of



                                                       25
the boom for persons who moved across MSAs within that state during the boom. The Census/ACS results
may thus still be confounded by endogenous migration, even in the “same state” sample.
    The next two data sets used to study schooling address these concerns and also permit a number of rich,
alternate analyses that are not possible with the Census data. We discuss these two data sets, and results
from them, in turn.

5.2 IPEDS ESTIMATES

Our second source of information on educational attainment is the Integrated Postsecondary Education
Data System (IPEDS). The IPEDS is constructed from administrative data on enrollments reported
annually by most of the colleges and universities in the U.S, including both community colleges and four-
year colleges and universities. 35 The data tracks first-time, full-year enrollments, enabling us to identify
persons enrolling in college for the first time during the boom. We match colleges and universities to MSAs
by hand, and compute MSA-specific estimates of total first-time, full-year enrollments for different types of
colleges and universities in each year between 1997 and 2006.
    There are several important strengths of the IPEDS data. Because the enrollment information are from
administrative records, they are likely less error-ridden than survey self- reported schooling attained in the
Census/ACS. In addition, the IPEDS data specifically reports enrollment for different types of colleges
separately, permitting a precise characterization of the type of college training for every enrolment
(Associates’ or Bachelor’s’ levels, 2 or 4 year). Something analogous is not possible with the Census data for
persons whose completed schooling is less than a Bachelor’s degree. Finally, the annual IPEDS reports
provide high frequency information about college level training, which allows for some econometric tests
that cannot be done with other data sources.
    The main shortcoming of the IPEDS is that it is not an individual-based survey, but is rather a survey of
enrollments in institutions. It is not possible to measure enrollment by birth cohort using the IPEDS, as we
do with the Census/ACS. Indeed, we know very little about precisely who the first-time enrollees in the
IPEDS are, including exactly where they are from. In the analysis we assume that they are from the local
market that houses that college or university, but this will likely not be true some portion of enrollments if
people move across MSAs for their college training.
    For all of the IPEDS analysis, we use the per capita enrollment rate in the MSA, calculated by adjusting
total first-time enrollment totals by the size of the 18-25 population in the MSA based on interpolations
between the 1990 Census, the 2000 Census and the 2006 ACS. The analysis focuses on the 224 MSAs for

35 Unfortunately, for-profit universities are underrepresented in IPEDS data, and they are growing fast during the housing boom

period. In principle, we should be able to capture these educational investments in Census/ACS self-reported educational
attainment variable.
                                                              26
which enrollment data are reported every year between 1997 and 2006. The sample of MSAs is thus smaller
than the 275 MSAs used in our Census/ACS results above. We divide all IPEDS enrollments into two
mutually exclusive and exhaustive categories: community college enrollments and 4-year colleges and
universities. The community college category includes junior colleges and technical colleges, while the 4-year
colleges and universities category includes all institutions that award bachelor’s degrees. 36
    We perform two types of analysis with the IPEDS data. The first set of results follows the analysis
Census/ACS data and focuses on changes in average enrollments during the 2001-2006 relative to average
enrollments in the 1995-2000 period. The primary advantage of this “long difference” specification is it
allows us to use our TSLS specification where we instrument for the housing demand change with our
estimated structural break (λk). The second set of results exploits the higher frequency annual administrative
data to examine whether the specific timing and magnitude of the structural break instrument lines up with
the timing and magnitude of the enrollment change within each MSA.


TSLS Estimates for Changes in Per Capita Enrollment


For our first analysis, we show the results from a TSLS estimation of a first difference model of the effect of
the 2000-2006 change in housing demand on the change in average annual per capita enrollment from the
1995-2000 period (when people made enrollment decisions before the boom began) to average annual per
capita enrollment during the 2001-2006 period (when people made decisions during the boom). We
                                             
instrument for the change in housing demand, ∆H k D , using the structural break. This specification is
identical to regression specification (6) used previously for the various first-difference Census/ACS results
aside from the change in dependent variable.
    As the first column Table 4 shows, the TSLS results indicate that a 1 log point increase in an MSA’s
housing demand from 2000 to 2006 lowered the five year average of per capita annual enrollment in 2-year
colleges by about 1.1 percentage points. 37 This statistically significant effect was similar for male and female
enrollment. The second column of Table 4 presents results for enrollment in 4-year colleges. The contrast
with the results in the first column is very striking. We find that the 2000-2006 growth housing demand in


36 Note that some 4-year colleges will award associate’s degrees, but we cannot separately measure enrollments of students

studying towards associate’s degrees in the IPEDS data, so they are included in the 4-year college category. This means that the
total community college enrollment in our analysis sample is likely an underestimate of total enrollment of students studying
towards associate’s degrees. The Data Appendix provides more detail on these categorizations and the construction of our data
set.
37 Because of space constraints, we show the OLS specification in the Online Appendix that accompanies the paper. All of the

OLS results show a negative and statistically significant association between housing demand in an MSA and enrollment in 2 year
colleges for both men and women, and no statistically significant relationship between housing demand in an MSA and
enrollment in 4 year colleges.
                                                              27
an MSA had no statistically significant effect on per capital 4-year enrollment. For men, the 4-year
enrollment point estimates are very small, less than one-tenth the size of the corresponding 2-year
enrollment estimate. The estimated effect for women is larger but it is also imprecisely estimated. Given
the large standard errors on the Bachelor’s results, we cannot rule out whether women actually increased
their bachelor’s enrollments, perhaps because of the liquidity constraint mechanism discussed in Section 2.
    For the third and fourth columns of Table 4, we use IPEDS data from several years before the boom to
assess whether the results in the first two columns actually capture the causal effect of housing boom, or
whether the regressions might simply be picking up the effect of pre-existing trends. In these placebo tests,
we measure whether the 2000-2006 change in housing demand predicts the growth in annual average
enrollment from a previous time period – specifically the change in average annual enrollment during the
1987-1990 period relative to average enrollment during the 1991-1996 period. Reassuringly, the results
show that current booms do not predict previous changes in average annual per capita for either 2- or 4-year
college enrollment. This suggests that the estimates in the first two columns are not simply capturing long-
term trends and indeed capture causal effects attributable to the housing demand shock.
    What are the implied magnitudes of the main results in column 1 of Table 4, and how do they compare
to the TSLS Census results for completed schooling in Table 3?       Although enrollment is a flow measure of
schooling and the Census highest schooling completed variable studied in Table 3 is a measure of the stock
of college training, the two constructs should offer the same basic picture of the effect of housing booms,
since the years of college that a person has completed as of given year is necessarily a function of their
enrollment decisions in several separate years before year in question. It is therefore reassuring that the two
sets of results give the same qualitative picture, of a strongly significant negative effect of the booms on
Associates-level type training, with much smaller effects for Bachelor’s type training.
    Relative to the five-year average of annual enrollment in 2-year colleges of 4.7 and 5.3 percent in 2000
for men and women, respectively, the point estimates in Table 4 imply that a one standard deviation
increase in housing demand reduced per capital male and female enrollment in Associate’s-granting colleges
by 11 percent and 10 percent, respectively. Comparing these effects to the implied magnitudes from the
Census/ACS results is difficult for several reasons. There is, first, the fact that the IPEDS results are based a
sample of 224 MSAs rather than 275 used in the Census analysis. This does not guarantee that the results
would be quantitatively the same even if the measures used in the two studies were identical. A second issue
that frustrates easy comparison across the two sets of results is that we do not know the ages of enrollees in
the IPEDS, whereas all of the Census/ACS results focus on schooling completed by persons in particular
age bins.     Another important difference between the data sources that makes comparison of the
magnitudes difficult is that whereas the Census data are limited to persons born in the same state, there is


                                                       28
no information about where IPEDS enrollee are from. Thus, IPEDS results include not only enrollment
decisions of native-born persons from other states, but also immigrants.              Finally, our IPEDS results are
based on first-time, full year enrollment, from which it is impossible to translate into completion rates for
different types of schooling. Despite these challenges, we think our conclusion that the likely effect of on
standard deviation boom on Associate’s-level highest completion was about one percentage points is highly
consistent with the effect sizes for per capita enrollment rates in the IPEDS.


Difference in Difference Estimates for Per-Capita Enrollments


The second type of exercise we conduct with the IPEDS exploits the exogenous variation associated with
the MSA-specific information about the timing and size of structural breaks in a difference in difference
(DD) model. Specifically, using annual per capital enrollment in a given MSA during a given time period,
ekt , we estimate


                              ekt= α k + δ t + β DD   ( ( Post t ) × λ ) + X Γ + v
                                                                *
                                                                k   k      k     kt                      (7)


where ( Post tk* ) is an indicator variable denoting time periods after the date of the MSA-specific structural

break, tk* - that is, all t such that t ≥ tk* . The variable λk is size of the structural break, and α k and δ t are,

respectively, MSA and year fixed effects. The DD coefficient β DD measures how per capita enrollment in
an MSA in the years after the structural break differs from enrollment in the years before the break, with
this post-break/pre-break difference weighted by the size of the structural break. A very appealing aspect of
(7) is that it tests whether there is a change in MSA enrollment that coincides with the break its housing
demand. Since this DD estimate controls very flexibly for time effects, and for fixed features of the MSA
that affect enrollment, the interaction arguably yields unbiased estimates of our effects of interest, so long as
the time breaks are random, as we have argued throughout.
    Table 5 presents the DD results. Column 1 shows that there was a strongly statistically significant
reduction in per capita enrollment in 2-year, Associates’-granting institutions in an MSA in the years after
the MSA’s break, compared to the years before the break. These enrollment declines occurred for both
men and women. To figure out the implied magnitudes of the point estimates in this table, it is useful to
know that the standard deviation of the structural break variable across the different MSAs is about 0.06.
This means that a one standard deviation larger structural break meant annual enrollment in 2-year,
Associate’s-granting institutions during the post-break period was lower by 0.4 percentage points
(0.066*0.06). Relative to annual average enrollment before the national boom, our results imply that
                                                             29
immediately after the structural break in an MSA, and for the each subsequent year of the boom, per capita
enrollment in Associate’s-granting institutions in the MSA fell by about 8.2 percent (0.004/4.9) relative to
enrollment in the years before the break. This approximately 8 percent decline was true for both men and
women.
     The results for per capita enrollment in 4-year colleges and universities in the second column are very
different. They show that there was no statistically significant change in per capita enrollment in these
Bachelor’s degree-granting institutions in the years after the structural break, relative to enrollment before.
Although not precisely estimated, the point estimates in column 2 do suggest that there may have been a
modest increase in enrollment in Bachelor’s-granting institutions in the years after the structural break. This
is particularly true for women.          However, none of the enrollment responses in Bachelor’s granting
institutions are statistically different from zero. We emphasize that this effect would be perfectly consistent
with our conceptual framework, which argues that besides the opportunity cost mechanism that is this
paper’s main focus, housing booms may have eased liquidity constraints for some persons. To the extent
that this effect exists, Bachelor’s-granting institutions is precisely where one would expect to observe it,
since these institutions are more expensive. The relatively small number of people in an MSA whose
college-going decisions are immediately changed by increased in homeowner wealth also probably makes the
effect difficult to precisely detect empirically. Why the effect, if it exist, should be bigger for women than it
is for men as the point estimates suggest is unclear.
     The DD results suggest that there were changes in MSA enrollments in the years after a structural break
in the MSA’s housing prices, and that how large that change was varied positively with the size of the
structural break used by various TSLS analyses. Both the timing and magnitude of break therefore appear
to be important for explaining trends in college enrollment for two-year colleges, but not for four-year
colleges and universities.
     To assess the robustness of the DD results, we conduct a randomization inference exercise which
permutes assignment of year and magnitude of structural break in house prices across the various MSAs. 38
We carry this out 1,000 times, and each time we re-estimate the DD equation (7) on the permuted data. We
then compare the main DD estimates in Table 5 to the empirical distribution formed by the 1,000 different
estimates. The results are reported in Figure 11. On the left side of figure, the results for two-year colleges
show that the main DD estimates from Table 5 are unusually large in magnitude compared to the empirical
distribution and statistically significant for men, women, and all adults. The results are stronger for two-year
colleges than four-year colleges and universities, as in Table 5. These results confirm that the precise timing


38We randomly permute the pair of the magnitude and year of structural break to preserve the weak correlation between them in
each permutation. If we permute the magnitude and year of structural break independently, the results are very similar.
                                                             30
and magnitude of structural break in house prices is important for explaining timing and magnitude of
changes in enrollment in two-year colleges.

5.3 INDIVIDUAL PANEL RESULTS FROM NLYS97

The third data source we use to study the effect of the boom on college attainment is the restricted use
version of 1997 National Longitudinal Survey of Youth (NLSY97), for which we obtained special
permission. This individual-level longitudinal panel data set initially surveyed a random sample of American
youth aged 12-16 in 1997 and has followed them since.
     The age range of the NLSY97 sample and the timing of the survey are ideal for our study: at 15-19 years
old in 2000, these young people would have been making college-going decisions right around the time of
the housing boom. Because the restricted-use NLSY97 provides information about respondents’ MSA in
each survey year, we identify exactly where a person lived at the beginning of the housing boom, and
irrespective of whether they moved subsequently. 39 As noted, this is something that is impossible to do
with the individual level Census/ACS data. More generally, uniquely among our data sources, the panel
nature of the NLSY97 data allows us to track outcomes for particular persons through time. The NLSY97
is also the only one of the data sources we use that includes a rich set of control variables measuring family
background and other demographic characteristics, including parental education, race, ethnicity, and family
composition.
     The big downside of the NLSY97 is its small sample size. Our NLSY sample consists of only
approximately 6,000 men and women, which effectively renders credible comparisons of means across the
275 separate MSAs impossible. We therefore must collapse the cross-MSA variation in our housing demand
proxy to an indicator variable for whether or not the individual lived in a “housing boom MSA” in 1997
(which is defined based on whether the MSA was in the top third of the distribution based on the structural
break instrument). 40
     Our NLSY97 sample is restricted to individuals with non-missing data on employment, educational
attainment, and control demographic variables. The final sample is 5,923 individuals (2,979 men and 2,944
women). We estimate a series of regression, relating people’s outcomes in 2006 to the whether they lived in
a “housing boom” MSA in 1997, controlling for a rich set of demographic controls.




39 We use the individual’s metropolitan area of residence in 1997 and assign the housing demand change of that MSA to the
individual over the entire time period, even if that individual moves elsewhere during the sample period. Approximately 20
percent of the sample relocates during the 1997-2006 time period.
40 Even without constraints imposed by sample size considerations, our data agreement with the NLS for the use of the restricted-

use NLSY97 prevents us presenting results separately by individual MSA.
                                                               31
     Table 6 presents the results. 41 The first outcome variable, in column 1, is whether the person is
employed at age 20. We show the results for this variable because the NLSY is the only data set which allow
us to directly assess not only whether people in boom markets faced situations where labor market
prospects for young, non-college educated adults in general, but whether they personally were more likely to
participate in labor market activity. The results show clearly that this was the case. We find that young
adults living in “housing boom” MSAs just before the start of the housing boom were more likely to be
employed at age 20, with a particularly pronounced effect for young men. Overall, being from a “housing
boom” market increased the probability of being employed at age 20 by 5.8 percentage points. For men, the
increase was a strongly statistically significant 7.1 percentage points. Though somewhat smaller than the
effect for men, and marginally significant, the employed effect for young women from boom markets was
also substantial at 4.1 percentage points. These effects represent 10.3 and 6.0 percent increases relative to
mean employment rates, respectively.
     The second and third columns of Table 6 use the available information in the NLYS97 about schooling
attainment to measure the effect of being from a housing boom market on our two measures of schooling
attainment defined as of 2006: whether the person had attended “any college” and whether they had
received at least a Bachelor’s degree. The results show that the effect of being from a boom MSA on having
gotten “any college” training by 2006 was negative, substantial and strongly statistically significant. Overall
we find that young adults in “boom” MSAs when the national housing boom began were 5.8 percentage
points less likely to have attended college at all by 2006. Interestingly, at -4.9 compared to -6.8, the
percentage point lower attainment effect for men was smaller than that for women, although the two are
closer in terms of magnitude and not statistically different from each other at standard levels. The point
estimates in the third column for effect of being from a housing boom MSA on Bachelor’s degree
attainment by 2006 are very small compared to the corresponding “any college” results, and none is
statistically different from 0. 42



41 In Online Appendix Table OA.16, we report results from alternative specifications to assess robustness of the main NLSY
results.   In main results, we focus on comparing "housing boom MSAs" to other MSAs based
on whether or not the MSA was in the top-third of structural break instrument. We alternatively define “housing boom MSAs"
based on the estimated change in housing demand between 2000 and 2006 (change in prices plus change in permits). Both of
these approaches are binary comparisons grouping cities in boom/non-boom groups. We prefer these results because of limited
sample size in NLSY data set. However, we also estimate results which use continuous measure of both housing demand
instrument and housing demand change proxy. In all cases, we find a similar pattern of results: living through housing boom
causes statistically significant decline in share of population with "any college" by 2006 and no statistically significant change in
share of population with "Bachelors degree." The patterns are similar for men and women, together and separately, across each
of the outcomes.
42 In Online Appendix Tables OA.4 and OA.5, we repeat the analysis in Table 1 and Table 3 using the same indicator variable

used in the NLSY97 analysis instead of the main housing demand proxy. The point estimates are somewhat smaller in magnitude,
but we find a broadly similar pattern of results, with statistically significant increases in employment and decreases in “Any
College”, and no statistically significant change in “At Least Bachelor’s Degrees.”
                                                                32
    Because the NLSY analysis tracks individuals over time, even as they move across MSAs, the findings
in Table 6 are free of any concerns about endogenous migration. The broad similarly between the NLSY
results and those presented earlier in the paper suggest that endogenous migration is also unlikely to be the
primarily explanation for the pattern of results in the “same state” Census/ACS sample, and suggests that,
despite our ignorance about the identity of enrollees in the IPEDS data, the enrollment results too capture
true causal effects of being from a housing boom market rather than the effect of migration.

5.4 DISCUSSION

We find a consistent pattern of results across different data sources and methods: a negative effect of local
housing boom on college attainment (or college going) with the virtually all of the reduction coming college
training below the Bachelor’s degree level.
   The patterns are consistent with the “single index” conceptual model of college choice presented in
Section 2. Young adults deciding between Associate’s level training and labor force participation should be
particularly sensitive to prevailing labor market conditions for less-skilled persons, as we find. The very
small (or modestly positive) effect on Bachelor’s level training could stem either from the fact that labor
market conditions for young unskilled persons workers are irrelevant to the decisions of person thinking of
going to Bachelor’s training because of the larger gains from this type of college, or because the degree to
which   housing booms relieve liquidity constraints, and counteract the force of opportunity costs, is
particularly important at Bachelors-granting universities and colleges compared to the much cheaper
community colleges.
   Another potential explanation for our results is the possibility the various estimated effects do not
reflect changes in the behavior of potential students, but rather how colleges respond over the course of a
boom. In particular, we would find the same results if, instead, it was simply easier for Bachelor’s than for
Associate colleges to expand to deal with the increase in the number of students arising from population
inflows into MSAs experiencing large booms. The best available evidence about the ease with which
different types of colleges can expand, or even their differential desire to expand to accommodate interested
students, suggests that this line of reasoning is very unlikely to explain our results. Exploiting exogenous
variation in class size arising from cohort sizes Bound and Turner (2007) show that Associates and two year
colleges are vastly more supply-elastic than their Bachelor’s-granting counterparts. Moreover, they argue
convincingly that Associates degree granting institutions clearly prioritize “access” as compared to
Bachelor’s-granting institutions which tend to emphasize maintaining student “quality”. Consistent with
this previous work, we find no evidence that changes in housing demand affect the average cost of two-year



                                                     33
colleges in an MSA (Online Appendix OA.14). 43 We therefore conclude that the effects we estimate during
the boom were the result of the decisions of potential students in response to changes in their labor market
opportunities, and not due to supply-side responses of colleges and universities to the boom.
     We conclude discussion with a rough calculation of what share of the “slowdown” in the share of young
adults with any college attendance shown in Figure 2. Extrapolating the pre-1996 trend to 2006 suggests a
roughly four percentage point decline relative to trend for both men and women. What share of this
“slowdown” can be accounted for by our estimated effect of the housing boom? To answer this, we apply
our local housing boom estimates to national housing boom. Aggregating the housing price and housing
permits data, we estimate a national change in housing demand of 0.55 between 1997 and 2006. Applying
the 2SLS estimates in Table 3 to this change yields a predicted decline by 2006 of 1.16 percentage points, or
roughly 30 percent of the aggregate “slowdown” for both men and women. 44

6. EFFECTS DURING BUST AND FULL HOUSING CYCLE, AND PERSISTENCE OF
     BOOM EFFECTS

Our results thus far have focused on changes during the 2000-2006 national housing boom. In this section,
we study the effect of local housing demand changes during the massive national housing “bust” shown in
Figure 1, and over the 2000-2012 interval spanning the entire boom and bust cycle. The goal of this section
is to assess whether the housing boom had persistent effects on the educational attainment of individuals.
As shown in our simple theory, a housing boom when an individual is young may have a greater effect on
their human capital choice than a corresponding housing bust when an individual is older. However, new
cohorts may respond to the housing bust in a symmetric way as prior cohorts did when the prior cohorts
experienced an equally sized housing boom.
     We begin with an analysis of how changes in housing demand during these periods affected the labor
market opportunity costs of attending college faced by different generations of young adults. Using data
from the Census/ACS, we estimate first difference models relating the change in average labor market


43 The primary measure of average cost is calculated for each MSA-year by averaging across the two-year colleges (or four-year
colleges and universities) in the sample, weighting by the college’s enrollment in that year. The average cost measure is calculated
as the net tuition revenue across all students divided by the full-time equivalent enrollment. The net tuition revenue is net of all
grants (e.g., Pell, federal, and state grants), so that changes in average cost reflect both changes in prices as well as changes in the
availability and eligibility of grants. We also find no evidence that changes in housing demand affect “direct costs”, which is the
sum of published in-state tuition and costs related to fees, books, and other supplies.
44 Using either the results reported in Figure 4 and the IPEDS “difference-in-difference” results lead to similar percentages of

between one-quarter and one-half of the “slowdown” explained by the housing boom. Alternatively, instead of accounting for
slowdown in Figure 2, we can account for slowdown in “Any College” across cohorts (as shown in Figure 3). This is less
straightforward since some individuals in older cohorts could still have been “treated” by the housing boom, but assuming that no
cohorts before 1975 were treated by the boom, then one can fit a pre-1975 trend by gender and compare predicted effect of
housing boom.
                                                                  34
outcome among 18-25 year olds without a college education between 2006 and 2012 (the bust), and between
2000 and 2012 (the full cycle) to the 2000-2006 change in housing demand in the MSA. Throughout all
these analyses, our housing demand shock is defined over the 2000-2006 period. These regressions, which
we estimate by TSLS using the structural break as an instrument for the change in housing demand, assess
how the size of the boom an MSA experienced affected labor market conditions in the MSA over the course
of the bust, and from the beginning to end of the housing cycle. As we have already noted, the size of an
MSA’s boom is nearly perfect correlated with the size of the bust it later experienced. Consistent with all
previous Census/ACS results, 2006 values are the average in the Census/ACS from 2005 to 2007, and the
2012 values are the Census/ACS means from 2011 to 2013.
    Table 7 presents results for the three different measures we have used to reflect a young adult’s
opportunity costs of attending college: the change in mean employment rates of 18-25 year olds with no
college education in the MSA (first set of columns), the change in average wages of 18-25 years old with no
college educations in the MSA (second set of columns), and the product of these two measures (final set of
columns). We find that, compared to young adults of the same age at the peak of the boom in 2006, 18-25
year olds making college-going decisions after the bust faced labor markets with much worse immediate
opportunities for non-college educated young adults, the larger the preceding local boom. In term of the
probability of being employed, we estimate that an MSA with a one point larger increase in housing demand
during the boom saw a 9.2 percentage point larger decrease in the employment rate of young men over the
course of the bust. The employment rate decrease among young adult women was not as massive as the
decline among young adult men, but at 6.4 percentage points, it was also quite large. The effects were much
larger than the estimates in Table 1 of the increases in employment rates these MSAs during the boom.
    The large negative point estimates in the second set of columns suggest that, even with the well-known
tendency for wages to exhibit “downward stickiness” (Card and Hyslop 1997), average wages for non-
college-educated young adults may have fallen during the bust by at least as much as they rose during the
boom, but none of the wage estimates are statistically significant. The results for the wages adjusted by the
probability of employment offer a nice summary of how labor market circumstances confronting young
adults changed from the peak of the boom and the end of the bust. Local markets with a one point larger
increase in local housing demand during the boom experienced a 23.5 percent decline in adjusted wages for
young men without college educations, and a 15.9 percent decline for their female counterparts by the end
of the bust.
    Across all three outcomes, our results show that, at the very minimum, the bust totally erased the
favorable labor market conditions wrought by the boom. Indeed, all the point estimates suggest that the
bust may have made labor market conditions for unskilled young adults slightly worse than they had been


                                                     35
before the boom began. This would be consistent with the recent arguments about the effects of debt
during the housing cycle emphasized by authors like Mian and Sufi (2014).
     Table 8 presents TSLS first difference estimates of the effect of changes in housing demand on the
2006-2012 and the 2000-2012 changes in college attendance. Columns (1) and (2) show results for the share
of 18-25 year olds in an MSA with “Any College” training as measured in the Census/ACS. 45 Although not
precisely estimated, the point estimates suggest that young adult making schooling during the bust, when
labor market conditions for non-college educated young adults had worsened substantially from the peak of
the boom, were more likely to have attended college at all compared to similarly aged people at the peak of
the boom.      The results indicate that by the end of the bust, the size of the boom that an MSA had
experienced during the 2000-2006 period had no effect on the share of 18-25 year olds with “Any College”
training compared to what had been the case for young adults in that MSA before the start of the housing
boom and bust cycle. Both of these Census results are consistent with the organizing theoretical framework
about the effect of opportunity costs described above. As labor market conditions returned to normal (or
slightly worsened) during the bust, young individuals started going back to college.
     The remaining columns of Table 8 show results for changes in per capita enrollment using
administrative IPEDS data. Following the specification in Table 4, the outcomes variable for the bust
estimates is the difference between average annual enrollment during 2002-2006 and the average of annual
enrollment during 2000-2012. Similarly, for the results from the start of the housing cycle to the end of the
bust, the outcome variable is difference between average annual enrollment during 1996-2000 and the
average of annual enrollment during 2000-2012. The results show that enrollment in two year colleges was
higher during the years of the bust, by marginally statistically significant amounts, the bigger the size of the
MSA’s preceding boom. By the time that labor market conditions had essentially returned to levels seen
before the start of the boom and bust cycle, annual enrollments were no different from what they had been
in 2000, irrespective of the size of the preceding boom. This enrollment behavior is precisely what our
conceptual model would predict.
     The results in Table 8 are cross-generation comparisons: how one generation of young adults compares
to another generation of young adults, making decisions at a different time. We study next whether the
specific generation of young adults who, as we have shown, invested less in college during the boom, invested
more in college training during the bust, when housing demand, and the associated labor market
opportunities for non-college educated collapsed. Were the reductions in college training for this generation
during the boom merely delays, or were the effects more permanent?


45As with all of the results from the boom period, we find that housing demand changes has no effect on “Bachelor’s” degree
during the bust.
                                                            36
       Although we did not emphasize this point when we discussed Figure 4 in the Introduction, the patterns
in that figure showing that cohorts from big boom markets, who made their college-going decisions during
the years of the boom, had reduced attainment when we observe them relative to persons from other
markets suggests that these results might be permanent. To see this, notice that among the cohorts in
question (people born between 1978 and 1986), attainment rates for those in markets that had particularly
large local booms remained lower as late as the 2013 ACS, when the earliest birth cohorts from this group
were 33 years old and had presumably completed their college training.
       Similarly suggestive evidence about the durability of reduced college attainment can be seen in first
difference analyses from the Census/ACS. Using TSLS, we assess the effect of the change in local housing
demand in an MSA on the difference in average attainment between persons aged 18-25 in 2006 and
persons in the same MSA aged 24-31 in 2012. Notice, this latter group is drawn precisely from the same
sample as people aged 18-25 in 2006, so the regression estimates how the size of a boom (and thus the later
bust) affected the degree to which this particular birth cohort increased its schooling during the bust. The
small and statistically insignificant effects we estimate suggest that this group, who we know had invested
less in college during the boom years the larger their local housing demand change, did not increase their
college attainment during the bust. 46
       While these results suggest that the effect of the decreased college investment during the boom was not
reversed during the bust, the Census data do not track individual people over time, nor does the analysis
account for endogenous migration across MSAs. Much sharper tests of whether there is persistence in
reduced college attainment is provided by results using individual panel data from the NLSY97, where
individual are tracked over time and where we know precisely where the person was at the start of the
boom. In Table 9, we present results for the NLSY97 sample in 2012. The results in column 1 show that
after the end of the bust, people from “housing boom” MSAs were no more likely to be employed. This
contrasts sharply with the large employment increase we earlier document for these persons around the peak
of the housing boom.
       The second column shows that as of 2012, people from the top “boom” MSAs were still less likely to
have attended college by about 5 percentage points.         Their reduced education at the peak of the housing
boom was about 6 percentage points, so there is arguably some evidence of very modest catch-up in Table
9. Even allowing for this, our results clearly suggest that the likelihood of ever has remained significantly
depressed well after the housing boom ended.
         Taken together, our various results across the different data sources indicate that there was a
permanent “educational scarring” for the specific group of people who came of age during housing boom


46   See the Online Appendix for these results.
                                                       37
and who were from markets with especially large booms: their college training was reduced during the
boom and did not recover during the bust. Their schooling investment stands in sharp contrast to later
generations of young adults in markets with large housing booms, who made college investments at rates
identical to people from other markets after the bust had removed the large changes in labor market
opportunities associated with the boom. The results suggest that the housing boom had a persistent effect
on the human capital of younger individuals who experienced the boom.

7. CONCLUSION

This paper studies the effect of the recent housing boom and bust on the college-going decisions of young
adults. We exploit cross-city variation in local housing booms, and we isolate plausibly exogenous variation
in housing demand by building on the work of Ferreira and Gyourko (2011) by creating an instrument for
local housing booms using the size of the structural break in housing prices during the early 2000s. We
argue this instrument primarily captures speculative activity which generates increases in local housing
demand, and we use this instrument to identify the causal effect of housing demand shocks on labor market
outcomes, college attendance, and educational attainment.
     Across several different (and complementary) data sources and empirical strategies, we consistently find
evidence that the housing boom reduced college attendance and educational attainment. These effects are
generally similar for men and women, and seem to be concentrated among students studying at two-year
colleges or towards Associate’s degrees. Applying our local labor market effects nationally, we find that the
national housing boom can account for roughly 30 percent of the observed slowdown in college-going for
young men and women.
     We present a simple model of college attainment during a housing boom. The theory highlights the
separate roles of (1) the opportunity cost of attending college, (2) the changing skill premium, and (3) the
potential relaxation of liquidity constraints. Using detailed labor market data, we find that that the housing
boom increased the employment and average wages of men and women without a college education, raising
the opportunity cost of attending college. We find no evidence that housing boom altered the returns to
going to college. This suggests that the estimated changes in educational attainment during the housing
boom are likely coming through changes in opportunity costs rather than changes in returns to education.
     Further evidence of the role of opportunity costs comes from the housing bust that followed the boom.
We find that employment rates return roughly to pre-boom levels following the boom and bust in housing,
and two-year college attendance in 2012 returns roughly to pre-boom levels, as well. 47 In contrast to these

47Although the labor market outcome themselves are not the primary focus of this paper, the labor market results indicate that
both the housing bust and the housing boom affected aggregate employment, which suggests that the specific sectoral shifts
                                                               38
results, we find evidence of persistent declines in educational attainment for birth cohorts who were of
college-going age during the boom.
    An important question left unanswered by this paper is what the consequences are of the persistent
negative schooling effects on individual and social welfare. The answer would appear to partly depend on
the magnitude of the marginal returns to additional schooling for individuals on the margin of college
attendance. Recent work suggests that this marginal return is very high for academically marginal students
who would seem to be fairly representative of the marginal individuals whose college-going decisions are
affected by local housing demand shocks (Zimmerman, forthcoming). 48 If true, then our results suggest a
“scarring” effect of the housing boom for individuals who had the bad luck of being college-going age
during the historically unprecedented boom and bust in housing.
    Such “scarring” can also suggest part of the reason why growth has been so sluggish in the aftermath of
housing boom and bust cycle. By forgoing schooling during the housing boom, there is a set of workers
with lower marginal products than they would have had otherwise.                     The lower level of productivity for
these workers can act as a drag on aggregate labor productivity, raising the question of whether our findings
can help understand the decline in labor productivity within the U.S. in the aftermath of the Great
Recession.




occurring during that housing boom had aggregate effects. Understanding why these particular sectoral shifts had such a large
effect on aggregate employment represents an important area of future work.
48 Of course, this logic implicitly assumes that observably similar individuals have similar marginal returns. Given recent work

documenting large heterogeneity in marginal returns to college across individuals (see, e.g., Carneiro, Heckman, and Vytlacil
2011), such a claim is necessarily speculative.
                                                              39
REFERENCES
Atkin, David (2015). “Endogenous Skill Acquisition and Export Manufacturing in Mexico.” Working Paper.
Barlevy, Gadi and Jonas D. M. Fisher (2010) “Mortgage Choices and Housing Speculation,” Federal Reserve Bank of
Chicago Working Paper.
Becker, Gary (1964). Human Capital: A Theoretical and Empirical Analysis with Special Reference to Education. New York:
Columbia University Press.
Ben-Porath, Yoram. (1967). “The Production of Human Capital and the Life Cycle of Earnings,” Journal of Political
Economy, 75(4): 352-365.
Bhutta, Neil (2014). “The Ins and Outs of Mortgage Debt during the Housing Boom and Bust,” Journal of Monetary
Economics.
Black, Dan A., Terra G. McKinnish, and Seth G. Sanders (2005). “Tight Labor Markets and the Demand for
Education: Evidence from the Coal Boom and Bust,” Industrial and Labor Relations Review, 59(1): 3-16.
Blanchard, Olivier and Lawrence F. Katz (1992). “Regional Evolutions,” Brookings Papers on Economic Activity, 23(1): 1-
76.
Bound, John and Harry J. Holzer (2000). “Demand Shifts, Population Adjustments, and Labor Market Outcomes
during the 1980s,” Journal of Labor Economics.
Bound, John and Sarah Turner (2007). “Cohort Crowding: How Resources Affect Collegiate Attainment,” Journal of
Public Economics, 91(5-6): 877-899.
Burnside, Craig, Martin Eichenbaum and Sergio Rebelo (2015). “Understanding Boom and Busts in Housing
Markets,” Journal of Political Economy, forthcoming.
Cadena, Brian C. and Brian K. Kovak (2015). “Immigrants Equilibrate Local Labor Markets: Evidence from the Great
Recession,” American Economic Journal: Applied Economics, forthcoming.
Campbell, John and Joao Cocco (2014). “A Model of Mortgage Default”, NBER Working Paper #17516.
Cameron, Stephen V. and Christopher Taber (2004). “Estimation of Educational Borrowing Constraints Using
Returns to Schooling,” Journal of Political Economy, 112(1), 132-182.
Card, David and Dean Hyslop (1997). “Does Inflation Grease the Wheels of the Labor Market,” in Reducing Inflation:
Motivation and Strategy. Christina Romer and David Romer, eds. Chicago: University of Chicago Press.
Card, David, Alex Mas, and Jesse Rothstein (2008). “Tipping and the Dynamics of Segregation,” Quarterly Journal of
Economics 123(1), 177-218.
Charles, Kerwin Kofi, Erik Hurst, and Matthew J. Notowidigdo (2013). “Manufacturing Decline, Housing Booms,
and Non-Employment,” NBER Working Paper #18949.
Chen, Kaiji and Yi Wen (2014). “The Great Housing Boom of China,” Working Paper.
Chico, Alex and Chris Mayer (2014). “Misinformed Speculators and Mispricing in the Housing Market,” NBER
Working Paper #19817.
Davidoff, Thomas (2015). “Supply Constraints are Not Valid Instrumental Variables for Home Prices Because they
are Correlated with Many Demand Factors”, Critical Finance Review, forthcoming.
Favilukis Jack, Sydney C. Ludvigson., Stijn Van Nieuwerburgh (2010). “The Macroeconomic Effects of Housing
Wealth, Housing Finance, and Limited Risk-Sharing in General Equilibrium,” NBER Working Paper #15988.
Ferreira, Ferando and Joe Gyourko (2011). "Anatomy of the Beginning of the Housing Boom: U.S. Neighborhoods
and Metropolitan Areas, 1993-2009,” NBER Working Paper 17374.
Gerardi, Kristopher, Andreas Lehnert, Shane Sherlund, and Paul Willen (2008). "Making Sense of the Subprime
Crisis", Brookings Papers on Economic Activity, Fall, 69-145.
Glaeser, Edward, Joseph Gyourko, and Albert Saiz (2008). “Housing Supply and Housing Bubbles,” Journal of Urban
Economics 64(2): 198-217.
Glaeser, Edward and Charles Nathanson (2014). “Housing Bubbles”. NBER Working Paper 20426.

                                                          40
Goldin, Claudia and Lawrence Katz (2010). The Race Between Education and Technology, Bekknap Press.
Hilger, Nathaniel (2014). “Parental Job Loss and Children's Long-Term Outcomes: Evidence from 7 Million Fathers'
Layoffs,” Working Paper.
Houthakker,       Hendrick    S.     and    Lester     D.      Taylor.       1970.      Consumer     Demand        in   the
United States, 1929-1970. Cambridge: Harvard University Press.
Jorda Oscar, Moritz Schularick, and Alan M. Taylor (2014). “The Great Mortgaging: Housing Finance, Crises, and
Business Cycles.” NBER Working Paper 20501.
Lovenheim, Michael F. (2011). “The Effect of Liquid Housing Wealth on College Enrollment.” Journal of Labor
Economics, 29(4), 741-771.
Manoli, Dayanand S. and Nicholas Turner (2014). “Cash-on-Hand & College Enrollment: Evidence from Population
Tax Data and Policy Nonlinearities,” NBER Working Paper 19836.
Mayer, Chris (2011). “Housing Bubbles: A Survey,” Annual Review of Economics, 3, 559-577.
Mayer, Chris and Karen Pence (2009). “Subprime Mortgages: What, Where, and to Whom?” In Housing Markets and
the Economy: Risk, Regulation, and Policy. Essays in Honor of Karl E. Case, ed. E. Glaeser, J. Quigley, pp. 149-96.
Cambridge, MA: Lincoln Land Ins.
Mian, Atif and Amir Sufi (2014). “What Explains the 2007–2009 Drop in Employment?” Econometrica, 82(6): 2197-
2223.
Mian, Atif and Amir Sufi (2011). “House Prices, Home Equity-Based Borrowing, and the U.S. Household Leverage
Crises,” American Economic Review, 101, 2132-56.
Mian, Atif, Kamalesh Rao, and Amir Sufi (2013). "Household Balance Sheets, Consumption, and the Economic
Slump", Quarterly Journal of Economics, 128(4): 1687-726.
Mincer, Jacob (1958). “Investment in Human Capital and Personal Income Distribution.” Journal of Political Economy,
66(4): 281-302.
Notowidigdo, Matthew J. (2013). “The Incidence of Local Labor Market Shocks,” Working Paper.
Polinsky A. Mitchell and Ellwood David T. (1979). “An Empirical Reconciliation of Micro and Group Estimates of
the Demand for Housing,” Review of Economics and Statistics, vol. 61, pp. 199-205.
Ruggles, Steven, Matthew Sobek, Trent Alexander, Catherine Fitch, Ronald Goeken, Patricia Kelly Hall, Miriam King,
and Chad Ronnander (2004). "Integrated Public Use Microdata Series: Version 3.0". Minneapolis, MN: Minnesota
Population Center.
Saiz, Albert (2010). “The Geographic Determinants of Housing Supply,” Quarterly Journal of Economics, 125(3), 1253-
96.
Shapiro, Jesse (2006). “Smart Cities: Quality of Life, Productivity, and the Growth Effects of Human Capital.” Review
of Economics and Statistics, 88(2): 324-335.
Sinai, Todd M. (2012). “ House Price Moments in Boom-Bust Cycles,” NBER Working Paper #18059.Shiller, Robert
J. (2005). Irrational Exuberance. Princeton, NJ: Princeton Univ. Press
Shiller, Robert J. (2009). “Unlearned Lessons From the Housing Bubble,” Economist’s Voice 6(7):6.
Shiller, Robert J. (2008). “Understanding Recent Trends in House Prices and Homeownership” in Housing, Housing
Finance and Monetary Policy, Jackson Hole Conference Series, Federal Reserve Bank of Kansas City, 85-123.
Willis, Robert J. and Sherwin Rosen (1979). “Education and Self-Selection,” Journal of Political Economy, 87(5).
Yagan, Danny (2014). "Moving to Opportunity? Migratory Insurance over the Great Recession", Working Paper.
Zimmerman, Seth D. “The Returns to College Admission for Academically Marginal Students.” Journal of Labor
Economics, forthcoming.




                                                           41
                Figure 1: Fraction to Have Ever Attended College Among Persons Aged 18-29, 1980-2013
                                                    Panel A: Men




                               .6
                               .56
                     Share of Population
                        .48      .52
                               .44
                               .4




                                           1980   1985        1990       1995     2000        2005       2010
                                                                             Year

                                                         Share Having Attended Any College (Men, Age 18−29)


                                                                     Panel B: Women
                               .66
                               .62
                     Share of Population
                     .5     .54.46
                               .42  .58




                                           1980   1985        1990       1995     2000        2005       2010
                                                                             Year

                                                     Share Having Attended Any College (Women, Age 18−29)



Notes: This figure reports trends in the share of men and women (age 18-29) who have attended at least one year of college.
This series is constructed from the Current Population Survey (CPS) using CPS survey weights. The dashed line is the
predicted college attendance rates based on a quadratic trend that is fit to the 1980-1996 period.




                                                                           42
                                           Figure 2: Fraction to Have Ever Attended College by Age 25,
                                         By Year of Birth for Men and Women Born Between 1960 and 1989

                                                                 Panel A: Men




                               .7
                               .65
                               .6
                      Predicted Share
                      .45    .5.4
                               .35
                               .3 .55




                                        1960      1965       1970       1975       1980      1985        1990
                                                                     Birth Year



                                                               Panel B: Women
                              .75
                              .7
                              .65
                      Predicted Share
                       .5   .55
                              .45
                              .4
                              .35 .6




                                        1960      1965       1970       1975       1980      1985        1990
                                                                     Birth Year


Notes: This figure reports estimated birth year (birth cohort) fixed effects in education for all men and women born between
1960 and 1990 (inclusive). The sample is all individuals between the ages of 25 and 54 (based on age in survey year), pooling
CPS data sets between 1994 and 2014. The birth year fixed effects are recovered from an estimated model that regresses an
indicator for whether individual has attended any college on a fourth-degree polynomial in age, birth year fixed effects, and
normalized year fixed effects (setting the first and last year fixed effect equal to 0 and the sum of remaining year fixed effects
equal to 0). The figures reported fitted values at age 25 using CPS survey weights. The sample is restricted to native-born
men and women.
                                                                      43
   Figure 3: Share Any College Attendance for Individuals Born Between 1965 and 1987, by MSA House Price Growth




                                         0.70


                                         0.68


                                         0.66


                                         0.64
             Fraction with Any College




                                         0.62


                                         0.60


                                         0.58


                                         0.56


                                         0.54


                                         0.52


                                         0.50
                                                1965 1966 1967 1968 1969 1970 1971 1972 1973 1974 1975 1976 1977 1978 1979 1980 1981 1982 1983 1984 1985 1986 1987
                                                                                                   Birth Cohort

                                                                  Top Third MSA Housing Price Growth        Bottom Two Third MSA Housing Price Growth




Notes: This figure reports education attainment by birth cohort for all men and women born between 1965 and 1987. The
data come from the 1990 Census, the 2000 Census, and the 2005-2013 American Community Survey (ACS). The sample is
restricted to all men and women between ages 25 and 54 in the survey year. The two lines are sub-samples of metropolitan
areas based on whether or not the metropolitan was in the top tercile of distribution of house price changes between 2000
and 2006. We use FHFA house price data to compute MSA level house price changes. The data use Census/ACS survey
weights.




                                                                                                       44
                Figure 4: Home Prices, Housing Permits, and Housing Transactions in the U.S., 1980-2012




                                                                                                        260
                            160




                                                                                                        220
                            140




                                                                                                        Permits/Sales Index
                     Home Price Index




                                                                                                                    180
                               120




                                                                                                           140
                      100




                                                                                                        100
                            80




                                                                                                        60
                            60




                                        1980   1985      1990   1995      2000     2005        2010
                                                                  Year

                                               Home Prices       Housing Permits          House Sales




Notes: This figure reports trends in the FHFA National Home Price Index (1980 = 100), trends in the Census Housing Permits
Index (1980 = 100), and trends in total new home sales from the Survey of Construction (1980 = 100). The FHFA series
is a weighted, repeat-sales index that measures average changes in house prices across 363 metropolitan areas. The Census
series is a building permits survey that estimates the number of new housing units (as authorized by building permits). The
Survey of Construction series measures new house sales of single-family homes, whether or not building new homes in those
areas requires a building permit.




                                                                  45
                                                  Figure 5: An Economic Model of College Attendance

                                                      Panel A: College Attendance Decisions by Ability
                             Ric (θi )



                                                                                                       RiB (1)




                                                                                                       RiA (1)




                            R

                            0
                                                                                         Attend
                                                                                            B
                    RiA   ( 0)
                                                                                         college
                                                             Attend
                                                                A
                                                             college
                    RiB ( 0 )
                                         No college



                                 0                    θ A*                  θˆ AB                  1             Ability, θi

                            Panel B: Attendance Decisions Following Increase in Yt0 From Housing Boom
                            Ric (θi )



                                                                                                       RiB (1)




                                                                                                       RiA (1)




                            R

                            0
                                                                                         Attend
                                                                                            B
                    RiA   ( 0)
                                                                       Attend            college
                                                                          A
                                                                       college

                    RiB ( 0 )

                                                No college


                                 0                    θ A*      θ A*        θˆ AB                  1             Ability, θi

                                                                        0
                                    Increase
Notes: This figure shows the equilibrium        in attendance
                                           college  Yt from decisions
                                                               HousingforShock
                                                                            individuals as a function of their underlying ability.
The equilibrium shows individuals making choices of whether to attend college (and, if so, whether to attend type-A “Asso-
ciate’s” college or type-B “Bachelors” college). In the equilibrium, individuals sort based on comparative advantage, with
low-ability individuals not attending college, middle-ability individuals attending type-A college, and high-ability individuals
attending type-B college. In Panel B, there is a positive housing demand shock (housing boom), which raises income of all
non-college-educated individuals by the same amount. In the new equilibrium, there is a reduction in share of population
attending type-A college but no change in share attending type-B college.
                                                                                    46
                    Figure 6: Trends in Housing Demand Over Time and Across Metropolitan Areas




                                4        3
                     Housing Demand Index
                    1         2 0




                                             1990           1995       2000         2005              2010
                                                                       Year

                                                    10th Percentile        Median          90th Percentile



Notes: This figure reports trends in our constructed housing demand index (which is the log sum of the prices and permits
indexes) at the 10th percentile, median, and 90th percentile, normalized to 1980 values within each percentile.




                                                                      47
                                                              Figure 7: Variation in Structural Break Across Cities

                                     Citis without Structural Break                                                         Cities with Structural Break

                                      Pittsburgh, PA [No Break]                                                             Portland, OR [Small Break]
                  180




                                                                                                         180
                        160




                                                                                                               160
      House Price Index




                                                                                             House Price Index
           140




                                                                                                  140
                  120




                                                                                                         120
                  100




                                                                                                         100
                              2000   2001       2002   2003       2004   2005    2006                                2000   2001   2002   2003   2004      2005   2006
                                                       Year                                                                               Year




                                            Chicago, IL [No Break]                                                          Tucson, AZ [Medium Break]
                  180




                                                                                                         180
                        160




                                                                                                               160
      House Price Index




                                                                                             House Price Index
           140




                                                                                                  140
                  120




                                                                                                         120
                  100




                                                                                                         100




                              2000   2001       2002   2003       2004   2005    2006                                2000   2001   2002   2003   2004      2005   2006
                                                       Year                                                                               Year




                                      New Haven, CT [No Break]                                                                Naples, FL [Large Break]
                  180




                                                                                                         220
                        160




                                                                                                              190
      House Price Index




                                                                                             House Price Index
           140




                                                                                                 160
                  120




                                                                                                         130
                  100




                                                                                                         100




                              2000   2001       2002   2003       2004   2005    2006                                2000   2001   2002   2003   2004      2005   2006
                                                       Year                                                                               Year




Notes: This figure shows graphs of quarterly house price data for six MSAs. The house price index for each city is normalized
so that Q1, 2000 = 100. The solid lines report the house price series, while the dashed lines reports the structural break
estimates, with a solid dot indicating the estimated quarter of the structural break. The MSAs in first column have small
estimated structural breaks, and the MSAs in the second column have relatively larger estimated structural breaks. The
rows group MSAs based on overall house price growth up until the estimated structural break.

                                                                                        48
        Figure 8: First Stage Relationship Between Structural Break Instrument and Change in Housing Demand




                                                                  4
                     Estimated Change in Housing Demand, 2000−2007
                     0    .5    1    1.5    2    2.5  3     3.5




                                                                      −.1           0                    .1                .2           .3
                                                                            Magnitude of Structural Break (Housing Demand Instrument)


Notes: This figure shows the correlation across cities between the magnitude of structural break (based on quarterly data
between Q1, 2001 and Q4, 2005) and the estimated housing demand change across 2000-2006. The Magnitude of Structural
Break variable corresponds to the (annualized) coefficient from the city-specific structural break regression. The higher the
value of the instrument, the larger the estimated structural break.




                                                                                                   49
                                                                                   Figure 9: Lack of Correlation Between Structural Break Instrument and ...

                                                                          Housing Price Index, 1990                                                                          Lagged Change in House Price Index, 1990-1995
                                     1.2




                                                                                                                                                                                          1
                                                                                                                                                                                    .2 .4 .6 .8
                                                                                                                                                              Lagged House Price Growth, 1990−1995
                                     1
       House Price Index, 1990
                       .8




                                                                                                                                                           −.8 −.6 −.4 −.2 0
            .6                       .4




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          2
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         R = 0.08


                                                                                                                                     2
                                                                                                                                    R = 0.08
                                     .2




                                                                                                                                                                                          −1
                                                                  −.2      −.1               0              .1             .2                  .3                                                                      −.2      −.1               0              .1             .2                   .3
                                                                        Magnitude of Structural Break (Housing Demand Instrument)                                                                                            Magnitude of Structural Break (Housing Demand Instrument)




                                                                            Employment Rate, 1990                                                                                                                                   Average Wages, 1990




                                                                                                                                                                                          20
                              .8     .9
        Employment Rate in 2000




                                                                                                                                                           Average Wage in 1990
                                                                                                                                                                            15
                 .7




                                                                                                                                                           10
       .6




                                                                                                                                     2
                                                                                                                                    R = 0.09
                                     .5




                                                                                                                                                                                          5




                                                                  −.2      −.1               0              .1             .2                  .3                                                                      −.2      −.1               0              .1             .2                   .3
                                                                        Magnitude of Structural Break (Housing Demand Instrument)                                                                                            Magnitude of Structural Break (Housing Demand Instrument)
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          2
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         R = 0.005




    Change in Two-Year Enrollment Per Capita, 1990-1995                                                                                                  Change in Four-Year Enrollment Per Capita, 1990-1995
                                                                                                                                                           Four−year college enrollment per capita, 1990−1996 change
       Two−year college enrollment per capita, 1990−1996 change
                                                            .06




                                                                                                                                                                                                                 .06




                                                                                                                                     2                                                                                                                                                    2
                                                                                                                                    R = 0.00                                                                                                                                             R = 0.00
                                                     .04




                                                                                                                                                                                                          .04
                                              .02




                                                                                                                                                                                                   .02
                                      0




                                                                                                                                                                                           0
       −.08 −.06 −.04 −.02




                                                                                                                                                           −.08 −.06 −.04 −.02




                                                                  −.2      −.1               0              .1             .2                  .3                                                                      −.2      −.1               0              .1             .2                   .3
                                                                        Magnitude of Structural Break (Housing Demand Instrument)                                                                                            Magnitude of Structural Break (Housing Demand Instrument)




Notes: This figure reports the correlation between the structural break instrument used in the IV specifications and the
following: lagged house price levels, lagged (1990-1995) house price growth, lagged employment rate and average wages from
the 1990 Census, and lagged changes in two-year and four-year college enrollment (per capita) from IPEDS.


                                                                                                                                                    50
                                                              Figure 10: Significant Correlation Between Structural Break Instrument and ...

                                                          Growth in Price-Rent Ratio                                                                                             Change in “Out-of-Town” Buyers Share
                              1.2




                                                                                                                                                                         .06
        Growth in Price−to−Rent Ratio, 2000−2007




                                                                                                                                   Change in Share of Out−of−Town Buyers
                                             1




                                                                                                                                                                  .05
                                       .8




                                                                                                                                                            .04
                              .6




                                                                                                                                                     .03
                        .4




                                                                                                                                             .02
                 .2




                                                                                                                                     .01
          0




                                                                                                                2                                                                                                                           2
                                                                                                              R = 0.61                                                                                                                    R = 0.50




                                                                                                                                                         0
                              −.2




                                                   −.1           0                    .1                .2               .3                                                    −.1           0                    .1                .2               .3
                                                         Magnitude of Structural Break (Housing Demand Instrument)                                                                   Magnitude of Structural Break (Housing Demand Instrument)




Notes: This figure reports the correlation between the structural break instrument used in the IV specifications and the
growth in the price-rent ratio and the change in the share of “out-of-town” buyers, which can be interpreted as proxies for
speculation. See text for details of the price-rent ratio calculation and the source of the “out of town” buyer share .




                                                                                                                              51
   Figure 11: Randomization tests of college enrollment results exploiting timing and magnitude of local housing boom

                                        Two-year colleges                                                                         Four-year universities

                                             All adults                                                                                     All adults
               40                             Empirical estimate [p = .010]                                    40                 Empirical estimate [p = .118]




               30                                                                                              30
     density




                                                                                                     density
               20                                                                                              20




               10                                                                                              10




                0                                                                                               0
                    −.1   −.08   −.06    −.04 −.02       0      .02     .04    .06   .08   .1                       −.1   −.08   −.06   −.04 −.02       0      .02     .04    .06   .08   .1
                                         Two−year college enrollment effects                                                            Two−year college enrollment effects




                                                  Men                                                                                            Men
               40                              Empirical estimate [p = .030]                                   40            Empirical estimate [p = .280]




               30                                                                                              30
     density




                                                                                                     density




               20                                                                                              20




               10                                                                                              10




                0                                                                                               0
                    −.1   −.08   −.06    −.04 −.02       0      .02     .04    .06   .08   .1                       −.1   −.08   −.06   −.04 −.02       0      .02     .04    .06   .08   .1
                                         Two−year college enrollment effects                                                            Two−year college enrollment effects




                                               Women                                                                                          Women
               40                           Empirical estimate [p = .008]                                      40                       Empirical estimate [p = .086]




               30                                                                                              30
     density




                                                                                                     density




               20                                                                                              20




               10                                                                                              10




                0                                                                                               0
                    −.1   −.08   −.06    −.04 −.02       0      .02     .04    .06   .08   .1                       −.1   −.08   −.06   −.04 −.02       0      .02     .04    .06   .08   .1
                                         Two−year college enrollment effects                                                            Two−year college enrollment effects




Notes: This figure shows histograms of distribution of estimated effects of housing boom on two-year and four-year college
enrollment per capita for 1,000 permutation samples which permute the magnitude and year of structural break in local
house prices across each city. The vertical lines indicate the corresponding estimates from the true data shown in Table 5.


                                                                                                52
                                                    Table 1
               Housing Booms and Labor Market Opportunities for Adults Without Any College Education
                                                       Employment          Average         Emp. Rate *      Share Employed Share Employed
Dependent Variable is 2000-2006 Change in:
                                                          Rate             Wages          Average Wage      in Construction    in FIRE
                                                           (1)               (2)               (3)                (4)             (5)
                                                                                      Panel A: OLS Estimates

All Adults Age 18-25
                                  
 Housing Demand Change 2000-2006, ∆H kD                   0.031             0.079              0.115              0.016             0.002
                                                         (0.008)           (0.011)            (0.023)            (0.003)           (0.001)
  Share of Total Employment Change                                                                                51.6%             5.0%
      2                                                    0.31             0.17               0.33                0.13              0.12
  R

Men Age 18-25
                                  
 Housing Demand Change 2000-2006, ∆H kD                   0.030             0.080              0.119              0.026             0.001
                                                         (0.008)           (0.011)            (0.023)            (0.004)           (0.001)
  Share of Total Employment Change                                                                                86.6%             1.8%
  R2                                                       0.20             0.14               0.25                0.13              0.03

Women Age 18-25
                                  
 Housing Demand Change 2000-2006, ∆H kD                   0.032             0.085              0.115              0.005             0.002
                                                         (0.009)           (0.014)            (0.023)            (0.001)           (0.002)
  Share of Total Employment Change                                                                                16.8%             6.5%
  R2                                                       0.22             0.09               0.23                0.10              0.10

                                                                                      Panel B: 2SLS Estimates

All Adults Age 18-25
                                  
 Housing Demand Change 2000-2006, ∆H kD                   0.051             0.115              0.179              0.021             0.010
                                                         (0.018)           (0.025)            (0.049)            (0.005)           (0.004)
  Share of Total Employment Change                                                                                41.4%             20.1%

Men Age 18-25
                                  
 Housing Demand Change 2000-2006, ∆H kD                   0.059             0.111              0.202              0.034             0.004
                                                         (0.020)           (0.029)            (0.060)            (0.008)           (0.004)
  Share of Total Employment Change                                                                                58.6%             7.5%

Women Age 18-25
                                  
 Housing Demand Change 2000-2006, ∆H kD                   0.043             0.117              0.152              0.006             0.018
                                                         (0.018)           (0.032)            (0.050)            (0.002)           (0.009)
  Share of Total Employment Change                                                                                12.8%             40.6%

First stage F-statistic                                   38.86             38.86             38.86               38.86             38.86


N                                                          275               275               275                 275               275
Include baseline controls                                   y                 y                 y                   y                 y

Notes: This table reports OLS and 2SLS estimates. All samples are from Census/ACS data, have been restricted to ages 18-25, have been
restricted to individuals who live in same state where they were born, and excludes individuals in group quarters. Additionally, all individuals
have no college education, which includes high school dropouts and high school graduates with no reported college attendance. The baseline
controls included in all columns are the following: log of MSA population in 2000, share of employed adults with a college degree, the share of
adults who are foreign born, and the share of women in the labor force. The average 18-25 employment rate in 2000 is 0.61 for adults, 0.64 for
men, and 0.57 for women. Standard errors are shown in parentheses and are clustered by state.




                                                                      53
                                           Table 2
                      Housing Booms and the Lifetime Returns to Education

         Dependent Variable is 2000-2006 Change in Difference Between Any College and No College
                                                    Employment             Average         Employment Rate *
Variable:
                                                       Rate                 Wage            Average Wage
                                                         (1)                  (2)                   (3)

2SLS Estimates for Adults Age 26-55
 Housing Demand Change 2000-2006, ∆ 
                                    H kD               -0.026               0.002                  -0.060
                                                      (0.006)              (0.011)                (0.019)


2SLS Estimates for Men Age 26-55
                                  
 Housing Demand Change 2000-2006, ∆H kD                -0.020               0.008                  -0.041
                                                      (0.006)              (0.014)                (0.024)


2SLS Estimates for Women Age 26-55
                                  
 Housing Demand Change 2000-2006, ∆H kD                -0.030               -0.014                 -0.080
                                                      (0.007)              (0.009)                (0.021)



First stage F-statistic                                38.86                38.86                 38.86

N                                                       275                  275                   275
Include baseline controls                                y                    y                     y

Notes: This table reports 2SLS estimates for alternative gender and education groups. All samples are
restricted to ages 26-55 and have been restricted to individuals who live in same state where they were born and
excludes individuals in group quarters. All individuals with no college education represents high school
dropouts and high school graduates with no reported college attendance; all individuals with "any college"
reported attending college for at least part of one year (which includes college graduates and college dropouts).
The dependent variables are the difference in the change in labor market outcomes for those with "any college"
relative to the same labor market change for those with "no college". A negative coefficient means the labor
market outcomes of those with "no college" improved relative to those with "any college" during the housing
boom. The baseline controls are described in Table 1. Standard errors are shown in parentheses and are
clustered by state.




                                                       54
                               Table 3
 Housing Booms and Educational Attainment: 2SLS Estimates, Census/ACS
                                Data
              Dependent Variable is 2000-2006 Change in Share With College Education
                                                                                  Bachelors Degree
College Education Definition:
                                                                Any College          or Higher
                                                                     (1)                 (2)

2SLS Estimates for All Adults Age 18-25
 Housing Demand Change 2000-2006, ∆ H kD                           -0.021              0.003
                                                                   (0.007)             (0.004)
 Average for Adults Age 18-25 in 2000
  Average in 2000                                                  0.469                0.100
  Average in 2006                                                  0.619                0.285

2SLS Estimates for Men Age 18-25
                                  
 Housing Demand Change 2000-2006, ∆H kD                             -0.018              -0.002
                                                                   (0.008)             (0.004)
 Average for Men Age 18-25 in 2000
  Average in 2000                                                  0.426                0.083
  Average in 2006                                                  0.572                0.250

2SLS Estimates for Women Age 18-25
                                  
 Housing Demand Change 2000-2006, ∆H kD                             -0.024              0.008
                                                                   (0.009)             (0.006)
 Average for Women Age 18-25 in 2000
  Average in 2000                                                  0.511                0.118
  Average in 2006                                                  0.664                0.319



[Placebo Specification]
2SLS Estimates for All Adults Age 26-33
 Housing Demand Change 2000-2006, ∆ H kD                           0.008               0.004
                                                                   (0.010)             (0.007)

 Average for Adults Age 26-33 in 2000
  Average in 2000                                                  0.609                0.269
  Average in 2006                                                  0.626                0.301


First stage F-statistic                                            38.86                38.86

N                                                                   275                  275
Include baseline controls                                            y                    y

Notes: This table reports 2SLS estimates for alternative gender and age groups. All samples are
restricted to ages listed in panel heading have been restricted to individuals who live in same state
where they were born, and excluded those in group quarters. All individuals with "any college"
reported attending college for at least a portion of one year. The baseline controls are described in
Table 1. Standard errors are shown in parentheses and are clustered by state.



                                                 55
                                           Table 4
               Housing Booms and College Enrollment: 2SLS Estimates, IPEDS Data
                     Dependent Variable is the Change in Average Annual Enrollment Per Capita
Change defined betwee following years:                    2000 and 2006                     1990 and 1996
                                                        2-year      4-year colleges         2-year      4-year colleges
Enrollment outcome:
                                                       colleges     and universities       colleges     and universities
                                                         (1)               (2)               (3)               (4)

2SLS Estimates for Men and Women
                                  
 Housing Demand Change 2000-2006, ∆H kD                 -0.011            0.001             -0.003            0.002
                                                       (0.005)           (0.004)           (0.011)           (0.002)

  Average level at start of period                      0.050            0.064              0.053            0.056


2SLS Estimates for Men Only
                                  
 Housing Demand Change 2000-2006, ∆H kD                 -0.011            -0.002            -0.001            0.003
                                                       (0.005)           (0.003)           (0.011)           (0.002)

  Average level at start of period                      0.047            0.058              0.048            0.052


2SLS Estimates for Women Only
                                  
 Housing Demand Change 2000-2006, ∆H kD                 -0.011            0.004             -0.005            0.002
                                                       (0.005)           (0.007)           (0.012)           (0.002)

  Average level at start of period                      0.053            0.071              0.058            0.060



First Stage F-statistic                                 38.71            38.71              26.80            26.80
N (Number of Metropolitan Areas)                         224              224                191              191
Include baseline controls                                 y                y                  y                y

Notes: The unit of observation is the metropolitan area, and the data come from the IPEDS data set. The dependent
variable are long differences across years reported in column headings. Each endpoint is average annual enrollment during
the preceding five years. The enrollment data are matched to metropolitan areas by county, using 2000 metropolitan area
definitions. Two-year colleges are defined to be any college that does not offer a four-year degree. Some 4-year colleges
may offer two-year degrees but they will be included in columns (2) and (4). This table reports 2SLS estimates for
alternative demographic groups. The baseline controls are described in Table 1. Standard errors are shown in parentheses
and are clustered by state.




                                                           56
                                          Table 5
                         Housing Booms and College Enrollment:
                 Difference-in-Difference Estimates Exploiting Timing and
                         Magnitude of Housing Boom, IPEDS Data
                    Dependent Variable is Enrollment Per Capita, Annual Data 1990-2006

                                                                                               4-year colleges
Enrollment outcome:                                                          2-year colleges   and universities
                                                                                    (1)               (2)

Panel A: OLS Estimates for All Adults
 Interaction between magnitude and timing of structural break,                    -0.066            0.019
  λk × (Post tk* )                                                               (0.022)           (0.020)

  Mean of dependent variable                                                      0.049             0.069

Panel B: OLS Estimates for Men Only
 Interaction between magnitude and timing of structural break,                    -0.062            0.012
  λk × (Post tk* )                                                               (0.020)           (0.013)

  Mean of dependent variable                                                      0.045             0.061

Panel C: OLS Estimates for Women Only
 Interaction between magnitude and timing of structural break,                    -0.071            0.028
  λk × (Post tk* )                                                               (0.025)           (0.028)

  Mean of dependent variable                                                      0.053             0.076


N                                                                                 3853              3625
Number of Metropolitan Areas                                                       223               223
Metropolitan Area FEs and Year FEs                                                  y                 y

Notes: The unit of observation is the metropolitan area-by-year and come from the IPEDS data set. The
enrollment data are matched to metropolitan areas by county, using 2000 metropolitan area definitions. Two-
year colleges are defined to be any college that does not offer a four-year degree. Some 4-year colleges may
offer two-year degrees but they will be included in columns (2). This table reports OLS estimates for
alternative demographic groups. All regressions include MSA and year fixed effects. The baseline controls
from previous tables are not included because they are not identified when metropolitan area fixed effects are
included. The right-hand side variable is interaction of structural break variable and indicator for whether the
year is after the estimated year of structural break. Standard errors are shown in parentheses and are clustered
by state.




                                                      57
                                      Table 6
               Housing Booms, Employment, and Educational Attainment:
                Evidence from Individual-Level Panel Data from NLSY
                                                                            Has Attended     Has Bachelors
Dependent variable:                                       Employed at       Any College,       Degree,
                                                            Age 20           Year 2006        Year 2006
                                                             (1)                 (2)              (3)

Panel A: OLS Reduced Form Estimates for Men and Women
 Living in Housing Boom MSA in 1997                0.058                        -0.058            -0.014
                                                  (0.018)                      (0.020)           (0.025)

  Mean of Dependent Variable                                  0.684             0.569             0.233
  N                                                           5362               5362             5362

Panel B: OLS Reduced Form Estimates for Men Only
Living in Housing Boom MSA in 1997                            0.071             -0.049            -0.020
                                                             (0.026)           (0.028)           (0.035)

  Mean of Dependent Variable                                  0.689             0.522             0.191
  N                                                           2697               2697             2697

Panel C: OLS Reduced Form Estimates for Women Only
Living in Housing Boom MSA in 1997                  0.041                       -0.068            -0.009
                                                   (0.026)                     (0.028)           (0.024)
  Mean of Dependent Variable                                  0.679             0.616             0.274
  N                                                           2665               2665             2665


Include Baseline Controls (Metropolitan Area)                   y                 y                 y
Include Additional Individual-Level Controls                    y                 y                 y

Notes: The unit of observation is individual, and the assignment of housing demand change (between 2000
and 2006) is based on where the individual was living in 1997 at start of the NLSY97 sample. This table
reports OLS estimates for alternative demographic groups, and each column reports results for a different
dependent variable. The key independent variable is a dummy variable indicating whether the estimated
structural break instrument was in the top tercile across MSAs. The baseline controls are the same as the
controls in Table 1, and the additional individual-level controls are the following: age, demographic
indicators for black, hispanic, mixed race, non-black; separate indicators for father's and mother's education
(missing, high school dropout, high school graduate, some college, and Bachelors or greater). Standard
errors are shown in parentheses and are clustered by state.




                                                     58
                                                         Table 7
                      Housing Booms, Housing Busts, and Labor Market Opportunities, Census/ACS Data
                                                                                                                              Employment Rate *
Dependent variable:                                    Employment Rate                       Average Wage
                                                                                                                               Average Wage
Change defined between following periods:       2006 and 2012 2000 and 2012         2006 and 2012 2000 and 2012         2006 and 2012 2000 and 2012
                                                      (1)              (2)                (3)              (4)                (5)              (6)

2SLS Estimates for All Adults Age 18-25
 Housing Demand Change 2000-2006, ∆ H kD            -0.081          -0.029              -0.046           0.069              -0.203           -0.024
                                                    (0.018)         (0.022)             (0.034)          (0.044)            (0.048)          (0.063)

2SLS Estimates for Men Age 18-25
                                  
 Housing Demand Change 2000-2006, ∆H kD              -0.092          -0.033              -0.043           0.068              -0.235           -0.033
                                                    (0.018)         (0.024)             (0.047)          (0.052)            (0.049)          (0.072)

2SLS Estimates for Women Age 18-25
                                  
 Housing Demand Change 2000-2006, ∆H kD              -0.066          -0.023              -0.034           0.083              -0.159           -0.007
                                                    (0.026)         (0.025)             (0.048)          (0.041)            (0.068)          (0.063)

First stage F-statistic                             38.86            38.86               38.86           38.86               38.86            38.86
N                                                    275              275                 275             275                 275              275
Include baseline controls                             y                y                   y               y                   y                y

Notes: This table reports 2SLS estimates for alternative demographic groups. All samples are restricted to ages 18-25 and have been restricted to
individuals who live in same state where they were born. Additionally, all individuals have no college education, which includes high school dropouts and
high school graduate with no reported college attendance. The Census/ACS sample and baseline controls are described in Table 1. Standard errors are
shown in parentheses and are clustered by state.




                                                                             59
                                      Table 8
   Housing Booms and Housing Busts: Educational Attainment and College Enrollment,
                           Census/ACS and IPEDS Data

Dependent variable:                                Share With Any College          Two-Year College Enrollment
Change defined over following periods:         2006 and 2012 2000 and 2012        2006 and 2012 2000 and 2012
                                                     (1)             (2)                (3)             (4)

2SLS Estimates for All Adults Age 18-25
 Housing Demand Change 2000-2006, ∆ H kD           0.016           -0.005             0.008           -0.002
                                                   (0.010)         (0.010)            (0.005)         (0.007)

2SLS Estimates for Men Age 18-25
                                  
 Housing Demand Change 2000-2006, ∆H kD             0.018           -0.000             0.008           -0.003
                                                   (0.011)         (0.012)            (0.005)         (0.008)

2SLS Estimates for Women Age 18-25
                                  
 Housing Demand Change 2000-2006, ∆H kD             0.015           -0.009             0.008           -0.003
                                                   (0.011)         (0.012)            (0.005)         (0.008)

First stage F-statistic                            38.86            38.86              38.47           38.19
N                                                   275              275                230             227
Include baseline controls                            y                y                  y               y

Notes: This table reports 2SLS estimates for alternative demographic groups. Columns (1) and (2) report results
using Census/ACS data that are analogous to results in Table 3 for alternative years. Columns (3) and (4) report
results using IPEDS data that are analogous to results in Table 4 for alternative years. The baseline controls are
described in Table 1. Standard errors are shown in parentheses and are clustered by state.




                                                       60
                                          Table 9
      The Persistent Effects of Housing Booms on Educational Attainment, NLSY Data
                                                                                  Has Attended       Has Bachelors
Dependent variable:                                             Employed,         Any College,         Degree,
                                                                Year 2012          Year 2012          Year 2012
                                                                   (1)                 (2)                (3)

Panel A: OLS Reduced Form Estimates for All Individuals
 Living in Housing Boom MSA in 1997                               0.004               -0.048              -0.022
                                                                 (0.022)             (0.025)             (0.018)

  Mean of Dependent Variable                                      0.747               0.613               0.302
  N                                                                5362                5362               5362

Panel B: OLS Reduced Form Estimates for Men Only
 Living in Housing Boom MSA in 1997                               0.008               -0.049              -0.029
                                                                 (0.016)             (0.029)             (0.025)

  Mean of Dependent Variable                                      0.778               0.562               0.263
  N                                                                2697                2697               2697

Panel C: OLS Reduced Form Estimates for Women Only
 Living in Housing Boom MSA in 1997                               0.006               -0.049              -0.015
                                                                 (0.022)             (0.032)             (0.026)
  Mean of Dependent Variable                                      0.716               0.664               0.342
  N                                                                2665                2665               2665

Include Baseline Controls (Metropolitan Area)                       y                   y                   y
Include Additional Individual-Level Controls                        y                   y                   y

Notes: The unit of observation is individual, and the assignment of housing demand change (between 2000 and 2006) is
based on where the individual was living in 1997 at start of the NLSY97 sample. This table reports OLS estimates for
alternative demographic groups, and each column reports results for a different dependent variable. The controls and
key idenpendent variable are described in Table 6. Standard errors are shown in parentheses and are clustered by state.




                                                          61
                                       Appendix Table A1
                         First Stage for Housing Demand Change Using
            Magnitude of Structural Break in House Prices as an Instrumental Variable
                                                              Housing                 House                 Housing
Dependent Variable is 2000-2006 Change in:                          
                                                            Demand, ∆H kD
                                                                    ___             Prices, dP            Permits, dQ
                                                                (1)                     (3)                   (5)

Magnitude of Structural Break in House Prices                     3.780                3.292                  0.704
 [Housing Boom Instrument]                                       (0.606)              (0.484)                (0.382)

  First-stage F-statistic                                        36.68
    2                                                            0.70                   0.72                  0.34
  R


N                                                                 275                   275                    275
Include baseline controls                                          y                     y                      y

Notes: This table reports OLS estimates of the first stage underlying the 2SLS regressions reported in Tables 1-4, 7, and
8. The baseline control variables are described in Table 1. The Magnitude of Structural Break in House Prices
corresponds to the estimated MSA-specific magnitude of structural break in house price as estimated using quarterly
house price data (from FHFA) between Q1, 2000 and Q4, 2005, where the structural break is constrained to be between
Q1, 2001 and Q1, 2005 (inclusive). The structural break procedure is carried out separately for each MSA by regressing
log house prices on a linear time trend and a structural break term, where the timing of the structural break is selected to
maximize the R2 of the time-series regression. Standard errors are shown in parentheses and are clustered by state.




                                                            62
                                        Appendix Table A2
                     List of Metropolitan Areas with Largest Structural Breaks
                                                                          [Housing Demand
                                                                             Instrument]
                                                     Housing Demand         Magnitude of            Timing of
Rank                 Metropolitan Area              Change, 2000-2006      Structural Break      Structural Break

  1    Yuma, AZ                                            1.396                 0.271               2004 Q2
  2    Phoenix, AZ                                         1.009                 0.270               2004 Q2
  3    Biloxi - Gulfport, MS                               0.461                 0.250               2005 Q2
  4    Boise City, ID                                      0.868                 0.238               2005 Q1
  5    Fort Walton Beach, FL                               1.193                 0.229               2003 Q3
  6    Visalia - Tulare - Porterville, CA                  1.681                 0.214               2003 Q3
  7    Lakeland - Winterhaven, FL                          1.743                 0.212               2004 Q3
  8    Naples, FL                                          1.055                 0.212               2004 Q2
  9    Albany, GA                                          0.180                 0.207               2005 Q3
  10   Las Vegas, NV                                       1.154                 0.194               2003 Q2
  11   Fort Myers - Cape Coral, FL                         2.128                 0.190               2004 Q2
  12   Bakersfield, CA                                     2.075                 0.189               2003 Q2
  13   Orlando, FL                                         1.103                 0.188               2004 Q2
  14   Pensacola, FL                                       0.821                 0.187               2004 Q1
  15   Reno, NV                                            0.930                 0.183               2003 Q2
  16   Ocala, FL                                           1.748                 0.177               2004 Q2
  17   Tucson, AZ                                          0.909                 0.176               2004 Q2
  18   Flagstaff, AZ-UT                                    1.131                 0.173               2004 Q1
  19   Melbourne, FL                                       1.644                 0.171               2003 Q3
  20   Odessa, TX                                          0.887                 0.166               2005 Q1
 21    Daytona Beach, FL                                   1.670                 0.157               2004 Q1
 22    Wichita Falls, TX                                   0.806                 0.155               2005 Q3
 23    Jacksonville, NC                                    0.954                 0.154               2005 Q1
 24    Salt Lake City - Ogden, UT                          0.456                 0.152               2005 Q1
 25    Honolulu, HI                                        1.515                 0.143               2003 Q3

Notes: This table reports the top 25 MSAs in the main sample by the magnitude of structural break instrumental
variable. See notes to Appendix Table 1 for more details on construction of the structural break variable. The units
of the structural break variable represent the discontinuous change in (annualized) house price growth rates at the
location of the break. The average estimated magnitude of structural break is 0.039 and the average estimated
housing demand change is 0.539.




                                                        63
              Appendix Table A3
  Distribution of Estimated Structural Breaks


     Timing of            Number of
  Structural Break     Metropolitan Areas        Percent

      2001 Q1                   14                 4.9%
      2001 Q2                   6                  2.1%
      2001 Q3                   14                 4.9%
      2001 Q4                   16                 5.7%
      2002 Q1                   1                  0.4%
      2002 Q2                   5                  1.8%
      2002 Q3                   27                 9.5%
      2002 Q4                   7                  2.5%
      2003 Q1                   9                  3.2%
      2003 Q2                   32                11.3%
      2003 Q3                   22                 7.8%
      2003 Q4                   5                  1.8%
      2004 Q1                   47                16.6%
      2004 Q2                   14                 4.9%
      2004 Q3                   6                  2.1%
      2004 Q4                   3                  1.1%
      2005 Q1                   55                19.4%

Notes: This table reports the distribution of quarter of
estimated structural break for the 275 cities in main sample.
See notes to Appendix Table 1 for more details on
construction of the structural break variable. The units of the
structural break variable represent the discontinuous change
in (annualized) house price growth rates at the location of the
break. The housing price data covers 2000 Q1 through 2005
Q4, but structural breaks are limited to 2001 Q1 through 2005
Q1 to follow the 15% "trimming" recommended by Andrews
(1993).




                              64
