                             NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                     WHAT DRIVES HOME MARKET ADVANTAGE?

                                       A. Kerem Cosar
                                       Paul L. E. Grieco
                                         Shengyu Li
                                        Felix Tintelnot

                                     Working Paper 21583
                             http://www.nber.org/papers/w21583


                    NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                             1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                               Cambridge, MA 02138
                                  September 2015




We are grateful to Arnaud Costinot, Michael Dinerstein, Jonathan Eaton, Teresa Fort, Charlie
Murry, and Ralph Ossa for insightful conversations, to our discussants Treb Allen, Penny
Goldberg, Keith Head, Ferdinando Monte and Mahmut Yasar for valuable comments and
suggestions, and to seminar participants at the Princeton IES summer workshop, NBER summer
institute and various presentations for comments and suggestions. This work was completed in
part with resources provided by the University of Chicago Research Computing Center. Kathie
Chuang, Jacob Dorn, Adrian Geilen, Zhida Gui, John Lennox, and Ivy Malao provided excellent
research assistance. The authors gratefully acknowledge the support of the National Science
Foundation (under grants SES-1459950 and SES-1459905). Co ar wishes to thank the University
of Chicago Booth School of Business' Initiative on Global Markets and Stockholm School of
Economics, and Tintelnot wishes to thank the Andrew and Betsy Rosenfield Program in
Economics, Public Policy, and Law at the Becker Friedman Institute for financial support. The
views expressed herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the
National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.

© 2015 by A. Kerem Cosar, Paul L. E. Grieco, Shengyu Li, and Felix Tintelnot. All rights
reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit
permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
What Drives Home Market Advantage?
A. Kerem Cosar, Paul L. E. Grieco, Shengyu Li, and Felix Tintelnot
NBER Working Paper No. 21583
September 2015, Revised June 2016
JEL No. F14,F23,L11,L16,L62

                                         ABSTRACT

In the automobile industry, as in many tradable goods markets, firms usually earn their highest
market share within their domestic market. The goal of this paper is to disentangle the supply-
and demand-driven sources of the home market advantage. While trade costs, foreign production
costs, and taste heterogeneity all matter for market outcomes, we find that a preference for home
brands is the single most important driver of home market advantage - even after controlling for
brand histories and dealer networks. Furthermore, we also find that consumers favor domestically
producing brands regardless of the historical brand origin.


A. Kerem Cosar                                  Shengyu Li
Stockholm School of Economics                   Business School
Sveavägen 65, 113 83                            Durham University
Stockholm, Sweden                               Mill Hill Lane
kerem.cosar@gmail.com                           Durham, DH1 3LB
                                                UK
Paul L. E. Grieco                               shengyu.li@durham.ac.uk
The Pennsylvania State University
Department of Economics                         Felix Tintelnot
509 Kern Building                               Department of Economics
University Park                                 University of Chicago
Pennsylvania, PA 16802, USA                     5757 South University Avenue
paul.grieco@gmail.com                           Chicago, IL 60637
                                                and NBER
                                                tintelnot@uchicago.edu
1    Introduction

In tradable goods industries, it is typical for firms to earn their highest market shares in their

domestic market. This home market advantage persists despite substantial integration of interna-

tional markets over the past several decades. There is no shortage of explanations (e.g., trade costs,

investment frictions, home preference, taste heterogeneity for characteristics) for this empirical reg-

ularity, but different explanations have substantially different policy implications. The goal of this

paper is to quantify the sources of home market advantage, and to understand their implications

for international trade and investment. In particular, what are the roles of tariff and non-tariff

barriers, transportation costs, and foreign production costs in explaining global market outcomes?

How important are consumer preferences, either for particular characteristics or simply for national

brands? The automobile industry provides an interesting case for analyzing these questions. The

industry accounts for over 10 percent of world trade in manufactured goods (WTO, 2013) and

bears the features of many oligopolistic industries, producing differentiated and tradable goods,

while domestic producers command a dominant share in their home markets.

    Apart from the auto industry’s importance in world trade and manufacturing employment, the

availability of data also makes this industry suitable for our analysis. We have compiled a rich and

unique dataset of global sales and supply. The sales data inform us about prices and quantities (as

opposed to revenue only) by automobile model, as well as several characteristics (e.g., horsepower,

size, weight and fuel efficiency) in nine countries across three continents. On the supply side, we have

worldwide data on the assembly plant locations of each model. We propose a structural model that

exploits two features of the data to separate preference-based incentives to purchase local products

from supply-side frictions such as trade and investment costs. First, the availability of price data

allows us to measure the willingness to pay for models. Second, the prevalence of foreign direct

investment (FDI) provides variation between national brand identity and assembly location across

models, helping to disentangle their demand and supply effects. Moreover, we are able to separately

identify country-level preferences for observed characteristics (such as fuel efficiency) from home

preference—a systemic preference for purchasing local products. Such a preference could arise from

several sources including consumer information asymmetries between local and non-local products,

nationalistic feelings, or a stronger ability on the part of local brands to respond to localized tastes


                                                   2
for unobserved characteristics (e.g., body styling or interior features such as cup holders).1

    Traditionally, models of international trade have relied on relatively restrictive demand sys-

tems (e.g. constant elasticity of substitution in Krugman 1980, Eaton and Kortum 2002, Melitz

2003, and Anderson and van Wincoop 2003) to analyze market outcomes.2 While these approaches

represent tractable means of analysis, they may be limited in their ability to capture rich substitu-

tion patterns that are a feature of horizontally differentiated oligopolistic industries such as cars.

Quantitative applications have also been limited by the availability of only revenue data without

credible price and quantity information. As a result, they may lead to biased estimates of trade

costs and an underappreciation of preference differences across national markets. We incorporate

a random coefficients approach to estimate demand, allowing for both within- and across-market

heterogeneity in consumer preferences. This more flexible approach enables us to consistently es-

timate demand- and supply-driven mechanisms behind market segmentation.3 The model yields

estimates of product-specific markups, trade costs, and production costs from detailed industry

level data. This extends, in an industry equilibrium, the analysis of recent quantitative trade mod-

els with multinational production (Ramondo and Rodriguez-Clare 2013; Arkolakis et al. 2013; and

Tintelnot 2016), which were also limited by the availability of only revenue data on multinationals’

foreign affiliate sales for the aggregate manufacturing sector.

    Separating the underlying drivers of home market advantage is important for understanding

how globalization affects market outcomes and welfare. In the absence of preference-based drivers,

one would expect the home market advantage to vanish if all trade barriers were removed. Despite

large reductions in formal barriers to trade and foreign investment, as well as in transport and

communication costs, significant home market advantages persist. If this is to a large extent

accounted for by demand-related factors, the implications for policy and firm strategies are very

different from models that only consider supply-side frictions.

   1
      In a world with trade costs and increasing returns to scale, local producers may obtain larger national market
shares for reasons distinct from home preference if they happen to supply the goods that are in high relative demand
in the home country (the home market effect in Krugman 1980). Auer (2014) applies this idea to the automotive
industry in order to rationalize the sluggish response of trade flows when trade costs fall.
    2
      With the notable exception of non-homothetic preferences (Fieler 2011; Fajgelbaum, Grossman and Helpman
2011; Fajgelbaum and Khandelwal 2014) which are used to rationalize a certain pattern in the trade data, namely
the prevalence of north-north trade. However, in that literature consumer preferences are identical across countries,
and it is income levels that vary.
    3
      In previous work (Coşar, Grieco and Tintelnot 2015), we estimated supply-side border frictions in wind turbine
trade using detailed geographic data on firm sales.


                                                         3
   Our model builds on the random coefficients demand model developed by Berry, Levinsohn and

Pakes (1995). While we follow the general approach to estimating the demand and cost sides in

that workhorse model in the industrial organization literature, we make several departures from

the standard analysis: On the demand side, our model includes brand-market-specific effects that

control for heterogeneous tastes for brands across countries. We then regress these tastes onto a

rich set of observables such as home status, dealer density, and brand entry date to each market

to understand the impact of home status on brand preference. On the cost side, we develop a

methodology to estimate trade and foreign production costs from a dataset of prices, quantities, and

the set of production locations, while direct trade flows between these locations and the markets

are not observed. To do so, we use the variation in assembly and headquarter locations, while

accounting for firms’ endogenous sourcing decision across the set of available plants. This allows

us to recover the cost elasticities of various trade-related observables, such as assembly-to-market

distance and headquarter-to-assembly distance. Finally, we propose a counterfactual procedure to

compare various supply and demand related factors in explaining market share differences between

home and foreign markets.

   To quantify home market advantage, we calculate the difference in market share when a model

is sold at home versus abroad, controlling for model and market fixed effects. Using our structural

estimates, we then evaluate the contributions of potential drivers of home market advantage by

computing counterfactual prices and shares after removing various demand and supply components

of our model and re-computing the home market advantage statistic. We find that home market

advantage is most sensitive to the removal of home preference for domestic brands, declining by

about 47 percent. In contrast, when we remove all tariffs, trade, and foreign production costs,

the home market advantage declines by only 19 percent. This finding points to home preference

as a key missing element of the trade and multinational production literatures. Importantly, our

results are obtained by controlling for the impact of a brand’s entry date into a market, dealer

density, and whether the brand has any local assembly. Since, for historical reasons, these factors

are correlated with home status, treating them as unobserved would lead to even larger estimates

of home preference.

   In addition to the importance of home preference for brands, we also uncover a novel demand

impact of foreign production. Since brands typically assemble models in a variety of locations,

                                                 4
we are able to separate how local production of any model affects local taste for the brand from

the usual cost effect of local assembly for a particular model. We find this preference for brands

with domestic assembly plants, regardless brands’ country of origin, to be significant and roughly

two-thirds of the home preference effect. As such, the domestic assembly demand effect represents

an intriguing rationale for FDI beyond reducing trade costs.

    A number of papers have looked at the car industry to study questions in international trade.

Among them, Feenstra (1988), Goldberg (1995), and Berry, Levinsohn and Pakes (1999) analyze

the effects of Japanese voluntary export restraints on the American auto market; Goldberg and

Verboven (2004) use panel data from the car industry to demonstrate a strong positive effect of the

Euro on price convergence; Brambilla (2007) investigates firms’ responses to trade policy in South

America; McCalman and Spearot (2013) study firms’ offshoring strategies using data on North

American light truck production locations; and Miravete, Moral and Thurk (2015) analyze the role

of emission policy as an entry barrier using Spanish car market data.

    Closer to our work, Goldberg and Verboven (2001) study price dispersion in the European car

market and also find evidence that consumers favor national brands. Their paper, however, does not

quantify the importance of demand versus cost drivers for market segmentation. By analyzing data

beyond the European market and accounting for dealer networks and brand-market histories, we

bring in important variation, such as larger differences in gas prices, supply barriers, and potentially

also in preferences across the Atlantic.

    In contemporaneous work, Head and Mayer (2015) estimate a model of international trade and

foreign production using sourcing data from the automotive industry, finding that foreign sales

are impeded significantly by trade, foreign production, and multinational sales frictions. Similar

to our paper, the latter captures a general disadvantage in selling outside the home market. Our

contribution is to disentangle the demand- and supply-related components of this disadvantage.4

    Our findings are related to Atkin (2013) who demonstrates that neglecting taste heterogeneity

for food leads to biased estimates of gains from trade. They also complement an extensive literature

in marketing illustrating the importance of brand preferences (Bronnenberg, Dhar and Dube 2009;

   4
     While their dataset reports model level flows between all assembly locations and many more destination markets,
our dataset has more detailed information about the product—most notably, prices and characteristics—in fewer yet
important markets. Having information on prices and quantities separately is key in identifying demand- from
supply-related factors.


                                                         5
Bronnenberg, Dube and Gentzkow 2012). Relative to these papers, we contribute by jointly analyz-

ing cost and preference differences across markets and quantifying their impact in an international

context. While previous work has documented that each of these channels is important, our work

is the first to directly compare the impact of tastes and costs on home market advantage.

    To summarize, our paper makes three contributions to the literature. First, we establish the

importance of demand relative to cost factors in shaping market outcomes in an important global

industry. Second, we build a rich dataset of automotive sales, characteristics, prices and production

locations as well as measures of brands’ market penetration, providing us with sources of variation

to tease out demand and supply factors. Finally, we develop a methodology for estimating trade and

foreign production costs from data on prices and assembly locations without requiring knowledge

of trade flows between locations.

    The next section describes the data and presents the stylized facts motivating our analysis.

Section 3 formulates a model of international competition in the automobile market. We estimate

the model in Section 4 and evaluate the drivers of home market advantage in Section 5.



2       Data and Descriptive Evidence

Our dataset covers the market for passenger cars in 6 EU countries (Belgium, Germany, France,

Italy, Spain, Great Britain), Brazil, Canada and the US for the period 2007-2011.5 For each

available market-year, we observe model-level sales (i.e. number of new cars sold), prices (MSRP)

and product characteristics (such as length, width, weight, and fuel efficiency). The characteristics

of a model are the sales-weighted average trim-level characteristics and vary across markets and

years. We also constructed a dataset of assembly countries for each model-year in the demand

data. Complementing these datasets are market-specific variables such as gas prices, import tariffs

on cars, sales taxes, the level and dispersion of household income, as well as brand-market-specific

variables such as a brand’s entry date into a market and the number of car dealers in the market.

Appendix A describes the construction of the dataset.

    Some manufacturing groups own multiple brands. In what follows, we distinguish firms (manu-

facturing groups such as General Motors (GM) and Volkswagen (VW)), brands (such as Chevrolet,
    5
    Brazilian market data is missing for 2007, and Canadian data is available for 2008-2009 only. Total sales cover
more than 90% of total new passenger car sales in the European markets and 80% of sales in the American markets.


                                                        6
                                    Table 1: Market concentration

                                Sales   Firms    Top 5    Brands    Top 5    Models    Top 5
                 BEL          496,171     20      0.68      39       0.44      314      0.13
                 BRA        2,635,547     17      0.82      24       0.81      101      0.36
                 CAN        1,137,750     16      0.65      34       0.50      207      0.22
                 DEU        3,011,988     20      0.71      38       0.54      323      0.18
                 ESP        1,082,868     21      0.72      39       0.44      290      0.16
                 FRA        2,046,077     20      0.81      38       0.65      271      0.25
                 GBR        2,026,497     22      0.63      39       0.47      311      0.21
                 ITA        2,016,114     22      0.70      41       0.51      283      0.26
                 USA       10,390,308     19      0.68      40       0.53      291      0.14
                  Notes: Average number of passenger cars sold annually in each country over
                  the data period. Market shares by top manufacturing group (firms), brands
                  and models are revenue-based.



Vauxhall, and Opel owned by GM; Audi and Seat owned by VW) and models (such as Chevrolet

Malibu and Opel Corsa). In cases where a firm owns foreign brands, we distinguish the headquarter

country from a brand’s nationality. For example, GM is a US firm, but Vauxhall and Opel are

British and German brands, respectively. In other words, a brand’s nationality is defined as the

country from which it historically originates. Accordingly, a brand enjoys home status in its coun-

try of origin (such as Opel in Germany). Across all years and markets, the dataset encompasses

28 firms, 60 brands and 598 models. Firms are headquartered in 12 different countries, and brands

are associated with 15 different countries.

   We now document a number of facts that guide our modeling choices. The oligopolistic nature

of the car industry is well known. While measures of concentration vary across markets (Table 1),

the top 5 firms account for an average of 55% of total revenues across all market-years. Similarly,

the market share of the top 5 brands is 36%.

   Table 2 presents market shares by brand nationality. The diagonal in bold highlights the

dominance of home brands (Belgium, Brazil and Canada do not have a national brand in our

dataset). Spanish and British brands have marginal sales outside of their markets. Similarly,

Italian brands have low sales in other European markets but a stronger presence in Brazil due

to FDI by Fiat in South America. The most striking difference is between Germany and France:

in both markets, home brands account for more than half of the sales, whereas German brands’

market share in France is only 19%, which is relatively higher than the French market share of 9%

in Germany.


                                                     7
                           Table 2: Market shares by brand nationality

                                          Market share of brands from
                               DEU      ESP FRA GBR ITA USA                        Other
                   BEL         0.34     0.02    0.26     0.02     0.04     0.09      0.23
                   BRA         0.23       -     0.11     0.00     0.22     0.31      0.13
                   CAN         0.07       -       -      0.01       -      0.34      0.58
                   DEU         0.55     0.02    0.09     0.01     0.03     0.08      0.21
                   ESP         0.26     0.09    0.26     0.01     0.03     0.11      0.22
                   FRA         0.19     0.02    0.52     0.01     0.04     0.07      0.16
                   GBR         0.23     0.02    0.13     0.18     0.02     0.16      0.25
                   ITA         0.24     0.01    0.15     0.02     0.30     0.12      0.17
                   USA         0.08       -       -      0.01     0.00     0.40      0.52
                   Notes: Each row presents the revenue-based market share of brands
                   originating from countries listed in the columns, adding up to one sub-
                   ject to rounding error. - means that brands from the origin country are
                   not sold in the market, and 0.00 implies a market share of less than one
                   percent. Other includes Japan, Korea, China, India, Sweden, Malaysia,
                   Czech Republic, Romania and Russia.



   Brands’ differential market shares across countries are driven by an extensive margin of model

offerings as well as an intensive margin of sales per model. In order to decompose these two margins,

we follow Bernard et al. (2009) and start with the identity


                                          sbmt = s̄bmt · Nbmt ,


where sbmt is the share of brand b in total market m sales in year t, and Nbmt is the number of

models offered. We then separately project ln(Nbmt ) and ln(s̄bmt ) on ln(sbmt ). Table 3 reports the

results. The intensive margin accounts for 58 to 62 percent of the overall variation, depending on

whether the market share is in revenues or units sold. Variation in the popularity of brands across

countries is not simply due to the number of products offered.

   To gauge the extent of the home market advantage, we project market shares on a dummy

variable that takes the value one if a model is at home and zero otherwise. Table 4 presents the

results. The first two columns are the brand-market-year (bmt) level, while the last column is at the

model-market-year (jmt) level. Given the importance of the extensive margin documented above,

column II also controls for the (log) number of models that the brand offers. Fixed effects control

for brands’ and models’ global popularity and market-year specific conditions. We find a large and


                                                     8
                                       Table 3: Market share decomposition

                                                   I             II             III            IV
                                               ln(s̄bmt )    ln(Nbmt )       ln(s̄bmt )     ln(Nbmt )
                       ln(sbmt )                 0.618         0.382           0.577          0.423
                                                (0.006)       (0.006)         (0.007)        (0.007)
                       Observations              1473          1473            1473           1473
                       R2                        0.810         0.619           0.780          0.654
                       Share                     Units         Units        Revenue         Revenue
                       Margin                 Intensive      Extensive      Intensive       Extensive
                       Notes: Standard errors in parentheses. This table shows the share of varia-
                       tion in sbm coming from the intensive margin (average model market share
                       of the brand) and the extensive margin (number of models offered by the
                       brand). Accordingly, columns 1 and 2 as well as columns 3 and 4 add up
                       to one. All regressions are estimated with year fixed effects.


                                         Table 4: Home market advantage

                                                             I            II          III
                                                         ln(sbmt )    ln(sbmt )    ln(sjmt )
                                 Home brand                1.679        1.066        1.219
                                                          (0.082)      (0.061)      (0.032)

                                 ln(Nbmt )                             1.533
                                                                      (0.042)
                                 Observations               1473       1473          8841
                                 R2                         0.793      0.895         0.720
                                 Market-year FE              Yes        Yes           Yes
                                 Brand FE                    Yes        Yes
                                 Model FE                                             Yes
                                 Notes: Standard errors in parentheses. All regressions
                                 are estimated with market-year (mt) fixed effects. The
                                 first two columns are at the brand-market-year (bmt)
                                 level and use brand fixed effects. The last column is at
                                 the model-market-year (jmt) and uses model fixed ef-
                                 fects.



significant home market effect: being a home brand increases market share at the model level by

238 percent.6 We label this effect “home market advantage.”

    The data also exhibits significant cross-country variation in product offerings and sales. Table

5 presents average prices and characteristics (weighted by sales) of cars sold in each market. The

    6
     We calculate home market advantage using 100 · (exp(ĉ) − 1), where ĉ is the coefficient on the dummy for being a
home brand. If we follow Kennedy (1981) and van Garderen and Shah (2002) and calculate home market advantage
using 100 · (exp(ĉ − 12 V (ĉ)) − 1), where V (ĉ) is the estimate of its variance, we obtain nearly identical results, since
the coefficient is very precisely estimated.


                                                              9
average car in the North American market is larger in horsepower and size (columns 2 and 3) and

less fuel efficient (column 4) than the typical car sold in Europe and Brazil. Differences in gas

prices, however, affect the average cost of a mile (last column) that consumers face in each market.

While some of this variation is due to the extensive margin, characteristics also differ within models.

Controlling for model fixed effects, we see less powerful engines and much higher fuel economy in

European countries and Brazil compared to the North American market (see Table B.2 in Appendix

B). These systematic differences highlight the importance of controlling for product characteristics

when estimating consumer demand.

    On the production side, there are 50 countries that assemble cars. 43% of the models (255 out

of 598) are assembled in more than one country, accounting for 64% of total revenue. The market

share of models assembled in 5 or more countries is 30% (see Figure B.1 in the appendix). Our data

inform us about the set of countries in which each model is assembled, but we do not know exactly

which assembly plant was used to serve which market. Column 1 of Table 6 presents the average

number of countries in which models consumed in a particular market are assembled (weighted by

sales). For instance, there are 3.8 countries in which models sold in Brazil are assembled, while

models sold in Canada are assembled in 5 countries. Geography, units costs and trade policy are

important determinants of these potential supply locations. Brazil is the most protected country

in our dataset, with an MFN import tariff on cars equal to 35%, and the US is the most open, with

an MFN import tariff of 2.5%.7 (column 4). The resulting tariff-jumping FDI leads to a higher

market share for the models that are assembled domestically (column 3) in countries with high

tariffs. For example, the market share of models with domestic assembly plants is 86 percent in

Brazil. There is also substantial variation across markets in the distance to the nearest assembly

plant.8

    To gain some initial insight into how model characteristics and supply locations correlate with

prices, Table 7 presents the results of a hedonic price regression with model and market-year

fixed effects. While this regression is unable to distinguish demand and supply effects from each

other, it does give an indication of how equilibrium prices move with model characteristics. As
    7
      The so-called US “chicken tax” of 25% applies on light trucks, which we exclude from our analysis. SUVs are
imported as passenger cars.
    8
      The distances in Table 6 include internal distance within a country. We use bilateral and internal distances from
the CEPII data (Mayer and Zignago 2011) calculated as population-weighted distances between the biggest cities of
two countries. Internal distances range from 66 km in Belgium to 1,853 km in the U.S.


                                                          10
                                  Table 5: Prices and characteristics

                               Price         HP/Wt     Size   MPG       Gas price       MPD
                   BEL        27,078          58.4     7.6     34.4         5.2          6.6
                   BRA        13,808          62.1     6.8     30.1         2.1         14.4
                   CAN        24,301          91.9     8.3     22.2         2.9         7.7
                   DEU        30,981          66.8     7.6     29.3         5.9          4.9
                   ESP        26,143          60.8     7.6     32.6         4.7           7
                   FRA        25,161          57.2     7.3     35.5         5.3          6.7
                   GBR        28,859          65.5     7.5     30.4         5.5          5.6
                   ITA        24,252          57.6      7      33.4         5.3          6.4
                   USA        26,363          97.9     8.7     20.8         2.5          8.3
                    Notes: All variables are averages across models weighted by market
                    share over the data period. Prices are deflated to their 2005 local
                    currency levels and converted to USD at that year’s exchange rate.
                    HP/Wt denotes horsepower per weight (kg) times 1,000. Size is me-
                    ter length times meter width. MPG is miles per gallon. Gas prices
                    are per gallon in 2005 USD. MPD is miles per dollar (MPG/price).
                    The Appendix describes data sources and tabulation procedures.


                                        Table 6: Supply locations

                                  Supply         Average      Domestic          MFN
                                 Locations       Distance     Share (%)       Tariff (%)
                     BEL               4.4           1095           9             10
                     BRA               3.8           1897          86             35
                     CAN                5            3669          26             6.1
                     DEU               4.7           1077          51             10
                     ESP               4.5           1627          33             10
                     FRA               4.2           1027          41             10
                     GBR               4.5           1440          17             10
                     ITA                4            1333          20             10
                     USA               4.2           3625          54             2.5
                       Notes: All figures weighted by market share. Supply location is
                       the average number of countries in which models sold in a mar-
                       ket are assembled, weighted by models’ market share. Average
                       distance is the average distance across models to the closest sup-
                       ply location including internal distance, see footnote 8. Domes-
                       tic share is the market share of models which have an assembly
                       plant in the country. Implied internal distances capture differ-
                       ences in land area across countries. MFN (most favored nation)
                       is the non-discriminatory tariff rate applied to WTO members
                       that are not in a free trade agreement with the country.



expected, horsepower per weight, size and fuel efficiency are all associated with higher prices. The

coefficient on distance to nearest assembly is also positive and significant. Under the assumption



                                                      11
that consumers do not care about distance to assembly after controlling for other factors, this result

implies that assembly distance has some power as an instrument for demand. Most interestingly, a

model being assembled at home is negatively correlated with price, while a model being associated

with a home brand is positively correlated with price. These two features can be separated due

to FDI: some home brands’ models are produced abroad and imported while some foreign brands’

models are assembled within the market. This finding supports our assumption in the structural

model below that brand nationality affects the demand for cars, while car models’ assembly location

affects their production costs.9

                                          Table 7: Price regression

                                                                       ln(pricejmt )
                              ln(hppwtjmt )                                 0.267
                                                                          (0.011)
                              ln(sizejmt )                                 0.544
                                                                          (0.039)
                              ln(mpdjmt )                                   0.029
                                                                          (0.010)
                              ln(distjmt )                                 0.019
                                                                          (0.002)
                              Domestic assembly by model                   -0.013
                                                                          (0.004)
                              Domestic assembly by brand                   -0.007
                                                                          (0.003)
                              Home brand                                    0.023
                                                                          (0.004)
                              Observations                                  8841
                              R2                                            0.985
                              Market-year FE                                 Yes
                              Model FE                                       Yes
                              Notes: See table 5 for the description of parameters.
                              Home brand is one if a model belongs to a national
                              brand and zero otherwise. Local assembly by model
                              is one if there is an assembly plant for a model in
                              the country and zero otherwise. Domestic assembly by
                              brand is one if there is at least one model owned by the
                              same brand and assembled in the country, and zero oth-
                              erwise. Regression controls for market-year and model
                              fixed effects.




   9
     As is well known, the MSRP can differ from the actual transaction price. In Appendix B.1, we analyze online
car sales from three countries. We document that while brands differ in the extent to which they give discounts on
MSRP, they do not give systematically larger discounts at home than they do abroad.


                                                        12
3    Model

We model the national market for cars in a given year. We first give a brief overview of the model

describing the assumptions on the timing of actions. We then discuss demand and supply in more

detail in the subsections below.

    Firms (e.g. Toyota) are endowed with a set of brands (e.g. Toyota, Lexus) which in turn are

endowed with a set of models (e.g. Toyota Corolla, Toyota Camry) to sell within the market. We

take as given the headquarter location of a firm and the country of origin of a brand. Each model is

endowed with a set of characteristics (e.g., size, fuel efficiency) and a set of assembly locations where

the model can be produced. At the start of the year, all firms observe a set of demand and supply

shocks for each model that are uncorrelated with model or assembly location characteristics. This

assumption implies that a firm chooses to offer a car in a location before observing the model-market

demand or supply shock. This assumption—which is common to many random coefficients demand

estimations (e.g., Berry, Levinsohn and Pakes, 1995)—is reasonable in our context because while it

is relatively easy to adjust a car’s price in reaction to local market conditions, the decision to release

a model in a country generally involves a significant period of design and marketing research prior to

entry. Similarly, moving the assembly of a certain model to a plant requires a planning and retooling

time. Having observed their own and competitors’ demand and supply shocks, firms simultaneously

choose prices at the model level according to a Nash-Bertrand equilibrium – taking into account

cannibalization across brands within the firm. We follow the literature on automobile pricing in

assuming that prices are set at the model level and consumers face a single price. Consumers then

observe these prices and make purchases. Finally, automakers select the assembly location from

which to source ordered cars. We allow for heterogeneity in production costs at the car-assembly

location level so that a firm may choose to source cars from multiple assembly locations to supply

the same model to a market. In addition to allowing for potential gains to variety in assembly

locations, cost heterogeneity makes the model much more computationally tractable to estimate.




                                                   13
3.1    Demand

The utility to consumer i in market m from purchasing model j is,10


                               ujmi = ū(xjm , pjm , βmi , αmi ) + ξjm + εjmi                               (1)


where xjm represents the model characteristics—e.g. horsepower per weight, size, fuel efficiency

—and pjm represents the price. Importantly, brand-country fixed effects are also included in xjm .

These brand-country fixed effects capture everything that varies at the brand-country level such as

dealer networks, the year of a brand’s first entry in a market, or whether the brand first originated

in the country. We assume that consumers are indifferent between the assembly locations for a

particular model, hence the assembly location used to serve model j to market m does not enter

xjm .11 Consumers are, however, allowed to have different preferences for brands that have local

production (for example, consumers may prefer to support local manufacturing employment). The

terms βmi and αmi represent tastes for characteristics and price sensitivity, respectively. Differences

in βmi across individuals and countries may arise due to innate preferences or differences in the

prices of complementary goods such as parking space and gasoline. Each model receives a market-

year-specific demand shock, ξjm , which is common to all consumers within a market. Finally, each

consumer receives an idiosyncratic utility shock for each model, εjmi , which is distributed according

to the Type-I extreme value distribution.

    Consumers in each market observe the set of available products and choose the model that

maximizes their utility from all available models and a no-purchase option. We normalize the

utility of the no-purchase option to u0mi = ε0mi and let Cm be the set of cars consumers can choose

from within market m. Each consumer chooses the option that maximizes her utility,


                                           dmi = argmax ujmi .
                                                    j∈Cm ∪0


Integrating out the idiosyncratic consumer taste shock, the probability that a consumer with tastes


  10
     For readability we omit the time subscript, t, from the model section.
  11
     This assumption is reasonable because if consumers indeed cared about the assembly location of a particular
model, manufacturers should offer different MSRPs for the same model produced in different locations, which we
don’t observe in the markets that we study.


                                                      14
(βmi , αmi ) buys model j is,

                                                              eūjmi +ξjm
                          P r(dmi = j|βmi , αmi ) =                            .
                                                          1 + k∈Cm eūkmi +ξkm
                                                             P


Market shares for model j then can be calculated by integrating these individual-specific probabil-

ities over the distribution of consumer tastes in the market:

                                   Z
                         sjm =         P r(dmi = j|βmi , αmi )dFm (βmi , αmi |θd ).               (2)


The demand parameters, θd , govern the distribution of tastes.


3.2   Supply

Firms supply models to consumers by sourcing them from available assembly locations, which were

determined prior to demand and cost shocks being revealed to the firms. The marginal cost of

sourcing a car i of model type j for market m from location ` is,


                                cjm`i = c1 (hjm , κ)c2 (gjm` , δ)eωjm −νjm`i                      (3)


where c1 (·) represents model- and market-specific costs of selling model j in market m, which

are determined by a vector of observable model and market characteristics hjm (such as global

production costs of the vehicle and local distribution costs) and a vector of parameters κ. Similarly,

c2 (·) represents the effect of costs due to sourcing model j from an assembly plant in location `

to be sold in market m. It depends on a vector of known market-assembly-model characteristics

gjm` (such as distance to the sourcing country from the market and the firm’s headquarter location

and productivity in the assembly location) and a vector of parameters δ. The structural error

term ωjm represents a shock to the marginal costs of selling model j in a given market m. Finally,

costs at the car level are affected by an idiosyncratic shock, νjm`i . This final cost is revealed to

the manufacturer at the time a car is ordered, after prices for models are set. Producers have full

knowledge of ωjm and all other cost shifters besides νjm`i when setting prices. As we show below,

the idiosyncratic error νjm`i introduces the possibility of “gains from diversification” in assembly

locations and rationalizes the possibility that some models are sourced from multiple assembly


                                                     15
locations.

    The manufacturer minimizes costs by sourcing cars from the lowest cost location from its set

of available assembly locations, Lj ,

                                                cjmi = min cjm`i .
                                                            `∈Lj


However, the firm must set prices prior to the νjm`i shock being revealed; therefore it must set

prices according to its expected cost of supplying a model by integrating over νjm`i . We assume

νjm`i is distributed Type-I extreme value with scale parameter σν .12 Given this assumption, the

probability of sourcing a car from location ` is,


                                                                     c2 (gjm` , δ)−1/σν
                           P r(i is sourced from `) = P                                −1/σν
                                                                                             ,                     (4)
                                                                   k∈L(j) c2 (gjmk , δ)

where we exploit the fact that minimizing cost is equivalent to maximizing the negative of the

logarithm of cost. Therefore, the logarithm of the average marginal cost to sell a car of model j

is,13

                                                                                                 
                                                                                                
                                                            X                 − log c2 (gjmk , δ) 
              log cjm = log c1 (hjm , κ) − σν log                  exp                             + ωjm .        (5)
                                                                                     σν
                                                           k∈L(j)

Or equivalently, the average marginal cost for model j in market m is,

                                                                                −σν
                                                  X
                        cjm = c1 (hjm , κ)               c2 (gjmk , δ)−1/σν           exp(ωjm ).                 (6)
                                                 k∈L(j)

    In these expressions, the second term captures the fact that manufacturers endogenously choose

to source cars from the lowest cost locations. The intuition behind this formula is straightforward.

Lower cost locations are more likely to be used as sources, which is reflected in the fact that they

contribute the most to the sum over locations. Moreover, as more locations are added, this sum

increases, further reducing costs. The expression for costs is computationally tractable, since it is

differentiable in all parameters. The value of σν captures “gains from variety” in the sense that

   12
      We could relax the assumption that νjm`i is independent across i at the cost of additional notation. For example,
we could divide the year into a large number of discrete time sub-periods and let each consumer who purchases a car
within a sub-period receive the same draw of νjm`i . This would be consistent with the shock reflecting unanticipated
backlogs or shocks to assembly location productivity during the year.
   13
      A constant from integrating the Type-1 extreme value distribution is absorbed in log c1 (hjm , κ).


                                                           16
the value of an additional assembly location is scaled by σν . Furthermore, as σν → 0, firms always

source from the single location that has the lowest average cost, and (5) becomes,

                                                                                          
                      lim log cjm = log c1 (hjm , κ) + min                  log c2 (gjmk , δ) + ωjm .
                     σν →0                                     k∈L(j)


So as σν → 0, only variation in gjmk at the minimum cost location affects the marginal cost of a

model. However, in the limit as σν → 0, average costs are no longer differentiable with respect

to the source-destination-specific cost parameters. The supply-side parameters to estimate are

θs = (δ, κ, σν ).


3.3     Pricing Equilibrium

Firms choose prices to maximize profits given demand and the average marginal cost of a model

cjmt , which is determined by the cost minimization across available assembly locations as described

above. Since a mass of consumers purchases cars, cjmt is exactly known to firms when they set

prices, even though they do not know νjm`i until consumer i purchases a car. For the same reason,

firms know from (2) exactly what the shares will be given a vector of prices within the market

pm . Therefore, firm f ’s profit maximization problem is to choose prices for its portfolio of models

within a market Jm (f ) to maximize profits,14


                                                 X 
                                                    pjm − cjm · Nm · sjm (pjm ; p−j
                                                             
                                 max                                             m ),                              (7)
                             {pjm }j∈Jm (f )
                                               j∈Jm (f )


where Nm is the exogenous number of potential buyers and p−j
                                                          m is the vector of prices for models

other than j. A Nash-Bertrand equilibrium strategy profile is a vector pm such that sjm = sjm (pm )

and all firms are maximizing profits. Therefore, prices satisfy the system of first order conditions

for every price, pjm .


                                                  X                    ∂skm (pm )
                                 sjm (pm ) +               pkm − ckm                = 0.                           (8)
                                                                           ∂pjm
                                               k∈Jm (f )



   14
     We control for differences in tax regimes (e.g., value added versus retail sales tax) across markets using country
market dummies in the specification of costs. The model could be extended to explicitly account for differing tax
regimes given stronger assumptions about how the base amount for these regimes is determined.


                                                             17
3.4      Identification

Before turning to the estimation section, we discuss how the parameters of our model are identified,

with a particular focus on the identification of the cost-side parameters. As we show below, these

parameters are identified even though we do not directly observe the source-destination-specific

trade flows of cars. Identification of the demand-side parameters is relatively standard: the de-

mand parameters are identified via moment condition assumptions on the model-market demand

shocks ξjm . As shown by Berry (1994), there is a one-to-one mapping between the demand shocks

and observed market shares given demand parameters and observed prices. So, given a demand

parameter θd , we can numerically recover the complete vector of demand shocks within a market,


                                             ξjm = s−1            d
                                                    j (sm , pm ; θ ).



We then identify the model using a vector of instruments zjm such that E[ξjm zjm ] = 0.15 The

model precludes price from being used as an instrument since it is endogenously determined.

   With the demand parameters identified, we are able to recover marginal cost for each model

by inverting the firms’ first order conditions at observed prices and shares as in Nevo (2001). For

clarity, we suppress the market subscripts and focus on a single market. Given demand parameters

and observed prices and shares, all the terms in (8) are known with the exception of the vector of

marginal costs cm . Note that firms internalize their cross-price effect on other models that they

sell, but not on competitor models. If we define Ω such that,

                                              ∂sk (pm )
                                   Ωjk = −              · 1[j, k jointly owned],
                                                ∂pj

then we can write (8) in vector notation, s(pm ) − Ω(pm − cm ) = 0, and we can easily solve this for

the vector of marginal costs,

                                            cm = [pm − Ω−1 s(pm )].

   Once costs are recovered, we can identify the cost-side parameter θs from (5) and the assump-

tion that E[ωjm |(hjm , gjm` )] = 0. While identification of model- and market-specific costs, κ,

is straightforward given regularity conditions that will be satisfied by our parameterization, the
  15
       We discuss the the demand instruments we use in estimation in Section 4.1.


                                                         18
contribution of trade- and location-specific production costs, parameterized by δ and σν , is more

subtle.16 First, consider identification of σν , the variance of the idiosyncratic car cost shock. Sup-

pose that all assembly locations were identical and geography was symmetric, that is, for a given

model, c2 (gjm` , δ) = c̄2 . In this case, the only reason to source from a particular location would

be due to the extreme value error, νjm`i . There would be a cost advantage to operating multiple

assembly locations in that the manufacturer would get a new draw of this idiosyncratic cost shock

for each location. Therefore, the extent to which marginal costs decline as we vary the number of

production locations identifies σν . In the extreme, suppose σν = 0. Then, an additional assembly

location will not reduce marginal costs at all. With σν identified, we can identify the parame-

ters on assembly location characteristics from the variation in these characteristics. This variation

will affect average costs in two ways. First, it will change the cost associated with that assembly

location conditional on it being used, and second, it will change the probability that the plant

is used to source cars. Again, consider the extreme case when σν = 0. Then, only variation in

the lowest cost assembly location’s characteristics affect average costs. Therefore, variation in an

assembly characteristic across locations first identifies which is the lowest cost and then identifies

the parameter for that characteristic based on the size of the change in cost. If σν is positive, then

variation in characteristics of all assembly locations affect costs, but its impact is weighted by the

quantity of cars each location provides. In summary, each element of δ is identified as long as it

affects c2 (gjm` , δ) for some model j where trade flows are positive between market m and assembly

location `. This is the case even though we do not directly observe trade flows because we can use

variation in model costs cjm and gjm` to infer the effect of δ.



4        Estimation

The model is estimated in two stages. We first estimate the demand side, and use firms’ profit

maximization conditions and the estimated demand parameters to recover the marginal cost of

supplying each model to each country. We then use these recovered costs to estimate the supply

side.17 Since we use data from multiple years, we introduce a time subscript, t, below.
    16
      We are assuming a location normalization in c2 (gjmk , δ), as is common in discrete choice models, without loss
of generality. A scale normalization on σν is not necessary as we explain below.
   17
      In principle, demand and supply can be estimated jointly, which would improve efficiency at the cost of compu-
tational tractability.


                                                         19
4.1     Demand Parameterization and Estimation

We start by parameterizing the utility function to be quasi-linear in price and car characteristics,

and quadratic in tastes for size:


                                          hp             md           sz            sz2
         ū(xjmt , pjmt , βmi , αmti ) = βmi hppwtjmt + βmi mpdjmt + βmi sizejmt + βm   size2jmt                    (9)

                                           − αmti pjmt + ιmti + ψmb(j) ,


where hppwtjmt is the horsepower of the car divided by its weight (a measure of acceleration

capability), sizejmt is the size of the car (length times width in meters), and mpdjmt is miles per

dollar at market price for gas (according to city fuel efficiency rating). This specification allows

for consumers’ marginal taste for size to increase or decrease in the amount of the characteristic

provided. We would expect the marginal utility of size to decrease as a car gets larger.

    We allow tastes for characteristics to vary by country. First, we assume that the tastes for

hppwtjmt and sizejmt are normally distributed with country-specific means and common variance,18

                                                                          
                                      hp                  hp          2
                                     βmi                β̄m          σhp    0 
                                            ∼ N             ,              ,
                                                            
                                 
                                      sz
                                     βmi                  sz
                                                        β̄m           0     2
                                                                           σsz

while the quadratic parameter for size is market-specific but constant across consumers within a

market.19

    Second, we allow consumers preferences for miles – a proxy for cost of ownership – to be

income dependent.20 Specifically, consumers tastes for miles per dollar are also normally distributed

according to,



   18
      In principle we could allow the variances to vary by market, however because they enter the objective function
in a nonlinear way, doing so would greatly increase the computational complexity of estimation. Moreover, since we
have only 4-5 years of data from each market it is unclear that these parameters could be precisely estimated at the
market level.
   19
      This specification leads to the intuitive interpretation that a model with sizejmt provides a marginal utility for
size to the median consumer within market m as given by
                                                       
                                                ∂ujmti         sz      sz2
                                        med               = β̄m   + 2βm    sizejmt ,
                                               ∂sizejmt
                                                                                                            2
while other consumers’ marginal utility for size is normally distributed around this level with variance σsz  .
    20
       Because we do not observe individual consumers, we simulate their income, incmti , from a log normal distribution
fitted to mean household income and the Gini ratio for each market.


                                                          20
                                     md         md                     2
                                    βmti ∼ N (β̄m  + πmd log incmti , σmd ).

    Third, consumers’ price-sensitivity, αmti , is distributed log-normally conditional on consumer

i’s income according to,

                                     log αmti ∼ N (ᾱ + πα log incmti , σα2 ).

Letting price sensitivity vary with income allows for non-homotheticity of preferences across mod-

els.21

    Fourth, we allow for consumers’ tastes for purchasing automobiles to be heterogeneous across

consumers with a mean that depends on the country and year to capture shocks to automobile

demand,

                                                ιmti ∼ N (ῑmt , σι2 ).

    The final term in (9) is a brand-country fixed effect. The brand-country fixed effects, ψmb(j) ,

capture revealed preference for different brands within each country.22 For each model j, b(j)

represents its brand. The same firm may operate multiple brands. That is, the Toyota Corolla is of

brand ‘Toyota’ while the Lexus RX 450 is of brand ‘Lexus’ even though they are offered by the same

firm (Toyota). Separating brands within firms is important since firms frequently use branding as a

method of accentuating product differentiation. To the extent that consumers exhibit a preference

for their home brands, this preference is absorbed into these brand-country fixed effects.

    Under this parameterization of the demand model, θd = (β¯m
                                                             x , β sz2 , σ , π
                                                                  m       x md , ᾱ, πα , σα , σι , ῑmt , ψmb )

represents the parameters to estimate, where x ∈ {hp, sz, md}. As discussed above, given θd and

the observed market shares, there is a one-to-one mapping to the vector of demand shocks ξ(θd ).

We approximate the market shares using Halton sequences to integrate out the distribution of con-

sumer taste, and we solve this mapping numerically to recover the demand shocks implied by the

data for a given parameter values. We estimate the model by minimizing the generalized method



   21
      We have experimented with allowing the taste for cars relative to the outside good to vary with income, but this
leads to imprecise estimates of that additional parameter and πα . Note that we include country-year fixed effects
which account for cross-country non-homotheticity.
   22
      As a robustness check, we have also estimated a version of the model with model fixed effects that are constant
across countries.


                                                          21
of moments objective function,


                                         θ̂d = argmin ξ(θd )0 Z Ŵ Z 0 ξ(θd ),
                                                   θd


where Z is a matrix of instruments and Ŵ is a consistent estimate of the optimal weight matrix

obtained from a first stage estimate.

    To identify the price and other nonlinear parameters (eight in all), we employ three types of

instruments. First, we make use of the sums of the characteristics of other products in the market—

the so-called “BLP” instruments used in Berry, Levinsohn and Pakes (1995) which include the num-

ber of rival products in the market and the sum of the characteristics of rival products (horsepower

per weight, size, and miles per dollar), yielding four instruments total. Second, we make use of the

“differentiation IVs” advocated recently by Gandhi and Houde (2016). For each characteristic, we

use two measures of the number of rival products in the vicinity a product, providing six additional

instruments.23 Finally, we leverage the assembly information in our data to use cost shifters as in-

struments. We use the distance to and the tariff rate on the model’s nearest assembly location, the

model’s total number of assembly locations, and a dummy for domestic assembly location for the

model.24 This provides us with four cost side instruments, giving us 14 instruments total. Hence

the model is over-identified. We have run several alternative specifications and have found that the

results—in particular our measures of home preference and relative elasticities and markups—are

qualitatively robust.


4.2    Demand Estimates

The demand estimates are presented in Table 8. Estimates of the tastes for characteristics are

listed by country across columns at the top of table, with estimates of the standard deviation of

the linear coefficients and income effects in the last two columns. Estimates of price sensitivity are

provided at the bottom of the table. The price sensitivity parameters are all strongly significant

and indicate that price sensitivity decreases in income (πα < 0). We also find that the taste for

   23
      Specifically, for each model j we count the number of competing models k such that difference in characteristics,
|xj − xk |, is within 0.1 and 1 standard deviations of the unconditional distribution of characteristic differences. This
statistic provides a measure of “local” competition in product space. See Gandhi and Houde (2016) for more details.
   24
      Note that domestic assembly at the model level is not perfectly correlated with domestic assembly at the brand
level, and is more likely to affect the cost of a particular model than the brand reputation of the model.


                                                           22
                                                        Table 8: Parameter estimates for the demand model

                                                                                                                                         Random          Income
                                              BRA         BEL      CAN       DEU       ESP       FRA       GBR        ITA      USA       Coef. Std     Interactions
     HP per Weight                            0.225       0.487    -0.011    0.801     0.331     0.338     0.279     0.383     -0.051      0.390
                                              (0.205)    (0.234)   (0.189)   (0.310)   (0.175)   (0.162)   (0.173)   (0.196)   (0.157)    (0.149)
     MPDCITY                                  0.128       0.436    0.281     0.437     -0.474    0.298     0.392     0.036     0.208       0.008          -0.533
                                              (0.129)    (0.241)   (0.284)   (0.296)   (0.183)   (0.248)   (0.264)   (0.186)   (0.263)    (0.015)         (0.287)
     Size                                     8.400       0.048    7.553     -3.669    5.620     6.597     5.485     1.613     8.390       0.041




23
                                             (10.570)    (2.779)   (2.374)   (3.176)   (2.822)   (1.729)   (2.237)   (2.099)   (2.157)    (0.370)
     Size Square                              -0.165      0.290    -0.261    0.547     -0.074    -0.200    -0.101    0.169     -0.344
                                              (0.658)    (0.217)   (0.139)   (0.250)   (0.203)   (0.125)   (0.163)   (0.170)   (0.124)


     Random coef. automobile tastes                                             Price Sensitivity Parameters
                   σι                                                                   α       πα     σα
                 3.182                                                                2.524 -0.997 0.053
                    (4.490)                                                            (0.190)   (0.296)   (0.087)
      Notes: The units for HP per weight, size, and price are horse power per 100 kg, m2 , and 10 thousand dollars, respectively. MPDCITY is miles per dollar in city
      driving. See table 5 for the description of parameters. This specification uses brand-country dummies. Weighted bootstrap standard errors in parenthesis.
miles per dollars decreases with income (πmd ), consistent with low income consumers being more

concerned with the cost of ownership of the vehicle.

    Considering the tastes for characteristics, we find evidence that the tastes for product char-

acteristics differ across countries, conditional on income. The estimated mean taste coefficients

for horse power per weight, size, and miles per dollar are remarkably similar across Canada and

the US, and quite different from the other countries. Since product characteristics are correlated

with each other and they are subject to technological constraints, the estimated taste coefficients

for characteristics are a bit difficult to interpret. Most countries tend to have positive taste for

horse power per weight, while the taste for this characteristic is negative in the US and Canada.

American and Canadian consumers tend to have lower taste for fuel efficiency than consumers in

Germany and Great Britain. The taste for size is concave for six out of nine countries, with a

significant coefficient on the quadratic term in four countries.

    Consumers may also have an innate preference for purchasing local brands. For example, one

might expect that Germans prefer Volkswagen because they view it as a German brand, while

Italians might derive extra utility from purchasing a Fiat. The brand-country effects, ψmb , capture

revealed tastes for particular brands within country m. These will include consumers’ valuation

of home brand status, as well as the unobserved quality of the brand (such as reliability), its

marketing cachet, the availability of dealerships and repair shops for the brand, et cetera. To assess

the strength of home preference, we project the brand-market fixed effects on home status, a series

of brand-market level controls, as well as brand and market fixed effects. Specifically, we follow

Chamberlain (1982) and (Nevo, 2001, 322-323) to estimate,


  ψbmb = ρ1 · 1[b is a home brand in m] + ρ2 · 1[b assembles in m] + ηXmb + µb + µm + umb ,                  (10)


where ρ1 represents the preference for brands that originated at home and ρ2 represents the pref-

erence for brands that have an assembly plant in the country, regardless of their origin. In our

data, almost all home brands have domestic assembly while only some multinationals assemble in

foreign markets, such as Toyota in the US.25 The controls, Xmb , account for brand-market charac-

teristics that are likely to be correlated with home status. We include in Xmb the number of years
  25
    The single exception in our data to the rule that home brands have a domestic assembly plant is Smart. It is a
German brand but is assembled completely outside Germany.


                                                       24
that brands have been selling in each country prior to the start of our data, and the number of

dealerships per household.26 These variables capture various aspects of market penetration such as

cumulative advertising, number of experienced mechanics, and the convenience for the consumer.

Finally, we include a full set of market and brand fixed effects. The brand fixed effects absorb the

global appeal of a brand. We refer to the first parameter of interest, ρ1 , as home preference; it is the

revealed preference for buying home brands, after controlling for characteristics of offerings, overall

brand quality, and the brand history and dealer network in a market. This preference may have

several sources, including the ability of home brands to provide unobserved characteristics that

better fit their home market, consumers’ nationalistic feelings for domestic brands, or consumers’

stronger familiarity with domestic brands. We refer to the second parameter of interest, ρ2 , as

domestic assembly preference. It captures consumers’ potential support for local jobs and their

perception of a brands’ long term commitment to supply their market.

    The parameters in (10) can be consistently estimated if umb is uncorrelated with the right hand

side variables. There are three major concerns one might have about this exogeneity assumption.27

First, there may be unobserved product characteristics (such as cup holders) for which tastes

across countries differ and which are correlated with having originated as a brand locally. While we

cannot rule out this possibility entirely, the results documented in Table B.2 of Appendix B (see

Section 2 for details) demonstrate that firms do enact substantial customization of their observed

product characteristics across markets - even within the same model. Hence if cup holders are in

higher demand in the US than in Europe, it is in the best interest of even foreign brands to react

and supply these characteristics to the US market. We therefore think it is unlikely that long-run

differences in unobserved product characteristics will severely bias our estimate of ρ1 . Moreover, we

view the ability of local brands to quickly adjust to innovations in local preferences as a potentially

important aspect of home preference. Second, whether or not to have assembly plants and dealer

networks were decisions endogenously made by the brand at some point in time. It is difficult

to find valid instruments to control for this endogeneity explicitly. Many brands, however, first

started producing in foreign countries and established dealer distribution networks a number of

   26
      While the number of dealerships changes slightly from year to year, it is highly persistent, so we fix it over time
in our data and rely on cross-brand variation. See the data description in Appendix A for details.
   27
      Note that even if this assumption does not hold, the estimates of brand preferences, elasticities and markups
will still be consistent under our timing assumptions since they rely on moment conditions in ξjmt rather than umb .


                                                           25
               Table 9: Estimates for home brand and domestic assembly statuses

                                                   I           II       III       IV         V
                                                 ψbmb         ψbmb      ψbmb      ψbmb      ψbmb
                Home brand, ρ1                  1.138        0.776     0.662     0.598     0.513
                                                (0.074)      (0.093)   (0.095)   (0.097)   (0.099)
                Domestic assembly, ρ2                        0.465     0.477     0.382     0.396
                                                             (0.062)   (0.062)   (0.064)   (0.064)
                Years in market                                        0.004               0.003
                                                                       (0.001)             (0.001)
                Dealer density                                                   0.121     0.116
                                                                                 (0.020)   (0.020)
                Brand FE                         Yes          Yes       Yes       Yes       Yes
                Market FE                        Yes          Yes       Yes       Yes       Yes
                Notes: Dependent variable ψbmb is the estimated brand-market fixed effects.
                Home brand is one if brand b originates from market m and zero otherwise. Do-
                mestic assembly is one if brand b has an assembly plant in market m and zero
                otherwise. Years in market is the number of years that brand b has been selling
                in market m as of 2011. Dealer density is number of dealers per household as of
                2015. Home preference assumed to be homogeneous across countries. Weighted
                bootstrap standard errors in parenthesis.



decades ago. Therefore, the current brand-country-specific demand shock, umb , is not likely to be

strongly correlated with these past decisions (for instance, Toyota has been selling in the US market

since 1958 and established production in 1986 in response to Japanese voluntary export restraints;

similarly, Ford has been exporting to Germany since 1907 and established production in 1926 in

response to tariff barriers). Nevertheless, this may lead our estimates of the taste for domestic

assembly ρ2 and the taste for dealer density to be overstated, if those activities are exercised

more when the brand-country-specific demand shock, umb , is high. By the same logic, this would

bias home preference, ρ1 , downward. Despite this possible downward bias, we find—as we discuss

below—that the taste for home origin is large. Third, brands that originated at home or that

have domestic assembly may also have higher advertising expenditures. We have tried to obtain

such data, but it was impossible to get this information for all brands in all markets. However,

advertising expenditure is presumably highly correlated with dealer networks and years in market,

which we include in the specification as controls.

   Table 9 presents our estimates of the drivers of brand preference varying the set of controls.

Across all specifications, the home preference estimate is substantial and highly significant. The



                                                        26
impact of history and dealer density attenuates the estimate of home preference by up to 35 percent,

suggesting that the head start of national brands plays an important role in their dominance.28

For our preferred specification with all controls in column V, the median consumer’s willingness to

pay for a home brand over a foreign one with domestic assembly is about $600 in the US (if all

other brand and model characteristics were identical). Relative to a foreign brand with no domestic

assembly, the median US consumer is willing to pay about $1,050 more for a home brand. This

corresponds to roughly 4 percent of the average car price in the US. The willingness to pay numbers

vary slightly across countries due to differences in the income distribution.

                                    Table 10: Country-specific estimates

                                                  Home            Domestic
                                                Brand (ρ1 )     Assembly (ρ2 )
                                   BRA                               -0.186
                                                                     (0.572)
                                   BEL                               0.220
                                                                     (0.146)
                                   CAN                               0.199
                                                                     (0.194)
                                   DEU             0.441             -0.194
                                                   (0.263)           (0.291)
                                   ESP             1.032             0.360
                                                   (0.462)           (0.168)
                                   FRA             0.853             0.364
                                                   (0.226)           (0.189)
                                   GBR             0.250             0.463
                                                   (0.338)           (0.174)
                                   ITA             0.945             0.320
                                                   (0.351)           (0.271)
                                   USA             0.316             0.701
                                                   (0.181)           (0.163)
                                   Notes: This table presents results for a speci-
                                   fication in which home preference, ρ1 , and the
                                   taste for brands with domestic assembly, ρ2 ,
                                   are heterogeneous across countries. Weighted
                                   bootstrap standard errors in parentheses.




    To investigate how home preference varies across countries, we also estimate the model allowing

home preference, ρ1 , and taste for domestic assembly, ρ2 , to be interacted with market country.

  28
    This result is robust to alternative specification of market-brand characteristics, such as rank of entry (rather
than years in market) and including controls in logarithms (as opposed to levels).


                                                         27
The results, presented in Table 10, show that the home preference is not driven by outlier countries.

Because most countries have relatively few home brands, these estimates are less precise, although

most estimates remain statistically significant. However, there is some heterogeneity in home

preference across countries. We find it to be highest in Spain, France, and Italy. These results

are consistent with the findings of Goldberg and Verboven (2001) who find a strong preference for

domestic brands in European car markets between 1980-1993. The taste for domestic assembly is

strongest in the United States and Great Britain, and insignificant in a number of countries.


4.3   Markups

              Table 11: Weighted average markups of firms across markets (percent)

                       BRA     BEL     CAN    DEU     ESP    FRA     GBR     ITA    USA
           Fiat         7.6     8.5            9.2    7.2     9.5     8.4    11.8    7.4
           Ford         6.3     8.5     9.0    8.4    7.5     9.2     9.4     8.5   10.0
           GM           6.6     8.9     9.5    8.6    7.6     9.4     9.3     8.7   11.3
           PSA          6.0     9.7            8.4    8.2    12.4     8.7     8.7
           Toyota       6.1     8.2     9.9    8.1    7.0     8.9     8.1     8.2    9.6
           VW           7.5     9.7     8.5   10.8    8.6     9.8     9.5     8.6    9.2


   The demand parameters directly imply elasticities and markups for each model. We provide

the implied own and cross elasticities for selected models in Appendix Table B.3. In general, the

model predicts plausible own and cross elasticity patterns, with models of similar classes competing

against each other more strongly. Our estimates of elasticities directly predict markups according

to the firm’s first order condition (8). Appendix Table B.4 presents the median (across years) of

the implied markups for a selection of models. To illustrate the impact of home preference on

markups, Table 11 displays the share-weighted average markup of the six major manufacturing

firms across all countries in our sales data. Across the table, we see that firms tend to charge their

highest markups in their home countries. Volkswagen (VW) in Germany, General Motors (GM) in

the United States, and most strikingly Peugeot (PSA) in France and Fiat in Italy. The pattern of

home country markups relative to markups of the same firm in other countries is consistent with

demand drivers playing an important role for home market advantage. Overall, the model produces

intuitive estimates of markups—and hence marginal costs—across countries and models.




                                                 28
4.4     Supply Parameterization and Estimation

In the second stage of our estimation procedure, we use the costs implied by the demand model to

estimate the supply side using nonlinear least squares. To do so, we parameterize c1 (hjmt , κ) and

c2 (gjm`t , δ), which determine the costs associated with selling model j in market m and the costs

associated with sourcing model j from assembly location `, respectively.

    For country-model-specific costs, we assume,


                    log c1 (hjmt , κ) = κhp log hpjmt + κwt log wtjmt + κsz log sizejmt                           (11)

                                          + κmg log mpgjmt + κmt + κj .


As opposed to the demand side, we allow costs to be determined by horsepower and weight sep-

arately, rather than by their ratio. This is intuitive because we would expect both to increase

the cost of a car, whereas on the demand side we use their ratio as a measure of acceleration

while accounting for size separately. We also include miles per gallon (mpg)—rather than miles per

dollar—on the cost side. This is because the price of gas in m should affect demand for fuel-efficient

vehicles, but not the cost of producing fuel-efficient vehicles. Finally, the supply side includes mar-

ket country-year and model fixed effects. In contrast, the demand side includes brand-country

effects. We prefer this specification because it allows us to control for the substantial variation in

unobserved costs of models within brands on the supply side while being flexible about how tastes

for brands vary across countries on the demand side.29

    The final element of the supply side is the assembly-location-specific cost function c2 (gjm`t , δ),


                 log c2 (gjm`t , δ) = δ mdist log distm` + δ dom 1[` = m] + δ hqdist log disth(j)`                (12)

                                       + log(1 + δ trf · tariffm`t ) + δ xr log fxrate`t + δ` .


The first two terms capture the effect of trade costs, including a direct effect of distance as well




   29
     We have also estimated several alternative specifications, including model fixed effects on both demand and
supply sides and country-brand effects on both sides. The results are qualitatively similar. Note that the effect of
characteristics on cost are still identified when model fixed effects are included on the supply side, due to variation
in the characteristics of a model both across countries and across years.


                                                          29
as a dummy to control for domestic trade, in a traditional iceberg-like fashion.30 The next term,

δ hqdist log disth(j)` , accounts for the impact of distance between a firm’s headquarters and the as-

sembly location. Costs may be larger for distant plants due to monitoring or communication costs

between a headquarters and its plants, or due to shipment of intermediate inputs.31 The parameter

δ trf captures the proportion of the model’s cost subject to import tariffs.32 Import tariffs are ad

valorem based on the reported port cost of the car, which is likely to be lower than the marginal

cost of the car implied by profit maximization, since the latter includes internal shipment and mar-

keting costs. Below, we estimate the model both holding δ trf fixed at one (the case where tariffs

are paid on the full marginal cost) and allowing it to be estimated. We would expect only a portion

of the marginal cost to be applied to the tariff, if a significant fraction of the marginal cost were

incurred within the market country, due to distribution / retailing costs. The second to last term,

δ xr log fxrate`t captures the effect of exchange rate variation in source locations to costs. fxrate`t

is local currency per USD, normalized to one for the base year 2007. A depreciation of assembly

country currencies would decrease dollar costs if δ xr < 0. Finally, we control for productivity dif-

ferences across assembly locations with a location fixed effect, δ` , which is common to all plants

within a country. This term absorbs both productivity difference across assembly countries and

measurement error of internal distances within the assembly country.

    The vector of supply parameters to estimate is θs = (κ, δ, σν ). The estimator for the supply

side is the minimizer of the nonlinear least squares objective function,

                                                     M X
                                                     X    Jmt
                                                       Tm X
                                      θ̂s = argmin                  ωjmt (θs )2 ,
                                               θs    m=1 t=1 j=1


where,
                                                                                                           
                                                                                                          
                                                                    X                  − log c2 (gjmkt , δ) 
          ωjmt (θs ) = log ĉjmt − log c1 (hjmt , κ) + σν log               exp                              .
                                                                                               σν
                                                                  k∈Lt (j)



  30
      Recall that we use internal distance when the assembly and market countries are the same (m = `), see footnote
8 in Section 2 for details.
   31
      See Giroud (2013) and Tintelnot (2016) for a discussion and evidence for such frictions.
   32
      While identification comes mainly from the cross-section, there is also time variation in tariffs due to several
events during the data period: some assembly countries become a member of the World Trade Organization (Ukraine’s
entry in 2008), the EU and US reclassify countries in their Generalized System of Preferences and, finally, free trade
agreements come into force (EU-Korea FTA in 2011).


                                                         30
To account for the fact that marginal costs ĉjmt are functions of demand estimates, standard errors

are calculated using a weighted bootstrap across both demand and supply stages.

    In practice, we find that the objective function is minimized at low values of σ̂ν , indicating

that the gains to variety are very small. For such values of σν , the probability of sourcing from

any particular location converges to either one or zero depending on whether that location is the

minimum cost supplier or not. At low values of σν , model predictions about marginal costs become

insensitive to variation in σν . As a result, the objective function becomes almost flat in this region,

although other parameters are precisely estimated. Therefore, we fix σ̄ν = 0.01 and estimate the

remaining parameters of the model.33 A low estimate of σν is consistent with the findings of Head

and Mayer (2015), who report that at the model level, firms almost always source a specific market

from a single origin country.


4.5    Supply Estimates

The estimates of the supply side are presented in Table 12. Considering the effect of characteristics

on the cost side (top panel), horsepower, size, weight and fuel efficiency all have the expected sign

and are statistically significant. Turning to sourcing related costs (bottom panel), we find that for

our preferred specification (column IV), production at a domestic (δ dom ) plant decreases costs. The

cost elasticity of distance, δ mdist , is comparable to the estimate of Head and Mayer (2015)—0.036—

and within the range of estimates summarized by Head and Mayer (2013). It is slightly lower than

the estimate from the reduced form price regression in Table 7, which could be interpreted as a cost

elasticity under the assumption of perfect competition where firms always source from the nearest

location. Assembly-to-HQ distances (δ hqdist ) increase marginal costs, consistent with non-trivial

monitoring and management costs related to remote production. However, this effect is smaller

than the assembly to market cost elasticity and is not statistically significant.

    We also find that properly controlling for tariffs matters for the magnitude of these effects. In

Columns I-II, the tariff incidence parameter, δ trf , is fixed at one—so the tariff applies to the full

marginal cost of the car—and in Columns III-IV, we allow δ trf to be estimated. When estimating

δ trf , we find that it is significantly below one, implying that the tariff is applied to less than the full

  33
    The estimates and counterfactual results are robust to fixing σν within a range of [0.001,0.2]. Moreover, an
LR-type test rejects σν > 0.2 at the 95% confidence level.


                                                      31
                                Table 12: Model marginal cost estimates

                                                                  I        II        III       IV
              Horsepower, κhp                                  0.300     0.300     0.317      0.316
                                                               (0.045)   (0.045)   (0.044)   (0.044)
              Weight, κwt                                      0.151     0.151     0.154      0.153
                                                               (0.036)   (0.037)   (0.036)   (0.036)
              Size, κsz                                        0.363     0.363     0.367      0.367
                                                               (0.015)   (0.015)   (0.015)   (0.014)
              Miles per gallon, κmg                            0.055     0.056     0.054      0.055
                                                               (0.013)   (0.013)   (0.013)   (0.013)

              Assembly-to-market distance,         δ mdist     0.004     0.004     0.016      0.016
                                                               (0.004)   (0.004)   (0.003)   (0.004)
              Domestic assembly, δ dom                         -0.008    -0.008    -0.001    -0.001
                                                               (0.005)   (0.005)   (0.002)   (0.004)
              Assembly-to-HQ distance,         δ hqdist        -0.001    -0.000    0.003      0.003
                                                               (0.008)   (0.009)   (0.007)   (0.007)
              Tariff, δ trf                                                        0.686      0.682
                                                                                   (0.060)   (0.063)
              FX rate, δ xr                                              -0.013              -0.019
                                                                         (0.015)             (0.015)
              Fixed σν                                          0.01      0.01      0.01      0.01
              Notes: Estimates of the supply function specified in Section 4.4. Car costs, dis-
              tance measures, tariff, and car characteristics are in logarithm. The coefficient on
              tariff, δ trf , is fixed to one in columns I and II. Weighted bootstrap standard errors
              in parentheses.



marginal cost of the car, consistent with the presence of a portion of marginal costs being to due

destination-specific internal delivery and marketing. Estimating δ trf also has a substantial effect on

the estimates of trade costs. In particular, the cost of assembly-to-market distance (δ mdist ) is four

times larger when tariffs are controlled for (from column I to III). At the same time, the benefits of

being domestic decrease substantially. This is intuitive because tariff rates are positively correlated

with distance. Moreover, tariffs are naturally zero when the assembly plant is domestic, and they

tend to be low between contiguous countries due to regional trade agreements. As a consequence,

fixing the tariff incidence parameter above its estimated value induces downward bias on the impact

of distance and an upward bias on the benefits of domesticity. The exchange rate parameter δ xr in

columns II and IV is negative as expected, though small in magnitude (a 10 percent depreciation

of the assembly country currency would decrease total production costs – which includes costs

incurred in the assembly, market, and possibly other supplier countries – by about .19 percent).


                                                          32
From column III to IV, its inclusion does not significantly alter other estimates.

    Our model delivers implied trade flows between countries at the model level through (3) and (4).

We use this to conduct an out-of-sample test of our cost estimates by investigating how well they

match aggregate trade flows. Specifically, we aggregate model-level flows up to the country-pair

level and compare them to trade flows reported in the WITS database of the World Bank.34 Figure

1 presents the scatter plot comparing our implied trade flows (in logs) with those in the trade data

together with the best linear predictor of the data given our model flows. If our model perfectly

replicated the aggregate data, the estimated slope of this regression would be exactly one, and R2

would be one. In fact, the regression estimates a slope of 0.77, and the R2 of this regression is

0.42. There are many reasons why we fail to match the aggregated trade flows perfectly. Our costs

are not intended to represent accounting costs reported to customs upon import, but are instead

the marginal costs the firm uses for setting prices—including costs incurred internal to the market

country. Moreover, there is likely measurement error in both the aggregated trade flow data and in

                                                                Figure 1: Predicted trade flows and data
                                                      25
                  Trade flows in the data (in logs)
                                                      20




                                                                                                           Slope: 0.771
                                                                                                           St.Err.: 0.070
                                                                                                           R−sq: 0.421
                                                      15




                                                           15                            20                             25
                                                                      Trade flows in the model (in logs)




  34
     This data is trade flows reported by importers in HS6 product categories associated with assembled cars. These
HS product codes are: 870321, 870322, 870323, 870324, 870331, 870332, 870333, and 870390. This data includes
many small flows due to personal imports of automobiles, so we exclude pairs with less than $5 million in reported
flows, which amounts to roughly 200 units. The reported results are robust to adjusting this cutoff.


                                                                                    33
our data on market shares and prices used to estimate our model.35 Finally, some mis-specification

of our parametric functional forms used in estimation is inevitable. Overall, we believe the fact

that the implied flow data matches the aggregate data as well as it does provides some degree of

confidence that the model is capturing the essential drivers of market outcomes.



5        What Drives Home Market Advantage?

In Section 2, we illustrated that firms tend to have substantially larger market shares in their home

market. In Sections 3 and 4, we proposed and estimated a structural model that accounts for various

demand and supply channels that could generate this home market advantage. These include tariffs,

trade and remote production costs, cross-country heterogeneity in tastes for characteristics, and a

preference for domestic brands. In this section, we use these estimates to asses the role of each in

contributing to the home market advantage.

     To do so, we re-estimate the same regression across a series of counterfactuals:


                     log(sjmt ) = λ · 1[b(j) is a home brand in m] + αj + γmt + εjmt ,                            (13)


where the parameter λ measures the extent of “home market advantage.” We do not interpret λ

causally, but instead use it as a metric of how home brands correlate with higher market shares

in the data. Prices and market shares exactly match the data at the structural estimates, so the

results from this exercise under the baseline are equivalent to our preliminary analysis in Section 2

(Table 4, Column 3), which implies that brands have on average 238 percent higher market share

(i.e., more than triple) at home versus abroad. For each counterfactual, we re-calculate equilibrium

costs, prices, and market shares, holding fixed model offerings within each market and the set of

available assembly locations for each model.36 However, we allow firms to re-optimize their sourcing

decisions from this set. Therefore, these counterfactuals should be interpreted as “medium run”

in the sense that firms can adjust sourcing and prices but neither the entry/exit of models into

    35
      Moreover, our model prices, shares and characteristics are themselves aggregations of finer trim-level data on
new automobile sales.
   36
      As is well known, discrete choice demand models with consumer heterogeneity in tastes for characteristics and
price could have multiple equilibria in the pricing game. We have not found such multiple equilibria for our estimates,
but we also cannot rule out that they occur. We use the iterated best response algorithm starting from the initial
equilibrium in order to compute the new equilibrium.


                                                          34
                   Table 13: Home market advantage under counterfactual scenarios

                                                                              Coefficient      Home
                                                                                  λ           Market
                                                                                             Advantage
                                                                                              (% Chg)
       Baseline                                                                   1.22
       Supply:
           All tariffs eliminated                                                 1.18            -4.9
           No international trade frictions                                       1.09           -17.6
           No multinational production frictions                                  1.22            -0.4
           No tariffs, trade or multinational production frictions                1.08           -18.5
       Market access and prices of complementary goods:
           Equalized dealer networks                                              1.04           -22.8
           All countries have German gas prices                                   1.23            1.5
       Demand:
           No home preference                                                     0.82           -46.7
           No local assembly preference                                           0.98           -30.7
           No local assembly and no home preference                               0.57           -67.6
        Notes: Column 2 reports changes in the home market advantage statistic (100 × (exp(λ) − 1)).




markets nor the construction/closure of assembly plants. Using these counterfactual market shares,

we re-estimate (13) to determine the change in the home market advantage. Clearly, some of these

counterfactuals do not represent changes that are achievable via policy. However, our goal is to use

them as thought experiments to illustrate the drivers of home market advantage.

    Table 13 displays the results. The first column reports the estimated coefficients under each

counterfactual. The second column reports the implied change in the market share difference

between the baseline and the counterfactual estimate of λ. We now discuss each of the scenarios in

turn.37 The baseline parameters which we modify below are the estimates in Tables 8, 9 (column

V), and 12 (column IV).

    Supply         We begin by examining supply-side explanations for the home market advantage.

In general, we would expect trade and foreign investment frictions to lead to cost differences that

favor home brands. However, we do account for the fact that brands offshore the production of

some models sold in their home market. Nonetheless, the home market advantage declines in all of

our scenarios where we remove supply-side frictions.

  37
    We present brand-country level market shares under each counterfactual in Appendix B. Price and profit out-
comes are available from the authors by request.


                                                        35
   We first consider the removal of all tariffs on automobile trade. This results in a slight decline

in home market advantage of 5 percent. One reason for this is that many popular models of foreign

brands are either produced domestically or in countries against which tariffs are already low—if not

zero—due to regional free trade agreements. As a result, eliminating tariffs has only a minor effect

on costs, which feeds through to a small decline in home market advantage. The effect increases

when we remove the impact of both tariffs and shipping costs from the model. The impact of

external shipping costs is removed by reducing shipping costs to their domestic level regardless of

assembly plant location. Again we allow firms to re-optimize their pricing and sourcing decisions.

In the new equilibrium, we find a 17.6 percent decline in the home market advantage relative to the

baseline. Next, we consider the impact of remote production frictions on the model. Eliminating

costs associated with the distance between assembly plants and headquarters location, has only

a small effect on home market advantage, which declines by 0.4 percent. Finally, we consider a

reduction in all cost-side trade and foreign investment frictions in concert. Overall, when we remove

all cost-side frictions, the home market advantage statistic declines by 18.5 percent. This suggests

that cost-side drivers are an important but far from complete driver of home market advantage.

   Market access and prices of complementary goods                    We next investigate how much

of home market advantage is driven by differences in sales networks and prices of complementary

goods. Foreign firms tend to have fewer dealers and service operations, lowering the utility of

potential buyers of these brands. When we equalize the dealer density across brands (we set it equal

to the median dealer density observed in the data in each country), we find that the home market

advantage statistic would fall by 22.8 percent. This suggests that differences in sunk investment in

retailing (and possibly advertising) are important sources of the observed home market advantage.

   We next consider the impact of gas price differences across countries on home market advantage.

Taking the current product offerings as given, home market advantage would increase slightly by

1.5 percent if all countries faced German gas prices, which are the highest gas prices across Europe.

As discussed in Section 2, car makers customize their product offerings to the local car market.

Therefore it is not surprising that differences in the price of gas across countries cannot explain the

observed home market advantage since most foreign brands offer products that comport with local

tastes—at in terms of fuel economy.



                                                  36
   Demand          Finally in Table 13, we remove consumers’ direct preference for home brands by

eliminating the structural home preference (i.e., ρ1 = 0). We find that eliminating home preference

alone, while maintaining local assembly preferences that are almost universally enjoyed by local

brands, has a dramatic effect on the home market advantage, which falls by 46.7 percent. Note that

this calculation controls for the fact that home brands tend to have more dealerships and a longer

history in their own home country. Home brands, as well as selected foreign brands, also have

local assembly. If we eliminate the preference for local assembly (ρ2 = 0), home market advantage

falls by 30.7 percent. In the case of eliminating both home preference and taste for local assembly

(ρ1 = ρ2 = 0), home market advantage falls by 67.6 percent. This leads us to conclude that

demand-side effects, and home brand preference in particular, are the key channel that gives rise

to home market advantage in the automobile industry in the medium run, while cost-side elements

play a substantive but secondary role.

   The value of a domestic brand              An interesting feature of the automobile industry is that

there have been several mergers where an international firm owns a domestic brand but maintains its

“domestic” image in marketing campaigns (e.g., Volkswagen’s ownership of SEAT in Spain, GM’s

ownership of Vauxhall and Opel in the UK and Germany, and Fiat’s recent purchase of Chrysler

in the United States). Our results suggest that one benefit of operating “domestic” brands for

foreign firms is due to consumers’ preferences for local brands. Hence home preference can provide

a motive for foreign direct investment (via acquiring local brands), analogous to jumping tariffs by

establishing foreign production. To explore this idea in more detail, we use our model to calculate

the importance of brand-nationality to the profitability of home brands. Specifically, we remove

the home preference from only the brand under consideration and re-calculate the equilibrium

to see the impact of home preference on that brand. For this exercise, we use country-specific

home preference estimates from Table 10 to highlight cross-country differences. Table 14 reports

how removing home preference affects local brands’ prices, sales and profitability in their home

country. The upper panel considers foreign-owned brands, while the lower panel lists the largest

home brand in the country.38 We find that home preference is extremely important to domestic

brands’ operating profits. Although firms do react to the loss of home preference by lowering prices

  38
    SEAT and Vauxhall are both foreign-owned and the largest brand in their home country, so we do not repeat
them.


                                                     37
                         Table 14: Value of domestic brand status for selected
                         brands

                                                                 Percent Change in
                                                              Price Quantity Profit
                         Seat in Spain (VW)                   -0.4     -59.6    -61.9
                         Vauxhall in UK (GM)                  -0.2     -17.1    -19.4
                         Chrysler in US (Fiat)                -0.1     -23.8    -24.3
                         Opel in Germany (GM)                 -0.2     -27.8    -29.4
                         VW in Germany                        -0.4     -25.2    -28.0
                         Renault in France                    -1.0     -45.6    -50.7
                         Fiat in Italy                        -1.3     -46.6    -53.4
                         Chevrolet in US                      -0.3     -21.8    -23.2



slightly,39 the reduction in profits is largely due to a dramatic reduction in sales when the home

preference is removed. The effect varies substantially by brand. The largest profit loss occurs at

the Spanish brand SEAT (62 percent), which is owned by Volkswagen but has a relatively small

presence worldwide. Despite being foreign-owned, SEAT appears to actively cultivate a Spanish

identity to the extent of offering models named the Leon, Toledo, and Alhambra. In contrast,

Volkswagen itself—a strong worldwide brand—loses a comparably modest 28 percent of its local

operating profits when its home preference is eliminated in Germany. In summary, the impact of

home preference does appear large enough to suggest that buying a local brand may be an attractive

mode of entry for foreign firms due to consumers’ innate preference for local brands.

    The demand and cost effects of FDI                        Instead of acquiring a local brand in a foreign

market, firms often simply establish foreign assembly operations. Our estimates suggest that such

foreign investment has both a cost reducing effect (due to closer proximity to the market and

possibly cheaper production costs) and a demand effect (due to consumers’ valuation of local

assembly). Consider for example the case of Toyota in the US. Suppose Toyota removed all its

US operations. How would its (variable) profits in the US market be affected?40 We disentangle

the total effect by the following thought experiment. Suppose Toyota’s US assembly plants were

removed, but Toyota would still be conceived of consumers as a brand with local assembly. This


  39
      Recall that markups are typically below 10 percent (see Table 11), so a one percent change in price represents
roughly a 10 percent change in the markup since costs are unchanged in this counterfactual.
   40
      Since we have not estimated the fixed costs of foreign plants, we can only analyze changes in Toyota’s variable
profit.


                                                         38
                    Table 15: Demand and cost effects of FDI for selected brands

                                                                   Percent Change in
                                                                Price Quantity Profit
                  Removing Toyota plants in US
                  No local assembly preference                   -0.4      -24.4      -28.5
                  Only cost effect                                1.9      -14.2      -17.1
                  Combined                                        0.9      -35.7      -41.1
                  Removing Ford plants in Germany
                  No local assembly preference                   -0.2      -29.2      -30.8
                  Only cost effect                                1.0      -11.9      -10.6
                  Combined                                        1.5      -38.0      -38.3



counterfactual scenario yields what we term the “cost effect of FDI”.41 As shown in Table 15, we

find that Toyota’s US profits would fall by 17 percent under such circumstances. If instead Toyota

is no longer valued as a local producer, but maintained its assembly locations on the supply side,

this gives us the “demand effect of FDI.” We find that Toyota’s profits in the US would fall by 29

percent without the demand effect of FDI. Combining the effects leads to 41 percent lower profits

by Toyota in the US. We have similarly analyzed the profits of Ford in Germany (also shown in

Table 15). The effects are qualitatively similar, with the demand effect of FDI exceeding the cost

effect. We think that the demand effect of FDI deserves further investigation as a novel channel

unaccounted for by the standard theories on multinational firms.



6        Conclusion

The automobile industry exhibits significant home market advantage in market shares. This paper

proposes and estimates a structural model to disentangle the contribution of various demand-

and cost-side elements to market outcomes. The estimates clearly establish the existence of both

demand factors and supply frictions behind the empirical regularity of home market advantage.

     On the demand side, consumers exhibit preference for their national brands relative to how these

brands are viewed in the rest of the world, even after controlling for car and brand characteristics.

They also show preference for brands with a local production presence. Moreover, there are distinct

    41
     Whenever a model has multiple assembly locations, we drop the US assembly location in the counterfactual.
Whenever the only assembly location for a model is in the US, we move the assembly location in the counterfactual
to Japan.


                                                       39
differences in tastes for characteristics across countries. On the cost side, tariffs, trade costs, and

remote production costs all play a role in segmenting markets.

   To establish the relative importance of these channels, we conduct a series of counterfactual

experiments isolating each feature of the model. Removing all tariffs, trade and multinational

frictions, i.e., supply factors, explains around 18.5 percent of home market advantage. Another

aspect of market penetration, the density of the dealers, has an equally important role. Equalizing

dealer networks reduces home market advantage by 22.8 percent. It turns out that, however, home

preference in demand is the major driver of the home market advantage, with an effect roughly

twice as large as removing all cost-side frictions. Together with preference for local assembly, these

demand side factors explain around two-thirds of home market advantage. Quantitative models

that ignore such strong demand side effects are prone to overestimating trade and multinational

costs.




                                                  40
References
Anderson, James E., and Eric van Wincoop. 2003. “Gravity with Gravitas: A Solution to
 the Border Puzzle.” American Economic Review, 93(1): 170–192.

Arkolakis, Costas, Natalia Ramondo, Andres Rodriguez-Clare, and Stephen Yeaple.
 2013. “Innovation and Production in the Global Economy.” National Bureau of Economic Re-
 search, Inc NBER Working Papers 18972.

Atkin, David. 2013. “Trade, Tastes, and Nutrition in India.” American Economic Review,
 103(5): 1629–63.

Auer, Raphael. 2014. “Product Heterogeneity, Cross-Country Taste Differences, and the Growth
 of World Trade.” Swiss National Bank.

Bernard, Andrew B., J. Bradford Jensen, Stephen J. Redding, and Peter K. Schott.
 2009. “The Margins of US Trade.” American Economic Review, 99(2): 487–93.

Berry, Steven. 1994. “Estimating Discrete-Choice Models of Product Differentiation.” RAND
 Journal of Economics, 25(2): 242–262.

Berry, Steven, James Levinsohn, and Ariel Pakes. 1995. “Automobile Prices in Market
 Equilibrium.” Econometrica, 63(4): 841–890.

Berry, Steven, James Levinsohn, and Ariel Pakes. 1999. “Voluntary Export Restraints on
 Automobiles: Evaluating a Trade Policy.” American Economic Review, 89(3): 400–430.

Brambilla, Irene. 2007. “A Customs Union with Multinational Firms: The Automobile Market
 in Argentina and Brazil.” mimeo.

Bronnenberg, Bart J., Jean-Pierre H. Dube, and Matthew Gentzkow. 2012. “The Evo-
 lution of Brand Preferences: Evidence from Consumer Migration.” American Economic Review,
 102(6): 2472–2508.

Bronnenberg, Bart J., Sanjay K. Dhar, and Jean-Pierre H. Dube. 2009. “Brand History,
 Geography, and the Persistence of Brand Shares.” Journal of Political Economy, 117(1): 87–115.

Chamberlain, Gary. 1982. “Multi Variate Regression Models for Panel Data.” Journal of Econo-
 metrics, 18: 5–46.

Coşar, A. Kerem, Paul L.E. Grieco, and Felix Tintelnot. 2015. “Borders Geography, and
 Oligopoly: Evidence from the Wind Turbine Industry.” Review of Economics and Statistics,
 97(3): 623–637.

Eaton, Jonathan, and Samuel Kortum. 2002. “Technology, Geography, and Trade.” Econo-
 metrica, 70(5): 1741–1779.

Fajgelbaum, Pablo D, and Amit K Khandelwal. 2014. “Measuring the unequal gains from
  trade.” National Bureau of Economic Research.

Fajgelbaum, Pablo, Gene M. Grossman, and Elhanan Helpman. 2011. “Income Distri-
  bution, Product Quality, and International Trade.” Journal of Political Economy, 119(4): 721 –
  765.


                                              41
Feenstra, Robert C. 1988. “Quality Change under Trade Restraints in Japanese Autos.” The
  Quarterly Journal of Economics, 103(1): 131–46.
Fieler, Ana Cecilia. 2011. “Nonhomotheticity and bilateral trade: Evidence and a quantitative
  explanation.” Econometrica, 79(4): 1069–1101.
Gandhi, Amit, and Jean-Francois Houde. 2016. “Measuring Substitution Patterns in Differ-
 entiated Products Industries.” University of Wisconsin-Madison and Wharton School.
Giroud, Xavier. 2013. “Proximity and Investment: Evidence from Plant-Level Data.” The Quar-
 terly Journal of Economics, 128(2): 861–915.
Goldberg, Pinelopi Koujianou. 1995. “Product Differentiation and Oligopoly in International
 Markets: The Case of the U.S. Automobile Industry.” Econometrica, 63(4): 891–951.
Goldberg, Pinelopi Koujianou, and Frank Verboven. 2001. “The Evolution of Price Disper-
 sion in the European Car Market.” Review of Economic Studies, 68(4): 811–48.
Goldberg, Pinelopi Koujianou, and Frank Verboven. 2004. “Cross-country price dispersion
 in the euro era: a case study of the European car market.” Economic Policy, 19(40): 483–521.
Head, Keith, and Thierry Mayer. 2013. “What Seperates Us? Sources of Resistance to Glob-
 alization.” Canadian Journal of Economics, 46(4): 1196–1231.
Head, Keith, and Thierry Mayer. 2015. “Brands in Motion: How frictions shape multinational
 production.” mimeo.
Kennedy, Peter E. 1981. “Estimation with correctly interpreted dummy variables in semiloga-
 rithmic equations.” American Economic Review, 71(4).
Krugman, Paul. 1980. “Scale economies, product differentiation, and the pattern of trade.” The
 American Economic Review, 950–959.
McCalman, Phillip, and Alan Spearot. 2013. “Why trucks jump: Offshoring and product
 characteristics.” Journal of International Economics, 91(1): 82 – 95.
Melitz, Marc J. 2003. “The Impact of Trade on Intra-Industry Reallocations and Aggregate
 Industry Productivity.” Econometrica, 71(6): 1695–1725.
Miravete, Eugenio J., Maria J. Moral, and Jeff Thurk. 2015. “Innovation, Emissions Policy,
 and Competitive Advantage in the Diffusion of European Diesel Automobiles.” CEPR Discussion
 Paper No. DP10783.
Nevo, Aviv. 2001. “Measuring Market Power in the Ready-to-Eat Cereal Industry.” Econometrica,
 69(2): 307–342.
Ramondo, Natalia, and Andres Rodriguez-Clare. 2013. “Trade, Multinational Production,
 and the Gains from Openness.” Journal of Political Economy, 121(2): 273 – 322.
Tintelnot, Felix. 2016. “Global Production with Export Platforms.” Forthcoming, Quarterly
  Journal of Economics.
van Garderen, Kees Jan, and Chandra Shah. 2002. “Exact interpretation of dummy variables
  in semilogarithmic equations.” The Econometrics Journal, 5(1): 149–159.
WTO. 2013. “International Trade Statistics 2013.” World Trade Organization.

                                             42
Appendices
Appendix A            Data
A.1    Demand Data
We purchased a dataset of trim-level unit sales, prices (MSRP) and characteristics (size, weight,
horsepower, fuel type, transmission, wheel base) for nine markets (Belgium, Brazil, Canada, France,
Germany, Italy, Spain, UK, US) and five years (2007-2011) from R.L.Polk & Company, a market
research firm that got acquired by IHS Inc. in 2013. Data for the years 2007 and 2008 are missing
for Brazil and Canada, respectively. Following the common practice in the literature, we aggregated
sales to the model level since very small market shares at the trim level create numerical challenges
for the BLP inversion. The aggregation used trim-level sales as weights to calculate average model
prices and characteristics. We fill in the few cases of missing characteristics (most notably in
Brazil), with the characteristics of the same models from the North American market. Prices at
local currencies were translated into USD using the average annual exchange rate. In countries with
a retail sales tax, we augment this price with the retail sales tax so it approximates the effective
price to the consumer. This procedure generated 9,498 observations. We dropped pickup trucks
since they constitute a somewhat unique segment in the US. We also dropped observations for
2010-2011 in Canada since information on SUV models sold there in these years was missing. This
leaves us with 8,841 observations. Additional data come from OECD (sales tax data), Penn World
Tables Version 8 (income per capita in 2005 PPP, price levels of GDP, exchange rates), and the
World Bank (Gini coefficients)
    All nominal variables in the data, MSRP and gas prices in each market-year, have been deflated
to 2005 US dollars to be consistent with the PPP income per capita variable denominated in 2005
US dollars. All variables are first deflated to their 2005 levels using price level time series from the
Penn World Tables, and then converted to USD using the nominal exchange rate of the year.

A.2    Supply Data
To locate the production locations of unique model-year combinations in the demand data, we
purchased data on assembly plants by manufacturer groups and models between 2007-2011 from
Ward’s Communications. Assembly countries for model-years present in the demand data but
missing in the purchased supply data were collected by research assistants from the Internet. The
complete supply data encompasses 52 assembly countries. The models produced in Uruguay belong
to the Chinese brand Geely for which fuel efficiency measures are missing. As a result, we drop
Uruguay as an assembly location. Also, data for Kenya and Bangladesh overlap in that Toyota
Land Cruiser is the only model produced in these countries. Since this leads to multicollinearity in
estimating model and production location fixed effects, we drop Bangladesh. This leaves us with
50 countries from which the models in the demand data could be supplied. The countries in which
manufacturer groups are headquartered constitute another dimension of the data, which is more
easily accessible from online sources. There are 12 headquarter countries associated with the 28
manufacturing groups: China, Germany, Spain, France, the UK, Italy, Japan, Korea, Malaysia,
Russia, Sweden and the US.42 The CEPII dataset (Head and Mayer 2013) provides us with the
distances between headquarter and assembly countries, as well as the distance and the contiguity
of our nine markets to assembly countries. Bilateral tariff data come from TARIC (EU Integrated
Tariff Database), Canada Border Services Agency, USITC and WITS databases. Most of the
bilateral tariffs were constant throughout the data period with two exceptions. The entry of
Ukraine to the WTO led to a reduction of US tariffs from 10% to the MFN level of 2.5%. EU
tariffs to S. Korea decreased from 10% to 3% in 2011 when a free trade agreement became effective.
We ignore rules of origin requirements related to the regional value-added content in FTAs: for
instance, according to NAFTA rules, a car can be imported from Mexico to the US tariff-free only
if the regional value-added content is above 62.5%. The rest is subject to tariff. Unfortunately,
systematic model-level data on location-specific value-added is not available. In our cost estimation
(subsection 4.5 ), we make an attempt to account for the fact that only a fraction of an imported
car’s cost is subject to import tariffs.
     In order to investigate the sources of the brand-country fixed effects from the demand estimation,
we supplement the demand data with information on brands’ years of entry into and the number of
their dealers in each of our 9 markets. The year-of-entry data was collected by consulting various
sources including the Internet, business history books and companies’ public relations agents. Data
regarding the number of dealers was collected from Google Maps. There are 331 brand-country
observations.
     The number of car dealers for a manufacturer brand within a country is collected using Google
Places API (https://developers.google.com/places/webservice/search?hl=en). This API
provides a function called radar search that returns the search query given the key words, place
types, center coordinates and radius of the area of interest. The query has detailed information
including place id that can uniquely identify a place, coordinates and description. There is a limit
to the number of results returned per search (200) and also the radius (50km). We set the keyword
to be the name of the manufacturer brand and the place type to be “car dealer”.43 Then we iterated
over areas to cover the entire country by choosing different coordinate centers and set the radius
to 50km. The area may cover places outside of the country, in which case we removed these results
based on their coordinates. There may also be overlapped area search in the search iteration, and
we removed the repeated results using place id. To avoid counting dealers of used cars, we did a
radar search using used car as the keyword, and deleted a place if its id is found in the used car
list.

A.3     Gas Prices
We collected data on unit price at the pump for gasoline, diesel and ethanol in all our markets.
Data sources are the websites of the US Energy Information Administration, Natural Resources
Canada, European Commission, and the Brazilian National Agency of Petroleum, Natural Gas and
Biofuels (ANP). Fuel market shares in each country and year are used as weights in calculating
average gas prices.


  42
      For two manufacturing groups, Chrysler-Fiat and Renault-Nissan, we assigned each firm a separate headquarter
country: Chrysler in the US and Fiat in Italy, Renault in France and Nissan in Japan. During this period, key
managerial decisions at Chrysler were still made in Detroit and the merger of the two companies wasn’t legally
complete until 2014. Similarly, while the Renault-Nissan alliance coordinates global procurement, production and
marketing, they still keep their separate management structures and brand identities.
   43
      Because Opel is a common location name in some countries, we use “Opel dealer” instead of “Opel” in the
search, where “dealer” is translated into the local language.
Appendix B                   Additional Figures and Tables
B.1       Analysis of Price Discounts
As is well known, transaction prices can differ from the manufacturer’s suggested retail price, which
introduces some measurement error into our price variable. Also, at least anecdotally, brands are
known to differ in their discount policies. In this Appendix section, we analyze whether home
brands differ systematically from foreign brands in their discount behavior. We downloaded online
car prices for US, Germany, and France during the period December 2015 to February 2016.44
We analyze discount behavior across the three countries. The left hand side variable is the price
discount ( online
             MSRP
                  price
                        − 1). On the right hand side, we interact a dummy variable whether a brand
is at home with a country dummy and include country fixed effects in the regression. We find that
German brands tend to give smaller discounts (note that discount is a negative number so a positive
coefficient implies smaller discounts), while French and US brands tend to give larger discounts.
Importantly, though, brands do not systematically give larger discounts in their home market than
in foreign markets as illustrated by the insignificant results for the home brand variables in the
results in columns II and III when global model or brand fixed effects are included. Hence the
global brand fixed effects in our demand estimation will absorb differences in the brands’ discount
behavior.


                                           Table B.1: Online price discounts

                                       Separate by country   Global model fixed effect   Global brand fixed effect
                                                I                       II                          III
                                            discount                 discount                    discount
       Home brand in USA                         -0.0173            -0.000689                    0.00633
                                                (0.00846)            (0.0205)                    (0.0157)
       Home brand in Germany                      0.0199             -0.00449                    0.00820
                                                (0.00841)           (0.00970)                   (0.00948)
       Home brand in France                      -0.0390             0.00968                      -0.0168
                                                (0.0108)             (0.0147)                    (0.0145)

       Observations                               803                  803                         803
       Country Fixed Effect                       Yes                  Yes                         Yes
       Model Fixed Effect                          No                  Yes                          No
       Brand Fixed Effect                          No                   No                         Yes
       Notes: Standard errors in parentheses.




  44
      Aggregate pricing data for the US was taken from www.truecar.com on December 22, 2015 in 5 cities (Philadel-
phia, Los Angeles, Washington D.C., and Dallas) and reflect the base car model. Aggregate pricing data for Germany
was taken from www.autohaus24.de on January 23, 2016 and reflect the base car model. Pricing data for France was
taken from www.promoneuve.fr on February 8, 2016 in every region and include car styles and possible optional
equipment, where authorized dealers post prices for new cars. Pricing discounts for each country are calculated by
first calculating the average price of the car model and MSRP for unique models and then calculating the discount.
B.2   Descriptive Evidence

          Figure B.1: Models and market shares by number of assembly countries




                       .6
                       .5 .4
                  Percent
                   .3  .2
                       .1
                       0




                               1      2     3       4      5     6    7        8    9       10+
                                                Number of assembly countries
                                           Fraction of models          Total market share




                                   Table B.2: Characteristics by market

                                                  I                   II                III
                                          ln(hppwtjmt )         ln(sizejmt )       ln(mpgjmt )
                 BEL                           -0.276              -0.009              0.253
                                              (0.006)             (0.001)            (0.006)
                 BRA                           -0.043             0.00308              0.188
                                             (0.0111)             (0.004)            (0.008)
                 CAN                          -0.0001             0.0008              0.0156
                                              (0.006)             (0.001)            (0.005)
                 DEU                           -0.195              -0.006              0.157
                                              (0.006)             (0.001)            (0.006)
                 ESP                           -0.228              -0.007             0.228
                                              (0.006)             (0.001)            (0.006)
                 FRA                           -0.239              -0.006              0.267
                                              (0.006)             (0.001)            (0.006)
                 GBR                           -0.210              -0.008              0.189
                                              (0.006)             (0.001)            (0.006)
                 ITA                           -0.235              -0.008              0.229
                                              (0.006)             (0.001)            (0.006)
                 Observations                   8841                8841               8841
                 R2                             0.953               0.985              0.928
                 Year FE                         Yes                 Yes                Yes
                 Model FE                        Yes                 Yes                Yes
                  Standard errors in parentheses. US is the omitted dummy, so all
                  coefficients showcase differences in country means against the US.
B.3      Model predictions
B.3.1     Elasticities and Markups
Table B.3 presents the elasticities and cross-elasticities for selected models in the subset of markets
where these models compete. Looking at the own-price elasticities, we see they vary mildly across
models. When we consider the cross-elasticities, the table illustrates that the model is able to
capture the expected competitive patterns. The two luxury models, the Audi A6 and Mercedes
E350, compete most strongly with each other. Similarly, Renault Clio, Toyota Corolla, and Ford
Focus compete strongly with each other but not with the luxury vehicles.

                  Table B.3: Median own and cross-price elasticities for select models

                          Audi A6      Ford Focus      Mercedes E350        Renault Clio       Toyota Corolla
   Audi A6                 -14.687           0.034             0.433             0.007              0.021
   Ford Focus               0.064           -14.473            0.029             0.261              0.471
   Mercedes E 350           0.230            0.006            -15.727            0.003              0.001
   Renault Clio             0.008            0.311             0.001            -14.090             0.028
   Toyota Corolla           0.003            0.483             0.001             0.269             -14.962
      Notes: This table shows the substitution elasticity of models in the row with respect to the prices of mod-
      els in the column. Each entry represents the median of elasticities across country-years.




                   Table B.4: Median markups of select models across years (percent)

                                     BRA       BEL    CAN       DEU     ESP     FRA       GBR     ITA     USA
   Audi A4                            5.8       9.1    8.0       9.8    8.5      9.9       9.3     8.3     9.3
   Audi A6                                      9.0    8.2       8.7    8.2      9.6       9.4     7.7    11.4
   BMW 530                                      7.8              6.7    6.7      8.7       8.8     7.4    10.6
   BMW X3                                       8.1    8.8       7.0    7.1      8.8       8.8     7.3    11.4
   Chrysler 300                                 6.8    9.2       5.6    6.5      8.1       8.3     6.3    10.9
   Ford Fiesta                        5.4       8.8              9.8    8.2      9.3       8.9     8.8     7.9
   Ford Focus                         6.0       8.2     8.8      7.7    7.8      8.8       8.9     8.0     8.1
   Honda Accord                       6.4       7.2     9.1      6.6    6.9      8.3       7.7     6.7     9.8
   Honda CR-V                         7.8       7.4     9.6      6.6    7.1      8.7       7.9     7.0     9.9
   Jaguar XF                                    6.9     8.0      5.5    6.1      7.7       8.8     6.0    11.9
   Jeep Grand Cherokee                6.8       6.8    10.0      5.8    6.4      8.0       8.3     6.3    13.0
   Lexus RX 450                                 5.8     6.9      4.8    4.9      6.8       6.9     5.2     8.5
   Mercedes E 350                               7.1     7.7      6.8    6.5      8.4       8.2     6.4    12.3
   Mini New Mini                      6.7       7.9     7.9      7.8    7.4      8.4       7.6     7.4     7.5
   Renault Clio                       4.6       9.5              9.7    8.6     12.3       8.6     8.6
   Toyota Corolla                     5.7       8.0    10.3      8.0    7.5      8.5       8.7     7.9      8.9
   Toyota RAV-4                       6.7       7.5     9.3      6.6    7.0      8.7       7.8     7.2     10.2
   VW Golf                            6.8       9.4     9.0     11.4    8.8      9.6       9.1     8.6      7.6
   VW Passat                          6.0       9.1     8.2     10.2    8.8      9.5       8.9     8.6      9.2
   VW Tiguan                          8.3       9.6     8.8     10.5    9.1     10.3       9.6     8.8     10.0

   Table B.4 presents the median (across years) of the implied markups for a selection of models in
all countries where those models appear. Intuitively, markups are lowest in Brazil, which is by far
the lowest income country in our dataset. Several smaller models such as the VW Golf, Mini, and
Ford Fiesta tend to have smaller markups in the United States than they do in European countries.
The overall pattern of brands tending to have higher markups in their home country is also apparent
in this table, although the popularity of model characteristics and product competition also clearly
affects markups.

B.3.2     Trade and Foreign Production Frictions
To get a sense for the magnitude of the estimated trade frictions, we conduct two exercises which
calculate the proportion of automobile costs that are due to external shipping and remote produc-
tion, and showcase how these quantities vary across brands and countries. Note that this analysis
computes costs actually paid in overcoming production frictions. It is not capturing the impact
of production frictions that firms endogenously avoid (e.g., sourcing locally to avoid high tariffs
and shipping costs). In the Section 5, we conduct a series of counterfactuals which allow firms to
re-optimize production decisions when frictions are removed.

Table B.5: Weighted average external shipping cost (assembly to market cost, including domestic
assembly effects) as percent of marginal cost

                         BRA      BEL     CAN      DEU      ESP     FRA      GBR      ITA    USA
              Fiat        0.0      5.0              2.5     2.8      2.4      4.0      1.4    2.5
              Ford        0.2      3.3     0.6      1.4     2.7      2.1      3.7      2.8    0.2
              GM          0.2      4.1     0.6      1.3     2.1      1.9      1.7      2.1    0.2
              PSA         0.4      4.4              2.2     1.4      1.3      3.2      2.2
              Toyota      0.3      5.6     0.9      3.2     3.5      2.4      3.7      2.8    1.1
              VW          0.2      3.9     2.5      1.2     1.5      1.9      3.1      2.0    1.6


    Table B.5 reflects the percentage of the total cost that is directly related to external shipping
and domesticity (but not including tariffs). In this exercise, we use the estimates from column IV
of Table 12 to calculate the proportion of costs paid that are due to shipping from an international
location. That is, we calculate the change in total costs when we set the domestic dummy equal
to one and the distance between the assembly countries and the destination market equal to the
internal distance of the destination market. This calculation keeps tariffs, sourcing locations, and
the distance between assembly and headquarters the same. We see some variation by firm and
country, ranging between 0 percent (Fiat in Brazil) to 5.6 percent (Toyota in Belgium) of the
marginal cost. As we would expect, these costs tend to be relatively low in the firm’s home
country, despite the fact that even home firms import at least some proportion of their cars from
abroad, generating positive external shipping costs. However, in Brazil, where many firms have
local plants targeting South American markets, average shipping costs are actually lower as a share
of costs than in home countries.45
    Table B.6 carries out a similar exercise by computing the proportion of costs due to sourcing
from assembly locations outside the firm’s headquarter country. In this case, we compute the
proportion of additional costs from assembling cars outside of the home headquarter country as
a proportion of the overall cost. Not surprisingly, these costs tend to be smallest in the firm’s
  45
    It is also interesting to note that General Motors has its lowest average shipping costs to European markets in
Germany, where its Opel subsidiary is based.
home country, although they are not zero since, again, firms source some models in home markets
from abroad. These costs range from about 0 to about 1 percent of marginal costs of supplying
a model to a market. As with shipping costs, the case of Brazil is especially interesting since
remote assembly costs tend to be highest there. This is the flip side of the low shipping costs for
the Brazilian market observed in Table B.5. Firms are endogenously choosing to locate assembly
locations in Brazil, incurring remote production costs instead of paying higher shipping costs and
high import tariffs to access the Brazilian market.

        Table B.6: Weighted average remote production cost as percent of marginal cost

                     BRA     BEL    CAN      DEU    ESP   FRA     GBR     ITA    USA
            Fiat      0.8     0.3             0.3   0.3    0.3     0.4     0.2    0.6
            Ford      0.4     0.3      0.0    0.3   0.3    0.3     0.3     0.3    0.0
            GM        0.4     0.4      0.0    0.4   0.4    0.4     0.4     0.4    0.0
            PSA       0.8     0.2             0.3   0.2    0.2     0.3     0.3
            Toyota    1.0     0.5      0.8    0.6   0.5    0.6     0.5     0.6      0.6
            VW        0.9     0.2      0.6    0.2   0.4    0.3     0.3     0.3      0.6




B.4    Counterfactuals
The following tables present market shares from the baseline model (which exactly matches share
and price data at the model level) and the counterfactual scenarios we consider. Data is aggregated
according to brand nationality.

         Table B.7: Data: average area-level market shares of brands across markets (%)

                                           Data/Baseline
                         BRA    BEL      CAN DEU ESP          FRA    GBR     ITA      USA
         US brands       31.0    8.9     34.1    8.3   11.3    6.6   15.9    11.6     39.6
         EU brands       56.6   75.7      8.5   77.0 70.6     82.6   62.8    74.0      9.5
         JPN brands       8.3   11.3     48.3   10.9 13.1      8.8   16.9    11.5     42.9
         Other brands     4.2    4.0      9.1    3.7    5.1    2.0    4.3     2.9      7.9
         Home brands                            55.4    9.0   52.3   18.2    30.3     39.6
Table B.8: Supply counterfactuals: percentage point changes of average area-level market share of
brands across markets

         All tariffs eliminated
                         BRA BEL CAN DEU ESP FRA                      GBR    ITA    USA
        US brands         -8.5   0.7    -5.3    1.1    1.8     0.3     2.3    2.0   -2.7
        EU brands        -18.7 -4.6      2.9   -5.4   -7.2     -2.1   -7.4   -5.7    2.1
        JPN brands        -3.5   3.0     0.4    3.6    4.0      1.3    4.2    2.9   -0.4
        Other brands 30.7        1.0    2.1     0.7    1.3     0.4     0.8    0.7    1.0
        Home brands                            -5.3   -4.0      0.3   -6.0   -3.6   -2.7
         No international trade frictions
                         BRA BEL CAN DEU ESP FRA                      GBR    ITA    USA
        US brands         -0.5  -0.1    -2.9    0.6    1.0      0.2    1.2    1.1   -3.1
        EU brands         -1.2  -2.8    1.5    -4.3   -5.0     -1.6   -4.7   -3.3    1.4
        JPN brands        -0.5   2.3     0.3    3.1    3.0      1.1    2.9    1.8    1.0
        Other brands       2.1   0.6    1.2     0.6    0.9     0.3     0.6    0.4    0.7
        Home brands                            -4.9   -3.1     -0.4   -4.4   -2.3   -3.1
         No multinational production frictions
                         BRA BEL CAN DEU ESP FRA                      GBR    ITA    USA
        US brands          0.0   0.4    -0.3    0.4    0.4      0.3    0.5    0.5   -0.4
        EU brands          0.0  -0.5     0.0   -0.6   -0.5     -0.4   -0.5   -0.6    0.1
        JPN brands         0.3   0.1    0.3     0.1    0.1     0.1     0.0    0.1    0.5
        Other brands -0.3        0.1    -0.1    0.1   -0.0      0.0    0.0    0.0   -0.2
        Home brands                            -0.6   -0.1     -0.2    0.3   -0.5   -0.4
         No tariffs, trade or multinational production frictions
                         BRA BEL CAN DEU ESP FRA                      GBR    ITA    USA
        US brands        -11.0   0.9    -8.5    1.6    2.4     0.5     3.3    3.1   -6.2
        EU brands        -24.6 -5.6      4.6   -7.0   -9.1     -2.8   -9.8   -7.9    3.9
        JPN brands        -3.1   3.8     0.9    4.8    5.4      1.9    5.6    4.0    0.6
        Other brands 38.7        1.0    3.0     0.7    1.3     0.5     0.9    0.8    1.6
        Home brands                            -6.1   -6.3      0.5   -9.6   -5.8   -6.2
Table B.9: Market access and prices of complementary goods counterfactuals: percentage point
changes of average area-level market share of brands across markets

         Equalize dealer networks
                        BRA BEL CAN DEU              ESP    FRA     GBR    ITA     USA
        US brands        -0.8  -0.0  -2.4     -0.8   -0.1    1.1    -0.7   -0.0    -1.4
        EU brands         0.8  -0.9   3.3     -1.9   -0.5   -3.3     0.2   -1.0     0.9
        JPN brands       -0.0   0.4  -1.0      2.1    0.3    1.8     0.3    0.7     0.2
        Other brands      0.1  0.5    0.1      0.6   0.3     0.4     0.2    0.3     0.4
        Home brands                           -4.4   -0.8   -9.7    -0.5   -2.8    -1.4
         All countries have German gas prices
                        BRA BEL CAN DEU              ESP    FRA     GBR    ITA     USA
        US brands        -9.0  -0.0  -0.1      0.0   -0.0   -0.0     0.0    0.1    -2.0
        EU brands         5.8  0.2    0.1      0.0   1.0     0.1     0.2   -0.0     0.0
        JPN brands        2.7  -0.1   0.5      0.0   -0.8   -0.0    -0.1   -0.0     2.2
        Other brands      0.6  -0.0  -0.5     0.0    -0.2   -0.0    -0.1   -0.0    -0.2
        Home brands                            0.0    0.6    0.1     0.0    0.0    -2.0




Table B.10: Demand counterfactuals: percentage point changes of average area-level market share
of brands across markets

         No home preference
                       BRA BEL CAN DEU               ESP    FRA     GBR    ITA     USA
        US brands       0.0    0.0    0.0     1.8    0.4     1.4     1.1    1.2    -9.6
        EU brands       0.0    0.0    0.0    -4.9    -0.9    -4.0   -2.6   -2.8     1.8
        JPN brands      0.0    0.0    0.0     2.4    0.4     2.1     1.2    1.3     6.6
        Other brands    0.0    0.0    0.0     0.7    0.2     0.4     0.3    0.3     1.1
        Home brands                          -9.8    -3.2   -10.4   -5.7   -7.0    -9.6
         No local assembly preference
                       BRA BEL CAN DEU               ESP    FRA     GBR    ITA     USA
        US brands      -0.7    -1.5   -2.8   -1.0    -0.6    1.4     1.5   -1.7    -1.2
        EU brands      -0.7    -0.2   1.8    -1.8    -2.1   -2.4     0.5    0.0     1.9
        JPN brands      0.0    1.3    -0.7    2.2     1.5    0.5    -2.4    1.3    -0.3
        Other brands    1.3    0.5    1.6     0.6    1.2     0.4     0.4    0.4    -0.4
        Home brands                          -6.2    -1.2   -6.7    -3.9   -4.8    -1.2
         No local assembly and no home preference
                       BRA BEL CAN DEU               ESP    FRA     GBR     ITA    USA
        US brands      -0.7    -1.5   -2.8    0.4    -0.3     2.9    2.5    -0.7   -10.7
        EU brands      -0.7    -0.2   1.8    -6.4    -3.0    -6.3   -1.6    -2.4    4.0
        JPN brands      0.0    1.3    -0.7    4.7     1.9     2.5   -1.5     2.5    6.1
        Other brands    1.3    0.5    1.6     1.3    1.4     0.9     0.6     0.7    0.6
        Home brands                         -15.9    -4.0   -16.8   -8.6   -11.3   -10.7
