                                NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




  DOES EDUCATION REDUCE TEEN FERTILITY? EVIDENCE FROM COMPULSORY
                         SCHOOLING LAWS

                                           Philip DeCicca
                                          Harry Krashinsky

                                        Working Paper 21594
                                http://www.nber.org/papers/w21594


                      NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                               1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                 Cambridge, MA 02138
                                    September 2015




We thank Maria Fitzpatrick, Mike Grossman, Don Kenkel, Mike Lovenheim, Alan Mathios, Mel Stephens,
Tara Watson and seminar participants at Cornell University and NBER for helpful comments. We
are especially indebted to Phil Oreopoulos for helpful comments and sharing useful data with us. The
views expressed herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National
Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.

© 2015 by Philip DeCicca and Harry Krashinsky. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to
exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including
© notice, is given to the source.
Does Education Reduce Teen Fertility? Evidence from Compulsory Schooling Laws
Philip DeCicca and Harry Krashinsky
NBER Working Paper No. 21594
September 2015
JEL No. I1,I18,I24,J13

                                               ABSTRACT

While less-educated women are more likely to give birth as teenagers, there is scant evidence the relationship
is causal. We investigate this possibility using variation in compulsory schooling laws (CSLs) to identify
the impact of formal education on teen fertility for a large sample of women drawn from multiple waves
of the Canadian Census. We find that greater CSL-induced schooling reduces the probability of giving
birth as a teenager by roughly two to three percentage points. We find evidence that education affects
the timing of births in a way that strongly implies an “incarceration” effect of education. In particular,
we find large negative impacts of education on births to young women aged seventeen and eighteen,
but little evidence of an effect after these ages, consistent with the idea that being enrolled in school
deters fertility in a contemporaneous manner. Our findings are robust to the inclusion of several
province-level characteristics including multiple dimensions of school quality, expenditures on public
programs and region-specific time trends.


Philip DeCicca
Department of Economics
422 Kenneth Taylor Hall
McMaster University
Hamilton, ON L8S 4M4
CANADA
and NBER
decicca@mcmaster.ca

Harry Krashinsky
Harry Krashinsky
Centre for Industrial Relations
121 St. George Street
University of Toronto
Toronto, ON M5S 2E8
Canada
harry.krashinsky@utoronto.ca
                                                                                                         1


1. Introduction

       Prior research suggests that teen fertility entails significant private and social costs.

Private costs associated with teen childbearing include lower levels of educational attainment by

teen mothers as well as diminished labor market outcomes like lower labor force participation

and lower wages, while plausibly external costs include greater dependence on welfare programs

and an increased need for remedial school services (c.f., Hofferth, 1987; Hoffman et al., 1993;

Klepinger et al., 1999; Chevalier and Viitanen, 2003). Beyond maternal costs, children born to

teen mothers are more likely to experience reduced life chances due to poor school performance,

greater substance abuse and an increased propensity to engage in criminal activity (c.f., Bronars

and Grogger, 1994; Grogger, 1997; Francesconi, 2008). While it is not clear that such

associations are causal in nature, it seems likely that at least some of the negative consequences

associated with teen fertility are indeed causal. To the extent that they are, policies that reduce

teen fertility can improve the well-being of women who are predominantly considered

disadvantaged relative to the general population.

       Despite this possibility, there exists relatively little research on the possible causal effect

of schooling on teen childbearing. Indeed, while there is much descriptive evidence that less-

educated women are more likely to give birth as teens, there is considerably less credible

evidence that this relationship is causal in nature. We investigate the causal relationship between

educational attainment and teen childbearing for a large sample of women drawn from multiple

waves of the Canadian Census. More precisely, we exploit variation in compulsory schooling

laws (CSLs) in an instrumental variables framework to identify the impact of schooling on

fertility as a teenager. While prior studies have been hampered by weak instruments, our

estimates are unique in the literature because they imply a strong first stage relationship. In turn,
                                                                                                   2


we find that CSL-induced schooling reduces the probability of giving birth as a teenager by

between two to three percentage points, which is proportionally substantial. We also explore

possible mechanisms underlying this relationship by examining the timing of our estimates as it

relates to age of first birth. We find evidence that education affects the timing of births in a way

that suggests a strong “incarceration” effect. In particular, we find large negative impacts of

education on births to young women aged seventeen and eighteen, but little evidence of an effect

after these ages, consistent with the idea that being enrolled in school deters fertility in a

contemporaneous manner. We also examine teen fertility on the intensive margin and find

estimates consistent with this interpretation.

       To address a recent critique of the broader CSL literature by Stephens and Yang (2014),

we also include controls for school quality in our models, in addition to other province-level

characteristics. Our main estimates are quite robust to their inclusion. To the extent that

avoiding a teen birth leads to improved life outcomes, our findings suggest that policies which

attempt to increase educational attainment at the lower end of the distribution may have

substantial non-pecuniary returns, at least in this dimension.

       In the following section, we provide background information on Canadian compulsory

school laws, discuss mechanisms by which schooling may affect teen fertility decisions and

review related literature. Section 3 describes our data, focusing on key definitions such as how

we label teen mothers, and also the relevant history of minimum school leaving ages which

provide the variation which we use to identify the impact of schooling on teen fertility. Section 4

presents our empirical strategy which relies on instrumental variables estimation. We also

discuss issues surrounding appropriate variance estimation when there are few clusters or sources

of independent variation. Since CSLs are a matter of provincial policy and since there are only
                                                                                                                 3


ten Canadian provinces, we implement the Wild cluster bootstrap procedure outlined in Cameron

and Miller (2015). Section 5 presents our findings, while Section 6 discusses them and

concludes the paper.

2. Background

2.1. A Brief History of Canadian CSLs

        Despite relatively recent attention by economists, compulsory schooling laws have

existed in North America for well over a century. Perhaps not surprisingly, their pattern of

development in Canada and the United States is quite similar, mirroring other key similarities

including education being a function of state/provincial governments delivered by local

governments and the use of similar, most often local, funding mechanisms in the relevant time

periods (Katz, 1976). In what follows, we briefly describe the history of CSLs in Canada

drawing heavily on existing research (Phillips, 1957; Axelrod, 1997; Oreopoulos, 2005). We

describe the law changes we use for identification purposes in greater detail in the following

section.

        As in the United States, compulsory schooling laws in Canada were first enacted in the

latter part of the 19th Century (Katz, 1976). Early versions of these laws were subject to many

exemptions, most often based on the age of children, their necessity in supporting their families

and distance lived from school. Generally speaking, however, these laws became more binding

over time. Though an early adopter, the province of Ontario provides a good example of the

typical evolution of CSLs in Canada. In 1871, Ontario became the first province in Canada to

enact a compulsory schooling law, requiring children aged seven to twelve to attend school for at

least four months per year.1 Two decades later these ages were raised to between eight and


1
 CSLs appeared in British Columbia shortly afterward in 1873 with most Canadian provinces enacting them by the
end of the first decade of 20th Century. Quebec is an interesting exception. Despite high levels of school
                                                                                                                     4


fourteen, and legislation introduced penalties for non-compliance as well as for hiring school

aged children, though many exemptions remained. For example, children under ten were

exempted if they lived more than 2 miles from school while children ten and over were similarly

exempted if they lived more than 3 miles away. Moreover, there was lax enforcement of the law,

particularly in rural areas.2 By the mid-1950s, the Schools Administration Act raised the age of

school attendance to sixteen for all students in Ontario, though farm children over the age of

fourteen were exempted as were children who were deemed to be essential to their family’s

subsistence. Similar to other Canadian provinces, even these exemptions were lifted in the early

1970s, which is also consistent with many U.S. states (Katz, 1976). Moreover, some Canadian

provinces have further increased the age of compulsory attendance. For example, New

Brunswick raised it to eighteen in 2000, as did Ontario in 2007 and Manitoba in 2011. Again,

note that this broad overview does not explicitly discuss the law changes we use in our analysis;

instead we do this in Section 3.

2.2. Why might compulsory schooling affect teen fertility?

         Prior work outlines two broad mechanisms by which compulsory education might affect

fertility. The first, consistent with economic models based on human capital theory, suggests

that education lowers female fertility through an increase in the opportunity cost of time.3 In

short, if there are positive returns to additional schooling, women’s labor market opportunities,


attendance, Quebec did not enact formal CSL legislation until 1943, though it had relatively strict child labor laws
which restricted children from working until age sixteen unless they could read and write.
2
  The deference shown to rural areas, mostly based on their agrarian nature and extensive use of child labor, is also
apparent in the Adolescent School Attendance Act of 1921 whereby Ontario increased the compulsory age of
attendance from fourteen to sixteen years old, but only for young adults living in urban areas. Perhaps not
surprisingly, newly required fourteen and fifteen year olds were exempted from the law if they were employed at
home or for wages and if they possessed a parent-endorsed “certificate of employment”, which exempted youth
from minimum school leaving laws, were often obtained by passing equivalency tests, typically at the level of grade
7 or 8, but sometimes merely tested basic skills like reading or writing. Interestingly, these young adults were still
required to attend part-time instruction in the evenings, where such classes existed.
3
  Following Black, Devereux and Salvanes (2008), we collectively label these explanations “human capital”
mechanisms in the discussion that follows.
                                                                                                                    5


including their wage rates, improve. Since children are highly time-intensive, such increases

might alter female fertility decisions, with the primary prediction that they reduce total fertility. 4

Indeed, theoretical models that consider lifecycle fertility highlight the wage rate as a key

parameter (Willis, 1973; Wolpin, 1984; Barro and Becker, 1988; Hotz and Miller, 1988). While

the literature understandably focuses on lifetime fertility, it is conceivable that teen fertility is

also altered. If, for instance, additional compulsory schooling sufficiently improves the labor

market opportunities of high school aged girls and if those impacted recognize this, it might

change their near-term behavior. In other words, even if the bulk of returns to additional

education are realized beyond the teen years, they may affect teen fertility if girls are even

somewhat forward-looking and did not previously realize the economic opportunities afforded

by additional education. In addition, it is possible that additional education improves either the

amount of health information possessed or the efficiency with which individuals use it

(Grossman, 1972; Rosenzweig and Schultz, 1982; Kenkel, 1991). For example, if education

improves information regarding alternative forms of birth control and/or their appropriate use,

fertility might be impacted. Indeed, prior work has shown that women with greater levels of

formal education are more likely to use birth control and to use it appropriately (c.f.,

Balakrishnan et al., 1985; Tanfer and Horn, 1985). Again, while it seems likely that these human

capital related mechanisms affect longer-run fertility, it is possible that they affect nearer-term,

and hence teen, fertility.

         The second broad mechanism by which education might affect fertility is more

mechanical in nature and involves the allocation of time. In particular, when individuals are in

school there is less time to engage in behaviors that occur outside of school, including sexual

4
  This explanation only references the substitution effect; there may be income effects which, if children are normal
goods, the corresponding increase in income would increase investment in children; however, the dominant thinking
is that such income effects are small relative to substitution effects.
                                                                                                                    6


activity.5 Naturally, this implies that minimum school leaving ages have their desired effect; that

is, they are indeed binding on the amount of formal schooling one receives which implies greater

time devoted to schooling. More generally, they must also bind on a non-trivial fraction of

students. In principle, greater seat time in school may lead to reduced fertility as might programs

or services offered in the school setting. Lovenheim et al. (2014), for instance, find that school-

based family health centers reduce teen fertility. While their estimates are specific to the U.S.

and cover a different time period than ours, they highlight a possible school-based mechanism.

Peer effects are another possible avenue through which incarceration may deter fertility. For

example, individuals induced by CSLs to remain in school (i.e., compliers) may spend less time

outside of school with peers who continue to drop out (i.e., non-compliers) than prior to the CSL.

In turn, this could mean less time with peers who might engage in risky behaviors that might

influence sexual behavior and hence teen fertility.

           Conceptually, these two broad mechanisms have different implications regarding the

timing of fertility. In particular, if the incarceration effect operates to the exclusion of the human

capital effect, as we describe it, one would expect less fertility around the relevant compulsory

schooling ages. More precisely, one would expect to observe effects only in that relatively

narrow period and not beyond it. Nevertheless, as noted above, the human capital mechanisms

described might also affect near-term fertility if girls induced to complete additional education

contemporaneously realize the potential returns to their now higher education level. Therefore,

finding only a near-term effect of education on fertility, while most ostensibly consistent with

incarceration, could also be due to what we label human capital mechanisms. Of course, it is

plausible that higher minimum school leaving age laws have both incarceration and human

capital effects; in other words, it is entirely possible for additional mandated schooling to impact
5
    In what follows, we label this mechanism an “incarceration effect” as in Black, Devereux and Salvanes (2008).
                                                                                                     7


fertility in the short and longer runs for different reasons. Though imperfect, we explore each of

these broad mechanisms by examining the impact of formal schooling on fertility at various

maternal ages extending from age 16 to 22. Our findings point to a pure incarceration effect

since education reduces fertility in the late teen years, but not into early adulthood.

2.3 Existing studies on education and teen fertility

       The relationship between education and labor market outcomes like earnings and

employment has long interested economists. More recently, economists have become interested

in broader notions of returns to education, including its possible impact on non-pecuniary

outcomes like health, crime, and civic-oriented behavior. It is well-recognized that estimating

the causal effect of education on any of these outcomes is challenging because educational

choices reflect factors other than schooling, factors often not easily observed by the researcher.

As a result, and in the absence of random assignment to different levels of education, economists

have increasingly explored quasi-random variation in schooling induced by natural events or

government policy. In what follows, we first briefly describe the broader literature and then

focus on two studies which are most relevant to our work. We also review a recent study which

challenges much of the broader literature and describe how we deal with issues raised therein.

       One government policy which has received much attention is compulsory schooling laws

(CSLs). Several studies use different parameterizations of these laws to instrument for

educational attainment or estimate reduced form relationships. The earliest of these studies

focused on the amount of schooling required, in essence subtracting compulsory school starting

ages from corresponding school leaving ages, and studied educational attainment as well as labor

market outcomes such as wage rates and earnings (c.f., Lang and Kropp, 1986; Acemoglu and

Angrist, 2000, Goldin and Katz, 2003, Black, Devereux and Salvanes, 2005; Oreopoulous,
                                                                                                                   8


2006). Later studies focused on broader outcomes and tended to find positive social impacts of

increased formal schooling (c.f., Lleras-Muney, 2002, Lochner and Moretti, 2004, Lleras-

Muney, 2005).6 The findings of even more recent, and in large part, non-U.S. based studies, are

decidedly more mixed both with respect to labor market outcomes (c.f., Meghir and Palme,

2005; Pischke and von Wachter, 2008; Grenet, 2013) and also broader social outcomes (c.f.,

Clark and Royer, 2013).

        Two studies are of greatest relevance to our work, with the second being most relevant.

First, McCrary and Royer (2011) examine the relationship between maternal education and

fertility, as part of a larger study focusing on child health. Using data from California and Texas,

these authors implement a regression discontinuity strategy based on school starting ages. They

find little evidence of a relationship between increases in CSL-induced education and fertility.7

While their data are very appropriate for examining the relationship between maternal education

and child health, they are more limited in examining fertility since they use natality data which,

by its nature, is comprised solely of births (i.e., those females who have given birth). The second

paper, Black, Devereux and Salvanes (2008) is more directly relevant to our work. These

authors examine the impact of educational attainment on teen fertility using compulsory

schooling reforms in the United States and Norway. Of the two corresponding sets of analysis,

the U.S. component is most similar to our work since it focuses on minimum school-leaving ages

as well as the similarity of U.S. and Canadian educational systems. In particular, Black,

Devereux and Salvanes (2008) use U.S. Census data from 1940 to 1980 and include women ages

20 to 30 in a given census year. As in our analysis, they infer whether a woman’s first birth


6
  For an excellent review of work related to the social or non-pecuniary benefits of compulsory law-induced
schooling see Oreopoulos and Salvanes (2011).
7
  McCrary and Royer (2011) also find no relationship between such education and child health, which again is the
focus of their study.
                                                                                                                       9


occurred in her teen years from her current household composition; in particular, the age

difference between the mother and her eldest co-resident child. Unlike most other literature, the

authors do not use these laws to instrument educational attainment since they do not find a

systematic first-stage relationship.8 Instead, they estimate reduced form models that include state

and cohort fixed effects as well as models that include state trends and variables that proxy labor

market conditions. Their main estimates imply that an extra year of schooling is associated with

between a five and nine percent decrease in teen fertility, depending on whether the CSL in

question requires school attendance until age 16 or age 17, respectively. Finally, Black,

Devereux and Salvanes (2008) test the notion of whether “incarceration” versus “human capital”

mechanisms drive their estimates and find evidence for both explanations, though relatively

weaker evidence for incarceration. We discuss these issues in greater detail later in the paper.

         Despite reasonably consistent findings of a positive relationship between compulsory

schooling laws and outcomes like earnings, health, civic behavior and others, Stephens and Yang

(2014) pose what may be a serious challenge to this literature. In particular, these authors revisit

many of the CSL-induced education findings cited earlier, but systematically discover that they

are not robust to the inclusion of a region-specific trend variable; the implication being that there

exist factors other than CSLs which have changed over the period in question and that these

factors may have impacted the outcomes studied. More precisely, Stephens and Yang (2014)

find that inclusion of a region-specific trend variable does not greatly affect the relevant first

stage estimates (i.e., the regression of educational attainment on CSLs), but substantially alters

corresponding structural estimates (i.e., the estimate of instrumented education on the ultimate

8
 Black, Devereux and Salvanes (2008) note that the lack of statistical significance is due to earlier studies clustering
on state-year cells, rather than just state cells. More recent work suggests that clustering at the state level is
preferred. That said, there is concern when the number of clusters is “too small”. Since there are only ten Canadian
provinces, we cluster at the province level and also implement the Wild cluster bootstrap procedure outlined in
Cameron and Miller (2015) as discussed in detail in Section 4.
                                                                                                                     10


outcome). These authors also explore one possible factor that changed along with CSLs, namely

“school quality” as measured by Card and Krueger (1992).9 When included, they find similar

impacts on the estimates of studies they replicate; I.e., first stage estimates that remain relatively

strong, but substantially different structural estimates. While this does not necessarily imply that

school quality is “the” missing factor, the overall pattern of their findings casts at least some

doubt on the findings of earlier work since they suggest pathways other than CSL-induced

increases in formal schooling.

          We address this critique in two ways—one conceptual and one empirical. First, we note

that our main finding, as previewed in the introduction, is strongly consistent with an

incarceration effect, rather than a human capital effect. In essence, our finding reflects the

mechanical nature of schooling’s impact on time use. As such, it is plausibly independent of

factors like school quality to the extent that quality does not influence the efficacy of CSLs in

increasing schooling. That said, we include a measure similar to the Card and Krueger (1992)

measures of school quality used by Stephens and Yang (2014), but specific to Canadian

provinces in our models, as well as other provincial-level controls such as aggregate program

spending. As will be seen, our estimates—both first stage and structural—are robust to their

inclusion. While we realize that this does not rule out all other factors, we believe that it rules

out a potentially important one.

3. Data

          The data used in this study are assembled from the 1976, 1981, 1986, and 1991

confidential extracts of the Canadian Census.10 The sample is comprised of women between the


9
  These school quality measures, which vary by state and year, include pupil to teacher ratio, length of the school
year, and relative teacher salaries.
   The confidential extracts of the Census were essential for this exercise because of a number of factors. Only the
10

confidential Census extracts contain an individual’s exact date of birth, as well as the necessary identifiers to link
                                                                                                                    11


ages of 22 and 35, and for these women, it was determined whether or not they had given birth to

a child by a certain age. This could not be ascertained from a direct survey question posed to the

women in the Census, since the Census does not directly ask women about the age at which they

first gave birth. But since the Census is a household-level survey, it contains variables that

identify individual households as well as the families within those households. Specifically, it

identifies “Census Families”11 living within these households (since some households contain

multiple families), as well as characteristics of family members. These questions could be

exploited to determine the age at which women in the sample had their first child. This was

accomplished by calculating the age differential between the female head of the household (or

female partner of the head of the household) and their eldest offspring present in the household.

The analysis will use this age gap to consider women who did or did not give birth to children by

a particular age (in particular, during their teenaged years). For the sake of reference, Figure 1

displays a schematic for the method used to identify potential mothers in our sample.

         Given the method used to identify the age at which women in our sample give birth, it is

important to note the maximal age of the female household head is an important consideration

for the analysis. As the female household head becomes progressively older, it is possible that

their eldest child is no longer present in the household. In the Census, virtually all heads of

household are at least 17 or 18 years old; thus, by setting the maximum age of women in the

sample to thirty-five years of age we can assure that this misclassification bias is effectively

eliminated.



parents and children. The confidential version of the 1971 Census is also available in Statistics Canada Research
Data Centres, but uses a different classification system to identify Census families. For consistency’s sake, we have
not used that Census extract.
11
   A “Census family” refers to a married couple and the children, if any, of either or both spouses; a couple living
common law and the children, if any, of either or both partners; or, a lone parent of any marital status with at least
one child living in the same dwelling and that child or those children.
                                                                                                              12


        To provide a general sense of the characteristics of the sample, Table 1 displays means

and standard deviations of certain variables for women in each of the four Censuses who either

did or did not give birth to their eldest child as a teenager. The variables in the samples are: age

(in years), educational attainment (in years), annual earnings (in the year prior to the Census, and

reported in terms of real 2002 dollars), the number of weeks worked in the year prior to the

Census, and the proportion who are married. The tables compare women between the ages of 22

and 35, and the relative differences in the characteristics demonstrate that women who have had

children in their teens are significantly less-educated, work fewer weeks of the year, and earn

less money12 than women who have not had children in their teens. Although this finding has

been documented elsewhere in the literature, it confirms that women who have had children as

teenagers also exhibit worse economic outcomes than those who have not had children as teens.

4. Regression Results

        Although not conclusive, the evidence in Table 1 suggests that lower educational

attainment may be a key factor in determining teen fertility. To further investigate the

relationship between these two variables, we first estimate the following OLS regression:




In this regression, all of the variables contain individual data points from data consisting of

means calculated for birth cohort b, in each province p, and each Census extract c. As seen in

Table 2, the dependent variable changes according to the age by which women have given birth

(denoted above as “A”), from 16 to 22 years old. The other control variables in the regression

(     ) include: age as well as its square, cube and quartic; controls for rural status, the percent

12
  The 1976 Census did not contain information on earnings or weeks worked, so the mean of this variable was
determined from the other three Censuses.
                                                                                                     13


employed in manufacturing, married status, aboriginal status, and immigrant status; and fixed

effects for province of birth, year of birth and the census extract. Furthermore, we seek to ensure

that our estimates are not prone to the issues identified in recent work by Stephens and Yang

(2014) who found that the IV return to education was not significantly different from zero when

controls such as school quality specific to the U.S. state and year were included in the IV

framework. To address this, we include three variables to account for school quality within each

province and birth cohort: the annual per-capita spending by the provincial government on

education, the annual per-capita number of schools in the province, and the annual per-capita

number of teachers in the province. In a separate model, we include region-level trends, again

designed to address the critique of Stephens and Yang (2014). Finally, since we are concerned

about potential within-province correlation of the errors, we calculate standard errors using a

Wild cluster bootstrap procedure – since Canada has only ten provinces, Cameron et al. (2008,

2015) suggest this is the appropriate clustering approach.

       The second row of Table 2 presents OLS estimates of the impact of years of education on

the proportion of women who gave birth by a given age, as described above. For brevity, we

present only the coefficient on years of education along with p-values that were calculated using

the Wild cluster bootstrap procedure. The estimates in the second row of Table 2 are

inconclusive. While the first three, corresponding to ages 16, 17 and 18, are negative, the

remaining coefficients in this row are positive. Moreover, all estimates in the second row of

Table 2 are statistically insignificant at conventional levels. Overall, there is no clear

relationship between education and the proportion of mothers who gave birth at a young age.

       However, these regressions are descriptive in nature, and do not have a causal

interpretation, given the clear endogeneity of the education variable. Instead, it is necessary to
                                                                                                      14


find an approach that will purge the model of its endogeneity. We employ a two-stage least

squares approach that relies upon compulsory schooling laws as an instrument for educational

attainment. To begin, we estimate the first stage of the model:



Once again, p represents province, b represents cohort of birth and c represents Census year.

EDUCbpc represents the average years of education of women from a particular province, p, born

in a particular birth cohort, b, in a particular Census year, c. CSLbp represents our compulsory

schooling law instrument which is based on province-determined minimum school leaving ages

and is specific to particular birth cohorts, Xbpc represents provincial level controls mentioned

above including the three province level school quality variables mentioned and θp, μb and ψc

represent province, birth cohort and Census year fixed effects, respectively, while νbpc is the error

term. Since this specification includes province and time related fixed effects, the coefficients on

the CSL variables (λ) are identified by both variation in CSLs across provinces as well as

variation within-province over time. We specify the CSL instrument as a dummy variable equal

to one if the birth cohort may only drop out of the province’s educational system once they are

either 15 or 16 years of age, and zero otherwise.13 Again, due to the relatively small number of

clusters in our data, the Wild bootstrap clustering procedure was necessary for the two-stage

least-squares estimation approach, and this has been discussed by Davidson and MacKinnon

(2010).

           The fourth row of Table 2 reports the main finding from the first stage, which is that the

instrument induces a higher level of educational attainment, and has an acceptably small p-value.

This suggests that our sample does not suffer from a weak instrument problem within this



13
     Information on the specific timing for changes in these laws is presented in Appendix Table 1.
                                                                                                                    15


framework.14       This is a substantive improvement over the existing literature, which was unable

to find a workable first stage with American and Norwegian data. Furthermore, our estimates

are similar to other papers that have used the Canadian Census to explore the relationship

between compulsory schooling laws and educational attainment.15 We investigate our first stage

estimates in more detail shortly.

         Our second stage results are presented in the third row of Table 2, and differ substantially

from the corresponding OLS estimates directly above them. Looking across the third row,

education has no significant effect on having had a child by the age of 16, but there is a negative

and statistically significant effect of having a child by age 17 or 18. In particular, our estimates

imply that an additional year of education reduces the fraction of teen births at these ages by

roughly two and three percentage points respectively, which translate proportionally to one-third

and one-half relative to the dependent mean. Beyond this point – having a child by 19 or later –

the negative impact of education disappears, as the remaining coefficients in this row are

statistically indistinguishable from zero. Appendix Table 2 mirrors Table 2, but includes region-

specific trends to further address the Stephens and Yang (2014) critique. Again, we find

evidence of a strong first stage relationship between our compulsory schooling law instrument

and years of formal education. More to the point, we find that CSL-induced education reduces

fertility only at ages 17 and 18, as before, which is consistent with an incarceration effect of

education on fertility. While the implied magnitudes are somewhat smaller than in Table 2, the

pattern is very similar.

         The consistent pattern of estimates presented in Table 2 and Appendix Table 2 suggests

that education does not have a permanent, causal impact on the fertility patterns of young

14
   As before, the standard errors and related p-values for the first stage were determined using a Wild bootstrap
clustering procedure.
15
   Specifically, our estimates are similar to those presented by Oreopoulos (2007, 2008).
                                                                                                     16


women. Although raising the drop-out age does effectively compel students to obtain more

education, a significant causal impact of this change is only evident one or two years after the

students are permitted to leave school. We interpret these results as being supportive of an

incarceration effect of education. If young women were postponing their fertility in order to

maximize the return to their increased education, then the IV results would be significantly

negative well after they had exited school. Instead, the results suggest that there is – at best –

two years during which fertility is lower for compliers, and then this effect expires. This is

consistent with an incarceration effect where compliers are constrained in having children while

in school, but are seeking to have children almost as soon as they are able to leave school. In the

case where the law permits a woman to leave school at the age of 14, given the time necessary to

find a mate as well as a gestation period of 9 months, women intent on having children relatively

soon after they leave school would report doing so by the age of 16 or 17. By comparison,

compliers who are also seeking to begin a family as quickly as possible once they leave school at

the age of 16 would be less likely to have children by the age of 17 or 18, but equally likely to

have had a child by the age of 19 or 20. This is precisely what the two-stage least squares results

show us.

       To further consider the incarceration effect implied by Table 2, Table 3 presents more

detail on the impact of our instrumental variable—whether a province requires a student to

remain in school until 15 or 16 years of age – on various levels of educational attainment.

Specifically, the table seeks to determine the effect on the probability of completing a particular

grade level; this is accomplished by running the following regression:
                                                                                                     17


Once again, p represents province, b represents cohort of birth and c represents Census year.

(Percent Who Completed Grade G)bpc represents the proportion of women from a particular

province, p, born in a particular birth cohort, b, in a particular Census year, c, who completed a

particular grade level, denoted by “G”. In the table, “G” ranges from grade 7 to at least one year

of college. CSLbp represents our compulsory schooling law instrument which is based on

province-determined minimum school leaving ages and is specific to particular birth cohorts,

Xbpc represents provincial level controls mentioned above including the three province level

school quality variables mentioned and θp, μb and ψc represent province, birth cohort and Census

year fixed effects, respectively, while νbpc is the error term.

        As seen in Table 3, the instrument increases educational attainment where it is expected

to do so, if indeed it is operative – that is, a higher dropout age has a heterogeneous impact on

the probability of completing different levels of education. The first four columns of the table

demonstrate that the instrument has a positive effect on the probability of completing grades 7

through 10. The first row of the table shows that over ninety percent of the women in our sample

completed these grades. The instrument has a statistically significant effect whose magnitude is

large: our increase in drop-out ages is associated with a roughly six- to seven-percentage point

increase in the probability of completing these grades. The fifth column of the table shows that

there is also a significant impact on the probability of completing the eleventh grade. Roughly

83 percent of the women in our sample completed this grade, and our instrument is associated

with a five-percentage-point increase in the likelihood of completing this grade.

        The results in the first five columns of Table 3 suggest that the increase in the drop-out

age did increase educational attainment in these particular grades. And this result is not

unexpected: since students are at least sixteen years old once they have completed grade eleven,
                                                                                                   18


the results suggest that the instrument has had an effect on grade completion up to the point

where it is legally binding. However, once the instrument is no longer legally binding, its effect

is negligible. The last two columns show that the instrument did not have a statistically

significant effect on the completion of high school, and actually had a negative effect on the

completion of a year of post-secondary education.

       Taken in conjunction with the results from Table 2, the findings in Table 3 suggest that

the fertility patterns of young women match well with the grade completion patterns of young

women. As the legally-mandated drop-out age increased, this significantly increased the grade

completion rates up to grade eleven (the last grade where these laws are generally binding).

Once these laws were no longer binding, their effect on educational attainment was diminished.

And once the effect of the law was diminished, the results in Table 2 suggest that the propensity

to conceive a first child increased right away. Once a female student leaves grade eleven, she is

at least seventeen years old. If she were to seek to conceive a child as soon as she left school

(but refrain from conceiving while she was attending school), then we would expect to see the

results that are evident in Table 2. Compared to a woman who was permitted leave school at

fourteen, a woman required to attend school until she was sixteen should exhibit a lower

propensity to have a child by seventeen or eighteen (given the nine-month gestation period for a

child), but an equal likelihood of conceiving a child by the age of nineteen. All of our various IV

specifications confirm this result.

       Finally, we present estimates of the impact of education on the total number of children

conceived by various young ages in Table 4 and Appendix Table 3. The evidence in Table 2

demonstrated that additional education induced by changes in compulsory schooling laws

temporarily delayed the first child conceived by a young woman, but Table 2 does not address
                                                                                                   19


fertility patterns beyond the first child. That is, Table 2 and Appendix Table 2 report evidence

on the extensive margin for fertility, but Table 4 and Appendix Table 3 report evidence on the

intensive margin for fertility. The models estimated are identical in method and specification to

those presented in Table 2, but now the dependent variable is the number of children, rather than

whether a woman has any children by various given ages. In both tables, we find evidence that

CSL-induced education reduces the number of children, but only at ages 17 and 18, which is

consistent with our earlier models and again consistent with an “incarceration” effect of

schooling on teen fertility.

5. Conclusion

        The childbearing tendencies of young women have long been a matter of policy concern,

and although the literature has explored different factors that might impact this outcome, there

has not yet been a documentation of the causal effect of education on the fertility of young

women. Broadly, there are two theories which have different predictions for the way in which

education could impact childbearing for young women. First, “time-use” theories emphasize the

“incarceration effect” of education, and suggest that spending more time in school leaves less

time for other activities, and hence decreases the likelihood of childbearing. As emphasized in

this paper, this theory has strong predictions about the timing of fertility decisions as compulsory

schooling laws change: when more schooling is required, fertility decisions are temporarily

postponed, but not permanently decreased. Second, “human capital” theories argue that

increased productivity gained through additional schooling makes it more expensive to leave the

labor market to bear and raise a child. This substitution effect would have a longer-term impact

for decreasing fertility rates.
                                                                                                     20


       The results in this paper demonstrate that there is strong evidence increased educational

attainment causes fertility to decline around the margin where students may first leave school,

but not in a nearby neighbourhood of ages. Furthermore, these effects are robust to different

specifications of our model, which is critical, given the recent critique of Stephens and Yang

(2014) on the compulsory schooling law literature. Overall, we argue that the transitory negative

effect of education is consistent with an incarceration effect, but is more difficult to reconcile

with theories which argue in favour of human capital effects influencing the fertility patterns of

young women. Given our results, we can only detect a causal, negative impact of education on

fertility for women giving birth at the age of 17 or 18, which is consistent with compliers in our

data seeking to bear children almost as soon as they are permitted to leave school.

       That said, the magnitude of our findings at these ages represent substantial reductions in

teen fertility. Our main estimates imply that an extra year of schooling leads to a two and three

percentage point reduction in fertility at age 17 and 18 respectively, which are large

proportionally since mean fertility is low at these ages. To the extent that they reflect causality,

our findings imply that policies which seek to increase educational attainment in the lower tail of

the education distribution may reduce teen fertility. In turn, if reduced teen childbearing results

in better life outcomes, our findings point to a role for educational policy in improving the life

chances of lower socioeconomic status women.
                                                                                                21


References

Acemogu, Daron and Joshua Angrist (2000). “How large are human capital externalities?
Evidence from compulsory schooling laws”, NBER Macroeconomics Annual, Volume 15: 9-74.

Axelrod, Paul (1997). The promise of schooling: Education in Canada, 1800-1914. Toronto,
Ontario: University of Toronto Press.

Balakrishnan, T.R., Krotki, K. and Lapierre-Adamcyk, E. (1985). “Contraceptive use in Canada,
1984”, Family Planning Perspectives, 17(5): 209-215.

Barro, Robert and Gary S. Becker (1988). “A reformulation of the economic theory of fertility”,
Quarterly Journal of Economics, 103(1): 1-25.

Black, Sandra E., Paul J. Devereux and Kjell G. Salvanes (2005). “Why the apples doesn’t fall
far: Understanding intergenerational transmission of human capital”, American Economic
Review, 95(1): 437-449.

Black, Sandra E., Paul J. Devereux and Kjell G. Salvanes (2008). “Staying in the classroom and
out of the maternity ward: The effect of compulsory schooling laws on teenage births”,
Economic Journal, 118(July): 1025-1054.

Bronars, Stephen G. and Jeff Grogger (1994). “The economic consequences of unwed
motherhood: using twin births as a natural experiment, American Economic Review, 84: 1141-
1156.

Cameron, A. Colin, Jonah Gelbach and Douglas Miller (2008). “Bootstrap based improvements
for inference with clustered errors, Review of Economics and Statistics, 90: 414-427.

Cameron, A. Colin and Douglas Miller (2015). “A practitioner’s guide to cluster-robust
inference, Journal of Human Resources, 50(2): 317-373.

Card, David and Alan B. Krueger (1992). “Does school quality matter? Returns to education and
the characteristics of public schools in the United States”, Journal of Political Economy, 100(1):
1-40.

Chevalier, Arnaud and Tarja Viitanen (2003). “The long-run labor market consequences of
teenage motherhood in Britain, Journal of Population Economics, 16: 323-343.

Clark, Damon and Heather Royer (2013). “The effect of education on adult mortality and
health”, American Economic Review, 103(6): 2087-2120.

Davidson, Russell and James G. MacKinnon (2010). “Wild bootstrap tests for IV estimation”,
Journal of Business and Economic Statistics, 28:128-144.

Francesconi, Marco (2008). “Adult outcomes for children of teenage mothers”, Scandanavian
Journal of Economics, 110(1): 93-117.
                                                                                                 22



Goldin, Claudia and Lawrence Katz (2003). “Mass secondary schooling and the state”, NBER
Working Paper #10075.

Grenet, Julien (2013). “Is it enough to increase compulsory education to raise earnings?
Evidence from French and British compulsory schooling laws”, The Scandanavian Journal of
Economics, 115(1): 176-210.

Grogger, Jeff (1997). “Incarceration-related costs of early childbearing”, In R. Maynard (ed.)
Kids Having Kids: Economic costs and social consequences of teen pregnancy”, Washington,
DC, Urban Institute Press.

Grossman, Michael (1972). “On the concept of health capital and the demand for health”,
Journal of Political Economy, 80(2): 223-255.

Hofferth, Sandra (1987). “The social and economic consequences of teenage childbearing”, In C.
Hayes and S. Hofferth (Eds.) Risking the future: Adolescent sexuality, pregnancy, and
childbearing, Washington, DC: National Academy Press.

Hoffman, Saul D., Foster, E. Michael and Frank F. Furstenberg (1993). “Reevaluating the costs
of teenage childbearing”, Demography, 30: 1-13.

Hotz, V. Joseph and Robert A. Miller (1988). “An empirical analysis of lifecycle fertility and
female labor supply”, Econometrica, 56(1): 91-118.

Katz, Michael S. (1976). “A history of compulsory education laws”, Fastback Series, No. 75,
Bloomington, IN: Phi Delta Kappa.

Kenkel, Donald S. (1991). “Health behavior, health knowledge and schooling”, Journal of
Political Economy, 99(2): 287-305.

Klepinger, Daniel, Lundberg, Shelly and Robert Plotnick (1999). “How does adolescent fertility
affect the human capital and wages of young women?” Journal of Human Resources, 34: 421-
448.

Lang, Kevin and David Kropp (1986). “Human capital versus sorting: The effects of compulsory
attendance laws”, Quarterly Journal of Economics, 101(3): 609-624.

Lleras-Muney, Adriana (2002). “Were compulsory education and child labor laws effective?
Analysis from 1915 to 1939 in the U.S.”, Journal of Law and Economics, 45(2): 401-435.

Lleras-Muney, Adriana (2005). “The relationship between education and adult mortality in the
United States”, Review of Economic Studies, 72(1): 189-221.

Lochner, Lance and Enrico Moretti (2004). “The effect of education on crime: Evidence from
prison inmates, arrests and self-reports”, American Economic Review, 94(1): 155-189.
                                                                                                     23



Lovenheim, Michael F, Randall Reback and Leigh Wedenoja (2014). “How does access to health
care affect teen fertility and dropout rates? Evidence from school-based health centers”,
Working paper.

McCrary, Justin and Heather Royer (2011). “The effect of female education on fertility and child
health: Evidence from school entry policies using exact date of birth”, American Economic
Review, 101(1): 158-195.

Meghir, Costas and Martin Palme (2005). “Education reform, ability and parental background”,
American Economic Review, 95(1): 414-424.

Oreopoulos, Philip (2005). “Canadian compulsory schooling laws and their impact on
educational attainment and future earnings”, Analytical Studies Branch Research Paper, No. 521,
Statistics Canada.

Oreopoulos, Philip (2006). “Estimating average and local average treatment effects of education
when compulsory schooling laws really matter”, American Economic Review, 96(1): 152-175.

Oreopoulos, Philip and Kjell G. Salvanes (2011). “Priceless: The non-pecuniary benefits of
schooling”, Journal of Economic Perspectives, 25(1): 159-184.

Phillips, Charles E. (1957). The development of Education in Canada. Toronto, Ontario: W.J.
Gage and Company.

Pischke, Jorn-Steffen and Till von Wachter (2008). “Zero returns to compulsory schooling in
Germany: Evidence and interpretation, Review of Economics and Statistics, 90(3): 592-598.

Rosenzweig, Mark and T. Paul Schultz (1982). “Market opportunities, genetic endowment, and
intrafamily resource distribution, American Economic Review, 72: 803-815.

Stephens Jr., Melvin and Dou-Yan Yang (2014). “Compulsory education and the benefits of
schooling”, American Economic Review, 104: 1777-1792.

Tanfer, K. and M.C. Horn (1985). “Contraceptive use, pregnancy and fertility patterns among single
American women in their 20s, Family Planning Perspectives, 17(1): 10-19.

Willis, Robert (1973). “A new approach to the economic theory of fertility behavior”, Journal of
Political Economy, 81: S14-S64.

Wolpin, Kenneth (1984). “An estimable dynamic stochastic model of fertility and child
mortality”, Journal of Political Economy, 92: 852-874.
                                                                                                      24


     Figure 1: Schematic for Identifying Women Who Were Teenagers When They Gave Birth


                                             Household Identifier




                                               Census Family




                             (1)
               Age determined for:                                             (2)
               -Female lone parent                             Age of oldest child still present in
               -Wife or common law partner                     household
               -Female same-sex married or
               common-law partner


The differential between the age of the woman identified in box (1) and the child identified in box
(2) determines the age at which the woman in box (1) gave birth to her eldest child.
                                                                                          25


                 Table 1: Sample Characteristics of Women who
                       Did or Did Not Give Birth as Teens
                              Gave Birth as a Teen            Did Not Give Birth as a Teen
                                     28.80                               28.44
Age
                                     (3.93)                              (3.97)
                                     10.89                               13.01
Education
                                     (2.39)                              (2.91)
Annual Income                        13736                               19524
(2002 dollars)                      (12542)                             (17061)
                                      24.38                               32.65
Weeks Worked
                                     (22.16)                             (21.60)
                                      0.785                               0.640
Married
                                     (0.390)                             (0.472)

The sample consists of women between the ages of 22 and 35 born in Canada, and is drawn from
the 1976, 1981, 1986 and 1991 Canadian Censuses.
                                                                                                                                    26


                          Table 2: Impact of Education on Being a Young Mother
                                       Child         Child        Child         Child        Child         Child        Child
                                       by 16         by 17        by 18         by 19        by 20         by 21        by 22
          Mean of the                  0.025         0.047        0.086         0.140        0.205         0.274        0.347
       Dependent Variable             (0.012)       (0.019)      (0.031)       (0.046)      (0.061)       (0.072)      (0.080)
                                       -0.006        -0.006       -0.001        0.009        0.014         0.012        0.009
         OLS Estimates
                                      [0.048]       [0.116]      [0.863]       [0.138]      [0.120]       [0.214]      [0.410]
                                       -0.008        -0.020       -0.031        -0.028       -0.019        -0.024       -0.051
           IV Estimates
                                      [0.458]       [0.010]      [0.032]       [0.234]      [0.638]       [0.612]      [0.368]

                                                                                0.264
      First Stage Coefficient
                                                                               [0.002]


Coefficients are listed in each cell with p-values in brackets underneath. The sample consists of women between the ages of 22
and 35 born in Canada, and is drawn from the 1976, 1981, 1986 and 1991 Canadian Censuses. The dependent variable is the
percentage of women within each year-of-birth/province-of-birth/Census-extract cell who have had a child by a certain age
(which is listed in the column heading). There are a number of control variables in the model:(i) sets of indicator variables for
year-of-birth, province of birth, and Census from which the data were drawn; (ii) variables based on cell-specific averages,
such as: a quartic in age, the percentage of individuals in a rural setting, the percentage of individuals employed in
manufacturing, percentage of individuals married, percentage of aboriginal respondents, percentage of immigrants; (iii)
variables based on provincial-level data, including: real annual provincial school expenditures per capita, number of provincial
schools per capita, number of provincial teachers per capita, real provincial per capita spending on social programs. Standard
errors are clustered at the provincial level, and calculated using the Wild Cluster Bootstrap.
                                                                                                                                    27


    Table 3: Impact of the Instrument on Educational Attainment for Particular Grade Levels
                                                                                                       At least        At least
                     At least        At least        At least        At least         At least
                                                                                                        High            Some
                     Grade 7         Grade 8         Grade 9         Grade 10         Grade 11
                                                                                                       School          College
 Mean of the
 Dependent            0.981           0.970           0.946            0.909           0.835            0.743           0.505
  Variable

 Coefficient          0.019           0.070            0.057           0.072            0.048           0.030           -0.017
on Instrument       [<0.001]        [<0.001]         [<0.001]        [<0.001]          [0.006]         [0.070]         [0.010]

Coefficients are listed in each cell with p-values in brackets underneath. The sample consists of women between the ages of 22
and 35 born in Canada, and is drawn from the 1976, 1981, 1986 and 1991 Canadian Censuses. The dependent variable is the
percentage of women within each year-of-birth/province-of-birth/Census-extract cell who have had a child by a certain age
(which is listed in the column heading). There are a number of control variables in the model:(i) sets of indicator variables for
year-of-birth, province of birth, and Census from which the data were drawn; (ii) variables based on cell-specific averages,
such as: a quartic in age, the percentage of individuals in a rural setting, the percentage of individuals employed in
manufacturing, percentage of individuals married, percentage of aboriginal respondents, percentage of immigrants; (iii)
variables based on provincial-level data, including: real annual provincial school expenditures per capita, number of provincial
schools per capita, number of provincial teachers per capita, real provincial per capita spending on social programs. Standard
errors are clustered at the provincial level, and calculated using the Wild Cluster Bootstrap.
                                                                                                                                    28




      Table 4: Impact of Education on Total Number of Children Conceived by a Given Age
                   Number of       Number of        Number of       Number of       Number of       Number of       Number of
                    Children        Children         Children        Children        Children        Children        Children
                     by 16           by 17            by 18           by 19           by 20           by 21           by 22
  Mean of the
                      0.024           0.051            0.107           0.197           0.318           0.466           0.631
  Dependent
                     (0.007)         (0.017)          (0.035)         (0.059)         (0.086)         (0.113)         (0.140)
   Variable
     OLS              -0.009          -0.017           -0.025          -0.029          -0.037          -0.052          -0.071
   Estimates         [0.002]         [0.002]          [0.002]         [0.002]         [0.004]         [0.002]         [0.002]
                      -0.008          -0.020           -0.031          -0.028          -0.019          -0.024          -0.051
 IV Estimates
                     [0.458]         [0.010]          [0.032]         [0.234]         [0.638]         [0.612]         [0.368]




Coefficients are listed in each cell with p-values in brackets underneath. The sample consists of women between the ages of 22
and 35 born in Canada, and is drawn from the 1976, 1981, 1986 and 1991 Canadian Censuses. The dependent variable is the
percentage of women within each year-of-birth/province-of-birth/Census-extract cell who have had a child by a certain age
(which is listed in the column heading). There are a number of control variables in the model:(i) sets of indicator variables for
year-of-birth, province of birth, and Census from which the data were drawn; (ii) variables based on cell-specific averages,
such as: a quartic in age, the percentage of individuals in a rural setting, the percentage of individuals employed in
manufacturing, percentage of individuals married, percentage of aboriginal respondents, percentage of immigrants; (iii)
variables based on provincial-level data, including: real annual provincial school expenditures per capita, number of provincial
schools per capita, number of provincial teachers per capita, real provincial per capita spending on social programs. Standard
errors are clustered at the provincial level, and calculated using the Wild Cluster Bootstrap.
                                                                         29


               Appendix Table 1: Variation in the instrument

                    Initial       Dropout       Dropout         Dropout
                   Dropout        Age = 14      Age = 15        Age = 16
                     Age
                   None Until
Newfoundland         1941
                                  1942-1951     1952-1986       1987-2000

                    13 Until
    PEI              1937
                                     …          1938-1979       1980-2000

                    12 Until
 Nova Scotia         1933
                                     …              …           1933-2000

   New             None until                                    1946-1998
                                  1913-1945         …
 Brunswick           1912                                      (18 thereafter)
                   None Until
   Quebec            1942
                                  1943-1960     1961-1987       1988-2000

   Ontario                        1900-1953                     1954-2000
                   None Until
                     1906
  Manitoba          Then 12
                                  1914-1962                     1963-2000
                   until 1913
                   None Until
Saskatchewan         1908
                                  1909-1921     1922-1963       1964-2000

                   None Until
   Alberta           1909
                                  1910-1922     1922-1968       1969-2000

   British          12 Until
                                  1905-1921     1922-1988       1989-2000
  Columbia           1904
                                                                                                                                    30


                   Appendix Table 2: Impact of Education on Being a Young Mother
                                       Child        Child        Child         Child        Child         Child         Child
                                       by 16        by 17        by 18         by 19        by 20         by 21         by 22
          Mean of the                  0.025        0.047        0.086         0.140         0.205        0.274         0.347
       Dependent Variable             (0.012)      (0.019)      (0.031)       (0.046)       (0.061)      (0.072)       (0.080)
                                       -0.003       -0.003       0.003         0.013        0.019         0.019         0.018
         OLS Estimates
                                      [0.028]      [0.278]      [0.400]       [0.002]      [<0.001]      [<0.001]      [0.004]
                                       -0.008       -0.017       -0.020        -0.015        -0.004       -0.006        -0.014
          IV Estimates
                                      [0.222]      [0.008]      [0.088]       [0.516]       [0.900]      [0.886]       [0.846]

                                                                                0.495
     First Stage Coefficient
                                                                              [<0.001]


Coefficients are listed in each cell with p-values in brackets underneath. The sample consists of women between the ages of 22
and 35 born in Canada, and is drawn from the 1976, 1981, 1986 and 1991 Canadian Censuses. The dependent variable is the
percentage of women within each year-of-birth/province-of-birth/Census-extract cell who have had a child by a certain age
(which is listed in the column heading). There are a number of control variables in the model:(i) sets of indicator variables for
year-of-birth, province of birth, and Census from which the data were drawn; (ii) variables based on cell-specific averages,
such as: a quartic in age, the percentage of individuals in a rural setting, the percentage of individuals employed in
manufacturing, percentage of individuals married, percentage of aboriginal respondents, percentage of immigrants; (iii)
Region-level trends, including: a linear trend for the four “maritime” provinces (Newfoundland, Prince Edward Island, Nova
Scotia and New Brunswick), a linear trend for the two central provinces (Ontario and Quebec), and a linear for three of the four
Western provinces (Saskatchewan, Alberta and British Columbia). Standard errors are clustered at the provincial level, and
calculated using the Wild Cluster Bootstrap
                                                                                                                                    31


Appendix Table 3: Impact of Education on Total Number of Children Conceived by a Given Age
                     Number of       Number of       Number of       Number of       Number of       Number of      Number of
                      Children        Children        Children        Children        Children        Children       Children
                       by 16           by 17           by 18           by 19           by 20           by 21          by 22
  Mean of the
                       0.024           0.051           0.107           0.197           0.318           0.466           0.631
  Dependent
                      (0.007)         (0.017)         (0.035)         (0.059)         (0.086)         (0.113)         (0.140)
   Variable
     OLS               -0.008          -0.016          -0.028          -0.033          -0.046          -0.068          -0.089
   Estimates          [0.002]         [0.002]         [0.002]         [0.002]         [0.002]         [0.002]         [0.002]
                       -0.011          -0.017          -0.019          -0.011          -0.007          -0.023          -0.055
  IV Estimates
                      [0.010]         [0.014]         [0.366]         [0.726]         [0.894]         [0.652]         [0.040]



Coefficients are listed in each cell with p-values in brackets underneath. The sample consists of women between the ages of 22
and 35 born in Canada, and is drawn from the 1976, 1981, 1986 and 1991 Canadian Censuses. The dependent variable is the
percentage of women within each year-of-birth/province-of-birth/Census-extract cell who have had a child by a certain age
(which is listed in the column heading). There are a number of control variables in the model:(i) sets of indicator variables for
year-of-birth, province of birth, and Census from which the data were drawn; (ii) variables based on cell-specific averages,
such as: a quartic in age, the percentage of individuals in a rural setting, the percentage of individuals employed in
manufacturing, percentage of individuals married, percentage of aboriginal respondents, percentage of immigrants; (iii)
Region-level trends, including: a linear trend for the four “maritime” provinces (Newfoundland, Prince Edward Island, Nova
Scotia and New Brunswick), a linear trend for the two central provinces (Ontario and Quebec), and a linear for three of the four
Western provinces (Saskatchewan, Alberta and British Columbia). Standard errors are clustered at the provincial level, and
calculated using the Wild Cluster Bootstrap
