NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

EDUCATION RESEARCH AND ADMINISTRATIVE DATA
David N. Figlio
Krzysztof Karbownik
Kjell G. Salvanes
Working Paper 21592
http://www.nber.org/papers/w21592

NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
September 2015

This paper was prepared for Volume 5 of the Handbook of the Economics of Education. We appreciate
helpful comments from Rick Hanushek, Steve Machin, and Ludger Woessmann. All errors and omissions
are our own. The views expressed herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the
views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peerreviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.
© 2015 by David N. Figlio, Krzysztof Karbownik, and Kjell G. Salvanes. All rights reserved. Short
sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided
that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.

Education Research and Administrative Data
David N. Figlio, Krzysztof Karbownik, and Kjell G. Salvanes
NBER Working Paper No. 21592
September 2015
JEL No. I20
ABSTRACT
Thanks to extraordinary and exponential improvements in data storage and computing capacities, it
is now possible to collect, manage, and analyze data in magnitudes and in manners that would have
been inconceivable just a short time ago. As the world has developed this remarkable capacity to store
and analyze data, so have the world’s governments developed large-scale, comprehensive data files
on tax programs, workforce information, benefit programs, health, and education. While these data
are collected for purely administrative purposes, they represent remarkable new opportunities for expanding
our knowledge. This chapter describes some of the benefits and challenges associated with the use
of administrative data in education research. We also offer specific case studies of data that have been
developed in both the Nordic countries and the United States, and offer an (incomplete) inventory
of data sets used by social scientists to study education questions on every inhabited continent on earth.

David N. Figlio
Institute for Policy Research
Northwestern University
2040 Sheridan Road
Evanston, IL 60208
and NBER
figlio@northwestern.edu
Krzysztof Karbownik
Institute for Policy Research
Northwestern University
2040 Sheridan Road
60208 Evanston IL
USA
krzysztof.karbownik@northwestern.edu

Kjell G. Salvanes
Department of Economics
Norwegian School of Economics
Hellev. 30, N-5035 Bergen
Norway
and IZA and CEPR
kjell.salvanes@nhh.no

Education Research and Administrative Data
I. Introduction
Thanks to extraordinary and exponential improvements in data storage and
computing capacities, it is now possible to collect, manage, and analyze data in
magnitudes and in manners that would have been inconceivable just a short time ago.
From 1986 to 2007, the world’s capacity to store data increased from 539 MB per capita
to 44,716 MB per capita, with 81 percent of that growth occurring over the last seven
years of that time period (Hilbert and Lopez, 2011). Over the same time period,
computing speed increased at an even faster pace – from 0.09 million instructions per
second on general-purpose computers in 1986 to 239 million instructions per second in
2000 to 28,620 million instructions per second in 2007 (Hilbert and Lopez, 2011). And
while we do not have comparable statistics for the past seven years, computing speed and
capacity growth has surely continued unabated.
As the world has developed this remarkable capacity to store and analyze data, so
have the world’s governments developed large-scale, comprehensive data files on tax
programs, workforce information, benefit programs, health, and education. Today, in
many countries around the world, governments collect, maintain, and store an archive of
information regarding a vast range of behaviors and outcomes over an individual’s entire
lifetime (Card et al, 2010). Governments have established statistical offices to maintain
and use these data to produce official statistics about their populations. In the education
sector, governments have invested large sums of funds to develop longitudinal data
systems. For example, in the United States, the federal Department of Education has
invested over $750 million to help states build, populate, and maintain these data
systems. Much of this innovation in the United States came about as part of school
accountability systems, and accountability systems still provide the backbone for the
country’s most frequently used databases.
At the same time, because administrative data sets are established for
administrative purposes, they are not designed in a manner that makes them readily
available for scholarly activity. In many locations, the data sets are administered by
officials who also implement the policies for which these data were collected, and those
who control access to the data may not be interested in evaluation of the policies they

oversee. Moreover, the structure of administrative data – with a set of records for each
administrative event, be it a point in time record about school attendance or workforce
participation, a test score, a disciplinary infraction, a residential move, or a class taken –
offers both complications and new opportunities of statistical analysis along a vast range
of substantive areas.
While these data are collected for purely administrative purposes, they represent
remarkable new opportunities for expanding our knowledge and, through the conduct of
analyses with more comprehensive data and better sources of exogenous variation than
could typically be used in times past, challenging conventional wisdom in many areas
based on previous research utilizing other sources like surveys. Administrative data also
facilitate study of research questions that have heretofore not been possible to study
credibly at all. Researchers who are able to access these data, especially those able to link
data across administrative domains, have the ability to make extraordinary scientific
advances by exploiting the population-wide data sets combined with the increased
opportunity for identification of causal effects through exogenous variation by, for
instance, policy changes, natural disasters, and other shocks that affect some groups of
people but not others. In addition to natural experiments, these data can facilitate the
conduct of field experiments, where the subjects of short-term experiments can be
followed administratively for a longer period of time in manners that would have been
impossible or prohibitively expensive to do absent large-scale administratively-collected
data. The new insights from these studies have extraordinary potential to inform
education policy and practice, and we document some cases where new policies have
been based upon insights from these studies. Indeed, the massive growth in the quality
and diversity of economic research on educational topics is certainly related to the
increased availability of good administrative data.
This chapter describes some of the benefits and challenges associated with the use
of administrative data in education research. We also offer specific case studies of data
that have been developed in both the Nordic countries and the United States, and offer an
(incomplete) inventory of data sets used by economists to study education questions on
every inhabited continent on earth.

2

II. The benefits of using administrative data in education research
Administrative data sets are not a panacea. They are limited to certain locations,
which can decrease generalizability. It’s hard to know whether a research study from
Colombia or North Carolina or Norway or Romania will translate into different contexts.
Administrative data sets often measure variables in a manner that is conducive to
administration of programs, say, but are not necessarily ideal for research purposes. And
administrative data sets are not necessarily structured in a manner that ensures data
quality similar to the one in purpose-built research data sets.
That said, while traditional purpose-built data sets have many strengths,
administrative data sets offer a number of clear advantages for empirical research in
education. One clear advantage involves the ability to study population-level data. This
ability offers a number of remarkable new possibilities. Perhaps the most obvious
involves statistical power – in contrast to data sets with hundreds or thousands of
observations, administrative data sets with many times that number of observations mean
that it is often (depending on research design) possible to detect modest but meaningful
relationships with much greater precision than was previously possible. But there are at
least two other distinct advantages of administrative data that are afforded by the large
magnitudes of observations. One involves the ability to detect rare events that might be
useful for identification: In administrative data sets, it is often possible to make twin
comparisons or study children from three-child families; to investigate the effects of
extremely rare climatic or seismic events; or to study specific economic events like plant
closures (Card et al, 2010; Roed and Raaum, 2003). In traditional purpose-built data sets,
it is rare to have sufficient numbers of observations to be able to carry out analyses of
these types. Another major advantage of having large-scale administrative data is the
ability to study heterogeneous effects of educational policies and practice: With very
large numbers of observations, it becomes possible to see whether the effects are similar
across wildly different groups of individuals, and if they differ, how they differ, and for
whom.
Allowing for new identification strategies and for the ability to see how
generalizable results are across groups are two major advantages of the population-level
nature of administrative data, but they are not the only benefits. Because data coverage is

3

universal, it becomes feasible that one can link administrative data from one domain
(e.g., education) to data from another domain (e.g., workforce or health). While it is
certainly possible to compare across domains in non-administrative settings, doing so is
considerably more difficult because people would have to be purposefully longitudinally
followed, and because a cross-section of educational data, say, and a cross-section of
health data may only include some of the same individuals by happenstance.
Administrative data, by virtue of their population-level nature and the frequency of data
observation, allow the researcher to follow individuals or entities over time, so that there
is a panel structure to the data.
Administrative data sets also provide novel types of variables typically not found
in non-administrative data (Einav and Levin, 2013). They can offer new opportunities,
for instance, to look at measures of delinquency, of changing geographical location, of
social networks, and of health instances that are nearly impossible to study in any other
manner. The real-time nature of administrative data also provides new opportunities to
study the effects of educational policies and practices that are very recent; and offers the
chance for researchers to make their scholarship much more relevant to the specific
policy decisions that policymakers must make right away than are studies that make use
of retrospective information (Einav and Levin, 2013). And of course, natural experiments
need not be rare events to be better-studied using administrative data sets: Because
natural experiments are unannounced, and often occur via chance or quirks, it is very
difficult to set up a prospective study that will permit the evaluation of a natural
experiment; with administrative data that cover a population and that are recorded
regularly, it is much more feasible to ex post identify and study these natural experiments
(Roed and Raaum, 2003).
The preceding description of advantages of administrative data makes clear the
benefits of these data for identifying causal effects. But these data are also highly
beneficial for the identification of structural parameters of human behavior for multiple
reasons. First of all, the population-level nature of administrative data means that these
data are representative of a given population. In addition, the administrative data, through
the variety of records across a set of domains, both simultaneously and over-time, allows
the structural analyst with the opportunity to simultaneously model a set of complex

4

relationships that would almost surely not be possible to uncover using retrospectivelycollected data (Roed and Raaum, 2003). The lack of a specific structure of administrative
data can also facilitate reduced-form analyses, because data that are recorded as a series
of observations but without a distinct structure can be rearranged to build rectangular
panel data sets that have precisely the properties that are more ideal for the specific
empirical task at hand (Eivan and Levin, 2013).
Another benefit of administrative data is that data quality is likely to be simply
better than retrospective data collection. Rather than ask people whether they participated
in a given program twenty years ago, scholars who make use of administrative data can
observe directly whether the individuals participated – according to the authorities who
paid for the participation and therefore had a strong interest in correctly recording the
occurrence! Also because of the mandatory nature of participation in the activities that
generate administrative data, these data are much less likely to suffer from attrition
problems or non-response problems than are data collected through voluntary means
(Card et al., 2010). Likewise, administrative data are likely to be less subject to overreporting or under-reporting of key variables.
Administrative data also facilitate the study of intergenerational issues. It is
possible, at least in some contexts, to match children’s administrative records to that of
their parents, and even grandparents. While it is certainly possible to purposefully follow
families longitudinally, the risk of attrition is surely greater when attempting to move
from one generation to the next than if it is possible to directly match individuals using
administrative means (Roed and Raaum, 2003). And, in the case of questions that require
a long amount of time to study in real time (e.g., intergenerational isssues), the time
horizon over which intergenerational questions may be studied can be shrunk
considerably with administrative data.
Using administrative data has major practical value as well. Importantly, different
countries have extremely different policy environments. While it is possible that in some
circumstances, a study conducted in Denmark would be just as relevant to Chile as would
be a study conducted in Chile, or vice versa, there are many cases – because of different
institutions and different populations – where it makes the most sense to study a specific
question in the location where the policy environment is what the researcher most wishes

5

to study. And, of course, this demonstrates the real benefit of comparative work across
jurisdictions: If a result is similar across very different populations or very different
policy environments, this lends additional credence to the idea that the result is general.
Likewise, we can learn a lot from studying how different are the outcomes in
jurisdictions where the policy environment is very different from one another. In sum,
some research is transferrable and we can learn a lot from work done in other countries,
but other research is best conducted locally, suggesting a benefit to many countries
developing, maintaining, and sharing with researchers their administrative data (Card et
al., 2010).
In summary, administrative data are more comprehensive than are purpose-built
survey data, and can be collected with frequently far more accurate information.
Furthermore, the costs of conducting research with administrative data are much lower as
well, at least once the data systems are developed. Once data structures are established,
linking and extracting more records from administrative data cost only the time of the
programmer, and the marginal cost of adding additional individuals or periods of data to
the analytical sample is extremely small, suggesting remarkably large economies of scale
associated with administrative data (Roed and Raaum, 2003). While there are obviously
many important roles for purpose-built survey data – not least the fact that only with
purpose-built data it is possible to study precisely the questions that one wishes to study
in exactly the manner in which one wishes to study them – it is also evident that
administrative data offer numerous new opportunities to conduct research on questions
that were previously impossible to study, or at least to study so well. Indeed,
administrative data and survey data, while sometimes substitutes, can frequently be
considered complements, as when administrative data can reduce the set of questions that
need to be answered via surveys, or when administrative data can be used to serve as a
check on the reliability of retrospective information collected via surveys (Roed and
Raaum, 2003). Administrative data can also be thought of as complementary to the
conduct of field experiments, as the costs of tracking and following up with field
experiment participants are much lower, and the data frequently much better, when the
field experiments can be linked with data collected by governments for administrative
purposes (Card et al., 2010). For all of these purposes, having a high degree of access to

6

administrative data makes a wide range of empirical studies in education more feasible
and more believable.
III. Case studies
The Nordic countries, notably Denmark, Sweden, Norway, Finland and to some
extent Iceland, established administrative registers in the mid-1960s. When populationwide social security systems were established, there was a need for a unique personal
identifier in order to follow people across jobs and other labor market states and collect
information on earned pension points. These population-wide identifiers were then
adopted for all administrative registers from birth registers to cause of death registers, and
included in registers covering education and labor market participation, as well as for
linking members of families together. The core of these registers is thus the universal
system for identification numbers covering everybody from date of birth (or immigration)
and identical across all administrative units. The identification number system was based
on the 1960 census and for some of the countries also local (municipality level) registries
of populations. This also implies then that people born several decades prior to 1960 are
covered. And for instance for Norway, a job has been done more recently to uncover time
and place of birth, and for some registers and cohorts also parental background.
The Nordic countries have established mechanisms to share these data with
members of the research community for specific research projects, and several research
groups in each country have now access to portions of the register data linking some of
these data sets depending on the focus of research.1 In the case of each research project,
both the administrative units who administer the data as well as the national Data
Inspection Authority must consent to the use and matching of registers based on a
detailed application procedure. Since the registers contain sensitive and very private
information, the national statistical offices link the registers for research purposes and
provide identification numbers for researchers that are different from the actual
administrative identification numbers.

1

This overview focus on registers used for research with a focus on education in wide sense and a lot of
register based research using Norwegian data is not included. For instance, Roed and Raaum (2003)
describe the collection of registers for one research group focusing mainly on labor market outcomes.

7

There are some common core data sets in all the Nordic countries such as family
links, several education registers for test scores at different levels, completed education
etc., and labor market outcomes and income. The countries do, however, differ to some
degree when it comes to, for instance, availability and access to health data, vital
statistics, etc. The Nordic countries also differ in terms of how far back in time data sets
are linked and available for potential research use. Of course, being data collected for
administrative purposes, when data are available to study the introduction of a given
program or policy, it is generally by good fortune rather than prospective design, and it’s
also the case that many policy programs are unique to each country.
In this section we offer three case studies of some of the data potentially available
to researchers in different jurisdictions, and how they have been used. Our case studies
are two Nordic countries – Norway and Sweden – as well as the state of Florida. These
are not intended to be complete overviews, but are rather examples of some
representative uses of administrative registers. When appropriate, we also mention some
complementary work conducted outside of the countries featured in the case studies.

A. Norway
Most of the research using register based data sets in Norway have exploited the
joint advantages of access to long panels of data combined with parental background and
child outcomes along many dimensions, and the fact that population-wide data provides
the opportunity of using policy reforms back in time for identifying causal effects. In
education research, one example of this strategy is assessing the causal effect of parental
education on children education exploiting a mandatory school reform for parents (Black,
Devereux and Salvanes, 2005a). In this paper, a parent cohort from the late 1940s to the
late 1950s and their children are used to estimate the intergenerational transmission of
education, using the panel structure of the data as well as the family links. In addition, a
mandatory school reform rolled out across 700 municipalities in a period of ten years for
the parental generation, which is used to identify the causal effect of the educational
transmission across generations. Due to the population wide data set, the analysis could

8

also be undertaken for different education subgroups, for instance whether mothers or
fathers or both were affected by the reform, and for different education levels.2
Family links for the whole population combined with the long term panel
structure following people from birth to adulthood have also been essential in the recent
research using register data in Norway and the other Nordic countries. Examples of this
line of research is Black, Devereux and Salvanes (2005b, 2007). Both these papers study
family dynamics in the sense of the effect of family size and birth order, or child health
on a set of long term outcomes in education and the labor market.. Both papers need to
match long term outcomes from a large set of registers measuring adult outcomes, such
as several measures of education (years of education, completing high school, college
attendance), as well as outcomes in the labor market including working and annual
earnings. In Norway, a person register that links family members to one another by
relationship facilitates the study of questions such as birth order effects by family size
(Black, Devereux and Salvanes, 2005b). Black, Devereux and Salvanes (2007) further
use a register of twins, including monozygotic twins, to identify the effects child health
on long term outcomes. For child health birth weight was used which required merging in
the Norwegian birth registry. Bharadwaj, Loken and Neilson (2013) use a very similar
data set to assess the effect on test scores in school of medical treatment just after birth
for just above or just below very low birth weights.
Early investment and long term outcomes has been another important part of the
agenda for Norwegian researchers using these data sets – especially using family policies
for identification. One of the obvious advantages of using the Norwegian data register
data is that since the data goes long back, many of the family policies and education
policies which were part of the developing welfare state can be analyzed. A notable
example of this approach is Havnes and Mogstad (2011) who study the long run effects
on children’s education and labor market outcomes by exploiting the fact that a day care
reform was rolled out across municipalities in the late 1970s and early 1980s. Similarly,
Bettinger, Haegeland and Rege (2013) investigate a program that increased parents’
incentives to stay home with children under the age of three. They assess the effect on

2

See Bjorklund and Salvanes (2011) for an overview of the international literature on the intergenerational
mobility of education, also discussing other identification strategies.

9

older siblings’ 10th grade GPA, and find support for a positive effect that seems to be
driven by mother’s reduced labor force participation. Another reform used for identifying
the effect of even earlier investment in children on adult outcomes, is an extension of a
maternity leave program that came into force on July 1, 1977. This sharp cutoff in
eligibility depending on the exact date of birth is well-suited for a regression
discontinuity design approach (Carneiro, Loken and Salvanes, 2014), and here especially
the value of large population-level data is on display, as one requires very large data sets
in order to execute very data intensive non-parametric approaches. Interestingly, fairly
strong effects on children’s medium and long term outcomes were found for staying
longer home after birth with the mother. On the other hand, analyzing extensions of the
maternity leave reform of up to one year fully covered leave, and using the same
estimating strategy does not seem to give a positive effect on children’s outcomes (Dahl,
Loken, Mogstad and Salvanes, 2013). There clearly seem to be decreasing returns also to
this input in the production function of children.
Several other strategies have been exploited to assess the effect of early
investment, especially related to the effect of parental income, on in-school education
outcomes, and a variety of long-run outcomes. Rege, Telle and Votruba (2011) evaluate
the effect on children’s test score in middle school using job loss from mass lay-offs for
identification. They find an asymmetry in the effect of father’s and mother’s job loss – a
negative effect on grade point average in 9th grade for father’s job loss and a positive
effect of mothers. The authors interpret their results as not an effect of income but of
distress form job loss which is strongly negative for men. Black, Devereux, Loken and
Salvanes (2013) analyze the effect of child care subsidies on children’s long term
education using a sharp discontinuity in the price of childcare in Norway. They find
significant positive effect of the subsidies on children’s middle school performance. This
suggest a positive shock of disposable income on children’s school performance.
Carneiro, Lopez-Garcia, Salvanes and Tominey (2014) use very similar data to assess the
effect of timing and possible dynamic complementarities of parents income on children’s
short term and long term outcomes both in completed years of education and
performance in the labor market. The rich data provides an opportunity to use non-

10

parametric methods, and supports findings that not only the discounted life time income
but also timing matter, which supports the dynamic complementarities hypothesis.
Since the early 2000s grades in high school and middle school have been
available as well as national tests for some years in primary school. The register of school
grades combined with school resources and information on teachers have been exploited
to answer a more traditional questions in the literature on the economics of education.
Leuven and Ronning (2011) use grades in middle school to study the effect of class size
on students’ achievement exploiting a version of the Maimonides rule, while Haegeland,
Kirkeboen, Raaum and Salvanes (2011) use the same pupil performance register, but a
wider school resource measure and different identification strategy – a local hydro power
plant tax. Both find small effects of resource use on children’s school performance.
Thanks to the population-wide register data comprising all pupils at a grade level, peer
effects may be identified. Leuven and Ronning (2014) use the same performance register
but add in detailed information on school grade mixing. They find positive effects on
pupils mixed with older peers. Black, Devereux and Salvanes (2011) exploit this and
assess the effect of the quality of peers using within school changes across years in the
composition of pupils. Using data going longer back in time, they are able to assess the
long term peer effects. In another paper, Black, Devereux and Salvanes (2013) analyze
the role of school starting age on cognitive outcomes such as IQ tests for boys at age 18,
and for longer-run outcomes such as educational attainment, teenage pregnancy, and
earnings. The important issue in this literature is to separate school starting age from test
age. Exploiting variation in the mapping between year and month of birth and the year
the military test is taken, allowed the analysis to distinguish the effects of school starting
age from pure age effects. Findings provide evidence for a very small positive effect of
starting school younger on IQ scores measured at age 18. In contrast, they find evidence
of much larger positive effects of age at test, and these results are very robust.
Another well-studied area in the economics of education where long panels of
register data may be helpful in making progress is in answering the seemingly simple
question of what are the returns to education? Exploiting Norwegian population panel
data with nearly career long earnings histories, a detailed picture of the causal
relationship between schooling and earnings over the life cycle can be analyzed (Bhuller,

11

Mogstad, and Salvanes, 2013). These authors estimate internal rates of returns over lifetime earnings from age 17 to the mid-60s for many cohorts, and make use of a direct
measure of life-time earnings instead of approximating earnings using one year or an age
groups, and thus, avoiding the problems of Mincer life-cycle bias. When doing so, they
find evidence that the estimated returns to schooling are biased downward.
Administrative data have already been in use, in particular in the Scandinavian
countries, for some years, and the enhanced knowledge from these studies have already
informed policies and we are starting to see the fruits of these new insights in active
policies. In Norway, the most striking example is a strong focus that politicians have
recently put on pre-school or early investment in children. As a part of a surge in the
interest in early investment in children and children outcomes, the focus among
researchers in Norway has been to exploit the possibility for assessing long-term
outcomes in education and the labor market. Both the effect of maternity leave, a daycare
roll out for preschool children as well as other programs increasing for instance parents
time use in preschool children, have painted quite a consistent picture of the importance
of early investment for medium and long term cognitive outcomes. These findings –
together with the international evidence – have informed the public debate and later led to
policy proving stronger incentives for more resource use in for instance preschools in
Norway. Different from the system in the United States, in the Scandinavian countries the
way that this type of research may penetrate the public debate and also inform the
ministries and politicians, is mainly through forming groups of academic “experts” in a
particular area. The “experts” document the new insights from research in the area, and
write a report to the Government. In this case a group of experts, including economists
who do research on early investment using administrative data, drafted a review of the
findings and also came up with concrete suggestions for how to improve both the
coverage and quality of preschools in Norway (NOU 2010:8). Based on reports like this a
white paper will be written to the Parliament with suggestion of a law change or
suggestion for reallocation of money to preschools. There are also several other examples
for Norway of how new research based on administrative data informs politicians and
leads to law changes outside the area of education, for instance from newly gained
information on how the labor market functions.

12

B. Sweden
The Swedish data infrastructure is constructed in a very similar way to Norwegian
data described in the section above. The data comes from local and national registers and
is maintained by municipalities and Statistics Sweden. Each Swedish resident is assigned
a unique and permanent identification number at the time of their birth and each
immigrant is assigned a similar number if they immigrate to Sweden for more than 6
months.3 These unique numbers are recorded in every administrative database, be it local
or national, and allow merging different registers together. They are also used in surveys
and experimental studies (Meghir and Palme, 2005; Hinnerich, Hoglin and Johannesson,
2011; Fredriksson, Ockert and Oosterbeek, 2013; Golsteyn, Gronqvist and Lindahl, 2014;
Jalava, Joensen and Pellas, 2015)4.
Historically Sweden conducted only population censuses at national level and
maintained birth and death records at parish level. Similar to Norway, this changed in the
1960s when Statistics Sweden (SCB) started building their registry data. Today SCB
maintains four core registers that together contain more than 50 different thematically
focused sub-registers. These four core data sets cover population (e.g. employment or
education registers), activity (e.g. earnings or pupils registers), real estate (e.g. prices or
GIS registers) and business (e.g. patent or schools registers). In addition to these SCB
registers, the National Board of Health and Welfare maintains more than 70 registers with
individual level medical diagnoses5. The registers are accessible to research community
through Statistics Sweden, various research institutes (e.g., the Research Institute in
Industrial Economics, or IFN) or governmental agencies (e.g., the Institute for Evaluation
of Labour Market in Education Policy, or IFAU). Access is granted on project-by-project
basis and each application undergoes detailed investigation. Different registers are
merged by SCB and researchers obtain data sets with a new unique, but randomly
generated, individual identifiers.
3

When the system was created in the 1960s all the living Swedes were also assigned unique identifiers
retrospectively.
4
Jalava, Joensen and Pellas (2015) evaluate short term effects of experimental intervention in Stockholm
schools, and their subsequent research will merge in registry data to study longer-run outcomes.
5
Similar data exist in a number of locations including Manitoba (Currie et al., 2010) and Denmark
(Dalsgaard, Nielsen and Simonsen, 2014).

13

Due to security and data management reasons SCB maintains different
educational databases under different “big registers”, and hence for a given project these
need to be merged with one another. For instance, Fredriksson, Ockert and Oosterbeek
(2013) investigate the long-run effects of class size, and their baseline data set is actually
a purpose-built longitudinal survey run by the Department of Education at Gothenburg
University. However, since the subjects in this survey all have unique identification
numbers it is possible to link them back to other administrative data sources. In
particular, the authors add data on class size from class registers, parental information
from multigenerational registers, medium-term achievement from compulsory school
pupil registers and military draft registers, completed education from education registers,
earnings from statement of earnings registers and wages from wages and staff for public
and private sector registers. On the one hand, this decomposition illustrates the
complexity of the data structure and emphasizes the crucial role of unique personal
identifier. On the other hand, such a complex structure enhances the security of the very
sensitive personal information and improves the management of the data.
The long panels and retrospective assignment of unique individual identifiers
allow studying lifecycle and multigenerational effects also in the case of Sweden. Meghir
and Palme (2005) study the effects of comprehensive schooling reform that among other
elements increased the length of compulsory schooling, and was introduced in the late
1940s. They utilize survey data on two cohorts that are then linked to registry data which
provide individual educational attainment and earnings. Meghir, Palme and Schnabel
(2012) utilize the same reform, richer data set and show that it not only reduces the
criminal activity of the treated generation but also of their children. Even more data
demanding endeavor is undertaken by Palme et al. (2015) where they combine Swedish
registers and historical survey records to estimate the intergenerational persistence of
human capital, measured by educational attainment, across four generations.
Both Norway and Sweden share two very unique and purpose built data sets:
military assessment and adoptions. The former one provides physical, cognitive and noncognitive assessment of all males at the age of 18-19 (Lundborg, Nilsson and Rooth,

14

2014)6. The latter one contains all persons who were born in Sweden between 1962 and
1996 and adopted by both parents (Bjorklund, Lindahl and Plug, 2006; Holmlund,
Lindahl and Plug, 2011) 7 . Together with the ability to link these data to population
registers they provide social scientists with extremely powerful analytical tool. There are
also several other purpose built survey data sets in Sweden. Fredriksson, Ockert and
Oosterbeek (2013) use the Gothenburg University panel mentioned above containing
cognitive test scores for 13 year olds. Golsteyn, Gronqvist and Lindahl (2014) use the
Stockholm Birth Cohort Study, which contains information on children’s time
preferences at age 13. In the paper the authors link this survey to administrative data and
conclude that adolescent time preferences predict outcomes up to five decades later in
life.
Although Sweden, and likewise Norway and Denmark, seem like ideal places for
empirical studies on the intersection of family, health, education and labor markets, there
are still many challenges in carrying out this research in reality. The two main obstacles
in educational research are that authorities tend to be reluctant to allow the conduct of
field experiments, as well as the lack of longitudinal assessment data. Scandinavia,
including Sweden, lags far behind the United States in the implementation of the field
experiments related to student incentives (Fryer, 2014), student support (Cook et al.,
2014), teacher incentives (Imberman and Lovenheim, 2015), school choice (Deming et
al., 2014) or school management (Fryer, 2014). Given the problems with tracking
students over time in the United States, the Scandinavian administrative data
infrastructure is ideal to study long-run consequences and potential positive and negative
spillovers of policy interventions, and field experiments are current gold standard in
policy evaluation.
That said, the Scandinavian countries do have a fair degree of assessment data of
late. Sweden, similar to Denmark and Norway, introduced in recent years some form of
longitudinal assessments in their compulsory schools. The longitudinal assessment data
in Sweden began in 2009 and comprise of tests given in grades three, six and nine. The
6

Since the mid 2000s the draft is no longer mandatory in Sweden so the data does not provide information
on the whole population. The draft continues to be mandatory in Norway. Finland has also mandatory
military draft (Kerr, Pekkarinen and Uusitalo, 2013).
7
The register is now expanded to cover more recent birth cohorts.

15

assessment data in grades 3 and 6 have not been widely used in research thus far 8. Before
this reform Swedish students were only assessed at the age 16. These data on compulsory
school exit exams are available since 1988, and have been often used, for example by
Almond, Edlund and Palme (2009) who study the effects of prenatal exposure to
radioactive fallout on school outcomes. It is worth noting that unlike in the United States
all tests in Scandinavian countries are low stakes and the Swedish Education Agency
explicitly states that they “… are not examination, but should be part of the teacher
information about student’s knowledge…” In fact, except for Stockholm and Malmo,
these virtually do not matter for high school admissions as children are guaranteed a
place in their closest high school (Karbownik, 2014).
Sweden and Denmark, unlike Norway, have also implemented a large-scale
refugee placement policy in a nearly random way. The placement assignment could be
seen as random conditional on observables because the individual could not choose their
first place of residence and there was no direct interaction between a refugee and
placement officers. This does not guarantee that immigrants were randomly assigned to
neighborhoods, in fact they were not, but the placement selection was based on
observable attributes of immigrants and these are all available in administrative data. This
policy has been extensively studied not only for its labor market consequences for
immigrants themselves (Edin, Fredriksson and Aslund, 2003) but also for the educational
consequences of their children (Aslund et al., 2011)9.
Sweden is also the only one of the Scandinavian countries that introduced some
form of charter schools. Unlike in the US these have not been introduced with a random
component and allow only for differences-in-differences type of identification.
Sandstrom and Bergsrton (2005) study the effects of the reform, and the competition it
induces, on quality of public schools. Bohlmark and Lindahl (2015) study its long-run
consequences. Hensvik (2012) utilized the same reform to understand how competition
affects teacher mobility and wages. Wikstrom and Wikstrom (2005) document that
8

Raw scores are not kept by the authorities and for the early schooling test it is only the pass/fail indicator
that is recorded in the registers. Although, from research perspective the more continuous score measure is
very valuable this is a clear example where the research needs do not cross with the administrative needs,
and indeed this data serves primarily administrative purposes for which a binary coding is sufficient.
9
The Danish study uses the placement policy to study the effects of early exposure to neighborhood crime
on subsequent criminal behavior of the youth (Damm and Dustmann, 2014)

16

school competition leads to grade inflation, and that voucher schools inflate their
students’ grades more heavily. Sweden has also introduced two other market oriented
educational reforms that have been evaluated by researchers. The first transferred the
funding responsibilities from central government to local municipalities (Fredriksson and
Ockert, 2008). The second allowed individual level wage bargaining between teachers
and principals (Bohlmark, Gronqvist and Vlachos, 2012). Yet another school choice
reform was introduced in Stockholm in 2000, and changed the high school admission
system from one largely based on place of residence to another entirely based on
compulsory school performance i.e. change from zoning to open enrollment. Soderstrom
and Uusitalo (2010) document that the reform lead to sharp changes in student
composition in Stockholm schools, while Karbownik (2014) shows that these changes in
student quality lead to changes in teacher labor supply.

C. Florida
Due to the decentralized nature of education in the United States, there exists no
prospect of national educational data records, at least in the foreseeable future. However,
a number of states and school districts have established systems in which students can be
followed longitudinally and matched to schools and, in some cases, their teachers over
time. The three states with the longest-standing state level student longitudinal data
systems that have been widely available for researchers are Florida, North Carolina and
Texas.
Florida has maintained statewide records of student test scores that are
longitudinally comparable (initially in grades 4, 5, 8, and 10, and soon thereafter
expanded to grades 3 through 10) since the 1997-98 school year within its Education
Data Warehouse (EDW). The EDW also includes information on high school graduation,
grade retention, student attendance, disciplinary infractions, school assignments, home
language, immigrant status, disability, race/ethnicity, gender, school transcripts, and a
measure of student poverty, along with other measures. Florida assigns a unique
identification number that remains with the student no matter which school district he or
she attends within the state. Since 2001-02, Florida has linked students with their teachers

17

in each class – permitting the matching of staff databases that include teacher credentials
to their students.
A large number of papers have made use of these student-level longitudinal data
to study a wide range of research questions. For example, Chiang (2009), Figlio and
Rouse (2006), Rouse et al. (2013), and West and Peterson (2006) identify the effects of
changing school-level accountability pressure on student test performance in public
schools, and Figlio and Lucas (2004) investigate the degree to which school
accountability policies affect student sorting across schools. Sass (2006) and Booker et al.
(2011) study the effects of charter schools on test scores and later outcomes. Figlio and
Hart (2014) measure the degree to which public schools respond to the competitive
pressure associated with school voucher systems. Harris and Sass (2011) study the effects
of a variety of teacher qualifications and in-service training on teachers’ contributions to
student achievement, while Chingos and West (2012) investigate the relationship
between measured teacher value added and labor market returns when those teachers
leave teaching. Winters and Greene (2012) study the effects of a test-based promotion
policy. Schwerdt and West (2013) evaluate the role of grade configuration on student
outcomes. Burke and Sass (2013) identify classroom peer effect relationships.
The Florida Department of Education, in conjunction with other state of Florida
agencies, has successfully linked K-12 data with a variety of post-secondary data sources,
including information on post-secondary education and training, employment and
earnings records, military service and criminal justice records. These matched data sets,
known as the Florida Education and Training Placement Information Program (FETPIP),
have followed students in Florida beginning with the 1996-97 high school graduation
cohort, so earnings data are now available for individuals as late as their early midcareers. A number of important papers have been written that have linked FETPIP data to
K-12 education records. For instance, Clark and Martorell (2014) compare labor market
outcomes of students who barely passed high school graduation examinations to those
who barely failed these examinations to identify the degree to which a high school
diploma has signaling value in the labor market.10 Other papers follow people from the
education data sets into the labor market. In a particularly inventive use of these data,
10

Clark and Martorell (2014) also make use of data from Texas to perform a parallel exercise in that state.

18

Chingos and West (2012) relate teachers to students’ test scores to obtain measures of
teacher “value added”, and then observe whether teachers with higher measured value
added command higher labor market earnings in the event in which they leave public
school teaching. Both of these papers offer glimpses into the types of analyses that are
possible when it is feasible to link education records – both those of students and those of
teachers – to labor market records.
In recent years, it has become possible to track Florida students not just forward
into the labor market but also backward to early childhood program participation and
birth records. For a series of projects by Figlio, Roth and co-authors, the Florida
Departments of Education and Health have matched the birth records of all children born
in Florida between 1992 and 2002 to the school records observed by the Department of
Education. To date, over 1.6 million children’s administrative records have been matched
between agencies for these research purposes. 11 These matched data have made it
possible to study questions ranging from the educational consequences of poor neonatal
health (Figlio et al., 2014) through the effects of early interventions for autism spectrum
disorders on children’s educational outcomes (Currie et al., 2014) to the spillover effects
of having disabled siblings on children’s cognitive development (Black et al., 2014). The
earliest of these birth cohorts are, at the time of writing, old enough to have graduated
from high school, so soon it will be possible to follow children born in Florida through
their K-12 schooling career and, thanks to the FETPIP data, into post-secondary
education, the labor market, the military, and the criminal justice system.
These matched administrative data from Florida highlight some major benefits
possible by virtue of the fact that they are drawn from population-level data. Consider,
for instance, the three papers described in the preceding paragraph: None of these
research projects could have been carried out without the benefit of population-level data
because they each require large-scale data to study relatively rare events. Figlio et al.
(2014) compare twin pairs with discordant birth weights; Currie et al. (2014) study
children with autism spectrum disorders, accounting for fewer than one percent of the
11

These data sets are linked by name, date of birth, and social security number (a national identification
number). This three-factor linkage allows for much more accurate matching of data across administrative
data domains than would have occurred with fewer linking factors (e.g., name and data of birth alone). See
Figlio et al. (2014) for details.

19

population; and Black et al. (2014) identify the effects of disabled siblings by comparing
the outcomes of first and second-born children in three-plus-sibling families. Traditional
surveys that follow children and families longitudinally are not equipped to study rare
occurrences such as these. With population-level data, many new research programs can
be launched at a fraction of the cost of purpose-built survey-based databases, and still
more research programs that were previously infeasible or impossible to undertake are
now possible to carry out.
These Florida data provide some distinct advantages over data sets observed in
other jurisdictions. The ability to follow students longitudinally, to observe frequent
assessment data and other student outcomes, and to link students to teachers – attributes
not found except for very recently in some European registry data – allows researchers to
study certain questions in the United States that are difficult to study in many other
jurisdictions. Now that it is possible to link school records to later labor market data, and
backward to birth and early childhood records, Florida is developing some attributes of
the registries found in northern European countries. On the other hand, linked data for
Florida children are only available for relatively recently-born children, and no
information about parents, except that observed on a child’s birth records, are currently
linkable to children in Florida. In addition, given the fact that the United States is an open
economy with high degrees of mobility across states, it is natural that there would be
considerable attrition from even the most complete records. For instance, the birth
records-school records linked data employed by Figlio et al. (2014) and others include
only 81 percent of the children born in Florida between 1992 and 2002; the remaining
children either left the state of Florida or enrolled in private schools and never were
included in the public school records. While careful checks of other data sources make
clear that virtually all of the children whom one would have expected to have been
matched between these data sets were ultimately matched, this highlights the
shortcomings of matched birth and school records in the United States context.
Nonetheless, the data from Florida highlight some of the limitless possible populationlevel research programs that matched administrative data sets could facilitate in the
United States and around the world.

20

As in the Scandinavian context, research using administrative data from Florida
has led to substantial policy changes. Noteworthy examples include how school voucher
policy in Florida (and in several other states in the United States) has been influenced by
research documenting the effects of school vouchers on selection, participation, and
competition; and how the state changed its compensation policies regarding the
accumulation of teacher credentials (in particular, National Board Certification) once
research identified the degree to which the attainment of this credential influenced – or
failed to influence – teacher performance in the classroom. These examples, coupled with
other cases both in Florida as well as around the country, such as how North Carolina
maintained an early childhood enrichment program when presented with research
evidence documenting its efficacy (Cite, XX), or how Washington changed its teacher
retention policies after research showed the relatively limited relationship between
teacher experience and value added in the classroom (Cite, XX), demonstrate the ways in
which administrative data in education have not only led to scholarly advances but also
are beginning to result in research-driven policy and practice changes.

IV. Challenges associated with the use of administrative data
We have so far stressed the important advantages of administrative registers as
compared to survey data - fewer issues with recall and other measurement problems;
since its population-wide the data set is representative; less problems with attrition
compared to surveys that follow the sampled populations over time; less problems with
non-response; and the ability to study heterogeneous effects and rare and infrequent
events. Combined with data for public policies in the past, many credible policy
evaluations such as education policies and family policies as described above can be
analyzed. Complete family links makes it possible to exploit other “experiments” for
identification such as comparing siblings and twins as well as the use of adoptees. The
long panel structure of administrative registers makes it possible to assess the effects of
policy programs both for short and long terms outcomes across a large number of
outcomes and across many administrative unites.

21

However, there are certain limitations or restrictions related to the use of
administrative register data, and we try to distinguish between three different aspects of
restrictions as compared to surveys designed for particular research questions.

A. Limited information/less flexibility than with purpose-built surveys
Administrative registers are collected for different reasons than research, and in
particular in one area they have limitations as compared to purpose-built surveys. Very
little information on cognitive skills other than achievement and attainment or social and
behavioral skills are available in most register data. Variables that potentially are very
important in understanding for instance school choices such as motivation and attitudes
and more general psychological traits for instance as measured by Big five components
are not available. Some of these questions are available in some countries in military data
for men, but usually only for a limited number of years.
This lack of important information on, for instance, reasons for education choices
or effort is a challenge, but several new strategies are being used to mediate this
limitation. Several research groups in the Nordic countries are now combining surveys
with registers data, as well as lab experiments and randomized field experiments with
register data.
One example connected to the economics of education undertaken is in Norway,
where pupils just prior to the decision to attend high school, were surveyed on the “Big
five” personality traits and on the information about the labor market (Almas, Cappelen,
Salvanes, Sorensen, Tungodden, 2014). The idea in the project was to use incentivized
lab experiments to tease out preferences for willingness to compete, risk taking, patience
etc., together with an ability test, a survey regarding the “big five”, time use on
homework etc., and a quite intensive survey on the students’ knowledge of the labor
market and the returns to education. Parents and students provided consent to follow
these students through the education system and into the labor market, and to match to
parental background from register data. Many research questions may be analyzed using
this resource, for instance to better understand high drop-out rates. These type of
approach also facilitates field experiments in school, and then allows following pupils

22

through the education system, into the labor market. Hence, the lack of information in the
administrative data sets may be compensated in different ways.

B. Technical issues with the use of administrative registers
Depending on the country, issues of a more technical nature might be an obstacle
in the use of administrative registers. One such obstacle is the ability to match
administrative registers across administrative units. For instance, important research
topics can be analyzed by connecting school outcomes to long term outcomes such as
income and completed education, or even outcomes such as fertility, crime, and marriage.
In many countries, and notably the Nordic countries a common identification number is
utilized across all administrative units and across all registers. Furthermore, even if the
different administrative registers are collected and owned in principle by the different
units, a law for statistical usage for research purposes enables researchers to use merged
registers across administrative units. De-identified and merged data are made available
through the national statistical offices. But in many countries a unique personal
identification number either does not exist, or there are legal restrictions to merge across
administrative units12. For example, in the United States only a few states have linked
children’s social security numbers, which are used for all labor market and benefits data,
to their birth records, and in many states it is actually illegal to link social security
numbers to education records. In cases like these, it becomes extremely difficult to link
data across administrative data domains. While many states in the United States are
making strong progress in linking education and workforce data, thanks to the leadership
of the Data Quality Campaign, a national organization dedicated to promoting the
development, implementation, and use of high-quality administrative education data sets,
and other allied groups, this is a difficult and slow-going process.
Another issue is, of course, that it is hard to follow people moving to other
countries since they may change citizenship, or even if people are studying and working
abroad it is hard to follow them in terms of income or graduation. Hence, attrition of
samples might be an issue. One will be able to identify which country they move to and

12

Another legal restriction was in place, until recently, in Finland where the possibility of indirect
identification of individuals in small groups prevented researchers from using registry data in full capacity.

23

the reason for moving, but not outcomes. This is of course a limitation, but the same
limitation is shared by standard surveys. This issue is certainly compounded in countries
like the United States where people move freely and often between states but individual
states maintain their own birth records, health records, education records, and workforce
data. In recent years, it has become possible in rare circumstances to match school
records to tax data from the Internal Revenue Service in order to follow children living in
one state to adult outcomes in another state (see, e.g., Chetty et al., 2014), and we are
hopeful that more cases like that will occur in the future.
Since the administrative data sets are not designed for research in the first place,
they are not particularly well-documented (with some exceptions). This also means that
there is a big investment aspect of using these data sets as compared to more standard
surveys, for instance in the United States some of the surveys are publicly available and
very well documented. The larger research groups in the Nordic countries using several
matched registers have used the data sets over a long time and spent a considerable
amount of resources in checking the data and understanding its structure, the content of
the variables, and the changing definitions of these variables over time. Due to changes in
tax laws for instance, also the definition of earnings provided in these data sets may
change. These changes are not always easily available to outsiders of the administrative
units collecting the data. And of course, it is always possible that the administrative data
sets are incomplete or have other errors in them, because their purpose was never for
research quality but rather for recording activities such as governmental program
participation and compliance. As a consequence, these data may not have been subjected
to the same type of quality assurance/quality control that is standard in the case of data
sets collected specifically for research purposes.

C. Political issues related to anonymity
An important issue with using administrative registers is that they cannot be made
available publicly, due to security and confidentiality concerns. Given that unique
personal identifiers exist, most countries with these data sets have developed secure
systems for making them available to researchers or research groups. In the Nordic
countries (with the exception of Finland where a slightly different system is in place),

24

very similar system have been developed over time where the Statistical agencies play an
important role in merging and de-identifying data for researchers, generally through
research centers that have been through a quite extensive application procedure with data
authorities, owners of data and the national statistical offices.
For all of the Nordic countries there are several research groups with access to the
same or very overlapping collection of administrative data sets, and no research group
has the “monopoly” to certain registers. The advantage is, of course, that research can be
replicated by other researchers. This is true to an increasing degree in a number of other
countries, such as the United Kingdom, Chile, the Netherlands, and numerous states in
the US, to name a few. Governments must balance the costs associated with potential
security breaches against the very large benefits of making data available to a wide range
of researchers, who have insights and expertise in a larger set of substantive research
issues. It is imperative that researchers work diligently to ensure that they treat
administrative data with care and maintain high degree of security so that justifiably
worried stewards of administrative data can feel more confident that sharing data with
scholars provides high benefits to citizens with extremely low risks of security breaches
or other forms of negligent behavior.

V. The use of administrative data around the world
We begin this section by specifying different types of administrative data used in
educational research. In tables 1 through 4 we mostly focus on student or teacher
registries; however, we also consider principals, pre-formal schooling children and other
individuals for whom we observe administrative educational records. These tables are
divided by whether the data sets are matched or unmatched to other records, and whether
or not they are linked to surveys or experiments. Table 1 lists papers that use a single
administrative data source; table 2 lists papers that matches individuals across various
administrative data sources; table 3 lists papers that use a single administrative data
source which is matched to either survey or experimental data; table 4 lists papers that
matches individuals both across various administrative data sources and to either survey
or experiment. We group the papers by continent, country, region (state) and provide
abbreviated bibliographic information.

25

It is not our purpose to provide an encyclopedic review of all papers making use
of administrative data around the world, but we wanted to offer a very wide-ranging
sampling of the current state of the use of administrative data throughout the world. We
therefore sought to systematically survey a large number of leading economics outlets
that publish papers in the economics of education. Specifically, we browsed all articles
published or accepted for publication between January 1990 and July 2014 in the
American Economic Journal: Applied Economics, American Economic Journal:
Economic Policy, American Economic Review, Econometrica, Economic Journal,
Economics of Education Review, Education Finance and Policy, Journal of Human
Resources, Journal of Labor Economics, Journal of Political Economy, Journal of Public
Economics, Quarterly Journal of Economics, Review of Economic Studies, and Review of
Economics and Statistics, as well as all 2014 NBER Working Papers from the Education
program published until the end of July 2014. Although we recognize that this list is far
from being comprehensive, we covered 350 papers from 28 countries and all continents
except for Antarctica.
In the tables, we organize countries by regions of the world -- Europe, North
America, South America, Asia, Africa, and Oceania – and then order all papers within
country and state (region) by publication date13. It is clear that the majority of research
(published in these outlets at least) makes use of data from North America (253 papers),
and in particular the United States (240 papers). It is possible that this is a substantial
overstatement of the North American share of education economics research using
administrative data because of possible publication biases of the journals that we selected
for inclusion, but again, our charge is not to be comprehensive in our survey. A large
fraction of papers in the list make use of data from Europe (85 papers), while smaller
shares makes use of data from South America (18 papers), Africa (6 papers), Asia (4
papers), and Oceania (1 paper). Within Europe the majority of papers come from
England, Israel, Norway, and Sweden. These four countries comprise 77% of European
output. Within United States, the majority of research comes from North Carolina,
Florida, Texas, Chicago, and New York City; however, nearly half of the States in the
Union contributed at least one paper to the list, and given the large investments in data
13

We treat Israel as part of Europe for our accounting purposes.

26

infrastructure throughout the United States we expect the geographic spread to continue
in the future. That said, it is not an accident that so many papers make use of data from
North Carolina, Florida, Texas, Chicago, and New York City, as these are major U.S.
jurisdictions that facilitate research more than most. Among other countries Chile
contributed 11 papers, while Canada 9. There is also growing output based on Kenyan
data. It is also clear from tables 1 to 4 that majority of the research output utilizes only a
single administrative data source (e.g. school records) which could be related to both
limited data infrastructure and matching restrictions (e.g. in the US). At the same time it
is relatively rare that researchers are able to match individuals across multiple
administrative data sets, say birth and school records, and also to survey or experiment –
only 10 out of 350 paper we identified and primarily from outside of the US.
As stated in the introduction, the use of administrative data is a rather new
phenomenon and it has been made possible due to the increase in computational power,
decrease in storage prices and enhanced cooperation between governmental agencies and
researchers all over the world. The first papers from our list were published in Economics
of Education Review (Theobald, 1990) and in the Journal of Human Resources (Murnane
and Olsen, 1990). The former one used data from Washington, while the latter one from
North Carolina, and both papers investigated the role that different variables play in
teacher retention. In fact through the 1990s the surveyed journals published only seven
papers using administrative data and six of these were studying the teacher labor market.
One reason for the focus on teachers in the early use of administrative data is the fact that
due to bureaucracy and budgeting the records of public school employees were compiled
and stored centrally by state departments of education long before researchers expressed
interest in them, while few countries around the world systematically collected student
achievement information.
In the 2000s there was a rapid increase in the amount of scientific output using
administrative data with 114 papers published in our list. The diversity also increased and
papers used not only data on teachers and students but also on individuals pre- and posttheir schooling years. Finally, between 2010 and July 2014 the scientific journals we
surveyed have already published nearly 230 papers. This massive increase was driven
mostly by the United States, but in every year more and more countries contribute to the

27

global “data village”. The first papers in our list using European data were published in
2001 using data from Jerusalem, from South America in 2000 using Chilean data, from
Asia in 2009 using data from Beijing, and from Africa in 2009 using Kenyan data.
Akin to the examples provided in our Norway, Sweden, and Florida case studies,
we observe a substantial variation in the types of registry data used internationally. This
depends both on data infrastructure itself but also on the institutional setting in a
particular country, state or region under investigation. For example, even though Norway
has very high-quality long run data it is difficult to study the long-run effects of school
competition in this country because there is no variation in the competitive pressure faced
by different schools. Similarly, although Sweden has introduced school competition to its
institutional setting and hence it is possible to study whether such policies have long
lasting effects, it is actually impossible to look at these effects in a short-run, i.e., in a
manner comparable to the United States, because Sweden did not test its pupils using
standardized assessments. Yet another problem is the possibility to link different data
registers, and from this perspective in most states in the United States it is not possible to
study the effects of, for example, neonatal health on schooling outcomes (Table 2). The
data simply do not allow a clean match between birth records and school records due to
lack of unique personal identifier. Notable exception here is Florida that assigns their
newborns social security numbers. Useful but not perfect way around this last problem is
widely used in historical research probabilistic matching of individuals (Ferrie and Long,
2013). This method has been applied to some modern data sets like birth and school
records in North Carolina (Ladd et al., 2012) but the match rates based on these
procedures are not ideal and they are sensitive to the type of populations under scrutiny.
The examples in the paragraph above illustrate the complexity behind research
projects involving registry data but also point out to the need of both data infrastructure
and credible variation in studying economic and educational phenomena. The agenda
becomes even more complex when the research objectives involve long-run effects of
particular interventions, their spillovers or understanding the mechanisms through which
these interventions operate. In this case population-level administrative registries are
particularly essential as these research projects often involve matching subjects in field
experiments to themselves decades later (Aslund, et al., 2011) or to subjects’ siblings

28

(Black et al., 2014). Furthermore, when the goal is to elicit mechanisms through which
the policies operate then most often the survey instruments need to be applied to the
studied populations and then matched back to the original registers (Burgess et al.,
forthcoming).
Due to the institutional issues brought up in the paragraphs above researchers in
different countries seem to specialize in studying very specific questions based on the
registers that are available to them, and the policy environments that they face.
Scandinavian countries produce mostly studies that involve rather lower quality
educational measures for which they compensate with the fact that individuals can be
tracked from their birth to their death and often also across generations 14. These countries
do not have longitudinal student assessment data but are the only locations in the world
where the whole population of males undergoes physical, intellectual and emotional
evaluations at the time of entering adulthood15. On the other side of this spectrum are
countries like England or the majority of the U.S. states that have regular student
assessments but do not allow merging different databases. A few notable exceptions to
that rule are for instance Florida, Texas, Chicago, Charlotte-Mecklenburg (North
Carolina), and New York City that allow linking student records to subsequent postsecondary education (Booker et al., 2011), criminal records (Deming, 2011) or labor
market outcomes (Clark and Martorell, 2014). These are generally rare because they
require agreements and cooperation of multiple governmental agencies16. A longitudinal
data set that follows kids from birth through childhood, adolescence to adulthood is also
available for the province of Manitoba, Canada. These data are somewhat in-between
Scandinavian and United States registers because although they allow tracking
individuals longitudinally, they do not allow for more complex familial linkages or
longitudinal student assessment. There are also few data sets with longitudinal

14

A notable exception here is Finland where research community has not have until recently such a wide
access to national registers as in Denmark, Sweden or Norway.
15
The mandatory military draft has been revoked in Sweden in the mid 2000s but the data for the cohorts
1952 to 2002 can still be used. At the same time as discussed in our case studies Sweden is in the process of
rolling out longitudinal student assessments in their compulsory schooling system in grades 3, 6 and 9.
16
Note that in Scandinavia, unlike in the US, the multiple registers are handled by a single agency and even
though Department of Defense administers the military draft and Department of Education coordinates the
9th grade assessments the research proposal is submitted and processed through a single Data Inspection
Authority.

29

components outside of Scandinavia or North America. For instance, it is possible to link
birth records to schooling records in Chile (Bharadwaj, Loken and Neilson, 2013), link
birth records to death records to schooling records in Taiwan (Gimenez et al., 2013) or
link schooling interventions to long-run outcomes in Israel (Lavy, 2014).
The growth in access to administrative data across the World is crucial from the
policy point of view because it allows direct testing of external validity of particular
economic phenomena in different institutional setting. In fact we see more and more
multi-state or multi-country studies in recent years, e.g. Fryer (2014) or Bharadwaj,
Loken and Neilson (2013)17. The concern with external validity and ability to study the
same policies in multiple locations is the more important in experimental work that
necessarily focuses on rather narrow populations, but is becoming a “gold standard” in
policy evaluations. The single-country multi-site studies are important from national
policy point of view, especially in diverse countries like United States or France, because
it is not obvious that intervention which works in Chicago Public Schools or East Paris
will work in more affluent areas like Greenwich, Connecticut or Neuilly-sur-Seine.
Another broader question is whether similar policies give the same effects in culturally,
economically or institutionally different environment. In this case researchers have to rely
on rare interventions that are universal across many countries, like for example
standardized treatment of low birth weight babies. These studies are extremely valuable
because they often allow research community to understand a more fundamental
background of human social behavior. They also allow studying externalities of particular
policies interacting with different institutional environments.
In the remaining part of this section we focus on particular questions relevant to
educational research agenda, and how these have been addressed in different countries or
states. We start off with the fundamental question of how early childhood environment
affects educational, and potentially long-run outcomes. Given the advantages and
disadvantages of various administrative data sets described in the paragraphs above, it is
not surprising that this research question has been dominated by studies based on
17

There is fewer published cross-country than cross-state studies, however, we should see more and more
of the former ones coming in the next few years. Another notable example is study of Bedard and Dhuey
(2006) which combines results from Canada based on administrative data and from other countries based
on various survey data.

30

Scandinavian data (Table 2). The excellent data infrastructure in Denmark, Sweden and
Norway allows tracking individuals not only from their birth to their death but also across
multiple generations and familial connections as children are linked to their biological
parents using unique identifiers, and the parents are in turn linked to their siblings using
unique identifiers. Except for the three aforementioned Scandinavian countries early
childhood has also been studied in two other European countries: England (Almond,
Mazumder and Van Ewijk, 2014) and Germany (Dustmann and Schonberg, 2012). In
North America we have a birth order study from Indiana (Hanushek, 1992) which is the
only study from the 1990s on our list that was not focused specifically on teachers but
used an experimental population from Gary Income Maintenance Experiment merged to
children schooling records. The other papers include birth weight effects estimates from
Canada (Oreopoulos et al., 2008) and Florida (Figlio et al., 2014), in-utero pollution
exposure study from Texas (Sanders, 2012) and an influential foster care system
evaluation from Illinois (Doyle, 2007). A paper from Taiwan investigates the effects of
parental loss on children’s well-being (Gimenez et al., 2013) while a paper based on
Chilean and Norwegian data studies the role of health interventions at birth (Bharadwaj,
Loken and Neilson, 2013). Some of these papers, due to their use of administrative data,
documented new and important empirical phenomena. Figlio et al. (2014) are among the
first to document that neonatal health and parental socioeconomic status are likely
complements rather than substitutes – a common perception was rather that wealthier
parents can better compensate for lower health capital of their children than poorer
parents. Bharadwaj, Lokean and Neilson (2013) show that health interventions in
countries as different as Chile and Norway can yield fairly similar effects which boosts
the confidence that earl life interventions effectiveness is not necessarily tied to specific
institutional environment or wealth of the society.
Across different countries and institutional settings the most often studied
question seems to be the role of school technology or the education production function.
These topics range from the questions of how gender composition of classrooms
influences female school choice in Austria (Schneeweis and Zweimuller, 2012), or how
ethnic and immigrant concentration in schools affects cognitive development of children

31

in Denamrk (Jensen and Rasmussen, 2011) 18 and England (Dustmann, Machin and
Schonberg, 2010), through mandatory school entry and exit ages in Germany
(Muhlenweg and Puhani, 2010) and the Netherlands (Cabus and De Witte, 2011) to
school resources in Norway (Haegeland, Raaum and Salvanes, 2012), Canada (Leach,
Payne and Chan, 2010) and New York City (Rubenstein et al., 2009). There is also a
substantial variation in the kind of inputs that are investigated in different states within
the Union. They span from the role of the quantity of math instruction hours in Florida
(Taylor, 2014) through teacher cheating in Chicago (Jacob and Levitt, 2003) to the role of
school crowding in North Carolina (McMullen and Rouse, 2012) or paying students for
grade completion in Ohio (Bettinger, 2012).
There are also multi-site studies within the US that explore the role of same
school inputs in very different school environments, and thus, allow for assessment of
generalizability of the interventions. An example of such study would be Fryer’s (2014)
investigation of the role of importing best charter school practices to traditional public
schools in Chicago, Denver and Houston. His results are remarkably similar across
Denver and Houston, the two experimental samples, and are smaller for Chicago, where
only quasi-experimental variation is available. Notably Denver and Houston differ both
in terms of demographics and institutional setting so the similarity of the estimates is
noteworthy. It is also the case that Chicago implemented a slightly less intensive program
which could account for the difference in the effects. Another example of this kind of
cross-sites within-country research is Abdulkadiroglu, Angrist and Pathak (2014) who
investigate the role of school composition on student achievement in Boston and New
York. In both cities they find little evidence that attending elite schools has a causal effect
on test scores or college quality. Similar findings are confirmed in Kenyan setting (Lucas
and Mbiti, 2014) but Jackson (2010) finds large gains from attending elite schools in
Trinidad and Tobago. This set of papers unlike the health interventions at birth suggests

18

The Danish study is the more important because it merges PISA data with registry data which in a
longer-run will allow benchmarking the PISA test scores against economically meaningful variables like
university graduation or income. Since PISA is used globally to compare the efficiency of educational
systems it seems imperative to understand how PISA scores translate into long-run outcomes. To our
knowledge Denmark is the only country that successfully merged their PISA samples to administrative
records.

32

that some educational policies might be generalizable with country but not across
countires.
One particular school attribute that gained a lot of attention in the educational
research agenda involves class size (Angrist and Lavy, 1999; Chetty et al. 2011). Neither
of these two papers used administrative educational data sets, but there exists evidence on
this topic from at least four countries and two states using educational administrative
data. This question has been studied in Denmark (Heinesen, 2010), Italy (Angrist,
Battisin and Vuri, 2014), Sweden (Fredriksson, Ockert and Oosterbeek, 2013), and in the
United States in Florida (Chingos, 2012). Using different identification strategies and
data these papers generally find conflating results. Danish, Italian and Swedish studies
confirm the previous results based on survey data that smaller classes generate significant
advantages in later life schooling and labor market outcomes. On the contrary the Florida
case-study and also another paper using Norwegian registry data (Leuven, Oosterbeek
and Ronning, 2008) do not find much of an effect of a reduction in class size. It is
particularly interesting that the Swedish and Norwegian studies use an identical
identification strategy but find very different results. This point makes clear the value of
cross-context replication and studies.
The two remaining studies of class size in our list are somewhat different.
Complementary research from Kentucky (Barrett and Toma, 2013) documents that
principals are more likely to assign more effective teachers to larger classes, potentially
to compensate for the negative class-size effects. Finally, a Chilean (Urquiola and
Verhoogen, 2009) paper makes a more methodological point by documenting an
inverted-U cross-sectional relationship between class-size and household income as well
as stacking of schools’ enrollments at multiples of the class-size cap. These two data facts
could invalidate non-experimental or regression discontinuity estimates of the class-size
in liberalized market settings where schools are free to set prices and/or turn away
students, and households are free to sort between schools. The manipulation of a classsize rule that can potentially invalidate the regression discontinuity estimates has also
been documented in Israel (Cohen-Zada, Gradstein and Reuven, 2013). Comprehensive
administrative data facilitated these studies that otherwise would be harder to conduct.

33

Another hotly debated in the past decades educational policy topic has been the
role of school choice and competition. Around the world, governments have recently
implemented and researchers evaluated various forms of choice and competition. Outside
the United States the countries that contributed to this broad research agenda are England,
Israel, and Sweden in Europe, Canada and United States in North America, Colombia and
Chile in South America, and China in Asia. However, not all of these countries study the
same phenomena that we encapsulate in a single broad term of school choice. For
example, outside the United States, the effects of voucher and charter schools on student
outcomes are examined in England (Clark, 2009), Sweden (Sandstrom and Bergstrom,
2005), Chile (Mizala and Romaguera, 2000) and Colombia (Angrist, Bettinger and
Kremer, 2006; Bettinger, Kremer and Saavedra, 2010). These papers, with the exception
of early Chilean descriptive work, point towards beneficial effects of vouchers on student
achievement. An interesting modification of the voucher system type of competition is
studied in Ontario, Canada (Card, Dooley and Payne, 2010) where non-Catholics are
subject to monopoly of public schools while Catholics (40% of children in the province)
can choose between sending their kids to secular public schools or to separate schools.
The authors also find test score gains due to increased competition in Ontario.
These effects have also been investigated in the United States for Florida (Figlio
and Hart, 2014), Chicago (Booker et al., 2011), Massachusetts (Angrist, Pathak and
Walters, 2013), New York City (Winters, 2012), Texas (Booker et al., 2007) and Utah
(Ni and Rorrer, 2012). The results generally suggest heterogeneous effects of charters
which might be either due to the fact that they apply different identification strategies or
due to differential role of institutional settings. Research by Zimmer et al. (2012)
examines the role of charter schools more comprehensively by looking simultaneously at
seven states but it is important to note that their analysis is based on individual fixed
effects and not on random or quasi-random variation. They find mixed results for charter
school effects and point out that their results rely heavily on the assumptions they make
along the way. This study with such an external validity would not be possible without
administrative data available in multiple sites within the US. There is also research that
considers lotteries and open enrollment to schools that are not necessarily private schools.
Cullen, Jacob and Levitt (2006) find little evidence for improvements of achievement of

34

lottery winners in Chicago, while Deming et al. (2014) find increases in college
attainment among lottery winners in Charlotte-Mecklenburg. Free school choice seems to
also benefit students in Israel (Lavy, 2010). Clearly, more work is needed in order to
gauge the degree to which specific programs and identification strategies are responsible
for differing research findings.
Another strand of this agenda considers the role of parents in school choice in
England (Burgess et al., forthcoming), Beijing (Lai, Sadoulet and de Janvry, 2009) and
Charlotte-Mecklenburg (Hastings and Weinstein, 2008). There is also research that
considers the importance of accurate information on school quality when school choice is
available in England (Allen and Burgess, 2013); and that examines the potential negative
spillovers from school choice, like grade inflation in Sweden (Wikstrom and Wikstrom,
2005). Finally, competition and school choice may affect not only students but also their
teachers, and we discuss this research agenda below where we focus more broadly on the
labor market for teachers.
Much of the early research using administrative data focused on the labor market
for teachers but the interest in this topic did not decline over time. In fact other countries
and states started contributing papers studying teachers. In the United States we observe
researchers in a large number of states investigating the labor market for teachers;
specific examples include the use of administrative data in Alaska, Arkansas, Colorado,
Florida, Illinois, Georgia, Kentucky, Michigan, Missouri, North Carolina, New York,
Ohio, Pennsylvania, Texas, Washington, and Wisconsin. Outside of the United States
teachers have been studied in Israel, Italy, Norway, Sweden, and Venezuela. The most
widely studied question is likely the teacher labor supply and mobility that has been
investigated within the United States in Florida (Feng, 2010), Georgia (Scafidi, Sjoquist
and Stinebrickner, 2007), Kentucky (Cowen et al., 2012), Michigan (Gershenson, 2012),
Missouri (Podgursky, Monroe and Watson, 2004), North Carolina (Jackson, 2013), New
York (Brewer, 1996), Texas (Hanushek, Kain and Rivkin, 2004), Washington (Theobald,
1990), Wisconsin (Imezeki, 2005); and internationally in Italy (Barbieri, Rossetti and
Sestito, 2011), Norway (Falch and Strom, 2005), Sweden (Karbownik, 2014) and

35

Venezuela (Ortega, 2010) 19 . The broad conclusion from these papers is that school
quality and working conditions matter for attracting and retaining teachers, particularly
those of higher quality, but particular factors differ across sites in both whether they
matter and how much they matter.
Another related topic that is present only in the United States research, to the best
of our knowledge, is the role of teacher retirement and the retirement benefits. This
particular question has been studied in Arkansas (Costrell and McGee, 2010), Illinois
(Fitzpatrick and Lovenheim, 2014), Missouri (Koedel, Ni and Podgursky, 2014),
Pennsylvania (Ferguson, Strauss and Vogt, 2006) and Washington (DeArmond and
Goldhaber, 2010). Some other studies consider the role of incentives in improving
teacher performance in Denver (Goldhaber and Walch, 2012), Chicago (Jacob, 2013),
Kentucky (Barrett and Toma, 2013), New York City (Fryer, 2013), Houston (Imberman
and Lovenheim, 2015) and outside of the US in Israel (Lavy, 2009).
A lot of attention in the United States has also been given to the interaction
between the schools, teachers and their students. School accountability was introduced
voluntarily by many states in the 1990s but with the introduction of the federal No Child
Left Behind law in 2002 the remaining states were required to start measuring the relative
performance of their students, which by extension allowed calculations of value added
measures, assessment of teacher effectiveness and as an unintended side-effect produced
large quantities of administrative data on teacher and their students (Figlio and Loeb,
2011). Based on our selection of journals we found value added or accountability
research from San Diego (Koedel and Betts, 2010), Colorado (Briggs and Weeks, 2009),
Florida (Sass, Semykina and Harris, 2014), Chicago (Aaronson, Barrow and Sander,
2007), North Carolina (Rothstein, 2010), Texas (Rivkin, Hanushek and Kain, 2005), and
Washington (Krieg, 2011). Outside of the United States, value added models have also
been examined in two other English speaking countries, mainly England (Ray,
McCormack and Evans, 2009) and Australia (Leigh, 2010).
There are many other research themes that we did not cover in this brief review
and which gained considerable attention in the research community. To name a few from

19

Many of these states and countries contributed multiple studies on the topic of teacher labor supply and
mobility.

36

our extensive but incomplete list, registry data have been used to study: the introduction
of new technologies to schools in England (Machin, McNally and Silva, 2007),
experimental evidence on schools influence on parents’ involvement in education in
France (Avvisati et al., 2014), experimental evidence on gender differences in
competitiveness and its consequences for educational choices in the Netherlands (Buser,
Niederle and Oosterbeek, 2014), the role of school quality in Romania (Pop-Elches and
Urquiola, 2013), experimental evidence on learning incentives in Mexico (Behrman et
al., 2015), perceived effects of school quality on housing market (Figlio and Lucas,
2004), the role of peer effects utilizing student reshuffling due to extreme events
(Imberman, Kugler and Sacerdote, 2012) or the ability of principals to recognize effective
teachers (Jacob and Lefgren, 2008). We also have not mentioned some unique
educational data sets used worldwide to address very specific research questions. These
would be GED takers in Florida and Texas (Tyler, Murnane and Willett, 2004), principals
in Illinois and North Carolina (Gates et al., 2006), college entry exam takers in Michigan
(Andrews, DesJardins and Ranchhod, 2010) or anthropometric measurements of school
children in Peru (Dell, 2010).
In summary, there is a growing prevalence in the use of administrative data in
educational research and in this section we hoped to provide some brief overview of this
phenomenon internationally. We did not and could not aim to be complete here, however,
our goal was to provide useful examples of applications and data types utilized in
different countries. It is clear that there are many opportunities to study new questions in
new environments, and we expect that the explosion in the use of administrative data in
education research will only continue to expand rapidly.

VI. Conclusions
It is evident that administrative data present a world of opportunity, and while
there are clearly challenges associated with the use of administrative data, the benefits of
collecting these data and using them for research and policy purposes surely outweigh the
costs involved. While administrative data are not a substitute for many purpose-built
survey data, in the cases in which they are substitutes they have the potential to save
taxpayers considerable amounts of money while delivering better-quality data, and of

37

course there are many ways in which administrative data can make survey data better,
more cost-effective, and more flexible. The availability of these data has led to new
research questions that had previously not been addressable being studied; the
overturning of conventional wisdom through higher-quality research designs made
possible by better data; and more data-driven policymaking in education. All of these are
victories for both research and policy. Given the remarkable progress of computing
power and capacity, it is in the best interest of both science and policy to make good use
of these administratively-collected data while following best practices in data security
and ethics. Furthering partnerships and trust relationships between the entities that collect
and administer these administrative data and members of the scholarly community, and
developing de-identified data sets that will protect privacy and confidentiality while
furthering research will benefit taxpayers, policy makers and scholars alike.

References
Aaronson, D., Barrow, L., Sander, W., 2007. Teachers and Student Achievement in the
Chicago Public High Schools. J. Labor Econ. 25 (1), 95-135.
Abdulkadiroglu, A., Pathak, P.A., Roth, A.E., 2009. Strategy-Proofness versus Efficiency
in Matching with Indifferences: Redesigning the NYC High School Match. Am. Econ.
Rev. 99 (5), 1954-1978.
Abdulkadiroglu, A., Angrist, J.D., Dynarski, S.M., Kane, T.J., Pathak, P.A., 2011.
Accountability and Flexibility in Public Schools: Evidence from Boston's Charters and
Pilots. Q. J. Econ. 126 (2), 699-748.
Abdulkadiroglu, A., Angrist, J., Pathak, P., 2014. The Elite Illusion: Achievement Effects
at Boston and New York Exam Schools. Econometrica 82 (1), 137-196.
Ahn, T., 2014. A Regression Discontinuity Analysis of Graduation Standards and Their
Impact on Students’ Academic Trajectories. Econ. Educ. Rev. 38, 64-75.
Ahn, T., Vigdor, J.L., 2014. When Incentives Matter Too Much: Explaining Significant
Responses to Irrelevant Information. NBER Working Paper No. 20321.
Allen, R., Burgess, S., 2013. Evaluating the Provision of School Performance
Information for School Choice. Econ. Educ. Rev. 34, 175-190.
Almaas, I., Cappelen, A., Salvanes, K.G., Sorensen, E., and Tungodden, B. 2014.
Willingness to Compete: Family Matters. NHH Discussion Paper 3/2014.

38

Almond, D., Edlund, L., Palme, M., 2009. Chernobyl’s Subclinical Legacy: Prenatal
Exposure to Radioactive Fallout and School Outcomes in Sweden. Q. J. Econ. 124 (4),
1729-1772.
Almond, D., Mazumder, B., van Ewijk, R., 2014. In Utero Ramadan Exposure and
Children’s Academic Performance. forthcoming Econ. J.
Anand, P., Mizala, A., Repetto, A., 2009. Using School Scholarships to Estimate the
Effect of Private Education on the Academic Achievement of Low-Income Students in
Chile. Econ. Educ. Rev. 28 (3), 370-381.
Andersson, C., Johansson, P., Waldenstrom, N., 2011. Do You Want Your Child to Have
a Certified Teacher? Econ. Educ. Rev. 30 (1), 65-78.
Andrews, R.J., DesJardins, S., Ranchhod, V., 2010. The Effects of the Kalamazoo
Promise on College Choice. Econ. Educ. Rev. 29 (5), 722-737.
Angrist, J.D., Lavy, V., 2001. Does Teacher Training Affect Pupil Learning? Evidence
from Matched Comparisons in Jerusalem Public Schools. J. Labor Econ. 19 (2), 343-369.
Angrist, J.D., Lang, K., 2004. Does School Integration Generate Peer Effects? Evidence
from Boston's Metco Program. Am. Econ. Rev. 94 (5), 1613-1634.
Angrist, J., Bettinger, E., Kremer, M., 2006. Long-Term Educational Consequences of
Secondary School Vouchers: Evidence from Administrative Records in Colombia. Am.
Econ. Rev. 96 (3), 847-862.
Angrist, J., Lavy, V., 2009. The Effects of High Stakes High School Achievement
Awards: Evidence from a Randomized Trial. Am. Econ. Rev. 99 (4), 1384-1414.
Angrist, J.D., Pathak, P.A., Walters, C.R., 2013. Explaining Charter School
Effectiveness. Am. Econ. J. - Appl. Econ. 5 (4), 1-27.
Angrist, J.D., Battistin, E., Vuri, D., 2014. Is a Small Moment: Class Size and Moral
Hazard in the Mezzogiorno. NBER Worping Paper No. 20173.
Apps, P., Mendolina, S., Walker, I., 2013. The Impact of Pre-School on Adolescents’
Outcomes: Evidence from a Recent English Cohort. Econ. Educ. Rev. 37, 183-199.
Arteaga, I., Humpage, S., Reynolds, A.J., Temple, J.A., 2014. One Year of Preschool or
Two: Is It Important for Adult Outcomes? Econ. Educ. Rev. 40, 221-237.
Aslund, O., Edin, P-A., Fredriksson, P., Gronqvist, H., 2011. Peers, Neighborhoods, and
Immigrant Student Achievement: Evidence from a Placement Policy. Am. Econ. J. Appl. Econ. 3 (2), 67-95.
Avvisati, F., Guragand, M., Guyon, N., Maurin, E., 2014. Getting Parents Involved: A
Field Experiment in Deprived Schools. Rev. Econ. Stud. 81 (1), 57-83.

39

Barbieri, G., Rossetti, C., Sestito, P., 2011. The Determinants of Teacher Mobility:
Evidence Using Italian Teachers’ Transfer Applications. Econ. Educ. Rev. 30 (6), 14301444.
Barrera-Osorio, F., Bertrand, M., Linden, L.L., 2011. Improving the Design of
Conditional Transfer Programs: Evidence from a Randomized Education Experiment in
Colombia. Am. Econ. J. - Appl. Econ. 3 (2), 167-195.
Barrett, N., Toma, E.F., 2013. Reward or Punishment? Class Size and Teacher Quality.
Econ. Educ. Rev. 35, 41-52.
Barrow, L., Markman, L., Rouse, C.E., 2009. Technology’s Edge: The Educational
Benefits of Computer-Aided Instruction. Am. Econ. J. - Econ. Policy 1 (1), 52-74.
Bastian, K.C., Henry, G.T., Thompson, C.L., 2013. Incorporating Access to More
Effective Teachers into Assessments of Educational Resource Equity. Educ. Financ.
Policy. 8 (4), 560-580.
Bedard, K., Dhuey, E., 2006. The Persistence of Early Childhood Maturity: International
Evidence of Long-Run Age Effects. Q. J. Econ. 121 (4), 1437-1472.
Behrman, J.R., Parker, S.W., Todd, P.E., Wolpin, K.I., 2015. Aligning Learning
Incentives of Students and Teachers: Results from a Social Experiment in Mexican High
Schools. J. Polit. Econ. 123(2), 325-264.
Belfield, C.R., Levin, H.M, 2004. Should High School Economics Courses Be
Compulsory? Econ. Educ. Rev. 23 (4), 351-360.
Bellei, C., 2009. Does Lengthening the School Day Increase Students’ Academic
Achievement? Results from a Natural Experiment in Chile. Econ. Educ. Rev. 28 (5), 629640.
Bettinger, E., Kremer, M., Saavedra, J.E., 2010. Are Educational Vouchers Only
Redistributive? Econ. J. 120 (546), F204-F228.
Bettinger, E, 2012. Paying to Learn: The Effect of Financial Incentives on Elementary
School Test Scores. Rev. Econ. Stat. 94 (3), 686-698.
Bettinger, E., Haegeland, T, Rege, M., 2014. Home with Mom: The Effects of Stay-atHome Parents on Children’s Long-Run Educational Outcomes. J. Labor Econ. 32 (3),
443-467.
Beuermann, D.W., Cristia, J., Cueto, S., Malamud, O., Cruz-Aguayo, Y., 2014. One
Laptop per Child at Home: Short-Term Impacts from a Randomized Experiment in Peru.
Am. Econ. J. - Appl. Econ. 7(2), 53-80.

40

Bharadwaj, P., Loken, K.V., Neilson, C., 2013. Early Life Health Interventions and
Academic Achievement. Am. Econ. Rev. 103 (5), 1862-1891.
Bifulco, R., Ladd, H.F., 2006. The Impacts of Charter Schools on Student Achievement:
Evidence from North Carolina. Educ. Financ. Policy. 1 (1), 50-90.
Billings, S.B, Deming, D.J, Rockoff, J, 2014. School Segregation, Educational
Attainment, and Crime: Evidence from the End of Busing in Charlotte-Mecklenburg. Q.
J. Econ. 129 (1), 435-476.
Bjorklund, A., Lindahl, M., Plug, E., 2006. The Origins of Intergenerational
Associations: Lessons from Swedish Adoption Data. Q. J. Econ. 121 (3), 999-1028.
Bjorklund, A., Salvanes, K.G., 2011. Education and Family Background: Mechanisms
and Policies. Handbook of Economics of Education 3, 201-247.
Black, S.E., Devereux, P.J., Salvanes, K.G., 2005a. Why the Apple Doesn't Fall Far:
Understanding Intergenerational Transmission of Human Capital. Am. Econ. Rev. 95 (1),
437-449.
Black, S.E., Devereux, P.J., Salvanes, K.G., 2005b. The More the Merrier? The Effect of
Family Size and Birth Order on Children’s Education. Q. J. Econ. 120 (2), 669-700.
Black, S.E., Devereux, P.J., Salvanes, K.G., 2007. From the Cradle to the Labor Market?
The Effect of Birth Weight on Adult Outcomes. Q. J. Econ. 122 (1), 409-439.
Black, S.E., Devereux, P.J., Salvanes, K.G., 2010. Small Family, Smart Family? Family
Size and the IQ Scores of Young Men. J. Hum. Resour. 45 (1), 33-58.
Black, S.E., Devereux, P.J., Salvanes, K.G., 2011. Too Young to Leave the Nest? The
Effects of School Starting Age. Rev. Econ. Stat. 93 (2), 455-467.
Black, S.E., Devereux, P.J., Salvanes, K.G., 2013. Under Pressure? The Effect of Peers
on Outcomes of Young Adults. J. Labor Econ. 31 (1), 119-153.
Black, S.E., Devereux, P.J., Loken, K.V., Salvanes, K.G., 2014. Care or Cash? The Effect
of Child Care Subsidies on Student Performance. Rev. Econ. Stat. 96(5), 824-837.
Black, S.E., Devereux, P.J., Salvanes, K.G., 2014. Does Grief Transfer Across
Generations? In-Utero Deaths and Child Outcomes. NBER Working Paper No. 19979.
Black, S.E., Figlio, D.N., Guryan, J.G., Karbownik, K., Roth, J., 2014. The Educational
Consequences of Having a Disabled Sibling. Mimeo
Blimpo, M.P., 2014. Team Incentives for Education in Developing Counties: A
Randomized Field Experiment in Benin. Am. Econ. J. - Appl. Econ. 6(4), 90-109.

41

Bohlmark, A., Gronqvist, E., Vlachos, J., 2012. The Headmaster Ritual: The Importance
of Management for School Outcomes. IFAU Working Paper 2012:16.
Bohlmark, A., Lindahl, M., 2015. Independent Schools and Long-Run Educational
Outcomes – Evidence from Sweden’s Large Scale Voucher Reform. Economica.
82(327), 508-551.
Booker, K., Gilpatric, S.M., Gronberg, T., Jansen, D., 2007. The Impact of Charter
School Attendance on Student Performance. J. Public Econ. 91, 849-876.
Booker, K., Sass, T.R., Gill, B., Zimmer, R., 2011. The Effects of Charter High Schools
on Educational Attainment. J. Labor Econ. 29 (2), 377-415
Boyd, D., Grossman, P., Lankford, H., Loeb, S., Wyckoff, J., 2006. How Changes in
Entry Requirements Alter the Teacher Workforce and Affect Student Achievement.
Educ. Financ. Policy. 1 (2), 176-216.
Boyd, D., Grossman, P., Ing, M., Lankford, H., Loeb, S., O’Brien, R., Wyckoff, J., 2011.
The Effectiveness and Retention of Teachers with Prior Career Experience. Econ. Educ.
Rev. 30 (6), 1229-1241.
Boyd, D., Lankford, H., Loeb, S., Wyckoff, J., 2013. Analyzing the Determinants of the
Matching of Public School Teachers to Jobs: Disentangling the Preferences of Teachers
and Employers. J. Labor Econ. 31 (1), 83-117.
Brewer, D.J., 1996. Career Paths and Quit Decisions: Evidence from Teaching. J. Labor
Econ. 14 (2), 313-339.
Briggs, D.C., Weeks, J.P., 2009. The Sensitivity of Value-Added Modeling to the
Creation of a Vertical Score Scale. Educ. Financ. Policy. 4 (4), 384-414.
Brummet, Q., 2014. The Effects of School Closings on Student Achievement. J. Public
Econ. 119, 108-124.
Bui, S.A., Craig, S.G., Imberman, S.A., 2014. Is Gifted Education a Bright Idea?
Assessing the Impact of Gifted and Talented Programs on Students. Am. Econ. J. - Econ.
Policy 6 (3), 30-62.
Burgess, S., Briggs, A., 2010. School Assignment, School Choice and Social Mobility.
Econ. Educ. Rev. 29 (4), 639-649.
Burgess, S., Greaves, E., 2013. Test Scores, Subjective Assessment, and Stereotyping of
Ethnic Minorities. J. Labor Econ. 31 (3), 535-576.
Burgess, S., Wilson, D., Worth, J., 2013. A Natural Experiment in School Accountability:
The Impact of School Performance Information on Pupil Progress. J. Public Econ. 106,
57-67.

42

Burgess, S., Greaves, E., Vignoles, A., Wilson, D., 2014. What Parents Want: School
Preferences and School Choice. forthcoming Econ. J.
Burke, M.A., Sass, T.R., 2013. Classroom Peer Effects and Student Achievement. J.
Labor Econ. 31 (1), 51-82.
Buser, T., Niederle, M., Oosterbeek, H., 2014. Gender, Competitiveness, and Career
Choices. Q. J. Econ. 129(3), 1409-1447.
Cabus, S.J., De Witte, K., 2011. Does School Time Matter?—On the Impact of
Compulsory Education Age on School Dropout. Econ. Educ. Rev. 30 (6), 1384-1398.
Card, D., Chetty, R., Feldstein, M., Saez, E., 2010. Expanding Access to Administrative
Data for Research in the United States. White paper, National Science Foundation,
Washington, DC.
Card, D., Dooley, M.D., Payne, A., 2010. School Competition and Efficiency with
Publicly Funded Catholic Schools. Am. Econ. J. - Appl. Econ. 2 (4), 150-176.
Carneiro, P., Loken, K., Salvanes, K.G., 2014. A Flying Start? Long Term Consequences
of Maternal Time Investments in Children during the First Year of Life. forthcoming J.
Polit. Econ.
Carneiro, P., K., Salvanes, K.G., and Tominey, E. 2014. Intergenerational Transmission,
Human Capital Formation and the Timing of Parental Income. Working paper,
Norwegian School of Economics.
Carrell, S.E., Hoekstra, M.L., 2010. Externalities in the Classroom: How Children
Exposed to Domestic Violence Affect Everyone’s Kids. Am. Econ. J. - Appl. Econ. 2 (1),
211-228.
Carruthers, C.K., 2012. The Qualifications and Classroom Performance of Teachers
Moving to Charter Schools. Educ. Financ. Policy. 7 (3), 233-268.
Carruthers, C.K., 2012. New Schools, New Students, New Teachers: Evaluating the
Effectiveness of Charter Schools. Econ. Educ. Rev. 31 (2), 280-292.
Chetty, R., Friedman, J.N., Rockoff, J.E., 2014. Measuring the Impacts of Teachers I:
Evaluating Bias in Teacher Value-Added Estimates. Am. Econ. Rev. 104(9), 2593-2632.
Chetty, R., Friedman, J.N., Rockoff, J.E., 2014. Measuring the Impacts of Teachers II:
Teacher Value-Added and Student Outcomes in Adulthood. Am. Econ. Rev. 104(9),
2633-2679.
Chiang, H., 2009. How Accountability Pressure on Failing Schools Affects Student
Achievement. J. Public Econ. 93, 1045-1057.

43

Chingos, M.M, West, M.R., 2011. Promotion and Reassignment in Public School
Districts: How Do Schools Respond to Differences in Teacher Effectiveness? Econ.
Educ. Rev. 30 (3), 419-433.
Chingos, M.M, Peterson, P.E, 2011. It’s Easier to Pick a Good Teacher Than to Train
One: Familiar and New Results on the Correlates of Teacher Effectiveness. Econ. Educ.
Rev. 30 (3), 449-465.
Chingos, M.M., West, M.R., 2012. Do More Effective Teachers Earn More Outside the
Classroom? Educ. Financ. Policy. 7 (1), 8-43.
Chingos, M.M., 2012. The Impact of a Universal Class-Size Reduction Policy: Evidence
from Florida’s Statewide Mandate. Econ. Educ. Rev. 31 (5), 543-562.
Cho, R.M., 2009. The Impact of Maternal Imprisonment on Children’s Educational
Achievement: Results from Children in Chicago Public Schools. J. Hum. Resour. 44 (3),
772-797.
Clark, D., 2009. The Performance and Competitive Effects of School Autonomy. J. Polit.
Econ. 117 (4), 745-783.
Clark, D., See, E., 2011. The Impact of Tougher Education Standards: Evidence from
Florida. Econ. Educ. Rev. 30 (6), 1123-1135.
Clark, D., Martorell, P., 2014. The Signaling Value of a High School Diploma. J. Polit.
Econ. 122 (2), 282-318.
Clark, M., Rothstein, J., Schanzenbach, D.W., 2009. Selection Bias in College
Admissions Test Scores. Econ. Educ. Rev. 28 (3), 295-307.
Clotfelter, C.T., Ladd, H.F., Vigdor, J., 2005. Who Teaches Whom? Race and the
Distribution of Novice Teachers. Econ. Educ. Rev. 24 (4), 377-392.
Clotfelter, C.T., Ladd, H.F., Vigdor, J.L., 2006. Teacher-Student Matching and the
Assessment of Teacher Effectiveness. J. Hum. Resour. 41 (4), 778-820.
Clotfelter, C.T., Ladd, H.F., Vigdor, J.L., 2007. Teacher Credentials and Student
Achievement: Longitudinal Analysis with Student Fixed Effects. Econ. Educ. Rev. 26
(6), 673-682.
Clotfelter, C.T., Glennie, E., Hall, H., Vigdor, J., 2008. Would Higher Salaries Keep
Teachers in High-Poverty Schools? Evidence from a Policy Intervention in North
Carolina. J. Public Econ. 92, 1352-1370.
Clotfelter, C.T., Ladd, H.F., Vigdor, J.L., 2009. The Academic Achievement Gap in
Grades 3 To 8. Rev. Econ. Stat. 91 (2), 398-419.

44

Clotfelter, C.T., Ladd, H.F., Vigdor, J.L., 2009. Teacher Credentials and Student
Achievement in High School: A Cross-Subject Analysis with Student Fixed Effects. J.
Hum. Resour. 45 (3), 655-681.
Clotfelter, C.T., Ladd, H.F., Vigdor, J.L., 2009. Are Teacher Absences Worth Worrying
about in the United States? Educ. Financ. Policy. 4 (2), 115-149.
Clotfelter, C.T., Ladd, H.F., Vigdor, J.L., 2011. Teacher Mobility, School Segregation,
and Pay-Based Policies to Level the Playing Field. Educ. Financ. Policy. 6 (3), 399-438.
Coelli, M., Green, D.A., 2012. Leadership Effects: School Principals and Student
Outcomes. Econ. Educ. Rev. 31 (1), 92-109.
Cohen-Zada, D., Gradstein, M., Reuven, E., 2013. Allocation of Students in Public
Schools: Theory and New Evidence. Econ. Educ. Rev. 34, 96-106.
Condie, S., Lefgren, L., Sims, D., 2014. Teacher Heterogeneity, Value-Added and
Education Policy. Econ. Educ. Rev. 40, 76-92.
Cook, P.J., Dodge, K., Farkas, G., Fryer, R.G., Guryan, J., Ludwig, J., Mayer, S., Pollack,
H., Steinberg, L., 2014. The (Surprising) Efficacy of Academic and Behavioral
Intervention with Disadvantaged Youth: Results from a Randomized Experiment in
Chicago. NBER Working Paper No. 19862.
Cortes, K.E., Moussa, W.S., Weinstein, J.M., 2013. Educating Bright Students in Urban
Schools. Econ. Educ. Rev. 37, 286-297.
Cortes, K., Goodman, J., Nomi, T., 2014. Intensive Math Instruction and Educational
Attainment: Long-Run Impacts of Double-Dose Algebra. NBER Working Paper No.
20211.
Costrell, R.M., McGee, J.B., 2010. Teacher Pension Incentives, Retirement Behavior,
and Potential for Reform in Arkansas. Educ. Financ. Policy. 5 (4), 492-518.
Costrell, R.M., Podgursky, M., 2010. Distribution of Benefits in Teacher Retirement
Systems and Their Implications for Mobility. Educ. Financ. Policy. 5 (4), 519-557.
Cowen, J.M., Butler, J.S., Fowles, J., Streams, M.E., Toma, E.F., 2012. Teacher
Retention in Appalachian Schools: Evidence from Kentucky. Econ. Educ. Rev. 31 (4),
431-441.
Cowen, J.M, Winter, M.A, 2013. Do Charters Retain Teachers Differently? Evidence
from Elementary Schools in Florida. Educ. Financ. Policy. 8 (1), 14-42.
Cratty, D., 2012. Potential for Significant Reductions in Dropout Rates: Analysis of an
Entire 3rd Grade State Cohort. Econ. Educ. Rev. 31 (5), 644-662.

45

Cullen, J.B., Jacob, B.A., Levitt, S.D., 2005. The Impact of School Choice on Student
Outcomes: An Analysis of the Chicago Public Schools. J. Public Econ. 89, 729-760.
Cullen, J.B., Jacog, B.A., Levitt, S., 2006. The Effect of School Choice on Participants:
Evidence from Randomized Lotteries. Econometrica 74 (5), 1191-1230.
Cullen, J.B., Long, M.C., Reback, R., 2013. Jockeying for Position: Strategic High
School Choice under Texas' Top Ten Percent Plan. J. Public Econ. 97, 32-48.
Currie, J., Hanushek, E.A., Kahn, M.E., Neidell, M., Rivkin, S.G., 2009. Does Pollution
Increase School Absences? Rev. Econ. Stat. 91 (4), 682-694.
Currie, J., Stabile, M., Manivong, P., Roos, L.L., 2010. Child Health and Young Adult
Outcomes. J. Hum. Resour. 45 (3), 517-548.
Currie, J., Figlio, D., Goodman, J., Presico, C., Roth, J., 2014. A Population Level Study
of the Effects of Early Intervention for Autism. Mimeo
Curto, V.E., Fryer, R.G., 2014. The Potential of Urban Boarding Schools for the Poor:
Evidence from SEED. J. Labor Econ. 32 (1), 65-93.
Dalsgaard, S., Nielsen, H.S., Simonsen, M., 2014. Consequences of ADHD Medication
Use for Children’s Outcomes. J. Health Econ. 37, 137-151
Damm, A.P., Dustman C., 2014. Does Growing Up in a High Crime Neighborhood
Affect Youth Criminal Behavior? Am. Econ. Rev. 104 (6), 1806-1832.
DeArmond, M., Goldhaber, D., 2010. Scrambling the Nest Egg: How Well Do Teachers
Understand Their Pensions, and What Do They Think about Alternative Pension
Structures? Educ. Financ. Policy. 5 (4), 558-586.
DeCicca, P., Smith, J., 2013. The Long-Run Impacts of Early Childhood Education:
Evidence from a Failed Policy Experiment. Econ. Educ. Rev. 36, 41-59.
Dell, M., 2010. The Persistent Effects of Peru’s Mining Mita. Econometrica 78 (6), 18631903.
Deming, D.J, 2011. Better Schools, Less Crime? Q. J. Econ. 126 (4), 2063-2115.
Deming, D.J., Hastings, J.S, Kane, T.J., Staiger, D.O., 2013. School Choice, School
Quality, and Postsecondary Attainment. Am. Econ. Rev. 104 (3), 991-1013.
Deming, D.J., 2014. Using School Choice Lotteries to Test Measures of School
Effectiveness. NBER Working Paper No. 19803.
Dinkelman, T., Martinez, C.A., 2014. Investing in Schooling in Chile: The Role of
Information about Financial Aid for Higher Education. Rev. Econ. Stat. 96 (2), 244-257.

46

Dobbie, W., Fryer, R.G., 2011. Are High-Quality Schools Enough to Increase
Achievement Among the Poor? Evidence from the Harlem Children’s Zone. Am. Econ. J.
- Appl. Econ. 3 (3), 158-187.
Dobbie, W., Fryer, R.G., 2013. Getting Beneath the Veil of Effective Schools: Evidence
From New York City. Am. Econ. J. - Appl. Econ. 5 (4), 28-60.
Dobbie, W., Fryer, R.G., 2014. The Impact of Attending a School with High-Achieving
Peers: Evidence from the New York City Exam Schools. Am. Econ. J. - Appl. Econ. 6
(3), 58-75.
Doyle, J.J., 2007. Child Protection and Child Outcomes: Measuring the Effects of Foster
Care. Am. Econ. Rev. 97 (5), 1583-1610.
Dustmann, C., Machin, S., Schonberg, U., 2010. Ethnicity and Educational Achievement
in Compulsory Schooling. Econ. J. 120 (546), F272-F297.
Dustmann, C., Schonberg, U., 2012. Expansions in Maternity Leave Coverage and
Children’s Long-Term Outcomes. Am. Econ. J. - Appl. Econ. 4 (3), 190-224.
Edin, P-A., Fredriksson, P., Aslund, O., 2003. Ethnic Enclaves and the Economic Success
of Immigrants - Evidence from a Natural Experiment. Q. J. Econ. – 11(1), 329-57
Edwards, F., 2012. Early to Rise? The Effect of Daily Start Times on Academic
Performance. Econ. Educ. Rev. 31 (6), 970-983.
Einav, L., Levin, J., 2013. The Data Revolution and Economic Analysis. NBER Working
Paper No. 19035.
Engberg, J., Epple, D., Imbrogno, J., Sieg, H., Zimmer, R., 2014. Evaluating Education
Programs That Have Lotteried Admission and Selective Attrition. J. Labor Econ. 32 (1),
27-63.
Engel, R.C., Gallagher, L.B., Lyle, D.S., 2010. Military Deployments and Children’s
Academic Achievement: Evidence from Department of Defense Education Activity
Schools. Econ. Educ. Rev. 29 (1), 73-82.
Fairlie, R.W., Robinson, J., 2013. Experimental Evidence on the Effects of Home
Computers on Academic Achievement among Schoolchildren. Am. Econ. J. - Appl.
Econ. 5 (3), 211-240.
Falch, T., Strom, B., 2005. Teacher Turnover and Non-Pecuniary Factors. Econ. Educ.
Rev. 24 (6), 611-631.
Falch, T., Naper, L.R., 2013. Educational Evaluation Schemes and Gender Gaps in
Student Achievement. Econ. Educ. Rev. 36, 12-25.

47

Feng, L., 2010. Hire Today, Gone Tomorrow: New Teacher Classroom Assignments and
Teacher Mobility. Educ. Financ. Policy. 5 (3), 278-316.
Feng, L., Sass, T.R., 2013. What Makes Special-Education Teachers Special? Teacher
Training and Achievement of Students with Disabilities. Econ. Educ. Rev. 36, 122-134.
Ferguson, J., Strauss, R.P., Vogt, W.B., 2006. The Effects of Defined Benefit Pension
Incentives and Working Conditions on Teacher Retirement Decisions. Educ. Financ.
Policy. 1 (3), 316-348.
Ferrie, J., Long, J., 2013. Intergenerational Occupational Mobility in Britain and the U.S.
Since 1850. Am. Econ. Rev. 103(4), 1109-1137.
Figlio, D.N., Lucas, M.E., 2004. Do High Grading Standards Affect Student
Performance? J. Public Econ. 89, 1815-1834.
Figlio, D.N., Lucas, M.E, 2004. What's in a Grade? School Report Cards and the Housing
Market. Am. Econ. Rev. 94 (3), 591-604.
Figlio, D.N., Rouse, C.E., 2006. Do Accountability and Voucher Threats Improve LowPerforming Schools? J. Public Econ. 90, 239-255.
Figlio, D.N., 2006. Testing, Crime and Punishment. J. Public Econ. 90, 837-851.
Figlio, D.N., 2007. Boys Named Sue: Disruptive Children and Their Peers. Educ. Financ.
Policy. 2 (4), 376-394.
Figlio, D.N., Hart, C.M.D., Metzger, M., 2010. Who Uses a Means-Tested Scholarship,
and What Do They Choose? Econ. Educ. Rev. 29 (2), 301-317.
Figlio, D.N., Loeb, S., 2011. School Accountability. Handbook of Economics of
Education 3, 383-421
Figlio, D.N., Hart, C.M.D., 2014. Competitive Effects of Means-Tested School
Vouchers. Am. Econ. J. - Appl. Econ. 6 (1), 133-156.
Figlio, D.N., Guryan, J., Karbownik, K., Roth, J., 2014. The Effects of Poor Neonatal
Health on Children’s Cognitive Development. Am. Econ. Rev. 104(12), 3921-55.
Fitzpatrick, M.D., Lovenheim, M.F., 2014. Early Retirement Incentives and Student
Achievement. Am. Econ. J. - Econ. Policy 6 (3), 120-154.
Fredriksson, P., Ockert, B., 2008. Resources and Student Achievement – Evidence from a
Swedish Policy Reform. Scand. J. Econ. 110(2), 277-296.
Fredriksson, P., Ockert, B., Oosterbeek, H., 2013. Long-Term Effects of Class Size. Q. J.
Econ. 128 (1), 249-285.

48

Friesen, J., Hickey, R., Krauth, B., 2010. Disabled Peers and Academic Achievement.
Educ. Financ. Policy. 5 (3), 317-348.
Fruehwirth, J.C., 2014. Can Achievement Peer Effect Estimates Inform Policy? A View
from Inside the Black Box. Rev. Econ. Stat. 96 (3), 514-523.
Fryer, R.G, 2011. Financial Incentives and Student Achievement: Evidence from
Randomized Trials. Q. J. Econ. 126 (4), 1755-1798.
Fryer, R.G., 2013. Teacher Incentives and Student Achievement: Evidence from New
York City Public Schools. J. Labor Econ. 31 (2), 373-407.
Fryer, R.G., 2014. Injecting Charter School Best Practices into Traditional Public
Schools: Evidence from Field Experiments. Q. J. Econ. 129(3), 1355-1407.
Fuller, S.C., Ladd, H.F., 2013. School-Based Accountability and the Distribution of
Teacher Quality across Grades in Elementary School. Educ. Financ. Policy. 8 (4), 528559.
Gates, S.M., Ringel, J.S., Santibanez, L., Guarino, C., Ghosh-Dastidar, B., Brown, A.,
2006. Mobility and Turnover Among School Principals. Econ. Educ. Rev. 25 (3), 289302.
Geay, C., McNally, S., Telhaj, S., 2013. Non-Native Speakers of English in the
Classroom: What Are the Effects on Pupil Performance? Econ. J. 123 (570), F281-F307.
Gershenson, S., 2012. How Do Substitute Teachers Substitute? An Empirical Study of
Substitute-Teacher Labor Supply. Econ. Educ. Rev. 31 (4), 410-430.
Gibbons, S., Silva, O., 2011. Faith Primary Schools: Better Schools or Better Pupils? J.
Labor Econ. 29 (3), 589-635.
Gibbons, S., Silva, O., 2011. School Quality, Child Wellbeing and Parents’ Satisfaction.
Econ. Educ. Rev. 30 (2), 312-331.
Gibbons, S., Telhaj, S., 2011. Pupil Mobility and School Disruption. J. Public Econ. 95,
1156-1167.
Gibbons, S., Silva, O., Weinhardt, F., 2013. Everybody Needs Good Neighbours?
Evidence from Students’ Outcomes in England. Econ. J. 123 (571), 831-874.
Gimenez, L., Chou, S-Y., Liu, J-T., Liu. J-L., 2013. Parental Loss and Children’s WellBeing. J. Hum. Resour. 48 (4), 1035-1071.
Glewwe, P., Kremer, M., Moulin, S., 2009. Many Children Left Behind? Textbooks and
Test Scores in Kenya. Am. Econ. J. - Appl. Econ. 1 (1), 112-135.

49

Goldhaber, D., 2007. Everyone’s Doing It, But What Does Teacher Testing Tell us about
Teacher Effectiveness? J. Hum. Resour. 42 (4), 765-794.
Goldhaber, D., Anthony, E., 2007. Can Teacher Quality Be Effectively Assessed?
National Board Certification as a Signal of Effective Teaching. Rev. Econ. Stat. 89 (1),
134-150.
Goldhaber, D., Choi, H-J., Cramer, L., 2007. A Descriptive Analysis of the Distribution
of NBPTS-Certified Teachers in North Carolina Econ. Educ. Rev. 26 (2), 160-172.
Goldhaber, D., Hansen, M., 2009. National Board Certification and Teachers’ Career
Paths: Does Nbpts Certification Influence How Long Teachers Remain in The Profession
and Where They Teach? Educ. Financ. Policy. 4 (3), 229-262.
Goldhaber, D., Walch, J., 2012. Strategic Pay Reform: A Student Outcomes-Based
Evaluation of Denver’s Procomp Teacher Pay Initiative. Econ. Educ. Rev. 31 (6), 10671083.
Goldhaber, D., Cowan, J., Walch, J., 2013. Is a Good Elementary Teacher Always Good?
Assessing Teacher Performance Estimates across Subjects. Econ. Educ. Rev. 36, 216228.
Goldhaber, D., Liddle, S., Theobald, R., 2013. The Gateway to the Profession: Assessing
Teacher Preparation Programs Based on Student Achievement. Econ. Educ. Rev. 34, 2944.
Goldhaber, D., Theobald, R., 2013. Managing the Teacher Workforce in Austere Times:
The Determinants and Implications of Teacher Layoffs. Educ. Financ. Policy. 8 (4), 494527.
Golsteyn, B., Gronqvist, H., Lindahl, L., 2014. Adolescent Time Preferences Predict
Lifetime Outcomes. Econ. J. 124(580), F739-F761.
Goodman, J., 2008. Who Merits Financial Aid?: Massachusetts' Adams Scholarship. J.
Public Econ. 92, 2121-2131.
Goodman, J., 2010. Skills, Schools, and Credit Constraints: Evidence from
Massachusetts. Educ. Financ. Policy. 5 (1), 36-53.
Goodman, J., 2014. Flaking Out: Student Absences and Snow Days as Disruptions of
Instructional Time. NBER Working Paper No. 20221.
Gould, E.D., Lavy, V., Paserman, D.M., 2004. Immigrating to Opportunity: Estimating
the Effect of School Quality Using a Natural Experiment on Ethiopians in Israel. Q. J.
Econ. 119 (2), 489-526.

50

Gould, E.D., Lavy, V., Paserman, M.D., 2009. Does Immigration Affect the Long-Term
Educational Outcomes of Natives? Quasi-Experimental Evidence. Econ. J. 119 (540),
1243-1269.
Greene, J.P., Winters, M.A., 2007. Revisiting Grade Retention: An Evaluation of
Florida’s Test-Based Promotion Policy. Educ. Financ. Policy. 2 (4), 319-340.
Greene, J.P., Winters, M.A., 2009. The Effects of Exemptions to Florida’s Test-Based
Promotion Policy: Who Is Retained? Who Benefits Academically? Econ. Educ. Rev. 28
(1), 135-142.
Gritz, M.R., Theobald, N.D., 1996. The Effects of School District Spending Priorities on
Length of Stay in Teaching. J. Hum. Resour. 31 (3), 477-512.
Gronqvist, H., Hall, C., 2013. Education Policy and Early Fertility: Lessons from an
Expansion of Upper Secondary Schooling. Econ. Educ. Rev. 37, 13-33.
Guardiano, C.M., Brown, A.B., Wyse, A.E., 2011. Can Districts Keep Good Teachers in
the Schools That Need Them Most? Econ. Educ. Rev. 30 (5), 962-979.
Gupta, N.D., Simonsen, M., 2010. Non-Cognitive Child Outcomes and Universal High
Quality Child Care. J. Public Econ. 94, 30-43.
Haegeland, T., Raaum, O., Salvanes, K.G., 2012. Pennies from Heaven? Using
Exogenous Tax Variation to Identify Effects of School Resources on Pupil Achievement.
Econ. Educ. Rev. 31 (5), 601-614.
Hakkinen, I., Kirjavainen, T., Uusitalo, R., 2003. School Resources and Student
Achievement Revisited: New Evidence from Panel Data. Econ. Educ. Rev. 22 (3), 329335.
Hall, C., 2012. The Effects of Reducing Tracking in Upper Secondary School: Evidence
from a Large-Scale Pilot Scheme. J. Hum. Resour. 47 (1), 237-269.
Hanushek, E.A., 1992. The Trade-off between Child Quantity and Quality. J. Polit. Econ.
100 (1), 84-117.
Hanushek, E.A., Kain, J.F., Rivkin, S.G., 2002. Inferring Program Effects for Special
Populations: Does Special Education Raise Achievement for Students With Disabilities?
Rev. Econ. Stat. 84 (4), 584-599.
Hanushek, E.A., Kain, J.F., Rivkin, S.G., 2004. Why Public Schools Lose Teachers. J.
Hum. Resour. 39 (2), 326-354.
Hanushek, E.A., Kain, J.F., Rivkin, S.G., 2004. Disruption Versus Tiebout Improvement:
The Costs and Benefits of Switching Schools. J. Public Econ. 88, 1721-1746.

51

Hanushek, E.A., Kain, J.F., Rivkin, S.G., Branch, G.F., 2007. Charter School Quality and
Parental Decision Making with School Choice. J. Public Econ. 91, 823-848.
Hanushek, E.A., Kain, J.F., Rivkin, S.G., 2009. New Evidence about Brown v. Board of
Education : The Complex Effects of School Racial Composition on Achievement. J.
Labor Econ. 27 (3), 349-383.
Harris, D.N., Sass, T.R., 2011. Teacher Training, Teacher Quality and Student
Achievement. J. Public Econ. 95, 798-812.
Harris, D.N., Sass, T.R., 2014. Skills, Productivity and the Evaluation of Teacher
Performance. Econ. Educ. Rev. 40, 183-204.
Hastings, J.S., Kane, T.J., Staiger, D.O., Weinstein, J.M., 2007. The Effect of
Randomized School Admissions on Voter Participation. J. Public Econ. 91, 915-937.
Hastings, J.S., Weinstein, J.M., 2008. Information, School Choice, and Academic
Achievement: Evidence from Two Experiments. Q. J. Econ. 123 (4), 1373-1414.
Havnes, T., Mogstad, M., 2011. No Child Left Behind: Subsidized Child Care and
Children’s Long-Run Outcomes. Am. Econ. J. - Econ. Policy 3 (2), 97-129.
Havens, T., Mogstad, M., 2014. Is Universal Child Care Leveling the Playing Field. J.
Public Econ. 127, 100-114.
Heers, M., Van Klaveren, C., Groot, W., Van den Brink, H.M., 2014. The Impact of
Community Schools on Student Dropout in Pre-Vocational Education. Econ. Educ. Rev.
41, 105-119.
Heinesen, E., 2010. Estimating Class-Size Effects using Within-School Variation in
Subject-Specific Classes. Econ. J. 120 (545), 737-760.
Hendricks, M.D., 2014. Does it Pay to Pay Teachers More? Evidence from Texas. J.
Public Econ. 109, 50-63.
Henry, G.T., Bastian, K.C., Fortner, C.K., Kershaw, D.C., Purtell, K.M., Thompson,
C.L., Zulli, R.A., 2014. Teacher Preparation Policies and their Effects on Student
Achievement. Educ. Financ. Policy. 9 (3), 264-303.
Hensvik, L., 2012. Competition, Wages and Teacher Sorting: Lessons Learned from a
Voucher Reform. Econ. J. 122 (561), 799-824.
Hermann, M.A., Rockoff, J.E., 2012. Worker Absence and Productivity: Evidence from
Teaching. J. Labor Econ. 30 (4), 749-782.
Hilbert, M., Lopez, P., 2011. The World’s Technological Capacity to Store,
Communicate, and Compute Information. Science 332, 60-65.

52

Hinnerich, B.T., Hoglin, E., Johannesson, M., 2011. Are Boys Discriminated in Swedish
High Schools? Econ. Educ. Rev. 30 (4), 682-690.
Hinrichs, P., 2011. When the Bell Tolls: The Effects of School Starting Times on
Academic Achievement. Educ. Financ. Policy. 6 (4), 486-507.
Holmlund, H., McNally, S., Viarengo, M., 2010. Does Money Matter for Schools? Econ.
Educ. Rev. 29 (6), 1154-1164.
Holmlund, H., Lindahl, M., Plug, E., 2011. The Causal Effect of Parents’ Schooling on
Children’s Schooling: A Comparison of Estimation Methods. J.Econ. Lit. 49 (3), 615651.
Imazeki, J., 2005. Teacher Salaries and Teacher Attrition. Econ. Educ. Rev. 24 (4), 431449.
Imberman, S.A., 2011. Achievement and Behavior in Charter Schools: Drawing a More
Complete Picture. Rev. Econ. Stat. 93 (2), 416-435.
Imberman, S.A., 2011. The Effect of Charter Schools on Achievement and Behavior of
Public School Students. J. Public Econ. 95, 850-863.
Imberman, S.A., Kugler A.D., Sacerdote B.I., 2012. Katrina's Children: Evidence on the
Structure of Peer Effects from Hurricane Evacuees. Am. Econ. Rev. 102 (5), 2048-2082.
Imberman, S.A., Lovenheim, M., 2015. Incentive Strength and Teacher Productivity:
Evidence from a Group-Based Teacher Incentive Pay System. Rev. Econ. Stat. 97(2),
364-386.
Jackson, C.K., 2009. Student Demographics, Teacher Sorting, and Teacher Quality:
Evidence from the End of School Desegregation. J. Labor Econ. 27 (2), 213-256.
Jackson, C.K., Bruegmann, E., 2009. Teaching Students and Teaching Each Other: The
Importance of Peer Learning for Teachers. Am. Econ. J. - Appl. Econ. 1 (4), 85-108.
Jackson, C.K., 2010. Do Students Benefit from Attending Better Schools? Evidence from
Rule-Based Student Assignments in Trinidad and Tobago. Econ. J. 120 (549), 13991429.
Jackson, C.K., 2012. Single-Sex Schools, Student Achievement, and Course Selection:
Evidence from Rule-Based Student Assignments in Trinidad and Tobago. J. Public Econ.
96, 173-187.
Jackson, C.K., 2012. School Competition and Teacher Labor Markets: Evidence from
Charter School Entry in North Carolina. J. Public Econ. 96, 431-448.
Jackson, C.K., 2013. Can Higher-Achieving Peers Explain the Benefits to Attending
Selective Schools? Evidence from Trinidad and Tobago. J. Public Econ. 108, 63-77.
53

Jackson, K.C., 2013. Match Quality, Worker Productivity, and Worker Mobility: Direct
Evidence from Teachers. Rev. Econ. Stat. 95 (4), 1096-1116.
Jackson, C.K., 2014. Teacher Quality at the High-School Level: The Importance of
Accounting for Tracks. J. Labor Econ. 32(4), 645-684.
Jacob, B.A., Levitt, S., 2003. Rotten Apples: an Investigation of the Prevalence and
Predictors of Teacher Cheating. Q. J. Econ. 118 (3), 843-877.
Jacob, B.A, 2004. Public Housing, Housing Vouchers, and Student Achievement:
Evidence from Public Housing Demolitions in Chicago. Am. Econ. Rev. 94 (1), 233-258.
Jacob, B.A., Lefgren, L., 2004. The Impact of Teacher Training on Student Achievement:
Quasi-Experimental Evidence from School Reform Efforts in Chicago. J. Hum. Resour.
39 (1), 50-79.
Jacob, B.A., Lefgren, L., 2004. Remedial Education and Student Achievement: A
Regression-Discontinuity Analysis. Rev. Econ. Stat. 86 (1), 226-244.
Jacob, B.A., 2005. Accountability, Incentives and Behavior: the Impact of High-Stakes
Testing in the Chicago Public Schools. J. Public Econ. 89, 761-796.
Jacob, B.A., Lefgren, L., 2007. What do Parents Value in Education? An Empirical
Investigation of Parents’ Revealed Preferences for Teachers. Q. J. Econ. 122 (4), 16031637.
Jacob, B.A., Lefgren, L., 2008. Can Principals Identify Effective Teachers? Evidence on
Subjective Performance Evaluation in Education. J. Labor Econ. 26 (1), 101-136.
Jacob, B.A., Lefgren, L., 2009. The Effect of Grade Retention on High School
Completion. Am. Econ. J. - Appl. Econ. 1 (3), 33-58.
Jacob, B.A., Lefgren, L., Sims, D.P., 2010. The Persistence of Teacher-Induced Learning.
J. Hum. Resour. 45 (4), 915-943.
Jacob, B.A., Walsh, E., 2011. What’s in a Rating? Econ. Educ. Rev. 30 (3), 434-448.
Jacob, B.A., 2013. The Effect of Employment Protection on Teacher Effort. J. Labor
Econ. 31 (4), 727-761.
Jacob, B., Kapustin, M., Ludwig, J., 2014. Human Capital Effects of Anti-Poverty
Programs: Evidence from a Randomized Housing Voucher Lottery. NBER Working
Paper No. 20164.
Jalava, N., Joensen, J., Pellas, E.M., 2015. Grades and Rank: Impacts of Non-Financial
Incentives on Test Performance. J. Econ. Behav. Organ. 115, 161-196.

54

Jensen, P., Rasmussen, A.W., 2011. The Effect of Immigrant Concentration in Schools
on Native and Immigrant Children’s Reading and Math Skills. Econ. Educ. Rev. 30 (6),
1503-1515.
Jepsen, C., 2010. Bilingual Education and English Proficiency. Educ. Financ. Policy. 5
(2), 200-227.
Joensen, J.S., Nielsen, H.S., 2009. Is there a Causal Effect of High School Math on Labor
Market Outcomes? J. Hum. Resour. 44 (1), 171-198.
Kane, T.J., Rockoff, J.E., Staiger, D.O., 2008. What Does Certification Tell Us About
Teacher Effectiveness? Evidence from New York City. Econ. Educ. Rev. 27 (6), 615631.
Kane, T., Taylor, E.S., Tyler, J.H., Wooten, A.L. 2011. Identifying Effective Classroom
Practices Using Student Achievement Data. J. Hum. Resour. 46 (3), 587-613.
Karbownik, K., 2014. Do Changes in Student Quality Affect Teacher Mobility? Evidence
from an Admission Reform. IFAU Working Paper 2014:15.
Kasman, M., Loeb, S., 2013. Principals’ Perceptions of Competition for Students in
Milwaukee Schools. Educ. Financ. Policy. 8 (1), 43-73.
Kerr, S.P., Pekkarinen, T., Uusitalo, R., 2013. School Tracking and Development of
Cognitive Skills. J. Labor Econ. 31 (3), 577-602.
Keslair, F., Maurin, E., McNally, S., 2012. Every Child Matters? An Evaluation of
“Special Educational Needs” Programmes in England. Econ. Educ. Rev. 31 (6), 932-948.
Kinsler, J., 2011. Understanding the Black–White School Discipline Gap. Econ. Educ.
Rev. 30 (6), 1370-1383.
Kinsler, J., 2012. Beyond Levels and Growth: Estimating Teacher Value-Added and its
Persistence. J. Hum. Resour. 47 (3), 722-753.
Klopfenstein, K., 2004. Advanced Placement: Do Minorities Have Equal Opportunity?
Econ. Educ. Rev. 23 (2), 115-131.
Koedel, C., 2009. An Empirical Analysis of Teacher Spillover Effects in Secondary
School. Econ. Educ. Rev. 28 (6), 682-692.
Koedel, C., Betts, J., 2010. Value Added to What? How a Ceiling in the Testing
Instrument Influences Value-Added Estimation. Educ. Financ. Policy. 5 (1), 54-81.
Koedel, C., Betts, J.R., 2011. Does Student Sorting Invalidate Value-Added Models of
Teacher Effectiveness? An Extended Analysis of the Rothstein Critique. Educ. Financ.
Policy. 6 (1), 18-42.

55

Koedel, C., Ni, S., Podgursky, M., 2014. Who Benefits From Pension Enhancements?
Educ. Financ. Policy. 9 (2), 165-192.
Kremer, M., Miguel, E., Thornton, R., 2009. Incentives to Learn. Rev. Econ. Stat. 91 (3),
437-456.
Krieg, J.M., 2006. Teacher Quality and Attrition. Econ. Educ. Rev. 25 (1), 13-27.
Krieg, J.M., 2008. Are Students Left Behind? The Distributional Effects of the No Child
Left Behind Act. Educ. Financ. Policy. 3 (2), 250-281.
Krieg, J.M, 2011. Which Students Are Left Behind? The Racial Impacts of the No Child
Left Behind Act. Econ. Educ. Rev. 30 (4), 654-664.
Kukla-Acevedo, S., 2009. Do Teacher Characteristics Matter? New Results on the
Effects of Teacher Preparation on Student Achievement. Econ. Educ. Rev. 28 (1), 49-57.
Ladd, H.F., Walsh, R.P., 2002. Implementing Value-Added Measures of School
Effectiveness: Getting the Incentives Right. Econ. Educ. Rev. 21 (1), 1-17.
Ladd, H.F., Muschkin, C., Dodge, K., 2012. From Birth to School: Early Childhood
Initiatives and Third Grade Outcomes in North Carolina. Mimeo.
Lai, F., Sadoulet, E., De Janvry, A., 2009. The Adverse Effects of Parents’ School
Selection Errors on Academic Achievement: Evidence from the Beijing Open Enrollment
Program. Econ. Educ. Rev. 28 (4), 485-496.
Lai, F., 2010. Are Boys Left Behind? The Evolution of the Gender Achievement Gap in
Beijing’s Middle Schools. Econ. Educ. Rev. 29 (3), 383-399.
Lai, F., Sadoulet, E., de Janvry, A., 2011. The Contributions of School Quality and
Teacher Qualifications to Student Performance Evidence from a Natural Experiment in
Beijing Middle Schools. J. Hum. Resour. 46 (1), 123-153.
Lankford, H., Wyckoff, J., 1997. The Changing Structure of Teacher Compensation,
1970-94. Econ. Educ. Rev. 16 (4), 371-384.
Lavy, V., Schlosser, A., 2005. Targeted Remedial Education for Underperforming
Teenagers: Costs and Benefits. J. Labor Econ. 23 (4), 839-874.
Lavy, V., 2008. Do Gender Stereotypes Reduce Girls' or Boys' Human Capital
Outcomes? Evidence from a Natural Experiment. J. Public Econ. 92, 2083-2105.
Lavy, V., 2009. Performance Pay and Teachers' Effort, Productivity, and Grading Ethics.
Am. Econ. Rev. 99 (5), 1979-2011.
Lavy, V., 2010. Effects of Free Choice among Public Schools. Rev. Econ. Stud. 77 (3),
1164-1191.

56

Lavy, V., Schlosser, A., 2011. Mechanisms and Impacts of Gender Peer Effects at
School. Am. Econ. J. - Appl. Econ. 3 (2), 1-33.
Lavy, V., Paserman, M.D., 2012. Inside The Black Box of Ability Peer Effects: Evidence
from Variation in the Proportion of Low Achievers in the Classroom. Econ. J. 122 (559),
208-237.
Lavy, V., Silva, O., Weinhardt, F., 2012. The Good, the Bad, and the Average: Evidence
on Ability Peer Effects in Schools. J. Labor Econ. 30 (2), 367-414.
Lavy, V., 2013. Gender Differences in Market Competitiveness in a Real Workplace:
Evidence from Performance-Based Pay Tournaments among Teachers. Econ. J. 123
(569), 540-573.
Lavy, V., 2014. Long Run Effects of Free School Choice: College Attainment,
Employment, Earnings, and Social Outcomes at Adulthood. Mimeo
Leach, J., Payne, A.A., Chan, S., 2010. The Effects of School Board Consolidation and
Financing on Student Performance. Econ. Educ. Rev. 29 (6), 1034-1046.
Leigh, A., 2010. Estimating Teacher Effectiveness from Two-Year Changes in Students’
Test Scores. Econ. Educ. Rev. 29 (3), 480-488.
Leos-Urbel, J., Schwartz, A.E., Weinstein, M., Corcoran, S., 2013. Not Just for Poor
Kids: The Impact of Universal Free School Breakfast on Meal Participation and Student
Outcomes. Econ. Educ. Rev. 36, 88-107.
Leuven, E, Lindahl, M., Oosterbeek, H., Webbink, D., 2007. The Effect of Extra Funding
for Disadvantaged Pupils on Achievement. Rev. Econ. Stat. 89 (4), 721-736.
Lockwood, J.R., McCaffrey, D.F., 2009. Exploring Student-Teacher Interactions in
Longitudinal Achievement Data. Educ. Financ. Policy. 4 (4), 439-467.
Loeb, S., Kalogrides, D., Beteille, T., 2012. Effective Schools: Teacher Hiring,
Assignment, Development, and Retention. Educ. Financ. Policy. 7 (3), 269-304.
Loken, K.V., Mogstad, M., Wiswall, M., 2012. What Linear Estimators Miss: The
Effects of Family Income on Child Outcomes. Am. Econ. J. - Appl. Econ. 4 (2), 1-35.
Lucas, A.M., Mbiti, I.M., 2012. Access, Sorting, and Achievement: The Short-Run
Effects of Free Primary Education in Kenya. Am. Econ. J. - Appl. Econ. 4 (4), 226-253.
Lucas, A.M., Mbiti, I.M., 2014. Effects of School Quality on Student Achievement:
Discontinuity Evidence from Kenya. Am. Econ. J. - Appl. Econ. 6 (3), 234-263.
Lundborg, P., Nilsson, A., Rooth, D-O., 2014. Parental Education and Offspring
Outcomes: Evidence from the Swedish Compulsory School Reform. Am. Econ. J. - Appl.
Econ. 6 (1), 253-278.

57

Lyle, D.S., 2006. Using Military Deployments and Job Assignments to Estimate the
Effect of Parental. J. Labor Econ. 24 (2), 319-350.
Macartney, H., 2014. The Dynamic Effects of Educational Accountability. NBER
Working Paper No. 19915.
Machin, S., McNally, S., Silva, O., 2007. New Technology in Schools: Is There a Payoff?
Econ. J. 117 (522), 1145-1167.
Manacorda, M., 2012. The Cost of Grade Retention. Rev. Econ. Stat. 94 (2), 596-606.
Mansfield, R.K., 2014. Teacher Quality and Student Inequality. J. Labor Econ. 33(3),
751-788.
Matsudaira, J.D., Hosek, A., Walsh, E., 2012. An Integrated Assessment of the Effects of
Title I on School Behavior, Resources, and Student Achievement. Econ. Educ. Rev. 31
(3), 1-14.
McCaffrey, D.F., Sass, T.R., Lockwood, J.R., Mihaly, K., 2009. The Intertemporal
Variability of Teacher Effect Estimates. Educ. Financ. Policy. 4 (4), 572-606.
McEwan, P.J., 2003. Peer Effects on Student Achievement: Evidence from Chile. Econ.
Educ. Rev. 22 (2), 131-141.
McEvan, P.J., Shapiro, J.S., 2008. The Benefits of Delayed Primary School Enrollment:
Discontinuity Estimates Using Exact Birth Dates. J. Hum. Resour. 43 (1), 1-29.
McEwan, P.J, 2013. The Impact of Chile’s School Feeding Program on Education
Outcomes. Econ. Educ. Rev. 32, 122-139.
McMullen, S.C., Rouse, K.E., 2012. The Impact of Year-Round Schooling on Academic
Achievement: Evidence from Mandatory School Calendar Conversions. Am. Econ. J. Econ. Policy 4 (4), 230-252.
McMullen, S.C, Rouse, K.E., 2012. School Crowding, Year-Round Schooling, and
Mobile Classroom Use: Evidence from North Carolina. Econ. Educ. Rev. 31 (5), 812823.
Meghir, C., Palme, M., 2005. Educational Reform, Ability, and Family Background. Am.
Econ. Rev. 95 (1), 414-424.
Meghir, C., Palme, M., Schnabel, M., 2012.The Effect of Education Policy on Crime: An
Intergenerational Perspective. NBER Working Paper No. 18145.
Meyer, E., Van Klaveren, C., 2013. The Effectiveness of Extended Day Programs:
Evidence from a Randomized Field Experiment in the Netherlands. Econ. Educ. Rev. 36,
1-11.

58

Mihaly, K., McCaffrey, D., Sass, T.R., Lockwood, J.R., 2013. Where You Come from or
Where You Go? Distinguishing Between School Quality and the Effectiveness of
Teacher Preparation Program Graduates. Educ. Financ. Policy. 8 (4), 459-493.
Miller, L.C, Mittleman, J., 2012. High Schools That Work and College Preparedness:
Measuring the Model’s Impact on Mathematics and Science Pipeline Progression. Econ.
Educ. Rev. 31 (6), 1116-1135.
Miller, A., 2013. Principal Turnover and Student Achievement. Econ. Educ. Rev. 36, 6072.
Mizal, A., Roumaguera, P., 2000. School Performance and Choice: The Chilean
Experience. J. Hum. Resour. 35 (2), 392-417.
Muhlenweg, A.M., Puhani, P.A., 2010. The Evolution of the School-Entry Age Effect in
a School Tracking System. J. Hum. Resour. 45 (2), 407-438.
Murnane, R.J., Olsen, R.J., 1990. The Effects of Salaries and Opportunity Costs on
Length of Stay in Teaching: Evidence from North Carolina. J. Hum. Resour. 25 (1), 106124.
Naper, L.N., 2010. Teacher Hiring Practices and Educational Efficiency. Econ. Educ.
Rev. 29 (4), 658-668.
Neal, D., Schanzenbach, D.W., 2010. Left Behind by Design: Proficiency Counts and
Test-Based Accountability. Rev. Econ. Stat. 92 (2), 263-283.
Ni, Y., Rorrer, A.K., 2012. Twice Considered: Charter Schools and Student Achievement
in Utah. Econ. Educ. Rev. 31 (5), 835-849.
Oreopoulos, P., Stabile, M., Walld, R., Roos, L.L., 2008. Short-, Medium-, and LongTerm Consequences of Poor Infant Health: An Analysis Using Siblings and Twins. J.
Hum. Resour. 43 (1), 88-138.
Ortega, D.E., 2010. The Effect of Wage Compression and Alternative Labor Market
Opportunities on Teacher Quality in Venezuela. Econ. Educ. Rev. 29 (5), 760-771.
Ost, B., 2014. How Do Teachers Improve? The Relative Importance of Specific and
General Human Capital. Am. Econ. J. - Appl. Econ. 6 (2), 127-151.
Ou, D., 2010. To Leave or not to Leave? A Regression Discontinuity Analysis of the
Impact of Failing the High School Exit Exam. Econ. Educ. Rev. 29 (2), 171-186.
Ouazad, A., Page, L., 2013. Students' Perceptions of Teacher Biases: Experimental
Economics in Schools. J. Public Econ. 105, 116-130.

59

Palme, M., Lindahl, M., Massih, S.S., Sjogren, A., 2014. Long-term Intergenerational
Persistence of Human Capital: An Empirical Analysis of Four Generations. J. Hum.
Resour. 50(1), 1-33.
Paredes, V., 2014. A Teacher Like Me or a Student Like Me? Role Model Versus
Teacher Bias Effect. Econ. Educ. Rev. 39, 38-49.
Pathak, P.A., Shi, P., 2014. Demand Modeling, Forecasting, and Counterfactuals, Part I.
NBER Working Paper No. 19859.
Player, D., 2010. Nonmonetary Compensation in the Public Teacher Labor Market. Educ.
Financ. Policy. 5 (1), 82-103.
Podgursky, M., Monroe, R., Watson, D., 2004. The Academic Quality of Public School
Teachers: An Analysis of Entry and Exit Behavior. Econ. Educ. Rev. 23 (5), 507-518.
Pop-Eleches, C., Urquiola, M., 2013. Going to a Better School: Effects and Behavioral
Responses. Am. Econ. Rev. 103 (4), 1289-1324.
Ransom, M.R., Sims, D.P., 2010. Estimating the Firm’s Labor Supply Curve in a “New
Monopsony” Framework: Schoolteachers in Missouri. J. Labor Econ. 28 (2), 331-355.
Ray, A., McCormack, T., Evans, H., 2009. Value Added in English Schools. Educ.
Financ. Policy. 4 (4), 415-438.
Reback, R., 2008. Teaching to the Rating: School Accountability and the Distribution of
Student Achievement. J. Public Econ. 92, 1394-1415.
Rege, M., Telle, K., Votruba, M., 2011. Parental Job Loss and Children’s School
Performance. Rev. Econ. Stud. 78 (4), 1462-1489.
Reinikka, R., Svensson, J., 2011. The Power of Information in Public Services: Evidence
from Education in Uganda. J. Public Econ. 95, 956-966.
Rivkin, S.G., Hanushek, E.A., Kain, J.F., 2005. Teachers, Schools, and Academic
Achievement. Econometrica 73 (2), 417-458.
Robsertson, E., 2011. The Effects of Quarter of Birth on Academic Outcomes at the
Elementary School Level. Econ. Educ. Rev. 30 (2), 300-311.
Rockoff, J.E., Staiger, D.O., Kane, T.J., Taylor, E.S., 2012. Information and Employee
Evaluation: Evidence from a Randomized Intervention in Public Schools. Am. Econ.
Rev. 102 (7), 3184-3213.
Rockoff, J.E., Lockwood, B.B., 2010. Stuck in the Middle: Impacts of Grade
Configuration in Public Schools. J. Public Econ. 94, 1051-1061.

60

Rockoff, J.E., Jacob, B.A., Kane, T.J., Staiger, D.O., 2011. Can You Recognize an
Effective Teacher When You Recruit One? Educ. Financ. Policy. 6 (1), 43-74.
Roed, K., Raaum, O., 2003. Administrative Registers: Unexplored Reservoirs of
Scientific Knowledge? Econ. J. 113 (488), F258-F281.
Rothstein, J., 2010. Teacher Quality in Educational Production: Tracking, Decay, and
Student Achievement. Q. J. Econ. 125 (1), 175-214.
Rothstein, J., 2009. Student Sorting and Bias in Value-Added Estimation: Selection on
Observables and Unobservables. Educ. Financ. Policy. 4 (4), 537-571.
Rouse, C.E., Hannaway, J., Goldhaber, D., Figlio, D., 2013. Feeling the Florida Heat?
How Low-Performing Schools Respond to Voucher and Accountability Pressure. Am.
Econ. J.: Econ. Policy 5(2), 251-281.
Rubenstein, R., Schwartz, A.E., Stiefel, L., Zabel, J., 2009. Spending, Size, and Grade
Span in K–8 Schools. Educ. Financ. Policy. 4 (1), 60-88.
Sacerdote, B., 2012. When the Saints Go Marching Out: Long-Term Outcomes for
Student Evacuees from Hurricanes Katrina and Rita. Am. Econ. J. - Appl. Econ. 4 (1),
109-135.
Sanders, N.J, 2012. What Doesn’t Kill You Makes You Weaker. Prenatal Pollution
Exposure and educational Outcomes. J. Hum. Resour. 47 (3), 826-850.
Sandstrom, M.F., Bergstrom, F., 2005. School Vouchers in Practice: Competition Will
Not Hurt You. J. Public Econ. 89, 351-380.
Sass, T.R., 2006. Charter Schools and Student Achievement in Florida. Educ. Financ.
Policy. 1 (1), 91-122.
Sass, T.R., Semykina, A., Harris, D.N., 2014. Value-Added Models and the Measurement
of Teacher Productivity. Econ. Educ. Rev. 38, 9-23.
Scafidi, B., Sjoquist, D.L., Stinebrickner, T.R., 2007. Race, Poverty, and Teacher
Mobility. Econ. Educ. Rev. 26 (2), 145-159.
Schneeweis, N., Zweimuller, M., 2012. Girls, Girls, Girls: Gender Composition and
Female School Choice. Econ. Educ. Rev. 31 (4), 482-500.
Schwartz, A.E., Stiefel, L., Kim, D.Y., 2004. The Impact of School Reform on Student
Performance: Evidence From the New York Network for School Renewal Project. J.
Hum. Resour. 39 (2), 500-522.
Schwartz, A.E., Stiefel, L., 2006. Is There a Nativity Gap? New Evidence on the
Academic Performance of Immigrant Students. Educ. Financ. Policy. 1 (1), 17-49.

61

Schwerdt, G., West, M.R., 2013. The Impact of Alternative Grade Configurations on
Student Outcomes through Middle and High School. J. Public Econ. 97, 308-326.
Smith, J., 2010. How Valuable Is the Gift of Time? The Factors That Drive the Birth
Date Effect in Education. Educ. Financ. Policy. 5 (3), 247-277.
Soderstrom, M., Uusitalo, R., 2010. School Choice and Segregation: Evidence from an
Admission Reform. Scand. J. Econ. 112(1), 55-76.
Springer, M.G., 2008. The Influence of an NCLB Accountability Plan on the Distribution
of Student Test Score Gains. Econ. Educ. Rev. 27 (5), 556-563.
Steinberg, M.P., 2014. Does Greater Autonomy Improve School Performance? Evidence
from a Regression Discontinuity Analysis in Chicago. Educ. Financ. Policy. 9 (1), 1-35.
Strain, M.R., 2013. Single-Sex Classes & Student Outcomes: Evidence from North
Carolina. Econ. Educ. Rev. 36, 73-87.
Streams, M., Butler, J.S., Cowen, J., Fowles, J., Toma, E.F., 2011. School Finance
Reform: Do Equalized Expenditures Imply Equalized Teacher Salaries? Educ. Financ.
Policy. 6 (4), 508-536.
Sund, K., 2009. Estimating Peer Effects in Swedish High School Using School, Teacher,
and Student Fixed Effects. Econ. Educ. Rev. 28 (3), 329-336.
Taylor, E.S., Tyler, J.H., 2012. The Effect of Evaluation on Teacher Performance. Am.
Econ. Rev. 102 (7), 3628-3651.
Taylor, E., 2014. Spending More of the School Day in Math Class: Evidence from a
Regression Discontinuity in Middle School. J. Public Econ. 117, 162-181.
Theobald, N.D., 1990. An Examination of the Influence of Personal, Professional, and
School District Characteristics on Public School Teacher Retention. Econ. Educ. Rev. 9
(3), 241-250.
Theobald, N.D., Gritz, M.R., 1996. The Effects of School District Spending Priorities on
the Exit Paths of Beginning Teachers Leaving the District. Econ. Educ. Rev. 15 (1), 1122.
Thieme, C., Prior, D., Tortosa-Ausina, E., 2013. A Multilevel Decomposition of School
Performance Using Robust Nonparametric Frontier Techniques. Econ. Educ. Rev. 32,
104-121.
Tuck, B., Berman, M., Hill, A., 2009. Local Amenities, Unobserved Quality, and Market
Clearing: Adjusting Teacher Compensation to Provide Equal Education Opportunities.
Econ. Educ. Rev. 28 (1), 58-66.

62

Tyler, J.H, Murnane, R.J., Willett, J.B., 2000. Estimating the Labor Market Signaling
Value of the GED. Q. J. Econ. 115 (2), 431-468.
Tyler, J.H., Murnane, R.J., Willett, J.B., 2004. The Devil’s in the Details: Evidence from
the GED on Large Effects of Small Differences in High Stakes Exams. Econ. Educ. Rev.
23 (4), 339-349.
Tyler, J.H., Lofstrom, M., 2010. Is the GED an Effective Route to Postsecondary
Education for School Dropouts? Econ. Educ. Rev. 29 (5), 813-825.
Urquiola, M., Verhoogen, E., 2009. Class-Size Caps, Sorting, and the RegressionDiscontinuity Design. Am. Econ. Rev. 99 (1), 179-215.
Waldo, S., 2007. On the Use of Student Data in Efficiency Analysis—Technical
Efficiency in Swedish Upper Secondary School. Econ. Educ. Rev. 26 (2), 173-185.
Weiss, M.J., May, H., 2012. A Policy Analysis of the Federal Growth Model Pilot
Program’s Measures of School Performance: The Florida Case. Educ. Financ. Policy. 7
(1), 44-73.
West, M.R., Peterson, P.E., 2006. The Efficacy of Choice Threats within School
Accountability Systems: Results from Legislatively Induced Experiments. Econ. J. 116
(510), C46-C62.
Wikstrom, C., Wikstrom, M., 2005. Grade Inflation and School Competition: An
Empirical Analysis Based on the Swedish Upper Secondary Schools. Econ. Educ. Rev.
24 (3), 309-322.
Winters, M.A., Trivitt, J.R., Greene, J.P., 2010. The Impact of High-Stakes Testing on
Student Proficiency in Low-Stakes Subjects: Evidence from Florida’s Elementary
Science Exam. Econ. Educ. Rev. 29 (1), 138-146.
Winters, M.A., 2012. Measuring the Effect of Charter Schools on Public School Student
Achievement in an Urban Environment: Evidence from New York City. Econ. Educ.
Rev. 31 (2), 293-301.
Winters. M.A., Dixon, B.L., Greene, J.P., 2012. Observed Characteristics and Teacher
Quality: Impacts of Sample Selection on a Value Added Model. Econ. Educ. Rev. 31 (1),
19-32.
Winters, M.A, Greene, J.P., 2012. The Medium-Run Effects of Florida’s Test-Based
Promotion Policy. Educ. Financ. Policy. 7 (3), 305-330.
Winters, M.A., Haight, R.C., Swaim, T.T., Pickering, K.A., 2013. The Effect of SameGender Teacher Assignment on Student Achievement in the Elementary and Secondary
Grades: Evidence from Panel Data. Econ. Educ. Rev. 34, 69-75.
Wiswall, M., 2013. The Dynamics of Teacher Quality. J. Public Econ. 100, 61-78.
63

Wiswall, M., Stiefel, L., Schwartz, A.E., Boccardo, J., 2014. Does Attending a STEM
High School Improve Student Performance? Evidence from New York City. Econ. Educ.
Rev. 40, 93-105.
Zabel, J.E., 2008. The Impact of Peer Effects on Student Outcomes in New York City
Public Schools. Educ. Financ. Policy. 3 (2), 197-249.
Zimmer, R., Gill, B., Booker, K., Lavertu, S., Witte, J., 2012. Examining Charter Student
Achievement Effects across Seven States. Econ. Educ. Rev. 31 (2), 213-224.
Zimmer, R., Gill, B., Attridge, J., Obenauf, K., 2014. Charter School Authorizers and
Student Achievement. Educ. Financ. Policy. 9 (1), 59-85.

64

Table 1: Survey of papers using administrative education data. Unmatched administrative
source studies.
(1)
(2)
Country/region
Authors, publication year and title
Austria: Linz
Schneeweis and Zweimuller (2012): “Girls, Girls, Girls: Gender
Composition and Female School Choice.
England
Machin, McNally and Silva (2007) New Technology in Schools: Is
There a Payoff?
England
Ray, McCormack and Evans (2009) Value Added in English Schools.
England
Dustmann, Machin and Schonberg (2010) Ethnicity and Educational
Achievement in Compulsory Schooling.
England
Holmlund, McNally and Viarengo (2010) Does Money Matter for
Schools?
England
Burgess and Briggs (2010) School Assignment, School Choice and
Social Mobility
England
Gibbons and Silva (2011) Faith Primary Schools: Better Schools or
Better Pupils?
England
Gibbons and Telhaj (2011) Pupil Mobility and School Disruption
England
Keslair, Maurin and McNally (2012) Every Child Matters? An
Evaluation of “Special Educational Needs” Programmes in England.
England
Lavy, Silva and Weinhardt (2012) The Good, the Bad, and the
Average: Evidence on Ability Peer Effects in Schools
England and
Burgess, Wilson and Worth (2013) A Natural Experiment in School
Wales
Accountability: The Impact of School Performance Information on
Pupil Progress
England
Burgess and Greaves (2013) Test Scores, Subjective Assessment, and
Stereotyping of Ethnic Minorities.
England
Geay, McNally and Telhaj (2013) Non-Native Speakers of English in
the Classroom: What Are the Effects on Pupil Performance?
England
Gibbons, Silva and Weinhardt (2013) Everybody Needs Good
Neighbours? Evidence from Students’ Outcomes in England.
England
Allen and Burgess (2013) Evaluating the Provision of School
Performance Information for School Choice.
England
Almond, Mazumder and Van Ewijk (2014) In Utero Ramadan
Exposure and Children’s Academic Performance.
Finland
Hakkinen, Kirjavainen and Uusitalo (2003) School Resources and
Student Achievement Revisited: New Evidence from Panel Data.
Germany: Hesse Muhlenweg and Puhani (2010) The Evolution of the School-Entry
Age Effect in a School Tracking System
Italy
Barbieri, Rossetti and Sestito (2011) The Determinants of Teacher
Mobility: Evidence Using Italian Teachers’ Transfer Applications.
Italy
Angrist, Battistin and Vuri (2014) Is a Small Moment: Class Size and
Moral Hazard in the Mezzogiorno.
Israel: Jerusalem Angrist and Lavy (2001) Does Teacher Training Affect Pupil
Learning? Evidence from Matched Comparisons in Jerusalem Public
Schools

65

Israel

Israel
Israel
Israel

Israel

Israel
Netherlands
Netherlands:
Rotterdam
Sweden
Canada: British
Columbia
Canada: British
Columbia
Canada: British
Columbia
Canada: British
Columbia
Canada: British
Columbia
Canada: Ontario
Canada: Ontario
Trinidad and
Tobago
Trinidad and
Tobago
Trinidad and
Tobago
USA: Alaska

Gould, Lavy and Paserman (2004) Immigrating to Opportunity:
Estimating the Effect of School Quality Using a Natural Experiment
on Ethiopians in Israel
Lavy and Schlosser (2005) Targeted Remedial Education for
Underperforming Teenagers: Costs and Benefits.
Lavy (2008) Do Gender Stereotypes Reduce Girls' or Boys' Human
Capital Outcomes? Evidence from a Natural Experiment.
Gould, Lavy and Paserman (2009) Does Immigration Affect the
Long-Term Educational Outcomes of Natives? Quasi-Experimental
Evidence.
Lavy and Paserman (2012) Inside The Black Box of Ability Peer
Effects: Evidence from Variation in the Proportion of Low Achievers
in the Classroom.
Cohen-Zada, Gradstein and Reuven (2013) Allocation of Students in
Public Schools: Theory and New Evidence.
Leuven et al. (2007) The Effect of Extra Funding for Disadvantaged
Pupils on Achievement
Heers et al. (2014) The Impact of Community Schools on Student
Dropout in Pre-Vocational Education.
Waldo (2007) On the Use of Student Data in Efficiency Analysis—
Technical Efficiency in Swedish Upper Secondary School.
Bedard and Dhuey (2006) The Persistence of Early Childhood
Maturity: International Evidence of Long-Run Age Effects
Smith (2010) How Valuable Is the Gift of Time? The Factors That
Drive the Birth Date Effect in Education.
Friesen, Hickey and Krauth (2010) Disabled Peers and Academic
Achievement.
Coelli and Green (2012) Leadership Effects: School Principals and
Student Outcomes.
DeCicca and Smith (2013) The Long-Run Impacts of Early
Childhood Education: Evidence from a Failed Policy Experiment
Card, Dooley and Payne (2010) School Competition and Efficiency
with Publicly Funded Catholic Schools.
Leach, Payne and Chan (2010) The Effects of School Board
Consolidation and Financing on Student Performance.
Jackson (2010) Do Students Benefit from Attending Better Schools?
Evidence from Rule-Based Student Assignments in Trinidad and
Tobago
Jackson (2012) Single-Sex Schools, Student Achievement, and
Course Selection: Evidence from Rule-Based Student Assignments in
Trinidad and Tobago.
Jackson (2013) Can Higher-Achieving Peers Explain the Benefits to
Attending Selective Schools? Evidence from Trinidad and Tobago.
Tuck, Berman and Hill (2009) Local Amenities, Unobserved Quality,
and Market Clearing: Adjusting Teacher Compensation to Provide
Equal Education Opportunities.

66

USA: California
USA: California
(San Diego)
USA: California
USA: California
(San Diego)
USA: California
(San Diego)
USA: California
(San Diego)
USA: Colorado
USA: Colorado
(Denver)
USA: Colorado
(Denver)
USA: District
Columbia
USA: Florida
USA: Florida

USA: Florida

USA: Florida
USA: Florida
USA: Florida
USA: Florida
USA: Florida

USA: Florida
USA: Florida

USA: Florida

Clark, Rothstein and Schanzenbach (2009) Selection Bias in College
Admissions Test Scores.
Koedel (2009) An Empirical Analysis of Teacher Spillover Effects in
Secondary School.
Jepsen (2010) Bilingual Education and English Proficiency
Koedel and Betts (2010) Value Added to What? How a Ceiling in the
Testing Instrument Influences Value-Added Estimation.
Koedel and Betts (2011) Does Student Sorting Invalidate ValueAdded Models of Teacher Effectiveness? An Extended Analysis of
the Rothstein Critique
Zimmer et al. (2012) Examining Charter Student Achievement
Effects across Seven States.
Briggs and Weeks (2009) The Sensitivity of Value-Added Modeling
to the Creation of a Vertical Score Scale.
Goldhaber and Walch (2012) Strategic Pay Reform: A Student
Outcomes-Based Evaluation of Denver’s Procomp Teacher Pay
Initiative.
Zimmer et al. (2012) Examining Charter Student Achievement
Effects across Seven States.
Curto and Fryer (2014) The Potential of Urban Boarding Schools for
the Poor: Evidence from SEED
Figlio and Lucas (2004) What's in a Grade? School Report Cards and
the Housing Market
Tyler, Murnane and Willett (2004) The Devil’s in the Details:
Evidence from the GED on Large Effects of Small Differences in
High Stakes Exams.
West and Peterson (2006) The Efficacy of Choice Threats within
School Accountability Systems: Results from Legislatively Induced
Experiments.
Figlio and Rouse (2006) Do Accountability and Voucher Threats
Improve Low-Performing Schools?
Sass (2006) Charter Schools and Student Achievement in Florida
Greene and Winters (2007) Revisiting Grade Retention: An
Evaluation of Florida’s Test-Based Promotion Policy.
McCaffrey et al. (2009) The Intertemporal Variability of Teacher
Effect Estimates.
Greene and Winters (2009) The Effects of Exemptions to Florida’s
Test-Based Promotion Policy: Who Is Retained? Who Benefits
Academically?
Chiang (2009) How Accountability Pressure on Failing Schools
Affects Student Achievement
Winters, Trivitt and Greene (2010) The Impact of High-Stakes
Testing on Student Proficiency in Low-Stakes Subjects: Evidence
from Florida’s Elementary Science Exam.
Feng (2010) Hire Today, Gone Tomorrow: New Teacher Classroom
Assignments and Teacher Mobility

67

USA: Florida
USA: Florida
USA: Florida

USA: Florida
USA: Florida

USA: Florida
USA: Florida

USA: Florida

USA: Florida

USA: Florida

USA: Florida

USA: Florida
USA: Florida
USA: Florida
USA: Florida
USA: Florida
(Miami-Dade)
USA: Florida
(Miami-Dade)
USA: Illinois
USA: Illinois
USA: Illinois
(Chicago)

Harris and Sass (2011) Teacher Training, Teacher Quality and
Student Achievement.
Booker et al. (2011) The Effects of Charter High Schools on
Educational Attainment
Chingos and Peterson (2011) It’s Easier to Pick a Good Teacher Than
to Train One: Familiar and New Results on the Correlates of Teacher
Effectiveness.
Chingos (2012) The Impact of a Universal Class-Size Reduction
Policy: Evidence from Florida’s Statewide Mandate.
Winters, Dixon and Greene (2012) Observed Characteristics and
Teacher Quality: Impacts of Sample Selection on a Value Added
Model.
Winters and Greene (2012) The Medium-Run Effects of Florida’s
Test-Based Promotion Policy
Weiss and May (2012) A Policy Analysis of the Federal Growth
Model Pilot Program’s Measures of School Performance: The Florida
Case.
Schwerdt and West (2013) The Impact of Alternative Grade
Configurations on Student Outcomes through Middle and High
School.
Mihaly et al. (2013) Where You Come from or Where You Go?
Distinguishing Between School Quality and the Effectiveness of
Teacher Preparation Program Graduates.
Feng and Sass (2013) What Makes Special-Education Teachers
Special? Teacher Training and Achievement of Students with
Disabilities.
Winters et al. (2013) The Effect of Same-Gender Teacher Assignment
on Student Achievement in the Elementary and Secondary Grades:
Evidence from Panel Data.
Burke and Sass (2013) Classroom Peer Effects and Student
Achievement
Cowen and Winter (2013) Do Charters Retain Teachers Differently?
Evidence from Elementary Schools in Florida
Figlio and Hart (2014) Competitive Effects of Means-Tested School
Vouchers.
Sass, Semykina and Harris (2014) Value-Added Models and the
Measurement of Teacher Productivity
Taylor (2014) Spending More of the School Day in Math Class:
Evidence from a Regression Discontinuity in Middle School
Loeb, Kalogrides and Beteille (2012) Effective Schools: Teacher
Hiring, Assignment, Development, and Retention
Fitzpatrick and Lovenheim (2014) Early Retirement Incentives and
Student Achievement.
Gates et al. (2006) Mobility and Turnover Among School Principals.
Cullen, Jacob and Levitt (2006) The Effect of School Choice on
Participants: Evidence from Randomized Lotteries

68

USA: Illinois
(Chicago)
USA: Illinois
(Chicago)
USA: Illinois
(Chicago)
USA: Illinois
(Chicago)
USA: Illinois
(Chicago)
USA: Illinois
(Chicago)
USA: Illinois
(Chicago)
USA: Illinois
(Chicago)
USA: Illinois
(Chicago)
USA: Illinois
(Chicago)
USA: Illinois
(Chicago)
USA: Illinois
(Chicago)
USA: Illinois
(Chicago)
USA: Illinois
(Chicago)
USA: Illinois
(Chicago)
USA: Kentucky
USA: Kentucky
USA: Kentucky
USA: Kentucky

USA: Louisiana
USA: Louisiana
USA:

Jacob and Levitt (2003) Rotten Apples: an Investigation of the
Prevalence and Predictors of Teacher Cheating
Neal and Schanzenbach (2010) Left Behind by Design: Proficiency
Counts and Test-Based Accountability
Jacob and Lefgren (2004) Remedial Education and Student
Achievement: A Regression-Discontinuity Analysis
Jacob and Lefgren (2004) The Impact of Teacher Training on Student
Achievement: Quasi-Experimental Evidence from School Reform
Efforts in Chicago
Booker (2011) The Effects of Charter High Schools on Educational
Attainment
Jacob (2013) The Effect of Employment Protection on Teacher Effort
Aaronson, Barrow and Sander (2007) Teachers and Student
Achievement in the Chicago Public High Schools.
Jacob and Lefgren (2009) The Effect of Grade Retention on High
School Completion
Jacob (2005) Accountability, Incentives and Behavior: the Impact of
High-Stakes Testing in the Chicago Public Schools
Cullen, Jacob and Levitt (2005) The Impact of School Choice on
Student Outcomes: An Analysis of the Chicago Public Schools.
Steinberg (2014) Does Greater Autonomy Improve School
Performance? Evidence from a Regression Discontinuity Analysis in
Chicago.
Cortes, Moussa and Weinstein (2013) Educating Bright Students in
Urban Schools.
Jacob and Walsh (2011) What’s in a Rating?
Robertson (2011) The Effects of Quarter of Birth on Academic
Outcomes at the Elementary School Level
Cortes, Goodman and Nomi (2014) Intensive Math Instruction and
Educational Attainment: Long-Run Impacts of Double-Dose Algebra.
Streams et al. (2011) School Finance Reform: Do Equalized
Expenditures Imply Equalized Teacher Salaries?
Barrett and Toma (2013) Reward or Punishment? Class Size and
Teacher Quality
Cowen et al. (2012) Teacher Retention in Appalachian Schools:
Evidence from Kentucky
Kukla-Acevedo (2009) Do Teacher Characteristics Matter? New
Results on the Effects of Teacher Preparation on Student
Achievement.
Imberman, Kugler and Sacerdote (2012) Katrina's Children: Evidence
on the Structure of Peer Effects from Hurricane Evacuees
Sacerdote (2012) When the Saints Go Marching Out: Long-Term
Outcomes for Student Evacuees from Hurricanes Katrina and Rita.
Goodman (2008) Who Merits Financial Aid?: Massachusetts' Adams

69

Massachusetts
USA:
Massachusetts
USA:
Massachusetts
USA:
Massachusetts
(Boston)
USA:
Massachusetts
(Brookline)
USA:
Massachusetts
(Boston)
USA:
Massachusetts
(Boston)
USA:
Massachusetts
(Boston)
USA: Michigan
USA: Michigan
USA: Michigan
USA: Minnesota
(Twin Cities)
USA: Missouri
USA: Missouri
USA: Missouri
USA: North
Carolina
USA: North
Carolina
USA: North
Carolina
USA: North
Carolina
USA: North
Carolina
USA: North
Carolina

Scholarship.
Goodman (2010) Skills, Schools, and Credit Constraints: Evidence
from Massachusetts
Goodman (2014) Flaking Out: Student Absences and Snow Days as
Disruptions of Instructional Time.
Abdulkadiroglu, Pathak and Roth (2009) Strategy-Proofness versus
Efficiency in Matching with Indifferences: Redesigning the NYC
High School Match
Angrist and Lang (2004) Does School Integration Generate Peer
Effects? Evidence from Boston's Metco Program
Abdulkadiroglu, Angrist and Pathak (2014) The Elite Illusion:
Achievement Effects at Boston and New York Exam Schools.
Abdulkadiroglu et al. (2011) Accountability and Flexibility in Public
Schools: Evidence from Boston's Charters and Pilots
Pathak and Shi (2014) Demand Modeling, Forecasting, and
Counterfactuals, Part I
Gershenson (2012) How Do Substitute Teachers Substitute? An
Empirical Study of Substitute-Teacher Labor Supply
Andrews, DesJardins and Ranchhod (2010) The Effects of the
Kalamazoo Promise on College Choice.
Brummet (2014) The Effects of School Closings on Student
Achievement.
Hinrichs (2011) When the Bell Tolls: The Effects of School Starting
Times on Academic Achievement.
Ransom and Sims (2010) Estimating the Firm’s Labor Supply Curve
in a “New Monopsony” Framework: Schoolteachers in Missouri.
Koedel, Ni and Podgursky (2014) Who Benefits From Pension
Enhancements?
Costrell and Podgursky (2010) Distribution of Benefits in Teacher
Retirement Systems and Their Implications for Mobility
Rothstein (2010) Teacher Quality in Educational Production:
Tracking, Decay, and Student Achievement
Jackson (2013) Worker Productivity, and Worker Mobility: Direct
Evidence from Teachers
Fruehwirth (2014) Can Achievement Peer Effect Estimates Inform
Policy? A View from Inside the Black Box.
Clotfelter, Ladd and Vigdor (2009) The Academic Achievement Gap
in Grades 3 To 8
Kinsler (2012) Beyond Levels and Growth: Estimating Teacher
Value-Added and its Persistence.
Goldhaber (2007) Everyone’s Doing It, But What Does Teacher
Testing Tell Us About Teacher Effectiveness?

70

USA: North
Carolina
USA: North
Carolina
USA: North
Carolina
USA: North
Carolina
USA: North
Carolina
USA: North
Carolina
USA: North
Carolina
USA: North
Carolina
USA: North
Carolina
USA: North
Carolina
USA: North
Carolina
USA: North
Carolina
USA: North
Carolina
USA: North
Carolina
USA: North
Carolina
USA: North
Carolina
USA: North
Carolina
USA: North
Carolina
USA: North
Carolina
USA: North
Carolina
USA: North
Carolina
USA: North
Carolina

Clotfelter, Ladd and Vigdor (2009) Teacher Credentials and Student
Achievement in High School: A Cross-Subject Analysis with Student
Fixed Effects.
Jacob, Lefgren and Sims (2010) The Persistence of Teacher-Induced
Learning
Clotfelter, Ladd, Vigdor (2006) Teacher-Student Matching and the
Assessment of Teacher Effectiveness
Murnane and Olsen (1990) The Effects of Salaries and Opportunity
Costs on Length of Stay in Teaching: Evidence from North Carolina
Jackson (2009) Student Demographics, Teacher Sorting, and Teacher
Quality: Evidence from the End of School Desegregation.
Jackson and Bruegmann (2009) Teaching Students and Teaching
Each Other: The Importance of Peer Learning for Teachers
Ost (2014) How Do Teachers Improve? The Relative Importance of
Specific and General Human Capital.
Jackson (2012) School Competition and Teacher Labor Markets:
Evidence from Charter School Entry in North Carolina.
Wiswall (2013) The Dynamics of Teacher Quality.
Clotfelter et al. (2008) Would Higher Salaries Keep Teachers in
High-Poverty Schools? Evidence from a Policy Intervention in North
Carolina.
Henry et al. (2014) Teacher Preparation Policies and their Effects on
Student Achievement.
Fuller and Ladd (2013) School-Based Accountability and the
Distribution of Teacher Quality across Grades in Elementary School.
Carruthers (2012) The Qualifications and Classroom Performance of
Teachers Moving to Charter Schools.
Clotfelter, Ladd and Vigdro (2011) Teacher Mobility, School
Segregation, and Pay-Based Policies to Level the Playing Field.
Player (2010) Nonmonetary Compensation in the Public Teacher
Labor Market
Bifulco and Ladd (2006) The Impacts of Charter Schools on Student
Achievement: Evidence from North Carolina.
Rothstein (2009) Student Sorting and Bias in Value-Added
Estimation: Selection on Observables and Unobservables.
Clotfelter, Ladd and Vigdor (2009) Are Teacher Absences Worth
Worrying about in the United States?
Condie, Lefgren and Sims (2014) Teacher Heterogeneity, ValueAdded and Education Policy
Ahn (2014) A Regression Discontinuity Analysis of Graduation
Standards and Their Impact on Students’ Academic Trajectories.
Miller (2013) Principal Turnover and Student Achievement.
Strain (2013) Single-Sex Classes & Student Outcomes: Evidence
from North Carolina.

71

USA: North
Carolina
USA: North
Carolina
USA: North
Carolina
USA: North
Carolina
USA: North
Carolina
USA: North
Carolina
USA: North
Carolina
USA: North
Carolina
USA: North
Carolina
USA: North
Carolina
USA: North
Carolina
USA: North
Carolina
USA: North
Carolina
USA: North
Carolina
USA: North
Carolina
(CharlotteMecklenburg)
USA: North
Carolina (Wake)
USA: North
Carolina (Wake)
USA: North
Carolina (Wake)
USA: North
Carolina
(Wayne)
USA: New

Goldhaber, Cowen and Walch (2013) Is a Good Elementary Teacher
Always Good? Assessing Teacher Performance Estimates across
Subjects
Cratty (2012) Potential for Significant Reductions in Dropout Rates:
Analysis of an Entire 3rd Grade State Cohort.
Miller and Mittleman (2012) High Schools That Work and College
Preparedness: Measuring the Model’s Impact on Mathematics and
Science Pipeline Progression
Carruthers (2012) New Schools, New Students, New Teachers:
Evaluating the Effectiveness of Charter Schools.
Kinsler (2011) Understanding the Black–White School Discipline
Gap.
Guardiano, Brown and Wyse (2011) Can Districts Keep Good
Teachers in the Schools That Need Them Most?
Clotfelter, Ladd and Vigdor (2007) Teacher Credentials and Student
Achievement: Longitudinal Analysis with Student Fixed Effects.
Gates et al. (2006) Mobility and Turnover Among School Principals.
Clotfelter, Ladd and Vigdor (2005) Who Teaches Whom? Race and
the Distribution of Novice Teachers.
Ladd and Walsh (2002) Implementing Value-Added Measures of
School Effectiveness: Getting the Incentives Right.
Jackson (2014) Teacher Quality at the High-School Level: The
Importance of Accounting for Tracks
Mansfield (2014) Teacher Quality and Student Inequality
Ahn and Vigdor (2014) When Incentives Matter Too Much:
Explaining Significant Responses to Irrelevant Information.
Macartney (2014) The Dynamic Effects of Educational
Accountability
Deming (2014) Using School Choice Lotteries to Test Measures of
School Effectiveness.

Edwards (2012) Early to Rise? The Effect of Daily Start Times on
Academic Performance.
McMullen and Rouse (2012) School Crowding, Year-Round
Schooling, and Mobile Classroom Use: Evidence from North
Carolina.
McMullen and Rouse (2012) The Impact of Year-Round Schooling
on Academic Achievement: Evidence from Mandatory School
Calendar Conversions
Bastian, Henry and Thompson (2013) Incorporating Access to More
Effective Teachers into Assessments of Educational Resource Equity.
Ou (2010) To Leave or not to Leave? A Regression Discontinuity

72

Jersey
USA: New York

USA: New York
USA: New York
USA: New York
(New York City)
USA: New York
(New York City)
USA: New York
(New York City)
USA: New York
(New York City)
USA: New York
(New York City)
USA: New York
(New York City)
USA: New York
(New York City)
USA: New York
(New York City)
USA: New York
(New York City)
USA: New York
(New York City)
USA: New York
(New York City)
USA: New York
(New York City)
USA: Ohio
USA: Ohio
USA: Ohio
(Cincinnati)
USA: Ohio
(Cincinnati)
USA:
Pennsylvania

Analysis of the Impact of Failing the High School Exit Exam.
Boyd et al. (2013) Analyzing the Determinants of the Matching of
Public School Teachers to Jobs: Disentangling the Preferences of
Teachers and Employers
Brewer (1996) Career Paths and Quit Decisions: Evidence from
Teaching
Lankford and Wyckoff (1997) The Changing Structure of Teacher
Compensation, 1970-94.
Abdulkadiroglu, Pathak and Roth (2009) Strategy-Proofness versus
Efficiency in Matching with Indifferences: Redesigning the NYC
High School Match
Abdulkadiroglu, Angrist and Pathak (2009)The Elite Illusion:
Achievement Effects at Boston and New York Exam Schools.
Schwartz, Stiefel and Kim (2004) The Impact of School Reform on
Student Performance: Evidence From the New York Network for
School Renewal Project
Hermann and Rockoff (2012) Worker Absence and Productivity:
Evidence from Teaching
Rockoff and Lockwood (2010) Stuck in the Middle: Impacts of Grade
Configuration in Public Schools.
Zabel (2008) The Impact of Peer Effects on Student Outcomes in
New York City Public Schools
Schwartz and Stiefel (2006) Is There a Nativity Gap? New Evidence
on the Academic Performance of Immigrant Students.
Rubenstein et al. (2009) Spending, Size, and Grade Span in K–8
Schools.
Wiswall et al. (2014) Does Attending a STEM High School Improve
Student Performance? Evidence from New York City.
Leos-Urbel et al. (2013) Not Just for Poor Kids: The Impact of
Universal Free School Breakfast on Meal Participation and Student
Outcomes.
Winters (2012) Measuring the Effect of Charter Schools on Public
School Student Achievement in an Urban Environment: Evidence
from New York City.
Kane, Rockoff and Staiger (2008) What Does Certification Tell Us
About Teacher Effectiveness? Evidence from New York City.
Zimmer et al. (2014) Charter School Authorizers and Student
Achievement
Zimmer et al. (2014) Examining Charter Student Achievement
Effects across Seven States.
Taylor and Tyler (2012) The Effect of Evaluation on Teacher
Performance.
Kane et al. (2011) Identifying Effective Classroom Practices Using
Student Achievement Data.
Ferguson, Strauss and Vogt (2006) The Effects of Defined Benefit
Pension Incentives and Working Conditions on Teacher Retirement

73

USA:
Pennsylvania
(Philadelphia)
USA: Texas
USA: Texas
USA: Texas
USA: Texas
USA: Texas
USA: Texas
USA: Texas
USA: Texas
USA: Texas
USA: Texas
USA: Texas

USA: Texas
USA: Texas

USA: Texas
USA: Texas
USA: Texas

USA: Texas
USA: Texas
(Houston)
USA: Texas
(Houston)
USA: Utah

Decisions
Zimmer et al. (2012) Examining Charter Student Achievement
Effects across Seven States.
Cullen, Long and Reback (2013) Jockeying for Position: Strategic
High School Choice under Texas' Top Ten Percent Plan.
Reback (2008) Teaching to the Rating: School Accountability and the
Distribution of Student Achievement.
Booker et al. (2007) The Impact of Charter School Attendance on
Student Performance.
Hanushek et al. (2007) Charter School Quality and Parental Decision
Making with School Choice.
Hanushek, Kain and Rivkin (2004) Disruption Versus Tiebout
Improvement: The Costs and Benefits of Switching Schools.
Clark, Rothstein and Schanzenbach (2009) Selection Bias in College
Admissions Test Scores.
Hanushek, Kain and Rivkin (2004) Why Public Schools Lose
Teachers
Hendricks (2014) Does it Pay to Pay Teachers More? Evidence from
Texas.
Rivkin, Hanushek and Kain (2005) Teachers, Schools, and Academic
Achievement.
Currie et al. (2009) Does Pollution Increase School Absences?
Hanushek, Kain and Rivkin (2002) Inferring Program Effects for
Special Populations: Does Special Education Raise Achievement for
Students With Disabilities?
Sanders (2012) What Doesn’t Kill You Makes You Weaker. Prenatal
Pollution Exposure and educational Outcomes
Hanushek, Kain and Rivkin (2009) New Evidence about Brown v.
Board of Education: The Complex Effects of School Racial
Composition on Achievement.
Zimmer (2012) Examining Charter Student Achievement Effects
across Seven States.
Tyler and Lofstrom (2010) Is the GED an Effective Route to
Postsecondary Education for School Dropouts?
Tyler, Murnane and Willett (2004) The Devil’s in the Details:
Evidence from the GED on Large Effects of Small Differences in
High Stakes Exams.
Klopfenstein (2004) Advanced Placement: Do Minorities Have Equal
Opportunity?
Imberman and Lovenheim (2015) Incentive Strength and Teacher
Productivity: Evidence from a Group-Based Teacher Incentive Pay
System
Imberman, Kugler and Sacerdote (2012) Katrina's Children: Evidence
on the Structure of Peer Effects from Hurricane Evacuees
Ni and Rorrer (2012) Twice Considered: Charter Schools and Student

74

USA:
Washington
USA:
Washington
USA:
Washington
USA:
Washington
USA:
Washington
USA:
Washington
USA:
Washington
USA:
Washington
USA: Wisconsin
USA: Wisconsin
(Milwaukee)
USA: unnamed
USA: unnamed

USA: unnamed
USA: unnamed
USA: unnamed
USA: unnamed
USA: unnamed
USA
Chile
Chile
Chile

Achievement in Utah
Theobald and Gritz (1996) The Effects of School District Spending
Priorities on Length of Stay in Teaching.
Goldhaber and Theobald (2013) Managing the Teacher Workforce in
Austere Times: The Determinants and Implications of Teacher
Layoffs
Krieg (2008) Are Students Left Behind? The Distributional Effects of
the No Child Left Behind Act.
Goldhaber, Liddle and Theobald (2013) The Gateway to the
Profession: Assessing Teacher Preparation Programs Based on
Student Achievement
Krieg (2011) Which Students Are Left Behind? The Racial Impacts of
the No Child Left Behind Act.
Krieg (2006) Teacher Quality and Attrition.
Theobald and Gritz (1996) The Effects of School District Spending
Priorities on the Exit Paths of Beginning Teachers Leaving the
District.
Theobald (1990) An Examination of the Influence of Personal,
Professional, and School District Characteristics on Public School
Teacher Retention.
Teacher Salaries and Teacher Attrition.
Examining Charter Student Achievement Effects across Seven States.
Springer (2008) The Influence of an NCLB Accountability Plan on
the Distribution of Student Test Score Gains.
Matsudaira, Hosek and Walsh (2012) An Integrated Assessment of
the Effects of Title I on School Behavior, Resources, and Student
Achievement.
Imberman (2011) The Effect of Charter Schools on Achievement and
Behavior of Public School Students.
Bui, Craig and Imberman (2014) Is Gifted Education a Bright Idea?
Assessing the Impact of Gifted and Talented Programs on Students.
Lockwood and McCaffrey (2009) Exploring Student-Teacher
Interactions in Longitudinal Achievement Data.
Engberg (2014) Evaluating Education Programs That Have Lotteried
Admission and Selective Attrition.
Imberman (2011) Achievement and Behavior in Charter Schools:
Drawing a More Complete Picture.
Belfield and Levin (2004) Should High School Economics Courses
Be Compulsory?
Urquiola and Verhoogen (2009) Class-Size Caps, Sorting, and the
Regression-Discontinuity Design
Mizal and Roumaguera (2000) School Performance and Choice: The
Chilean Experience
Thieme, Prior and Tortosa-Ausina (2013) A Multilevel

75

Chile
Peru
China: Beijing
Kenya
Australia:
Queensland

Decomposition of School Performance Using Robust Nonparametric
Frontier Techniques
Bellei (2009) Does Lengthening the School Day Increase Students’
Academic Achievement? Results from a Natural Experiment in Chile.
Dell (2010) The Persistent Effects of Peru’s Mining Mita
Lai (2010) Are Boys Left Behind? The Evolution of the Gender
Achievement Gap in Beijing’s Middle Schools.
Lucas and Mbiti (2014) Effects of School Quality on Student
Achievement: Discontinuity Evidence from Kenya
Leigh (2010) Estimating Teacher Effectiveness from Two-Year
Changes in Students’ Test Scores.

Note: This table lists studies which make use of unmatched administrative data, and that have been
published or announced as forthcoming between January 1990 and July 2014 in the following outlets:
American Economic Journal: Applied Economics, American Economic Journal: Economic Policy,
American Economic Review, Econometrica, Economic Journal, Economics of Education Review,
Education Finance and Policy, Journal of Human Resources, Journal of Labor Economics, Journal of
Political Economy, Journal of Public Economics, Quarterly Journal of Economics, Review of Economic
Studies, Review of Economics and Statistics and NBER Working Papers: Education Program. All the
papers in the table used at least one administrative data set in the analysis and these data were not matched
across registers or to other external data sources.

76

Table 2: Survey of papers using administrative education data. Multiple matched
administrative sources studies.
(1)
(2)
Country/region
Authors, publication year and title
Denmark
Heinesen (2009): Estimating Class-Size Effects using WithinSchool Variation in Subject-Specific Classes.
Denmark
Damm and Dustmann (2014) Does Growing Up in a High Crime
Neighborhood Affect Youth Criminal Behavior?
Finland
Kerr, Pekkarinen and Uusitalo (2013) School Tracking and
Development of Cognitive Skills.
Germany: Hesse,
Dustmann and Schonberg (2012) Expansions in Maternity Leave
Bayern,
Coverage and Children’s Long-Term Outcomes.
SchleswigHolstein
Norway
Falch and Strom (2005) Teacher Turnover and Non-Pecuniary
Factors.
Norway
Black, Devereux and Salvanes (2005) The More the Merrier? The
Effect of Family Size and Birth Order on Children’s Education
Norway
Black, Devereux and Salvanes (2005) Why the Apple Doesn't Fall
Far: Understanding Intergenerational Transmission of Human
Capital
Norway
Black, Devereux and Salvanes (2007) From the Cradle to the Labor
Market? The Effect of Birth Weight on Adult Outcomes
Norway
Black, Devereux and Salvanes (2010) Small Family, Smart Family?
Family Size and the IQ Scores of Young Men
Norway
Rege, Telle and Votruba (2011) Parental Job Loss and Children’s
School Performance
Norway
Black, Devereux and Salvanes (2011) Too Young to Leave the
Nest? The Effects Of School Starting
Norway
Havnes and Mogstad (2011) No Child Left Behind: Subsidized
Child Care and Children’s Long-Run Outcomes.
Norway
Haegeland, Raaum and Salvanes (2012) Pennies from Heaven?
Using Exogenous Tax Variation to Identify Effects of School
Resources on Pupil Achievement.
Norway
Loken, Mogstad and Wiswall (2012) What Linear Estimators Miss:
The Effects of Family Income on Child Outcomes.
Norway
Falch and Naper (2013) Educational Evaluation Schemes and
Gender Gaps in Student Achievement.
Norway
Bharadwaj, Loken and Neilson (2013) Early Life Health
Interventions and Academic Achievement
Norway
Black, Devereux and Salvanes (2013) Under Pressure? The Effect
of Peers on Outcomes of Young Adults
Norway
Bettinger, Haegeland and Rege (2014) Home with Mom: The
Effects of Stay-at-Home Parents on Children’s Long-Run
Educational Outcomes.
Norway
Black, Devereux and Salvanes (2014) Does Grief Transfer Across

77

Norway
Norway
Sweden

Sweden
Sweden

Sweden

Sweden:
Stockholm
Sweden
Sweden
Sweden
Sweden
Sweden
Sweden
Sweden

Canada: Manitoba

Canada: Manitoba
USA: Arkansas
USA: Florida
USA: Florida
USA: Florida
(Alachua)
USA: Florida

Generations? In-Utero Deaths and Child Outcomes.
Black et al. (2014) Care or Cash? The Effect of Child Care
Subsidies on Student Performance
Havens and Mogstad (2014) Is Universal Child Care Leveling the
Playing Field.
Wikstrom and Wikstrom (2005) Grade Inflation and School
Competition: An Empirical Analysis Based on the Swedish Upper
Secondary Schools.
Sandstrom and Bergstrom (2005) School Vouchers in Practice:
Competition Will Not Hurt You.
Bjorklund, Lindahl and Plug (2006) The Origins of
Intergenerational Associations: Lessons from Swedish Adoption
Data
Almond, Edlund and Palme (2009) Chernobyl’s Subclinical
Legacy: Prenatal Exposure to Radioactive Fallout and School
Outcomes in Sweden
Sund (2009) Estimating Peer Effects in Swedish High School Using
School, Teacher, and Student Fixed Effects
Chingos and West (2011) Do You Want Your Child to Have a
Certified Teacher?
Aslund et atl. (2011) Peers, Neighborhoods, and Immigrant Student
Achievement: Evidence from a Placement Policy
Hall (2012) The Effects of Reducing Tracking in Upper Secondary
School: Evidence from a Large-Scale Pilot Scheme.
Hensvik (2012) Competition, Wages and Teacher Sorting: Lessons
Learned from a Voucher Reform.
Gronqvist and Hall (2013) Education Policy and Early Fertility:
Lessons from an Expansion of Upper Secondary Schooling.
Fredriksson, Ockert and Oosterbeek (2013) Long-Term Effects of
Class Size
Lundborg, Nilsson and Rooth (2014) Parental Education and
Offspring Outcomes: Evidence from the Swedish Compulsory
School Reform.
Oreopoulos et al. (2008) Short-, Medium-, and Long-Term
Consequences of Poor Infant Health: An Analysis Using Siblings
and Twins
Currie et al. (2010) Child Health and Young Adult Outcomes
Costrell and McGee (2010) Teacher Pension Incentives, Retirement
Behavior, and Potential for Reform in Arkansas
Figlio (2007) Boys Named Sue: Disruptive Children and Their
Peers.
Figlio, Hart and Metzger (2010) Who Uses a Means-Tested
Scholarship, and What Do They Choose?
Carrell and Hoekstra (2010) Externalities in the Classroom: How
Children Exposed to Domestic Violence Affect Everyone’s Kids.
Clark and See (2011) The Impact of Tougher Education Standards:

78

USA: Florida

USA: Florida
USA: Florida
USA: Georgia
USA: Illinois
USA: Illinois
(Chicago)
USA: Illinois
(Chicago)
USA:
Massachusetts
USA: Missouri
USA: North
Carolina
USA: North
Carolina
USA: North
Carolina
USA: North
Carolina
(CharlotteMecklenburg)
USA: North
Carolina
(CharlotteMecklenburg)
USA: North
Carolina
(CharlotteMecklenburg)
USA: North
Carolina
(CharlotteMecklenburg)

Evidence from Florida.
Chingos and West (2011) Promotion and Reassignment in Public
School Districts: How Do Schools Respond to Differences in
Teacher Effectiveness?
Chingos and West (2012) Do More Effective Teachers Earn More
Outside the Classroom?
Figlio et al. (2014) The Effects of Poor Neonatal Health on
Children’s Cognitive Development
Scafidi, Sjoquist and Stinebrickner (2007) Race, Poverty, and
Teacher Mobility.
Doyle (2007) Child Protection and Child Outcomes: Measuring the
Effects of Foster Care
Jacob (2004) Public Housing, Housing Vouchers, and Student
Achievement: Evidence from Public Housing Demolitions in
Chicago
Cho (2009) The Impact of Maternal Imprisonment on Children’s
Educational Achievement: Results from Children in Chicago Public
Schools.
Angrist, Pathak and Walters (2013) Explaining Charter School
Effectiveness
Podgursky, Monroe and Watson (2004) The Academic Quality of
Public School Teachers: An Analysis of Entry and Exit Behavior
Goldhaber and Anthony (2007) Can Teacher Quality Be Effectively
Assessed? National Board Certification as a Signal of Effective
Teaching.
Goldhaber and Hansen (2009) National Board Certification and
Teachers’ Career Paths: Does NBPTS Certification Influence How
Long Teachers Remain in The Profession and Where They Teach?
Goldhaber,Choi and Cramer (2007) A Descriptive Analysis of the
Distribution of NBPTS-Certified Teachers in North Carolina
Billings, Deming and Rockoff (2014) School Segregation,
Educational Attainment, and Crime: Evidence from the End of
Busing in Charlotte-Mecklenburg
Deming (2011) Better Schools, Less Crime?

Hastings et al. (2007) The Effect of Randomized School
Admissions on Voter Participation

Deming et al. (2013) School Choice, School Quality, and
Postsecondary Attainment

79

USA: New York
(New York City)
USA: New York
(New York City)
USA: New York
(New York City)
USA: Texas
USA: Texas
USA: unnamed
USA: unnamed

USA: unnamed

USA
Taiwan

Dobbie and Fryer (2011) Are High-Quality Schools Enough to
Increase Achievement Among the Poor? Evidence from the Harlem
Children’s Zone
Dobbie and Fryer (2014) The Impact of Attending a School with
High-Achieving Peers: Evidence from the New York City Exam
Schools.
Boyd et al. (2006) How Changes in Entry Requirements Alter the
Teacher Workforce and Affect Student Achievement.
Clark and Martorell (2014) The Signaling Value of a High School
Diploma
Lyle (2006) Using Military Deployments and Job Assignments to
Estimate the Effect of Parental.
Chetty, Friedman and Rockoff (2014) Measuring the Impacts of
Teachers I: Evaluating Bias in Teacher Value-Added Estimates
Chetty, Friedman and Rockoff (2014) Measuring the Impacts of
Teachers II: Teacher Value-Added and Student Outcomes in
Adulthood
Engel, Gallagher and Lyle (2010) Military Deployments and
Children’s Academic Achievement: Evidence from Department of
Defense Education Activity Schools.
Tyler, Murnane and Willett (2000) Estimating the Labor Market
Signaling Value of the GED
Gimenez et al. (2013) Parental Loss and Children’s Well-Being.

Note: This table lists studies which make use of administrative data matched across multiple registers, and
that have been published or announced as forthcoming between January 1990 and July 2014 in the
following outlets: American Economic Journal: Applied Economics, American Economic Journal:
Economic Policy, American Economic Review, Econometrica, Economic Journal, Economics of Education
Review, Education Finance and Policy, Journal of Human Resources, Journal of Labor Economics, Journal
of Political Economy, Journal of Public Economics, Quarterly Journal of Economics, Review of Economic
Studies, Review of Economics and Statistics and NBER Working Papers: Education Program. All the
papers in the table used at least two administrative data sets in the analysis and these data sets were
matched together. We excluded from this table studies that matched a single administrative data source to
non-administrative external data sources such as surveys.

Table 3: Survey of papers using administrative education data. Unmatched administrative
source studies matched to surveys or experiments.
(1)
(2)
Country/region
Authors, publication year and title
England
Clark (2009) The Performance and Competitive Effects of School
Autonomy
England
Gibbons and Silva (2011) School Quality, Child Wellbeing and
Parents’ Satisfaction
England
Apps, Mendolina and Walker (2013) The Impact of Pre-School on
Adolescents’ Outcomes: Evidence from a Recent English Cohort
England
Ouazad and Page (2013) Students' Perceptions of Teacher Biases:
Experimental Economics in Schools
England
Burgess et al. (2014) What Parents Want: School Preferences and
School Choice.

80

France: Paris
Israel
Israel
Israel
Israel

Netherlands:
Amsterdam
Netherlands:
unnamed
Netherland:
Amsterdam
Romania
Sweden
Mexico

USA: California

USA: Colorado
(Denver)
USA: Florida
(Alachua)
USA: Florida
USA: Illinois
(Chicago)
USA: Illinois
(Chicago)
USA: Illinois
(Chicago)
USA: Indiana
(Gary)
USA: North
Carolina
(Charlotte-

Avvisati et al. (2014) Getting Parents Involved: A Field Experiment
in Deprived Schools
Angrist and Lavy (2009) The Effects of High Stakes High School
Achievement Awards: Evidence from a Randomized Trial
Lavy (2009) Performance Pay and Teachers' Effort, Productivity,
and Grading Ethics
Lavy and Schlosser (2011) Mechanisms and Impacts of Gender
Peer Effects at School
Lavy (2013) Gender Differences in Market Competitiveness in a
Real Workplace: Evidence from Performance-Based Pay
Tournaments among Teachers.
Cabus and De Witte (2011) Does School Time Matter?—On the
Impact of Compulsory Education Age on School Dropout.
Meyer and Van Klaveren (2013) The Effectiveness of Extended
Day Programs: Evidence from a Randomized Field Experiment in
the Netherlands.
Buser, Niederle and Oosterbeek (2014) Gender, Competitiveness,
and Career Choices
Pop-Eleches and Urquiola (2013) Going to a Better School: Effects
and Behavioral Responses
Hinnerich, Hoglin and Johannesson (2011) Are Boys Discriminated
in Swedish High Schools?
Behrman et al. (2014) Aligning Learning Incentives of Students and
Teachers: Results from a Social Experiment in Mexican High
Schools
Fairlie and Robinson (2013) Experimental Evidence on the Effects
of Home Computers on Academic Achievement among
Schoolchildren
Injecting Charter School Best Practices into Traditional Public
Schools: Evidence from Field Experiments
Figlio and Lucas (2004) Do High Grading Standards Affect Student
Performance?
Harris and Sass (2014) Skills, Productivity and the Evaluation of
Teacher Performance
Fryer (2011) Financial Incentives and Student Achievement:
Evidence from Randomized Trials
Fryer (2014) Injecting Charter School Best Practices into
Traditional Public Schools: Evidence from Field Experiments
Cook et al. (2014) The (Surprising) Efficacy of Academic and
Behavioral Intervention with Disadvantaged Youth: Results from a
Randomized Experiment in Chicago.
Hanushek (1992) The Trade-off between Child Quantity and
Quality
Hastings and Weinstein (2008) Information, School Choice, and
Academic Achievement: Evidence from Two Experiments

81

Mecklenburg)
USA: New York
(New York City)
USA: New York
(New York City)
USA: New York
(New York City)
USA: New York
(New York City)
USA: New York
(New York City)
USA: New York
(New York City)
USA: Ohio
(Coshocton)
USA: Texas
(Dallas)
USA: Texas
(Houston)
USA: Washington

USA: Wisconsin
(Milwaukee)
USA: unnamed
USA: unnamed

USA: unnamed

Chile
Chile

Chile
Chile
Chile

Chile

Rockoff et al. (2012) Information and Employee Evaluation:
Evidence from a Randomized Intervention in Public Schools
Fryer (2011) Financial Incentives and Student Achievement:
Evidence from Randomized Trials
Fryer (2013) Teacher Incentives and Student Achievement:
Evidence from New York City Public Schools
Dobbie and Fryer (2013) Getting Beneath the Veil of Effective
Schools: Evidence From New York City
Rockoff et al. (2011) Can You Recognize an Effective Teacher
When You Recruit One?
Boyd et al. (2011) The Effectiveness and Retention of Teachers
with Prior Career Experience.
Bettinger (2012) Paying to Learn: The Effect of Financial
Incentives on Elementary School Test Scores.
Fryer (2011) Financial Incentives and Student Achievement:
Evidence from Randomized Trials
Fryer (2014) Injecting Charter School Best Practices into
Traditional Public Schools: Evidence from Field Experiments
DeArmond and Goldhaber (2010) Scrambling the Nest Egg: How
Well Do Teachers Understand Their Pensions, and What Do They
Think about Alternative Pension Structures?
Principals’ Perceptions of Competition for Students in Milwaukee
Schools.
Barrow, Markman and Rouse (2009) Technology’s Edge: The
Educational Benefits of Computer-Aided Instruction.
Jacob and Lefgren (2008) Can Principals Identify Effective
Teachers? Evidence on Subjective Performance Evaluation in
Education.
Jacob and Lefgren (2007) What do Parents Value in Education? An
Empirical Investigation of Parents’ Revealed Preferences for
Teachers
Dinkelman and Martinez (2014) Investing in Schooling in Chile:
The Role of Information about Financial Aid for Higher Education
McEvan and Shapiro (2008) The Benefits of Delayed Primary
School Enrollment: Discontinuity Estimates Using Exact Birth
Dates
Paredes (2014) A Teacher Like Me or a Student Like Me? Role
Model Versus Teacher Bias Effect
McEwan (2013) The Impact of Chile’s School Feeding Program on
Education Outcomes
Anand, Mizala and Repetto (2009) Using School Scholarships to
Estimate the Effect of Private Education on the Academic
Achievement of Low-Income Students in Chile.
McEwan (2003) Peer Effects on Student Achievement: Evidence
from Chile

82

Colombia

Colombia
Colombia: Bogota

Peru
Uruguay
Venezuela
China: Beijing

China: Beijing

Benin
Kenya: Busia and
Teso
Kenya: Busia and
Teso
Kenya
Uganda

Angrist, Bettinger and Kremer (2006) Long-Term Educational
Consequences of Secondary School Vouchers: Evidence from
Administrative Records in Colombia
Bettinger, Kremer and Saavedra (2010) Are Educational Vouchers
Only Redistributive?
Barrera-Osorio, Bertrand and Linden (2011) Improving the Design
of Conditional Transfer Programs: Evidence from a Randomized
Education Experiment in Colombia
Beuermann (2014) One Laptop per Child at Home: Short-Term
Impacts from a Randomized Experiment in Peru.
Manacorda (2012) The Cost of Grade Retention
Ortega (2010) The Effect of Wage Compression and Alternative
Labor Market Opportunities on Teacher Quality in Venezuela.
Lai, Sadoulet and De Janvry (2011) The Contributions of School
Quality and Teacher Qualifications to Student Performance
Evidence from a Natural Experiment in Beijing Middle Schools.
Lai, Sadoulet and De Janvry (2009) The Adverse Effects of Parents’
School Selection Errors on Academic Achievement: Evidence from
the Beijing Open Enrollment Program.
Blimpo (2014) Team Incentives for Education in Developing
Counties: A Randomized Field Experiment in Benin.
Kremer, Miguel and Thornton (2009) Incentives to Learn
Glewwe, Kremer and Moulin (2009) Many Children Left Behind?
Textbooks and Test Scores in Kenya
Lucas and Mbiti (2012) Access, Sorting, and Achievement: The
Short-Run Effects of Free Primary Education in Kenya.
Reinikka and Svensson (2011) The Power of Information in Public
Services: Evidence from Education in Uganda.

Note: This table lists studies which make use of administrative data matched with surveys or experiments,
and that have been published or announced as forthcoming between January 1990 and July 2014 in the
following outlets: American Economic Journal: Applied Economics, American Economic Journal:
Economic Policy, American Economic Review, Econometrica, Economic Journal, Economics of Education
Review, Education Finance and Policy, Journal of Human Resources, Journal of Labor Economics, Journal
of Political Economy, Journal of Public Economics, Quarterly Journal of Economics, Review of Economic
Studies, Review of Economics and Statistics and NBER Working Papers: Education Program. All the
papers in the table used in the analysis single administrative data set that was matched to survey and/or
experimental data.

83

Table 4: Survey of papers using administrative education data. Multiple matched
administrative sources studies matched to surveys or experiments
(1)
(2)
Country/region
Authors, publication year and title
Denmark
Joensen and Hielsen (2009): Is there a Causal Effect of High School
Math on Labor Market Outcomes?
Denmark
Gupta and Simonsen (2010): Non-Cognitive Child Outcomes and
Universal High Quality Child Care.
Denmark
Jensen and Rasmussen (2011) The Effect of Immigrant
Concentration in Schools on Native and Immigrant Children’s
Reading and Math Skills
Israel: Tel-Aviv
Lavy (2010) Effects of Free Choice Among Public Schools
Norway
Naper (2010) Teacher Hiring Practices and Educational Efficiency
Sweden
Meghir and Palme (2005) Educational Reform, Ability, and Family
Background
Sweden
Golsteyn, Gronqvist and Lindahl (2014) Adolescent Time
Preferences Predict Lifetime Outcomes.
USA: Illinois
Arteaga et al. (2014) One Year of Preschool or Two: Is It Important
(Chicago)
for Adult Outcomes?
USA: Illinois
Jacob, Kapustin and Ludwig (2014) Human Capital Effects of Anti(Chicago)
Poverty Programs: Evidence from a Randomized Housing Voucher
Lottery.
Chile
Bharadwaj, Loken and Neilson (2013) Early Life Health
Interventions and Academic Achievement
Note: This table lists studies which make use of administrative data matched across multiple registers and
additionally to non-administrative based data source, and that have been published or announced as
forthcoming between January 1990 and July 2014 in the following outlets: American Economic Journal:
Applied Economics, American Economic Journal: Economic Policy, American Economic Review,
Econometrica, Economic Journal, Economics of Education Review, Education Finance and Policy, Journal
of Human Resources, Journal of Labor Economics, Journal of Political Economy, Journal of Public
Economics, Quarterly Journal of Economics, Review of Economic Studies, Review of Economics and
Statistics and NBER Working Papers: Education Program. All the papers in the table used in the analysis at
least two administrative data sets that were matched together, and then further matched to survey and/or
experimental data.

84

