NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

SOCIAL NETWORKS, ETHNICITY, AND ENTREPRENEURSHIP
William R. Kerr
Martin Mandorff
Working Paper 21597
http://www.nber.org/papers/w21597

NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
September 2015, Revised July 2019

Comments are appreciated and can be sent to wkerr@hbs.edu. We thank Emek Basker, Gary
Becker, Michel Beine, Ola Bengtsson, Gustaf Bruze, Dennis Carlton, Barry Chiswick, Rob
Fairlie, Matthew Gentzkow, John Haltiwanger, Emil Iantchev, Svante Janson, Mini Kaur, Steven
Lalley, Anne Le Brun, Ben Mathew, Trang Nguyen, Andriy Protsyk, Yona Rubinstein, Jesse
Shapiro, Rachel Soloveichik, Chad Syverson, Catherine Thomas, Robert Topel and Nick
Wormald and seminar participants for very valuable comments. We thank Meir Brooks and
Rahul Gupta for excellent research support. The theory section of this paper draws heavily from
Mandorff’s Ph.D. Dissertation at the University of Chicago. Financial support from the Marcus
Wallenberg Foundation, the Jan Wallander and Tom Hedelius Foundation, the Esther and T.W.
Schultz Dissertation Fellowship, the Markovitz Dissertation Fellowship, the Kauffman
Foundation, and Harvard Business School is gratefully acknowledged. The views expressed
herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of
Economic Research.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.
© 2015 by William R. Kerr and Martin Mandorff. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not
to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit,
including © notice, is given to the source.

Social Networks, Ethnicity, and Entrepreneurship
William R. Kerr and Martin Mandorff
NBER Working Paper No. 21597
September 2015, Revised July 2019
JEL No. D21,D22,D85,F22,J15,L14,L26,M13
ABSTRACT
We study the relationship between ethnicity, occupational choice, and entrepreneurship.
Immigrant groups in the United States cluster in specific business sectors. For example, Koreans
are 34 times more concentrated in self employment for dry cleaning than other immigrant groups,
and Gujarati-speaking Indians are 108 times more concentrated in managing motels. We quantify
that smaller and more socially isolated ethnic groups display higher rates of entrepreneurial
concentration. This is consistent with a model of social interactions where non-work relationships
facilitate the acquisition of sector-specific skills and result in occupational stratification along
ethnic lines via concentrated entrepreneurship.

William R. Kerr
Harvard Business School
Rock Center 212
Soldiers Field
Boston, MA 02163
and NBER
wkerr@hbs.edu
Martin Mandorff
Swedish Competition Authority
Konkurrensverket SE-103 85
Stockholm, Sweden
Martin.Mandorff@kkv.se

1

Introduction

Immigrants engage in self-employment and entrepreneurship more than natives, especially among new arrivals. Using the 2007-2011 Current Population Surveys, Fairlie
and Lofstrom (2013) calculate that immigrants represent 25% of new US business owners compared to their 15% workforce share. Moreover, immigrant business owners tend
to specialize in a few industries, and these industries vary across ethnic groups. Prominent US examples include Korean dry cleaners, Vietnamese nail care salons, Yemeni
grocery stores, and Punjabi Indian convenience stores. Earlier ethnic specializations
included Jewish merchants in medieval Europe and Chinese launderers in early twentieth century California. Despite the importance of these patterns economically— for
example, The Economist reported that one-third of all US motels in 2016 were owned
by Gujarati Indians— few studies examine the origin or consequences of this ethnic
specialization for self-employment.
We focus on how small ethnic group size and isolated social interactions among
group members can yield entrepreneurial specialization. We develop a simple model
that considers a small industry where self-employed entrepreneurs bene…t from social
interactions outside of work (e.g., family gatherings, religious and cultural functions,
meetings with friends). At these social events, self-employed entrepreneurs can discuss
customer trends, share best practices, coordinate activities, and so on. The model
describes how a small ethnic minority group that has restricted social interactions can
have a comparative advantage for self-employment, similar to the account of Chung
and Kalnins (2006) for better resource access through ethnic networks in the case of
Gujarati hotel owners.
We analyze the model’s predictions using Census Bureau data for the United States

2

in 2000. The size of groups and their social isolation, which we measure using inmarriage rates, strongly predict industrial concentration for immigrant self-employed
entrepreneurs. A 10% decline in group size raises the group’s industry concentration for
self-employment by 6%, and a 10% increase in group isolation boosts concentration by
5%. These results are robust under many speci…cation variants and using instrument
variable techniques outlined below.
We focus on ethnic group size and social isolation due to the exceptionally broad
and pervasive nature of immigrant concentration for self-employment. While the particulars vary across ethnic groups, time periods and national settings, we consistently
observe self-employed specialization among immigrant groups. Thus, we seek a general
mechanism that does not revolve around the traits of any single ethnic group or setting,
and our empirical analysis includes as many immigrant groups in the United States as
possible. Understanding how group-level behavior can generate group-level di¤erences
is important, as we know that the higher immigrant propensity towards entrepreneurship remains after controlling for the observable traits of individuals. Moreover, group
size and group social isolation manifest in many ways in the literature: risk sharing,
provision of support and mentoring, sanctions for misbehavior, etc. These factors become more powerful for smaller, tighter ethnic groups. Group in‡uences could also
lead to behavioral factors prompting self employment (e.g., Åstebro et al., 2014).
While there are anecdotal and sociological accounts of how social interactions can
connect to entrepreneurial activity (e.g., Fairlie and Robb, 2007), the re‡ection problem
described by Manski (2003) makes identi…cation of social interaction e¤ects challenging. Econometric challenges like omitted factors and reverse causality also exist. We
consider two instrument variable speci…cations to address this issue. One approach
uses the 1980 group sizes and in-marriage rates in the United States. Our second ap3

proach instruments US ethnic group size with the predictions from a gravity model
for migration to the United States and instruments US in-marriage rates with those
observed for the same ethnic group in the United Kingdom. These estimations, along
with many robustness checks, con…rm the OLS results.
Our work connects to prior studies of immigrant entrepreneurship and self-employment
behavior1 but with a focus on industrial specialization across groups. Classic accounts
of entrepreneurship focus on factors like risk taking (Kihlstrom and La¤ont, 1979),
business acumen (Lucas, 1978) or skill mix (Lazear, 2005), with the connection of entrepreneurship to migration being frequently noted but unexplained. We emphasize
how social interactions can generate group-level e¤ects around entrepreneurship and
industry choice that go beyond the individual traits. We also relate to literatures
regarding minority and immigrant group occupational specialization.2 Our setting
resembles but di¤ers substantially from the standard theory of discrimination, as we
analyze environments when groups are economically integrated but culturally isolated.3
These important di¤erences shape whether minority group isolation provides a comparative advantage for self-employment. We also relate to literature on the importance
of social interactions for economic behavior within or outside of the workplace.4
1

See Chung and Kalnins (2006), Fairlie (2008), Fairlie et al. (2010), Hunt (2011), Patel and Vella
(2013), and Kerr and Kerr (2017, 2018). Fairlie and Lofstrom (2013) and Kerr (2013) provide reviews.
2
Kuznets (1960) observes that "all minorities are characterized, at a given time, by an occupational
structure distinctly narrower than that of the total population and the majority." Our theory is also
related to the concept of ethnic capital (Borjas, 1992, 1995) and group assimilation (Lazear, 1999).
Patel et al. (2013) provide a review. Classics from the sociology literature include Light and Bonacich
(1991) and Light and Gold (2000), and our NBER working paper provides further references. Sharma
(2019) provides a recent UK depiction.
3
To illustrate how market interaction can take place without social interaction, consider a scene
from Shakespeare’s The Merchant of Venice (Act 1, Scene III) depicting the social divide between the
Christians and Jews in Renaissance Europe. Following a negotiation over a large loan to a Christian
man who has always scorned him, the Jewish moneylender Shylock comments: "I will buy with you,
sell with you, talk with you, walk with you, and so following; but I will not eat with you, drink with
you, nor pray with you."
4
Important examples include Granovetter (1973), Glaeser et al. (1996), and Glaeser and

4

2

A Model of Entrepreneurial Clustering

2.1

Model Set-Up

We construct a simple model to illustrate how social isolation and small group size
can generate ethnic entrepreneurial clustering when social interactions and production
are complementary. To keep the model tractable and intuitive, we make several strong
assumptions. Everyone has equal ability and is divided into two ethnic groups. Group
A is the minority, with a continuum of individuals of mass NA , and group B has mass
NB > NA . Both groups have equal access to industries and there is no product market
discrimination, but the groups are socially segregated and spend their leisure time
separately. Social interactions are random within ethnic groups, such that each person
interacts with a representative sample of individuals in their own group.
We analyze how these two ethnic groups sort across two industries. Industry 1 has
a production structure where self-employed entrepreneurs obtain advantages through
social interactions with other self-employed entrepreneurs in the same industry. When
socializing during family gatherings and religious/cultural functions, entrepreneurs in
this industry can mentor each other and exchange industry knowledge and professional advice. The more an entrepreneur socializes with other entrepreneurs, the more
knowledge is exchanged. Industry 0, by contrast, exhibits constant returns to scale
with worker productivity normalized to one. This industry can be equally comprised
of individuals working in self-employment or in larger …rms; the core assumption is
that private social interactions do not have the same bene…t in industry 0 as they do
in industry 1.
More formally, de…ne Xl for l 2 fA; Bg as the fraction of the population in group l
Scheinkman (2002). Durlauf and Fafchamps (2006) and Durlauf and Ioannides (2010) provide broad
reviews.

5

who are self-employed entrepreneurs in industry 1. Since social interaction is random
within groups, a fraction Xl of the friends and family members of every individual
in group l are also self-employed entrepreneurs in industry 1. For industry 1, denote
individual entrepreneurial productivity in group l as (Xl ) : Our assumption that productivity increases when socializing with other entrepreneurs in industry 1 is formally
stated as:
Assumption 1a Entrepreneurial productivity in industry 1 increases in
specialization:

0

> 0.

Denote aggregate output of industry 1 as Q1 , which is a function of the distribution
(XA ; XB ):
Q1 (XA ; XB ) = XA NA (XA ) + XB NB (XB ) :

(1)

Since social interaction plays no role for industry 0, its aggregate output is simply:
Q0 (XA ; XB ) = (1

XA ) NA + (1

X B ) NB :

(2)

Demand for the two industries need to be complementary enough to avoid the complications of multiple optima possibly generated by non-convexities. We simply assume
them to be perfect complements via a Leontief utility function for consumers:
U (q0 ; q1 ) = min q0 ;

q1
;
v

(3)

where v > 0 is a preference parameter and q0 and q1 are individual consumption of
each industry’s output, respectively.

2.2

The Pareto Problem

We now describe the e¢ cient outcome. Since the outputs of both industries have unitary income elasticities, distributional aspects can be ignored when characterizing the
6

e¢ cient outcome. The problem simpli…es to choosing an industry distribution (XA ; XB )
that maximizes a representative utility function U (Q0 (XA ; XB ) ; Q1 (XA ; XB )). A marginal analysis is inappropriate since this is a non-convex optimization problem. We
consider instead the most specialized industry distributions, where as many individuals as possible from a single group A or B are self-employed entrepreneurs in industry
1.
Figure 1 depicts the production possibilities for the two specialized distributions.
De…ne V (XA ; XB )

Q1 =Q0 as the ratio of industry outputs under the distribution

(XA ; XB ). Along the curve with the kink V (1; 0) in the …gure, group A specializes as
self-employed entrepreneurs in industry 1. Starting from a position on the far right
where everyone works in industry 0, members of group A are added to the set of selfemployed entrepreneurs in industry 1 as we move leftward along the x-axis. When the
kink at V (1; 0) is reached, all members of group A are self-employed entrepreneurs
in industry 1. Thereafter, continuing leftward, members of group B are also added
to industry 1 until Q0 = 0. Similarly, along the curve with the kink V (0; 1), group
B …rst specializes as self-employed entrepreneurs in industry 1. Members of group B
are added moving leftward along the x-axis until the kink at V (0; 1), where all Bs are
working in industry 1. Thereafter members of group A are also added until Q0 = 0.
The curve with minority specialization is above the curve with majority specialization, so long as the need for self-employed entrepreneurs in industry 1 is su¢ ciently
small. A large fraction of As are self-employed entrepreneurs in industry 1 when the
minority specializes, allowing minority entrepreneurs to socialize mostly with other
entrepreneurs in industry 1, improving productivity. The same is not true for the majority, since even if a large fraction of self-employed entrepreneurs in industry 1 are Bs,
most Bs are nevertheless employed in industry 0.
7

The argument can be generalized to show that minority specialization is Pareto
e¢ cient so long as industry 1 is small enough. Perfect complementarity simpli…es the
problem of solving for the optimal allocation, since any bundle where industrial outputs
are in the exact ratio v of the Leontief preferences (3) is strictly preferable to all other
bundles that do not include at least as much of each industry. The Pareto optimal
distribution (XA ; XB ) must therefore satisfy v = V (XA ; XB ). De…ne the total number
of entrepreneurs in the population as M
Proposition 1 If v

XA NA + XB NB . It follows that:

V (1; 0), all self-employed entrepreneurs in industry 1 belong

to minority group A.
Proof: Take the distribution (XA ; 0) where XA is such that v = V (XA ; 0). This is
feasible since v

V (1; 0). Assume by contradiction that it is not the uniquely e¢ cient

distribution. Then there exists an alternative distribution (XA0 ; XB0 ) with Q01
and Q00
XB0 NB

Q0 . Given Q00

Q0 , it follows that M 0

XA NA , which implies XA0

Q1

M , or equivalently, XA0 NA +

XA and XB0 < XA , with XA0 < XA if XB0 = 0.

Manipulating the expression for Q01 :
Q01 = (M 0
< (M
This contradicts Q01

XB0 NB ) (XA0 ) + XB0 NB (XB0 )
XB0 NB ) (XA ) + XB0 NB (XA ) = Q1

Q1 .

The e¢ cient outcome requires that a single group specializes as self-employed entrepreneurs in industry 1, and importantly, which group specializes is not arbitrary.
Minority specialization is more e¢ cient since the minority’s social isolation enables
entrepreneurs in A to socialize mostly with other entrepreneurs in their small isolated
group. For v

V (1; 0), the transformation curve and the curve with minority spe-

cialization in Figure 1 coincide. Group A has absolute and comparative advantages as
8

self-employed entrepreneurs in industry 1: If the demand for industry 1 is su¢ ciently
great, however, then the minority is too small to satisfy demand by themselves. In the
special case when v = V (0; 1), the demand for industry 1 is great enough for group B
to specialize completely. In this case minority involvement would dilute the majority’s
productivity advantage, and the Pareto e¢ cient solution is for Bs to specialize in being
self-employed entrepreneurs in industry 1.
Corollary If v = V (0; 1), all self-employed entrepreneurs in industry 1 belong to the
majority, B.
Thus, the relationship between group size and productivity is not monotonic, and
the group with the absolute advantage is the group with a population size that most
closely adheres to the size of industry 1. Other production possibilities generated by
more unspecialized distributions, such as XA = XB , are not displayed in Figure 1.
Our online theoretical appendix proves that a convex production function in social
interactions (

00

> 0) is su¢ cient to ensure that at least one group specializes, in

which case the e¢ cient frontier is the outer envelope of the curves shown in Figure
1. Consequently, above a certain value of v, there is a discrete jump from minority
specialization to majority specialization.

2.3

Model Discussion

This simple model provides a stark economic environment for considering how isolated
social interactions impact the sorting of ethnic groups over industries. While our model
considers only two industries, this simpli…cation is not as limiting as it may …rst appear.
The model captures a setting where a small industry of self-employed entrepreneurs
can bene…t through non-work interactions. Allowing the baseline industry 0 to be an

9

aggregate of many constant-returns-to-scale industries would still lead to the e¢ cient
solution being for the small ethnic group to specialize in being the self-employed entrepreneurs if their group size matches the demand preferences for industry 1: In fact,
framed this way, the baseline industry 0 would be expected to be quite large to any
one industry, making it more likely that the minority group should specialize.
Another obvious simpli…cation is that we only have two ethnic groups, whereas
the world is much more diverse. Yet, a complex model allowing for several small
industries and also several minority ethnic groups would lead to the same conclusions.
For example, consider an economy with industries 1a and 1b that have equal demand
and display the same productivity bene…t for social interaction. Also allow there to
be two minority groups of equal size. If the demands for industries 1a and 1b are
su¢ ciently small, then the e¢ cient outcome is for one minority group to specialize in
being self-employed entrepreneurs in 1a, and for the other minority group to specialize
in 1b. Which minority group specializes in which sector is arbitrary. In this multi-sector
economy with sector-speci…c skills, otherwise-similar groups consequently specialize in
di¤erent business sectors. Pushing further, if the economy has several small industries
of varying sizes that bene…t from these social interactions, and multiple minority ethnic
groups, the e¢ cient outcome will be characterized by minority groups specializing in
speci…c self-employment industries as much as possible.
Our online theoretical appendix also provides several formal extensions to the
model: analysis of competitive market outcomes; occupational strati…cation and the
dynamics of group specialization; endogenous social interactions and marriage markets; and the potential formation of splinter groups. These extensions reinforce the
core insight that a small and socially isolated group can have advantages for industry
specialization towards self-employment.
10

An additional extension in the appendix considers individual heterogeneity in ability
and earnings and predicts that members of an ethnic group can achieve greater earnings
when entering a common self-employed industrial specialization. This is important for
distinguishing this choice to specialize from discrimination against minority groups.
The empirical work of Patel and Vella (2013) show a positive earning relationship for
immigrant groups and common group occupational choices, and we note below some
complementary evidence from our own data.5

3

Analysis of US Entrepreneurial Strati…cation

3.1

US Census of Populations Data

We analyze the 2000 Census of Populations using the Integrated Public Use Microdata
Series (IPUMS). We focus on the 5% state-level sample, and we use person weights to
create population-level estimates. We also use the 1980 5% sample to construct one set
of instruments, while a second set of instruments uses 1991 information on the United
Kingdom from IPUMS-International.
We de…ne ethnic groups using birthplace locations and, to a lesser extent, language spoken. We merge some related birthplace locations (e.g., combining England,
Scotland, Wales, and non-speci…c U.K. designations into a single group). We also utilize the detailed language variable to create sub-groups among some larger birthplaces
(e.g., separating Gujarati and Punjabi Indians into separate groups). Our preparation
develops 146 potential ethnic groups from 198 birthplace locations, although most of
our empirical work focuses on 77 larger ethnic groups that have at least one industry
with ten or more IPUMS observations (equivalent to about 200 workers in the industry
5

The favorable economic outcome does not necessarily carry over to utility. Related work includes
Chiswick (1978), Borjas (1987), Simon and Warner (1992), Rauch (2001), Mandor¤ (2007), Bayer et
al. (2008), Beaman (2012), and Cadena et al. (2015).

11

nationally).
We assign industry classi…cation and self-employment status through the industry
and class-of-work variables. IPUMS uses a three-digit industry classi…cation to categorize work setting and economic sector of employment. Industry is distinct from an
individual’s technical function or occupation, and those operating in multiple industries are assigned to the industry of greatest income or amount of time spent. We
utilize the 1990 IPUMS industry delineations for temporal consistency. The class-ofwork variable identi…es self-employed and wage workers6 , and we de…ne a "cluster" as
an {industry, class of work} pairing. For example, a self-employed hotelier is classi…ed
di¤erently than a wage earner in the hotel industry. The sample excludes those whose
self-employment status is unknown and industries without self-employment.7
We retain males between 30 and 65 years old who are living in metropolitan statistical areas. We further require that immigrants to have migrated between 1968 and
1990 and to have 20 years of age or older at entry. The start year of 1968 re‡ects
the Immigration Reform Act of 1965, and the …nal entry of 1990 was chosen to avoid
issues related to migration for temporary employment (which is employer-sponsored in
America). Our …nal sample contains 1,604,350 observations, representing 34,984,436
people. Of these, 143,327 observations, representing 3,141,080 people, are immigrants.
6

In the IPUMS data, self-employment is assigned when it is the main activity of an individual (e.g.,
not capturing academics who consulting part-time). The de…nition includes both owners of employer
…rms and sole proprietors.
7
Our …nal sample includes 200 industries. We are cautious to not rely on very aggressive de…nitions
of industry boundaries, even if this leads us to underestimate some concentration. For example, Greek
restaurateurs will sort into Greek restaurants and Chinese restaurateurs into Chinese restaurants,
independent of social relationships, but we consider the restaurant industry as a whole to avoid tastebased factors. Similarly, we look at industries on a national basis, even though additional clustering
happening at localized levels for some industries (e.g., taxi cabs). We use this uniform approach to be
consistent over industries, versus for example de…ning the motel industry in a di¤erent way from taxi
cabs, and because ethnic connections can provide long-distance knowledge access (e.g., Rauch, 2001;
Agrawal et al., 2008).

12

3.2

Clustering in Entrepreneurial Activities

We design "overage" ratios to quantify for an ethnic group the heightened rate of selfemployment it displays for a particular industry and also across the full range of industries. Our primary metrics focus on the specialization evident among self-employed
individuals only, while robustness checks build samples combining wage earners and
self-employed.8
We …rst de…ne OV ERlk as the ratio of an ethnic group l’s concentration in an
industry k to the industry k’s national employment share. Thus, if an ethnic group l
has Nl total workers and Nlk workers in industry k, then Xlk = Nlk =Nl and OV ERlk =
Xlk =X k . This baseline metric measures the over- or under-representation of the ethnic
group for a speci…c industry, and by de…nition both cases exist for an ethnic group
across the full range of industries.
To aggregate these industry-level values into an overall measure of industry concentration for an ethnic group, our primary metric takes a weighted average using the
share of the group’s self-employment by industry as the weight:
OV ER1l =

K
X

OV ERlk Xlk :

(4)

k=1

Our estimations ultimately use the log value of this OV ER1 metric. We also test the
following variants:
1. Weighted average over the three largest industries for ethnic group l: OV ER2l =
P3
P3
P3
k0
k0
0
k0
0X =
OV
ER
X
,
where
k
=
k
such
that
0
0
lk
l
l
k =1
k =1
k0 =1 Nl is maximized.

8

It may seem appealing to use wage earners instead as a counterfactual to self-employed workers.
This approach is not useful, however, as ethnic entrepreneurs show a greater tendency to hire members
of their own ethnic groups into their …rms (e.g., Andersson et al., 2014a,b; Åslund et al., 2014; Kerr
et al., 2015).

13

2. Weighted average over the three largest industry-level overages for ethnic group l:
P
P
0 P
0
OV ER3l = 3k0 =1 OV ERlk0 Xlk = 3k0 =1 Xlk , where k 0 = k such that 3k0 =1 OV ERlk0
is maximized.

3. Maximum overage: OV ER4l = maxl [OV ERlk ]:
These calculations measure extreme values, and we need to be careful about small
sample size. Our earlier requirement that ethnicities have at least one industry with
ten or more IPUMS observations avoids spurious clusters that could appear in small
ethnic groups and obscure industries due to very small sample size or small population
size.
We investigate our entrepreneurial concentration hypotheses over the 77 primary
ethnic groups. OV ER1l takes the weighted sum across industries, while OV ER2l considers the three largest industries for an ethnic group. In most cases, OV ER2l is bigger
than OV ER1l as concentration is often linked to substantial numerical representation;
some exceptions happen when an ethnic group is focused on bigger industries. We calculate our metrics of extreme values, captured in OV ER3l and OV ER4l , over ethnic
group-industry clusters where we have at least ten observations.
Figure 2 displays the 16 ethnic groups with the highest OV ER1l metric. There is
substantial entrepreneurial clustering, with Yemeni immigrants displaying the overall
highest industrial concentration for entrepreneurship. Appendix Tables 1a and 1b give
a detailed list of overage ratios for each ethnic group and the industries with the largest
overage ratio. In most cases, the industry where the ethnic group displays the highest
concentration for self-employment is the same as the industry where the ethnic group
shows the highest concentration for total employment. Appendix Tables 2a and 2b
document the strong correlations between the four overage metrics.
14

3.3

Social Isolation and In-Marriage Rates

We measure social isolation and concentrated group interactions through within-group
marriage rates evident among ethnicities. This metric is a strong proxy if sorting in
the marriage market is similar to sorting in other social relationships.9 High marriage
rates within an ethnic group, also termed in-marriage, suggest greater social isolation
and strati…cation.
We calculate in-marriage rates for ethnicities using a second dataset developed
from IPUMS. We focus on women and men who immigrated to the United States
between the ages of 5 and 15 and who are between ages 30 and 65 in 2000, and exclude
individuals already married at the time of immigration. Importantly, this sample is
mutually exclusive from the earlier sample used to calculate our overage metrics.
Most immigrant groups are socially segregated with respect to marriage, some very
strongly so. With random matching for marriage and equal male and female migration,
in-marriage rates would roughly equal a group’s fraction of the overall population.
Group in-marriage rates (also shown in Appendix Table 1a) are typically much higher,
almost always exceeding 50%. Pairwise correlations of 0.51 and 0.60 exist for inmarriage rates and the OV ER1l and OV ER2l metrics, respectively.

3.4

OLS Empirical Tests

To quantify whether smaller and more-socially isolated ethnic groups have greater
industrial concentration for entrepreneurship, we use the following regression approach:
OV ER1l =

+

1 SIZEl

9

+

2 ISOLl

+ "l ;

(5)

Representative work includes Kennedy (1944), Bisin and Verdier (2000), and Bisin et al. (2004).
Furtado (2010) shows how inter-marriage can provide better access to the formal labor market, and
Furtado and Theodoropoulos (2011) consider shifts in likelihood of inter-marriage by when someone
migrates to the US. Furtado and Trejo (2013) provide an extended review.

15

where SIZEl is the negative of the log value of group size and ISOLl is the log inmarriage rate of the group. We take the negative of group size so that our theoretical
prediction is that

1

and

2

are positive. We report all coe¢ cients in unit standard

deviation terms for ease of interpretation. Our baseline regressions winsorize variables
at their 10% and 90% levels to guard against outliers, weight estimations by log ethnic
employment for each group, and report robust standard errors.
Column 1 of Table 1 measures that a one standard-deviation decrease in group size
is correlated with a 0.63 increase in average entrepreneurial concentration across all
industries. Similarly, a one standard-deviation increase in the in-marriage rate is correlated with a 0.52 standard-deviation increase in overage. The next columns consider
robustness checks on our metric design. Column 2 uses the full worker sample, Column
3 calculates overages only relative to immigrant populations by excluding natives from
the denominator shares, and Column 4 adds rural workers into the self-employment
overage calculations.10 The results are very robust to these adjustments. Column 5
shows that a focus on the three largest industries for an ethnic group (i.e., OV ER2l
discussed above) increases the relative importance of social isolation for predicting
overages. Columns 6 and 7 examine extreme values using the OV ER3l and OV ER4l
metrics de…ned above. These extreme values show a weaker connection to group size,
placing even more prominence on group isolation.11
Table 2 shows additional robustness checks on the OV ER1l outcomes. Columns 2
and 3 drop sample weights and winsorization steps, respectively, Column 4 introduces
…xed e¤ects for each origin continent, Column 5 uses a median regression format, and
10

Faggio and Silva (2014) analyze di¤erences in self-employment alignment to entrepreneurship in
urban and rural areas.
11
We obtain similar results when modifying of our overage measures with industry-level propensities
for being an employer …rm vis-à-vis sole proprietors using data from the Survey of Business Owners.

16

Column 6 bootstraps standard errors. These last two columns should be compared to
Column 2 given their unweighted nature.
Columns 7 and 8 test whether smaller sample sizes for ethnic groups mechanically
create concentration ratios, using Monte Carlo simulations. In one version, used for
Column 7, we draw industry and self-employment status independently from each
other, which means that we tend to predict the same self-employment rates across
industries. In a second version used in Column 8, we jointly draw the two components
such that we mimic the industry-by-industry entrepreneurship rates observed in the
data. From these 1000 Monte Carlo simulations, we calculate for each ethnic group the
average observed overage. Introducing these controls does not impact our estimations
except that the size relationship diminishes modestly.
We further test the relationships of relative size and isolation on entrepreneurial
clustering by using non-parametric regressions. We partition our size and isolation
variables into terciles and create indicator variables for each combination of {smallest
size, medium, largest size} and {most isolated, medium, least isolated}, and assign
ethnic groups that fall into [largest size, least isolated] as the reference category.
The results continue to support the theory, as depicted in Figure 3. The [smallest
size, most isolated] groups have entrepreneurial concentrations that are 2.5 standard
deviations greater than the [largest size, least isolated] groups (see Table 3 for detailed
coe¢ cients). Equally important, the pattern of coe¢ cients across the other indicator variables shows the relationships are quite regular and not due to a few outliers.
For example, holding the ethnic group size constant, higher levels of social isolation
strongly and signi…cantly correspond to larger overages. Flipping it around and holding
social isolation, smaller group sizes promote greater concentration within each isolation
category, with the exception of the least socially isolated tercile.
17

3.5

IV Empirical Tests: 1980 Values

We next consider IV speci…cations to test against reverse causality concerns (e.g.,
where isolated business ownerships lead to greater social isolation or lower group sizes)
or omitted variables.12 We use two sets of instruments. The …rst set builds upon
a dynamic version of our model where initial conditions have lasting and persistent
impacts for immigrant groups; this has been demonstrated empirically by Patel and
Vella (2013). We thus use the lagged 1980 values of ethnic group size and in-marriage
rates in the United States to instrument for 2000 levels. The ethnic divisions in 1980
are less detailed than in 2000, and in some cases, the same 1980 value must be applied
to several 2000 ethnic groups. We thus cluster standard errors around the 43 groups
present in the 1980 data, with other aspects of the IV estimations being the same as
OLS speci…cations.
The …rst-stage results with this instrument set are quite strong. The …rst two
columns of Table 4 show that these instruments have very strong individual predictive
power and a combined joint F-statistic of 24.13 The exclusion restriction requires that
the 1980 group sizes and in-marriage levels only impact entrepreneurship in 2000 to the
extent that they shape current group size and social isolation. This seems reasonable,
although some 1980 respondents may still be employed in 2000, and this may carry
with it persistence that violates the exclusion restriction.
The second-stage results in Column 3 are quite similar to the OLS …ndings. The
IV speci…cations suggest that a one standard-deviation decrease in ethnic group size
increases overage by 0.76 standard deviations. A one standard-deviation increase in
12

An example would be an ethnic group disproportionately located in areas with stringent employment veri…cation procedures (e.g., Amuedo-Dorantes and Bansak, 2012; Orrenius and Zavodny, 2016),
leading to more social and workplace isolation.
13
The F-statistic comes from the Kleibergen-Paap Wald rank F-statistic used when standard errors
are clustered or robust and is based o¤ the Cragg-Donald F-test for weak instrumentation.

18

isolation leads to a 0.52 standard-deviation increase in entrepreneurial concentration.
These results are well-measured and economically important. The size coe¢ cient grows
modestly from its OLS baseline, while the in-marriage rate coe¢ cient declines slightly.
The results are precisely enough estimated that we can reject at a 5% level the null hypothesis in Wu-Hausman tests that the instrumented regressors are exogenous. These
IV results strengthen the predictions of our theory that smaller, more isolated groups
are more conducive to entrepreneurial clustering.

3.6

IV Empirical Tests: Gravity Model and UK Values

Our second IV approach uses as instruments the predicted ethnic group size from a
gravity model and in-marriage rates from the United Kingdom in 1991. To instrument
for ethnic group size, we use a gravity model to quantify predicted ethnic size based
upon worldwide migration rates to the United States. The original application of
gravity models was to trade ‡ows, where studies showed that countries closer to each
other and with larger size tended to show greater trade ‡ows, similar to the forces of
planetary pull. This concept has also been applied to the migration literature, and we
similarly model
SIZEl =

+

1 DISTl

+

2 P OPl

(6)

+ "l ;

where DISTl is the log distance to the United States from the origin country and P OPl
is the log population of the origin country. For this purpose, we estimate log ethnic
group size in the United States as the dependent variable (without a negative value
being taken as in earlier estimations). Unsurprisingly, lower distance (
(s.e.=0:22)) and greater population (

2

1

=

1:56

= 0:38 (s.e.=0:06)) are strong predictors of

ethnic group size in the United States. We take the predicted values from this regression
for each ethnic group as our …rst instrument.
19

For our second instrument of in-marriage rates in the United States, we calculate
the in-marriage rates in the 1991 UK Census of Populations. This approach is attractive as the social isolation evident in the United Kingdom a decade before our study is
only likely to be predictive of US self-employment rates to the extent that the British
isolation captures a persistent trait of the ethnic group. The limitation of this instrument is that we are only able to calculate this for 24 broader ethnic divisions. We map
our observations to these groups and cluster the standard errors at the UK group level.
Columns 4-5 of Table 4 again report the …rst-stage relationships. The instruments
remain individually predictive of their corresponding endogenous regressor, and they
have a joint F-statistic of 35.5. Similar to the 1980 US instruments, the minimum 2SLS
relative bias that can be speci…ed is less than 10%. This implies that we can specify a
very small bias and still reject the null hypothesis that the instruments are weak. The
bias level is determined by the minimum eigenvalue statistic and the Stock-Yogo 2SLS
size of the nominal 5% Wald test.
The second-stage results are again comparable to our core OLS …ndings. The size
results are a bit lower than OLS, while the social isolation e¤ects are even stronger
than OLS, with elasticities of around 0.67. We now reject at a 10% level that the
instrumented regressors are exogenous.
Tables 5-7 show robustness checks with the two IV approaches. Results are very
similar with simple adjustments like excluding sample weights, dropping winsorization,
or using bootstrapped standard errors. The results with simulated overage controls
are very similar for the …rst instrument set, and we can only instrument for social
isolation in the second set as the predicted size relationship in the gravity model has
an insu¢ cient …rst stage when including the simulated metrics. Intuitively, both the
instrument and predicted overage are being built upon the same data, making it hard
20

to separate them.
Further analyses show comparable patterns with the alternative overage metric
designs. The results for social isolation are robust in all speci…cations. Those for group
size are mostly robust, with a few exceptions with the predicted size instruments. We
also …nd very similar results when expanding the gravity equation to have a squared
distance term or an indicator for Canada and Mexico as bordering countries or when
using underlying components of the gravity equation as direct instruments.
In summary, the OLS and IV variants provide consistent support to the model.
The strongest …ndings are those for social isolation, which is a very strong predictor
of immigrant entrepreneurial concentration. The weight of the evidence also supports
that smaller group sizes promote entrepreneurial concentration.

3.7

Earnings Estimations

Our model makes an additional prediction that members of an ethnic group can achieve
greater earnings when entering a common entrepreneurial setting. In our framework,
social complementarities produce a positive relationship between earnings and entrepreneurship at the group level. This prediction is in direct contrast to what would
be expected if discrimination in the marketplace is the most important factor leading
to segmented group self-employment. The empirical work of Patel and Vella (2013)
strongly shows a positive earning relationship for immigrant groups and common group
occupational choices using the 1980-2000 Census of Populations data. To close the loop
for this paper, we thus provide a brief analysis of earnings and refer readers to these
complementary pieces for additional evidence.
Table 8 provides individual-level estimations of the earnings relationship. The outcome variable is the log yearly income of individuals. We report three core explanatory

21

variables. The …rst is whether the individual is self-employed. The second is the percentage of an individual’s ethnic group who are self-employed (similar to the values
reported in Table A1a), regardless of industry. Third, we measure the share of the individual’s ethnic group that is employed in the industry of the focal individual. With
the model developed, we anticipate both of these group measures to have positive predictive power. For natives, these latter variables are simply measured over the whole
US-born population.
Our estimations also include many unreported controls for individuals that relate to
earnings. We include …xed e¤ects for PUMA geographical locations and for industries.
We also control for high-school and college education, whether the individual is a native
or an immigrant, whether the individual is ‡uent in the English language, and …xed
e¤ects for seven age categories and seven age-at-immigration categories. Regressions
cluster standard errors by ethnic group and use IPUMS sample weights.
The …rst three columns show that all three elements are predictive of earnings.
Being self-employed (a binary measure) is directly associated with a 3% increase in total
earnings in the cross-section. A 1% increase in the rate of overall self-employment for
an ethnic group connects to a 1% increase in total earnings. To aid interpretation, the
bottom of the table also provides the standard deviation x beta coe¢ cient for grouplevel variables; a one standard-deviation increase (0.0255) in group self-employment
connects to 3% higher earning. Similarly, looking at ethnic group concentration for the
individual in his particular industry, a 1% increase in group concentration connects to
a 0.6% increase in total earnings. In standard-deviation terms, the relative e¤ect of
5% is even larger than the 3% for group self-employment. Columns 4-6 show similar
outcomes when we exclude those in professional occupations and holders of doctorate
degrees.
22

These results support the model’s structure and are consistent with a potential
positive bene…t from immigrant entrepreneurial concentration. It is important for future theoretical and empirical work to consider both owners and employees of …rms.
Empirical work can particularly target employer-employee datasets to observe more detailed hiring and wage patterns; such work can also evaluate job transitions during the
assimilation of new members of ethnic groups, perhaps ultimately leading to starting
their own business.

4

Conclusions

A striking feature of entrepreneurship is the degree to which immigrants of di¤erent
ethnic backgrounds cluster into self-employment in di¤erent industries. These concentrations are su¢ ciently visible to be captured in popular culture (e.g., the Indian
immigrant entrepreneur Apu who runs the convenience store in The Simpsons), and
the cumulative magnitudes can be shocking: the Asian American Hotel Owners Association claims to be the largest hotel owners association in the world and represent half
of the hotels in the United States. Yet, while noticeable, the economic implications of
these tendencies are underexplored.
Our model outlines how the social interactions of small, socially isolated groups
can give rise to this self-employment pattern by reducing the cost of acquiring sectorspeci…c skills. Our online appendix explores several extensions to the basic framework,
and many other avenues for future research exist. A fruitful path would be to model
the intergenerational transmission of skills and to follow occupational structure and
entrepreneurial persistence across generations. This interaction mechanism can also be
applied to the study of the transmission of other types of skills beyond entrepreneurship.
Empirically, the Census data con…rm small and, especially, socially isolated immi23

grant groups in the United States display heightened entrepreneurial clustering. Further quantifying these forces in employer-employee data and …rm operating data are
important to understand hiring patterns, career trajectories, and market power. The
recent US patterns resemble many earlier observations of the economic success and social isolation of specialized minority groups throughout history. We hope this study can
be replicated in settings outside of the United States given its general nature (Fairlie
et al., 2010).

References
[1] Agrawal, Ajay, Devesh Kapur, and John McHale. 2008. How do spatial and social
proximity in‡uence knowledge ‡ows? Evidence from patent data. Journal of
Urban Economics 64: 258-269.
[2] Amuedo-Dorantes, Catalina, and Cynthia Bansak. 2012. The labor market impacts of mandated employment veri…cation systems. American Economic Review 102(3): 543-548.
[3] Andersson, Fredrik, Monica Garcia-Perez, John Haltiwanger, Kristin McCue,
and Seth Sanders. 2014. Workplace concentration of immigrants. Demography
51(6): 2281-2306.
[4] Andersson, Fredrik, Simon Burgess, and Julia Lane. 2014. Do as the neighbors do:
The impact of social networks on immigrant employment. Journal of Labor
Research.
[5] Åslund, Olof, Lena Hensvik, and Oskar Skans. 2014. Seeking similarity: How immigrants and natives manage in the labor market. Journal of Labor Economics
32(3): 405-442.
[6] Åstebro, Thomas, Holger Herz, Ramana Nanda, and Roberto Weber. 2014. Seeking the roots of entrepreneurship: Insights from behavioral economics. Journal
of Economic Perspectives 28: 49-70.
[7] Bayer, Patrick, Stephen Ross, and Giorgio Topa. 2008. Place of work and place
of residence: Informal hiring networks and labor market outcomes. Journal of
Political Economy 116: 1150-1180.
[8] Beaman, Lori. 2012. Social networks and the dynamics of labor market outcomes:
Evidence from refugees resettled in the US. Review of Economic Studies 79:
128-161.

24

[9] Bisin, Alberto, and Thierry Verdier. 2000. Beyond the melting pot: Cultural transmission, marriage, and the evolution of ethnic and religious traits. Quarterly
Journal of Economics 115: 955-988.
[10] Bisin, Alberto, Giorgio Topa, and Thierry Verdier. 2004. Religious intermarriage
and socialization in the United States. Journal of Political Economy 112: 615664.
[11] Borjas, George. 1987. Self-selection and the earnings of immigrants. American
Economic Review 80: 531-553.
[12] Borjas, George. 1992. Ethnic capital and intergenerational mobility. Quarterly
Journal of Economics 107: 123-150.
[13] Borjas, George. 1995. Ethnicity, neighborhoods and human capital externalities.
American Economic Review 85: 365-390.
[14] Cadena, Brian, Brian Duncan, and Stephen Trejo. 2015. The labor market integration and impacts of U.S. immigrants. In Handbook of the Economics of
International Migration, edited by Barry Chiswick and Paul Miller. Amsterdam: North Holland. 1197-1259.
[15] Chiswick, Barry. 1978. The e¤ect of Americanization on the earnings of foreignborn men. Journal of Political Economy 86: 897-921.
[16] Chung, Wilbur, and Arturs Kalnins. 2006. Social capital, geography, and the
survival: Gujarati immigrant entrepreneurs in the U.S. lodging industry. Management Science 52(2): 233-247.
[17] Durlauf, Steven, and Marcel Fafchamps. 2006. Social capital. In Handbook of Economic Growth, edited by Philippe Aghion and Steven Durlauf. Amsterdam:
North Holland.
[18] Durlauf, Steven, and Yannis Ioannides, 2010. Social interactions. Annual Review
of Economics 2: 451-478.
[19] Faggio, Giulia, and Olmo Silva. 2014. Self-employment and entrepreneurship in
urban and rural labour markets. Journal of Urban Economics 83(1): 67-85.
[20] Fairlie, Robert. 2008. Estimating the Contribution of Immigrant Business Owners to the U.S. Economy. Small Business Administration, O¢ ce of Advocacy
Report.
[21] Fairlie, Robert, Harry Krashinsky, and Julie Zissimopoulos. 2010. The international Asian business success story? A comparison of Chinese, Indian and
other Asian businesses in the United States, Canada and United Kingdom.
In International Di¤erences in Entrepreneurship, edited by Josh Lerner and
Antoinette Schoar. Chicago, IL: University of Chicago Press.
[22] Fairlie, Robert, and Magnus Lofstrom. 2013. Immigration and entrepreneurship.
In The Handbook on the Economics of International Migration, edited by Barry
Chiswick and Paul Miller. Amsterdam: North-Holland Publishing.

25

[23] Fairlie, Robert, and Alicia Robb. 2007. Families, human capital, and small business: Evidence from the Characteristics of Business Owners Survey. Industrial
and Labor Relations Review 60: 225-245.
[24] Furtado, Delia. 2010. Why does intermarriage increase immigrant employment?
The role of networks. B.E. Journal of Economic Analysis & Policy 10(1):
Article 101.
[25] Furtado, Delia, and Nikolaos Theodoropoulos. 2011. Interethnic marriage: A
choice between ethnic and educational similarities. Journal of Population Economics 24(4): 1257-1279.
[26] Furtado, Delia, and Stephen Trejo. 2013. Interethnic marriages and their economic
e¤ects. In International Handbook on the Economics of Migration, edited by
Amelie Constant and Klaus Zimmermann. Northampton, MA: Edward Elgar,
276-292.
[27] Glaeser, Edward, Bruce Sacerdote, and José Scheinkman. 1996. Crime and social
interactions. Quarterly Journal of Economics 111: 507-548.
[28] Glaeser, Edward, and José Scheinkman. 2002. Non-market interaction. In Advances in Economics and Econometrics: Theory and Applications, Eight World
Congress, edited by Mathias Dewatripont, Lars Peter Hansen, and Stephen
Turnovsky. Cambridge, UK: Cambridge University Press.
[29] Granovetter, Mark. 1973. The strength of weak ties. American Journal of Sociology
78: 1360-1380.
[30] Hunt, Jennifer. (2011). Which immigrants are most innovative and entrepreneurial? Distinctions by entry visa. Journal of Labor Economics 29(3): 417-457.
[31] Kennedy, Ruby. 1944. Single or triple melting-pot? Intermarriage trends in New
Haven, 1870-1940. The American Journal of Sociology 49: 331-339.
[32] Kerr, Sari Pekkala, and William Kerr. 2017. Immigrant entrepreneurship. In Measuring Entrepreneurial Businesses: Current Knowledge and Challenges, edited
by John Haltiwanger, Erik Hurst, Javier Miranda, and Antoinette Schoar.
Chicago, IL: University of Chicago Press.
[33] Kerr, Sari Pekkala, and William Kerr. 2018. Immigrant entrepreneurship in America: Evidence from the Survey of Business Owners 2007 & 2012. Working Paper
no. 24494, NBER Cambridge, MA.
[34] Kerr, Sari Pekkala, William Kerr, and William Lincoln. 2015. Skilled immigration
and the employment structures of U.S. …rms. Journal of Labor Economics
33(S1): S147-S186.
[35] Kerr, William. 2013. U.S. high-skilled immigration, innovation, and entrepreneurship: Empirical approaches and evidence. Working Paper no. 19377, NBER,
Cambridge, MA.
[36] Kerr, William, and Martin Mandor¤. 2018. Social networks, ethnicity, and entrepreneurship. Working Paper no. 21597 (revised), NBER, Cambridge, MA.
26

[37] Kihlstrom, R., and Jean-Jacques La¤ont. 1979. A general equilibrium entrepreneurial theory of …rm formation based on risk aversion. Journal of Political
Economy 87: 719-748.
[38] Kuznets, Simon. 1960. Economic structure and life of the Jews. In The Minority
Members: History, Culture, and Religion, edited by Louis Finkelstein. Philadelphia, PA: Jewish Publication Society of America.
[39] Lazear, Edward. 1999. Culture and language. Journal of Political Economy 107:
95-126.
[40] Lazear, Edward. 2005. Entrepreneurship. Journal of Labor Economics 23: 649680.
[41] Light, Ivan, and Edna Bonacich. 1991. Immigrant Entrepreneurs: Koreans in Los
Angeles, 1965-1982. Berkeley, CA: University of California Press.
[42] Light, Ivan, and Steven Gold. 2000. Ethnic Economies. Bingley, UK: Emerald
Group.
[43] Lucas, Robert. 1978. On the size distribution of business …rms. Bell Journal of
Economics 9: 508-523.
[44] Mandor¤, Martin. 2007. Social networks, ethnicity, and occupation. University of
Chicago Ph.D. Dissertation.
[45] Manski, Charles. 1993. Identi…cation of endogenous social e¤ects: The re‡ection
problem. Review of Economic Studies 60: 531-542.
[46] Orrenius, Pia, and Madeline Zavodny. 2016. Do state work eligibility veri…cation
laws reduce unauthorized immigration? IZA Journal of Migration 5:5.
[47] Patel, Krishna, Yevgeniya Savchenko, and Francis Vella. 2013. Occupational sorting of ethnic groups. In International Handbook on the Economics of Migration.
Edward Elgar Publishing.
[48] Patel, Krishna, and Francis Vella. 2013. Immigrant networks and their implications
for occupational choice and wages. Review of Economics and Statistics 95(4):
1249-1277.
[49] Rauch, James. 2001. Business and social networks in international trade. Journal
of Economic Literature 39: 1177-1203.
[50] Sharma, Babita. 2019. The Corner Shop: Shopkeepers, the Sharmas and the Making of Modern Britain. Hodder & Stoughton.
[51] Simon, Curtis, and John Warner. 1992. Matchmaker, matchmaker: The e¤ect of
old boy networks on job match quality, earnings and tenure. Journal of Labor
Economics 10(3): 306-330.

27

Table 1: OLS estimations
Log weighted average overage across all industries [OVER1]

Baseline
estimation

Excluding
natives from
Using total
denominator Including rural
worker sample
shares
workers

Log weighted
average overage Log average of
Log largest
three largest
using three
largest industries overage ratios overage ratio for
for ethnic group for ethnic group
ethnic group
[OVER2]
[OVER3]
[OVER4]

(1)

(2)

(3)

(4)

(5)

(6)

(7)

Inverse of log ethnic group size
(small groups have larger values)

0.634
(0.069)

0.595
(0.073)

0.398
(0.080)

0.602
(0.072)

0.375
(0.080)

0.130
(0.076)

0.068
(0.076)

Log isolation of ethnic group

0.519
(0.067)

0.514
(0.066)

0.578
(0.083)

0.529
(0.068)

0.640
(0.072)

0.722
(0.070)

0.706
(0.075)

0.61

0.53

0.47

0.58

0.51

0.53

0.51

R-Squared value

Notes: Estimations describe the OLS relationship between industry concentration for ethnic entrepreneurship and ethnic group size and in-marriage isolation. The outcome
variable in Columns 1-4 is the log weighted average overage ratio across industries for each ethnic group, where the weights are levels of self employment in each industry
per group. Variables are winsorized at their 10%/90% levels and transformed to have unit standard deviation for interpretation. Regressions are weighted by log ethnic group
employee counts in MSAs, include 77 observations, and report robust standard errors. Column 2 considers the metric that uses all employed workers for the ethnic group,
Column 3 compares industry-level overages only to rates of other immigrant groups, and Column 4 includes rural workers in the sample. Column 5 restricts the overage
measure to just the three largest self-employment industries for an ethnic group. Columns 6-7 consider extreme values among industries by ethnic group. These latter
overages are done without reference to industry importance in terms of ethnic group self-employment, but they require at least ten observations exist for an ethnic group industry cluster to be included.

Table 2: Robustness checks on OLS estimations
Baseline
estimation
(Table 1,
Column 1)

Without
sample
weights

Including
fixed effects
Without
for origin
winsorization continent

Using
median
regression
format

Using
bootstrapped
standard
errors

Including
simulated
overage
control1

Including
simulated
overage
control2

(1)

(2)

(3)

(4)

(5)

(6)

(7)

(8)

Inverse of log ethnic group size
(small groups have larger values)

0.634
(0.069)

0.630
(0.067)

0.629
(0.062)

0.552
(0.070)

0.586
(0.092)

0.630
(0.070)

0.509
(0.188)

0.524
(0.182)

Log isolation of ethnic group

0.519
(0.067)

0.521
(0.065)

0.511
(0.066)

0.485
(0.091)

0.529
(0.091)

0.521
(0.070)

0.550
(0.070)

0.538
(0.067)

Log predicted overage1

0.155
(0.195)

Log predicted overage2
R-Squared value

0.123
(0.186)
0.612

0.626

0.629

0.650

0.428

0.626

0.577

0.612

Notes: See Table 1. Columns 2-6 provide robustness checks on the baseline specification. Regressions in Columns 5 and 6 are unweighted and should be referenced
against Column 2. Column 5 reports pseudo R-squared values. Columns 7 and 8 include control variables for predicted overage ratios based upon 1000 Monte Carlo
simulations. In these simulations, pools of similarly sized ethnic groups to our true sample are formed and randomly assigned industry and entrepreneurship status
according to national propensities. From these random assignments, we calculate 1000 overage metrics for each ethnic group that exactly mirror our primary data
construction. The average of these simulations is entered as a control variable. In the first version included in Column 7, self-employment status and industry status are
separately randomized, such that we overall predict roughly the same self-employment rate in each industry. In the second version included in Column 8, selfemployment status and industry are jointly drawn such that we overall replicate observed self-employment levels across industries.

Table 3: OLS relationships with non-parametric forms
Log weighted average
overage across all
industries
[OVER1]

Log weighted average
Log average of three
overage across three largest overage ratios for Log largest overage ratio
for ethnic group
ethnic group
largest industries
[OVER2]
[OVER3]
[OVER4]

(1)

(2)

(3)

(4)

(0,1) Indicator: ethnic size in smallest third x
(0,1) Indicator: ethnic isolation in highest third

2.472
(0.188)

2.276
(0.168)

1.826
(0.155)

1.572
(0.180)

(0,1) Indicator: ethnic size in smallest third x
(0,1) Indicator: ethnic isolation in middle third

1.514
(0.271)

0.753
(0.380)

0.416
(0.368)

0.375
(0.362)

(0,1) Indicator: ethnic size in smallest third x
(0,1) Indicator: ethnic isolation in lowest third

1.048
(0.280)

0.280
(0.273)

-0.654
(0.243)

-1.002
(0.251)

(0,1) Indicator: ethnic size in middle third x
(0,1) Indicator: ethnic isolation in highest third

1.581
(0.322)

1.211
(0.374)

1.127
(0.253)

1.044
(0.260)

(0,1) Indicator: ethnic size in middle third x
(0,1) Indicator: ethnic isolation in middle third

0.908
(0.313)

0.573
(0.314)

0.351
(0.345)

0.338
(0.362)

(0,1) Indicator: ethnic size in middle third x
(0,1) Indicator: ethnic isolation in lowest third

0.428
(0.228)

-0.038
(0.220)

-0.443
(0.276)

-0.542
(0.306)

(0,1) Indicator: ethnic size in largest third x
(0,1) Indicator: ethnic isolation in highest third

0.802
(0.369)

0.944
(0.361)

0.927
(0.309)

0.767
(0.300)

(0,1) Indicator: ethnic size in largest third x
(0,1) Indicator: ethnic isolation in middle third

0.126
(0.312)

0.279
(0.334)

0.329
(0.297)

0.294
(0.299)

0.55

0.54

(0,1) Indicator: ethnic size in largest third x
(0,1) Indicator: ethnic isolation in lowest third
R-Squared value

Excluded group
0.57

Notes: See Table 1. Effects are measured relative to largest and least isolated ethnic groups.

0.49

Table 4: IV estimations
Instrumenting with 1980 ethnic group size and
in-marriage rates in United States

Instrumenting with predicted ethnic group size
from gravity model and in-marriage rates in
United Kingdom

First stage for First stage for Second stage
group size group isolation
results

First stage for First stage for Second stage
group size group isolation
results

(1)

(2)

Instrument for size

0.877
(0.044)

Instrument for isolation

(3)

(4)

(5)

-0.063
(0.055)

0.706
(0.069)

-0.018
(0.115)

-0.075
(0.043)

0.721
(0.114)

-0.142
(0.109)

0.587
(0.078)

F stat =
23.6

Bias =
<10%

F stat =
35.5

Bias =
<10%

(6)

Inverse of log ethnic group size

0.757
(0.077)

0.487
(0.132)

Log isolation of ethnic group

0.516
(0.099)

0.665
(0.119)

0.034

0.091

Exogeneity test p-value

Notes: See Table 1. Estimations describe the IV relationship between industry concentration for ethnic entrepreneurship and ethnic group size and inmarriage isolation. The column headers indicate the instruments used. The 2SLS relative bias reports the minimum bias that can be specified and still
reject the null hypothesis that the instruments are weak. This level is determined through the minimum eigenvalue statistic and Stock and Yogo's
(2005) 2SLS size of nominal 5% Wald test. The null hypothesis in Wu-Hausman exogeneity tests is that the instrumented regressors are exogenous.
The test statistic used is robust to clustering of standard errors. Regressions cluster standard errors by the 43 and 24 ethnic groups in the US 1980 and
UK 1990 datasets used to build the respective instruments.

Table 5: Robustness checks on IV estimations
Baseline
estimation
(Table 2,
Col. 1 & 6)

Without
sample
weights

(1)

(2)

Using
bootstrapped
standard
Without
errors
winsorization
(3)

(4)

Isolation IV Only
Including
Including
simulated
simulated
overage
overage
control1
control2
(5)

Double IV
Including
Including
simulated
simulated
overage
overage
control2
control1

(6)

(7)

(8)

A. IV results using 1980 ethnic group size and in-marriage rates in United States
Inverse of log ethnic group size
(small groups have larger values)

0.757
(0.077)

0.748
(0.072)

0.689
(0.084)

0.748
(0.085)

0.519
(0.232)

0.547
(0.116)

1.254
(0.355)

1.220
(0.332)

Log isolation of ethnic group

0.516
(0.099)

0.526
(0.091)

0.554
(0.145)

0.526
(0.095)

0.539
(0.122)

0.516
(0.212)

0.465
(0.133)

0.468
(0.125)

23.6
0.034

23.4
0.043

6.9
0.100

34.6
0.011

33.1
0.915

37.5
0.912

15.4
0.014

23.0
0.012

Insufficient
first stage

Insufficient
first stage

F statistic
Exogeneity test p-value

B. IV results using predicted group sizes and UK in-marriage rates
Inverse of log ethnic group size
(small groups have larger values)

0.487
(0.132)

0.476
(0.123)

0.506
(0.091)

0.476
(0.105)

0.315
(0.185)

0.334
(0.179)

Log isolation of ethnic group

0.665
(0.119)

0.639
(0.111)

0.464
(0.089)

0.639
(0.135)

0.772
(0.089)

0.751
(0.091)

35.5
0.091

34.1
0.084

13.5
0.160

20.0
0.061

40.7
0.137

29.8
0.166

F statistic
Exogeneity test p-value
Notes: See Tables 1 and 4.

Table 6: IV estimations with alternative metric designs
Log weighted average overage across all industries [OVER1]
Baseline
Excluding
estimation
natives from
(Table 2, Col. Using total
denominator Including rural
1 & 6)
worker sample
shares
workers
(1)

(2)

(3)

(4)

Log weighted
average overage Log average of
three largest
Log largest
using three
largest industries overage ratios overage ratio for
for ethnic group for ethnic group
ethnic group
[OVER2]
[OVER3]
[OVER4]
(5)

(6)

(7)

A. IV results using 1980 ethnic group size and in-marriage rates in United States
Inverse of log ethnic group size
(small groups have larger values)

0.757
(0.077)

0.636
(0.063)

0.491
(0.135)

0.730
(0.086)

0.531
(0.110)

0.272
(0.126)

0.193
(0.123)

Log isolation of ethnic group

0.516
(0.099)

0.469
(0.104)

0.771
(0.113)

0.532
(0.097)

0.696
(0.091)

0.759
(0.087)

0.720
(0.107)

23.6
0.034

54.4
0.403

23.6
0.081

23.6
0.040

23.6
0.019

23.6
0.042

23.6
0.078

F statistic
Exogeneity test p-value

B. IV results using predicted group sizes and UK in-marriage rates
Inverse of log ethnic group size
(small groups have larger values)

0.487
(0.132)

0.466
(0.120)

0.386
(0.141)

0.444
(0.132)

0.132
(0.109)

0.075
(0.100)

0.043
(0.090)

Log isolation of ethnic group

0.665
(0.119)

0.550
(0.177)

0.696
(0.130)

0.712
(0.122)

0.861
(0.125)

0.905
(0.104)

0.853
(0.088)

35.5
0.091

10.5
0.107

35.5
0.687

35.5
0.055

35.5
0.022

35.5
0.239

35.5
0.464

F statistic
Exogeneity test p-value
Notes: See Tables 1 and 4.

Table 7: IV results with alternative gravity model designs for predicted size
Using distance,
Using distance, population, and
distance
Using distance population, and
border as
squared as
and population
instruments
as instruments
instruments

Baseline
estimation
(Table 2,
Column 6)

Including
border in the
gravity model

Including
distance
squared in the
gravity model

(1)

(2)

(3)

(4)

(5)

(6)

Inverse of log ethnic group size
(small groups have larger values)

0.487
(0.132)

0.483
(0.131)

0.483
(0.130)

0.522
(0.149)

0.524
(0.148)

0.522
(0.150)

Log isolation of ethnic group

0.665
(0.119)

0.665
(0.120)

0.665
(0.120)

0.680
(0.111)

0.624
(0.084)

0.673
(0.083)

F statistic
Exogeneity test p-value
Overidentification test p-value

35.5
0.091

36.2
0.086

35.8
0.096

22.2
0.029
0.174

17.0
0.063
0.283

17.0
0.024
0.394

Notes: See Tables 1 and 4.

Table 8: Estimations for log yearly income of individual
Baseline estimation
(1)
Percent of self-employed in
individual's ethnic group (1)

1.145
(0.334)

Share of group that is working in
an individual's industry (2)
Indicator for individual being
self-employed
Observations
1 SD change x beta (1)
1 SD change x beta (2)

(2)

Excluding professionals and PhDs
(3)

(4)

1.122
(0.335)

1.091
(0.347)

0.680
(0.205)

0.615
(0.201)

0.031
(0.002)

0.033
(0.004)

0.030
(0.002)

1,560,890
0.029

1,560,890

1,560,890
0.029
0.050

0.055

(5)

(6)
1.067
(0.349)

0.624
(0.210)

0.562
(0.208)

0.022
(0.002)

0.025
(0.004)

0.022
(0.002)

1,286,318
0.028

1,286,318

1,286,318
0.027
0.046

0.050

Notes: Estimations describe the OLS relationship between log yearly income of individuals and entrepreneurial activity of their ethnic
group. Sample is taken from 2000 Census IPUMS. Sample includes native males and immigrant males who migrate after 1968 (effective
date of the Immigration Reform Act of 1965), are aged 30-65 in 2000, and have lived in the United States for at least 10 years. Sample
excludes workers whose self-employment status is unknown or not applicable, industries without self-employment, and workers living
outside of metropolitan areas. Baseline estimation includes fixed effects for the following person-level traits (category counts in
parentheses): PUMA geographical location (625), industry (200), native/immigrant (2), age (7), age at immigration for migrants (7),
education (3), and English language fluency (2). Regressions cluster standard errors by ethnic group and use IPUMS sample weights. The
bottom of the table provides the standard deviation x beta coefficient for the group-level variables (0.0255 for (1), 0.0810 for (2)).
Columns 4-6 exclude workers in professional occupations and holders of doctorate degrees.

Online Appendix: Empirical
Table A1a provides our largest overage ratios ordered by OV ER1l . We …nd evidence of strong entrepreneurial clustering. For example, Gujarati Indians have an
average overage ratio of 33 across the industries of their self-employment work, and
an average overage ratio of 59 in their three largest industries. Their max overage
is in the hotel and motel industry, which we further explore in Table A1b. The last
three columns of Table A1a provide broader statistics about each ethnic group, such as
its total employment (entrepreneurial and wage workers), self-employment share, and
in-marriage rates.
Table A1b displays the maximum overages observed at the industry level for ethnic
groups, ordered by max self-employment overage. The table displays for the ethnic
groups their industry of max self-employment overage, the industry of max overage
when using all workers, and the industry where the most workers for the ethnic group
are occupied in terms of absolute counts. In 17 of 25 cases shown, the industry where
the ethnic group displays the highest concentration for self-employment is the same as
the industry where the ethnic group shows the highest concentration for total employment. In 8 of 25 cases, the industry of maximum concentration is also the industry
where the ethnic group employs the most workers in an absolute sense. The industry
size variable ranks industries from largest (1) to smallest (200) in terms of their overall
size in the economy. Most of the maximum-concentration industries in the …rst two
industry lists are of moderate size; industries in the third set for highest absolute count
of ethnic employees tend to be larger industries.
It is noteworthy that some important factors aid group concentration are conceptually similar to but are not captured by our theoretical and empirical work. For example,
we treat the taxi industry as a single industry for our empirical work, but taxi markets
are often segmented by cities. Frequent travelers note the degree to which di¤erent
ethnic groups appear to dominate the taxi industry on a city-by-city basis, with the
most important group for each city being di¤erent. In fact, more broadly, many industries of maximum concentration (e.g., grocery stores, gas stations) are cases where
geography can play an important role. This suggests we are likely under-estimating
true concentration in this regard.1
On a related note, social interaction e¤ects should in principle be relevant to any
setting where the complementarity between social interaction and skill acquisition is
strong. However, occupations and industries that require speci…c education and skills
that are typically acquired early in life are not amenable to the forces that we model
in which immigrants arrive in the United States as adults. Thus, adult immigrants
1

Unfortunately, the data counts become very thin for segmenting by geography using IPUMS.
Future work using universal linked employer-employee data can analyze these features.

1

…nd it harder to enter the medical profession, despite its signi…cant interplay between
social and professional interactions, given medicine’s deep professional requirements
and extensive training period. Many of the displayed entrepreneurial activities that
are subject to ethnic concentration have much shorter training cycles and fewer degree
or occupational licensing requirements.
Tables A2a and A2b report pairwise correlations and pairwise rank correlations
for eight variants in overage ratios. All correlations exceed 0.4 and are statistically
signi…cant at a 5% level.

2

Appendix Table A1a: Ethnic groups displaying the greatest self-employment industrial concentration
Ethnic group,
Weighted
Weighted average
overage ratio for three
designated by
average
largest selfcountry of origin or overage ratio
sub-groups available
employment
over all
industries industries for ethnicity
in IPUMS
Yemen
Eritrea
Gujarati
Ethiopia
Bangladesh
Chaldean
Haiti
Ghana
Afghanistan
Nigeria
Tonga
Morocco
Punjabi
Jordan
Laos
Pakistan
Dominican Republic
Cambodia
Iraq
Turkey
Korea
Australia
Hungary
Syria
Sri Lanka (Ceylon)

50.0
35.4
32.8
27.2
20.5
16.1
16.1
15.9
15.3
13.6
12.0
11.3
10.5
10.0
9.9
9.9
8.7
8.5
8.5
8.1
8.0
7.9
7.6
7.5
7.3

64.2
45.5
59.4
43.9
27.6
35.0
29.8
20.6
20.9
29.5
14.5
11.2
21.8
17.6
3.6
18.5
16.6
7.8
3.4
3.4
15.0
2.1
3.1
11.0
9.1

Self-employment industry with max
overage ratio
Grocery stores
Taxicab service
Hotels and motels
Taxicab service
Taxicab service
Grocery stores
Taxicab service
Taxicab service
Taxicab service
Taxicab service
Landscape and horticultural services
Construction
Gasoline service stations
Grocery stores
Agricultural production, crops
Taxicab service
Taxicab service
Eating and drinking places
Offices and clinics of physicians
Eating and drinking places
Laundry, cleaning, and garment services
Construction
Construction
Offices and clinics of physicians
Offices and clinics of physicians

Share of
employment
Total
classified as
selfIn-marriage
employment
in sample
employed
rate
2,322
3,338
26,373
8,760
11,770
5,429
58,971
10,975
6,432
27,232
2,685
5,346
16,453
7,674
19,635
35,722
70,576
16,245
4,598
10,438
91,928
4,910
6,697
7,623
4,010

26%
17%
25%
14%
16%
33%
8%
11%
24%
18%
27%
23%
27%
35%
9%
22%
13%
15%
32%
27%
45%
23%
26%
41%
26%

86%
100%
93%
64%
86%
88%
75%
68%
76%
64%
77%
32%
96%
68%
77%
83%
62%
82%
60%
60%
70%
32%
32%
57%
50%

Notes: Descriptive statistics from 2000 Census IPUMS. Sample includes males immigrating after 1968 (effective date of the Immigration Reform Act of 1965),
aged 30-65 in 2000, and living in the United States for at least 10 years. Sample excludes workers whose self-employment status is unknown or not applicable,
industries without self-employment, and workers living outside of metropolitan areas. The overage ratios and industry titles are specific to self-employment and
weight industries by the number of self-employed workers for the ethnic group. Two small groups that are partially composed of residual individuals are not
listed in this table but have overage values in this range (Indochina, ns 9.4; Africa, ns/nec 8.2). The employment column displays the total workforce size
included in the sample for each ethnic group.

Appendix Table A1b: Maximum overage clusters and industry employment ranks by ethnic group
Ethnic group
Gujarati
Yemen
Eritrea
Ethiopia
Bangladesh
Haiti
Nigeria
Ghana
Punjabi
Korea
Afghanistan
Jordan
Dom. Republic
Armenian
Pakistan
Lebanon
Chaldean
Tonga
India
Portugal
Ecuador
Iran
Vietnam
USSR/Russia
Ukraine

Industry of max overage for selfIndustry Industry of max overage for total
Index
size
worker sample
employed sample
Hotels and motels
108.1
Grocery stores
75.0
Taxicab service
61.0
Taxicab service
52.6
Taxicab service
47.1
Taxicab service
42.3
Taxicab service
38.1
Taxicab service
35.3
Gasoline service stations
34.6
Laundry, cleaning, etc. services 33.5
Taxicab service
32.5
Grocery stores
28.1
Taxicab service
27.2
Jewelry stores
25.7
Taxicab service
25.6
Gasoline service stations
23.5
Grocery stores
20.6
Landscape/horticultural services 18.2
Hotels and motels
17.8
Fishing, hunting, and trapping
16.5
Taxicab service
15.6
Apparel, fabrics, and notions
14.3
Fishing, hunting, and trapping
13.4
Taxicab service
13.2
Taxicab service
13.2

31
13
77
77
77
77
77
77
88
94
77
13
77
138
77
88
13
25
31
170
77
144
170
77
77

Liquor stores
Grocery stores
Taxicab service
Taxicab service
Taxicab service
Taxicab service
Taxicab service
Taxicab service
Taxicab service
Shoe repair shops
Taxicab service
Taxicab service
Taxicab service
Jewelry stores
Taxicab service
Gasoline service stations
Liquor stores
Landscape/horticultural services
Offices and clinics of physicians
Dyeing and finishing textiles
Apparel and accessories
Apparel, fabrics, and notions
Fishing, hunting, and trapping
Taxicab service
Taxicab service

Industry
Industry of max total employment
size
146
13
77
77
77
77
77
77
77
200
77
77
77
138
77
88
146
25
36
176
106
144
170
77
77

Hotels and motels
Grocery stores
Taxicab service
Taxicab service
Eating and drinking places
Construction
Hospitals
Hospitals
Taxicab service
Laundry, cleaning, etc. services
Eating and drinking places
Grocery stores
Construction
Construction
Taxicab service
Eating and drinking places
Grocery stores
Construction
Computer and data processing
Construction
Construction
Eating and drinking places
Electrical machinery/equipment
Construction
Construction

Industry
size
31
13
77
77
4
1
5
5
77
94
4
13
1
1
77
4
13
1
8
1
1
4
14
1
1

Notes: See Table A1a. Table is ordered by the 25 largest self-employment overage ratios at the industry level for ethnic groups. The industry size variable ranks industries from largest
(1) to smallest (200). The table also displays for each ethnic group the industry of maximum overage when considering all employed workers and the industry where the greatest
number of workers are employed.

Appendix Table A2a: Pairwise correlations of various overage metrics
Sample

Metric

(1)

(2)

(3)

(4)

(5)

(6)

(7)

(1) Self-employed

Log weighted average overage ratio across
all industries [OVER1]

(2)

Log weighted average overage ratio in
three largest industries [OVER2]

0.946

1

(3)

Log average of three largest overage ratios
for ethnic group [OVER3]

0.923

0.961

1

(4)

Log largest overage ratio for ethnic group
[OVER4]

0.859

0.927

0.966

1

(5) All workers

Log weighted average overage ratio across
all industries [OVER1]

0.832

0.767

0.731

0.631

1

(6)

Log weighted average overage ratio in
three largest industries [OVER2]

0.835

0.796

0.785

0.685

0.948

1

(7)

Log average of three largest overage ratios
for ethnic group [OVER3]

0.555

0.627

0.640

0.630

0.541

0.632

1

(8)

Log largest overage ratio for ethnic group
[OVER4]

0.470

0.577

0.530

0.522

0.476

0.495

0.900

(8)

1

Notes: Table displays correlations between ethnic group overage measures calculated on both self-employment and industry total employment. All
correlations are significant at a 5% level.

1

Appendix Table A2b: Pairwise rank correlations of various overage metrics
Sample

Metric

(1)

(2)

(3)

(4)

(5)

(6)

(7)

(1) Self-employed

Log weighted average overage ratio across
all industries [OVER1]

(2)

Log weighted average overage ratio in
three largest industries [OVER2]

0.808

1

(3)

Log average of three largest overage ratios
for ethnic group [OVER3]

0.588

0.789

1

(4)

Log largest overage ratio for ethnic group
[OVER4]

0.569

0.760

0.971

1

(5) All workers

Log weighted average overage ratio across
all industries [OVER1]

0.835

0.821

0.661

0.648

1

(6)

Log weighted average overage ratio in
three largest industries [OVER2]

0.706

0.859

0.719

0.678

0.872

1

(7)

Log average of three largest overage ratios
for ethnic group [OVER3]

0.589

0.739

0.768

0.816

0.760

0.743

1

(8)

Log largest overage ratio for ethnic group
[OVER4]

0.587

0.705

0.705

0.742

0.749

0.724

0.955

(8)

1

1

Notes: See Appendix Table A2a. Table displays rank correlations between ethnic group overage measures calculated on both self-employment and industry
total employment. All correlations are significant at a 5% level.

Online Appendix: Theory
The theory in this paper consists of two fundamental building blocks. First, social
interactions and production are complementary. Second, di¤erent social relationships
are not close substitutes for one another. The former is analyzed in the main text, and
this appendix begins with additional discussion. We then consider pricing equilibrium
and social networks with endogenous matching. The numbering of assumptions and
propositions continues from the main text.

1

Discussion of Baseline Model

1.1

Quality and Convex Productivity

In addition to the quantity of social interactions with other self-employed entrepreneurs,
the quality of these interactions could also matter for productivity. Let individual
productivity for self-employed entrepreneurs in industry 1 increase both in the quantity
and average productivity of other entrepreneurs in the sector of the same group. Write
this as
= + Xl ;
(1)
where > 0 is a productivity term, 0 < < 1 is a social multiplier, Xl is the fraction
of entrepreneurs in group l, and is the average productivity of these entrepreneurs.
Solving for equilibrium productivity by setting equal to , individual productivity in
group l is a function:
:
(2)
1
Xl
Under these conditions, productivity is convex in the degree of specialization when
taking both the quantity and the quality of interaction into account.1 With this result
in mind, we make the following assumption:
(Xl ) =

Assumption 1B Productivity of self-employed entrepreneurs in industry 1 is convex
in specialization: 00 > 0.
Assumption 1B allows a full characterization of the e¢ cient solution without having
to resort to explicit functional form. We discuss further below. Convex productivity
gives the following result:
1

This speci…cation highlights the di¤erences from a standard interaction model. The standard
model is generally speci…ed so that individual productivity is a function of a group-speci…c term
and the discounted mean of the group, . Solving = + , interaction exacerbates the di¤erence
in across groups, = 1 > , but the degree of specialization Xl has no e¤ect on productivity.

1

Lemma If productivity is convex, both groups never work in both industries.
Proof: Assume by contradiction that an e¢ cient distribution (XA ; XB ) exists where
0 < Xl < 1 for l = fA; Bg. Consider a marginal change in the ethnic composition
of self-employed entrepreneurs in industry 1 while holding …xed the overall number of
said entrepreneurs M (and therefore also the outputs of both industries). Taking the
derivative of Q1 with respect to , and evaluating it at = 0:
@Q1
@

XA +

NA

; XB

NB

= (XA ) + XA 0 (XA )

(XB )

XB 0 (XB )

(3)

Since (XA ; XB ) is e¢ cient, and since Xl is interior, this derivative has to be zero.2 But
with convex productivity the derivative is zero only at XA = XB , which is the global
minimum. This contradicts e¢ ciency.
The e¢ cient economy aims for maximum ethnic homogeneity in self-employed entrepreneurship in industry 1. Ruling out that both groups work in both sectors implies
that only the specialized distributions along the two curves depicted in Figure 1 of the
main text could possibly coincide with the transformation frontier. The shape of the
entire transformation frontier can therefore be deduced by tracing out the maximum
of the two curves in that …gure.
Proposition 2 If productivity is convex, there is a cuto¤ value v such that for
v < v , the minority group specializes as self-employed entrepreneurs in industry 1,
whereas for v > v , the majority specializes.
Proof: Direct from Proposition 1 and Lemma proofs with convexity.
The right panel of Figure 1 of the main text also shows how the degree of specialization varies with the size of industry 1, as governed by v, and the cuto¤ value v for
majority group specialization. The greater the value of v, the greater is the demand for
industry 1 and the more people work in it. As industry 1 increases in size, the interaction externality generates a characteristic discrete jump from one type of equilibrium to
another. At the point v , where many from group B have also joined self-employed entrepreneurship in industry 1, the economy abruptly moves from minority specialization
to majority specialization.
2

If the derivative is nonzero, then the output of industry 1 could increase while keeping the output
of industry 0 constant. By subsequently increasing the number of workers in industry 0 marginally, a
Pareto improvement is feasible, thus contradicting e¢ ciency.

2

1.2

The Case of Non-Convex Productivity

To see that convexity is needed for the Lemma on ethnic homogeneity to hold, consider a non-convex production function where a threshold fraction must work as selfemployed entrepreneurs in industry 1 for interaction to have value: > 0 if Xl
b
and zero otherwise. This speci…cation violates the assumption that productivity is
strictly increasing in the degree of specialization. Then, if the demand for industry 1
output is so great that a single group cannot satisfy it entirely, v > V (0; 1), and if
in addition V (b; b) < v < V (b; 1), e¢ ciency requires that both ethnic groups work in
both industries, contradicting the Lemma.
To see why, consider what would happen if one of the groups specialized completely.
In this case the non-specialized group’s degree of specialization would be positive but
below b, causing the self-employed industry 1 entrepreneurs in that group to have zero
productivity. If, however, the industrial distribution was unspecialized instead, with
XA = XB , then self-employed industry 1 entrepreneurs in both groups would be as
productive as those in the most productive group were under the alternative. Clearly
this would be Pareto superior, contradicting the Lemma. This special case shows
how the Lemma fails for non-convex productivity, and how in this case the qualitative
features of specialization will depend on speci…c functional form assumptions. Recall
however that the results for both v
V (1; 0) and v = V (0; 1) are more general and
apply both for convex and non-convex productivity. This condition is less important
for the remaining model discussion.

2

The Price Equilibrium

The model in the main text characterizes the e¢ cient outcome. The focus now turns
to the competitive outcome. An equilibrium analysis will yield two insights into how
social interaction a¤ects distribution over industries. First, it shows how stratifying
forces act to make groups more and more di¤erent, and second, how group earnings
are positively related to the degree of specialization.
To see how social interaction works as a stratifying force, begin by introducing time
into the analysis, with t = 0; 1; :::; 1. Dynamics are built into the model by making the
interaction e¤ect work with a lag. Denote by Xlt the degree of specialization in period t
for group l, and let self-employed individual entrepreneurial productivity in industry 1
in period t be a function Xlt 1 . This one-period lag speci…cation for the interaction
e¤ect could easily be generalized to a distributed lag. Interaction now e¤ectively works
as a form of social capital, with the group’s self-employment activities in the previous
period bene…ting individual productivity today. Let pt1 and pt0 be the prices of industry
1 output and industry 0 output respectively. Entrepreneurial earnings in industry 1
t
t
= pt0 . Competitive
are y1;l
= pt1 Xlt 1 and worker earnings in industry 0 are y0;l
3

industrial choice is straightforward to derive in this setting; de…ning the relative price
pt
of industry 0 output to industry 1 output as pt = p0t , an individual in group l joins
1
industry 1 as a self-employed entrepreneur if
Xlt

1

pt

(4)

and favors being a worker in industry 0 if
Xlt 1
pt . Since individuals have
identical skills, aggregate labor supply for group l is discontinuous, with:
8
if Xlt 1 > pt
< 1
Xlt =
(5)
[0; 1] if Xlt 1 = pt
:
t 1
t
0
if Xl
<p:

Avoid for now the knife-edge unspecialized case where XAt 1 = XBt 1 . Since there is a
single price of labor, pt , at least one of the two groups A and B must then be in a
corner:
XAt ; XBt

=

(XAt = 1; 0 < XBt ) or (XAt
1; XBt = 0) if XAt
1) if XAt
(0 < XAt ; XBt = 1) or (XAt = 0; XBt

1
1

> XBt
< XBt

1
1

(6)

In equilibrium, supply must satisfy (6) and production must meet demand so that
markets clear. Because of perfect complementarity, meeting demand reduces to satisfying v = V (XAt ; XBt ). The resulting equilibrium distribution is unique. To see why, take
the case when group l is more specialized than group l0 in the previous period, with
Xlt 1 > Xlt0 1 . Given that at least one of the two groups must be in a corner according
to (6), the equilibrium distribution must either be of the type (Xlt ; 0) or of the type
(1; Xlt0 ). Since the function V is strictly increasing in both arguments, it follows that
V (1; Xlt0 ) > V (Xlt ; 0). Only one distribution can consequently make V equal to v.
The equilibrium distribution is therefore uniquely determined by the distribution
in the previous period. Continuing to avoid the knife-edge unspecialized case, de…ne a
function that maps every previous distribution into a new distribution:
XAt 1 ; XBt

XAt ; XBt =

1

(7)

Next, proceed to characterize stationary equilibrium distributions. Like other equilibrium distributions, stationary distributions must satisfy (6) and must meet demand.
Following the same argument as above, based on V being strictly increasing in both
arguments, it follows that there is a stationary equilibrium where each of the two
groups specializes. Denote the stationary distribution as XAA ; XBA when the minority
specializes, and the stationary distribution as XAB ; XBB when the majority specializes.
Finally, returning for a moment to the unspecialized knife-edge case where XAt 1 =
XBt 1 , this type of initial condition is of measure zero and therefore not elaborated
4

on. Note only that since V is strictly increasing in both arguments, there can only be
one such stationary unspecialized equilibrium distribution. Denote that equilibrium
distribution as XAU ; XBU . In the unspecialized case, although there is only one stationary equilibrium, the uniqueness of equilibria no longer applies. To summarize, there
are consequently three stationary equilibrium distributions: two specialized, XAA ; XBA
and XAB ; XBB , and one unspecialized, XAU ; XBU . Figure A1 shows the two specialized
equilibria, as well as the knife-edge equilibrium, when v is less than V (1; 0).

2.1

Industrial Strati…cation

Our next analysis shows that the dynamic system in (7) converges to a stationary
specialized equilibrium, so long as the interaction externality is not too strong. This
analysis only examines unspecialized initial conditions, which establishes convergence
on measure one. Consider what happens to the aggregate production of industry 1
when one (in…nitesimal) person in group l becomes a self-employed entrepreneur in that
industry. First, aggregate production increases by an amount equal to the individual
productivity of that person, (Xl ). In addition, all other self-employed entrepreneurs
in industry 1 from group l bene…t from the interaction externality when socializing with
this new entrepreneur. Individual productivity therefore increases by N1l 0 (Xl ) for all
Xl Nl self-employed industry 1 entrepreneurs in group l. Consequently, the internalized
e¤ect on aggregate production of one person joining the self-employed entrepreneurial
sector of industry 1 is (Xl ), and the external e¤ect is Xl 0 (Xl ). Assume that the
external e¤ect is smaller than the internal e¤ect.3
Assumption 2 The internal e¤ect dominates:

0

(Xl ) Xl < (Xl ).

This condition is satis…ed if productivity is concave in Xl , but it also holds for some
convexity as long as (0) > 0. To see why the assumption is needed for the system to
be stable, consider the extreme case when group A has no mass at all, with NA = 0.
Since the derivative of V with respect to XAt is zero in this case, group A can be ignored
altogether in the general equilibrium analysis. There is then a single stationary level
of specialization for group B; denote this value as XB .
Consider a perturbation in period t so that the majority starts out with too many
entrepreneurs in industry 1, XBt > XB , shown in Figure A2. Such a deviation boosts
the interaction e¤ect in period t + 1 relative to the stationary equilibrium, (XBt ) >
(XB ). With perfect complementarity, the outputs of both industry 0 and industry 1
must therefore increase relative to their stationary equivalents. Increasing the output
of industry 0 requires an increase in the number of workers in that industry, and
consequently, a decrease in the number of self-employed entrepreneurs in industry 1 to
3

We thank Rachel Soloveichik for this interpretation of Assumption 2.

5

below the stationary value XB . With fewer of these entrepreneurs in period t + 1 than
the stationary number, the tables turn in period t + 2, so that the interaction e¤ect
now is reduced to below that in the stationary equilibrium. Reducing the production
of industry 0 and industry 1 in period t + 2 in response, the number of industry 0
workers in period t + 2 has to decrease and the number of self-employed industry 1
entrepreneurs has to increase relative to the stationary equilibrium. These reversals
repeat every period in cobweb-style dynamics.4
The question of whether the system is stable reduces to whether the number of
self-employed entrepreneurs in industry 1 in period t + 2 is less than the number of
such entrepreneurs in period t, so that the degree of specialization in group B gets
closer and closer to the stationary value XB over time. Using the derived direction
of the change in industry 1 production, Qt+1
> Qt+2
1
1 , this latter inequality can be
equivalently expressed, after multiplying and dividing the left-hand side by XBt and
dividing both sides by XBt+1 NB , as:
XBt

XBt+1
(XBt )
t+2
> XB
XBt
XBt+1

(8)

Given that productivity is not too convex, as stipulated by Assumption 2, it follows
l)
that (X
is strictly decreasing in Xl . Since XBt > XBt+1 , equation (8) then establishes
Xl
that XBt > XBt+2 . This proves convergence and the stability of group B’s degree of
specialization around XB .
Having established stability in the case of NA = 0, the same example also serves
to show how the stratifying force comes into play. Let group B be in its stable state,
with XBt = XB , and perturb the minority’s industry distribution so that XAt > XB .
Since group B is so much greater in size than group A, the former is una¤ected by the
perturbation and the price continues to be locked in at pt+1 = (XB ). The interaction
e¤ect in period t+1, generated by the perturbation in period t, then results in everyone
in group A becoming more productive as self-employed entrepreneurs in industry 1
than as workers in industry 0, with (XAt ) > pt+1 . Group A’s degree of specialization
consequently jumps from XAt to XAt+1 = 1, and the distribution stays in this strati…ed
state forever. This strati…cation result is extended later for the general case of any
population size of the two groups, and it follows that for l 2 fA; Bg and l0 2 fA; Bg:
Proposition 3 Initial di¤erences result in long-run specialization: If group l is more
specialized than group l0 initially, Xl0 > Xl00 , then group l specializes in the long run
and the limiting distribution is XAl ; XBl .
4

The ‡ip-‡opping character of the equilibrium distribution is a result of the one-period lag speci…cation for the interaction e¤ect. The distribution would change more gradually with a more general
speci…cation allowing for distributed lags.

6

Proof : Consider the equilibrium sequence of industry distributions:
XA1 ; XB1 ; XA2 ; XB2 ; :::

(9)

If one group l is more specialized than the other group l0 initially, Xl0 > Xl00 , supply in
(5) requires that the equilibrium sequence begins in one of the following three ways:
Xl1 ; Xl10 ; Xl2 ; Xl20

8
< ((< 1; 0) ; :::)
; ::: =
((1; 0) ; (1; 0) ; :::)
:
((1; 0) ; (< 1; 0) ; :::) :

(10)

The proof proceeds by establishing that the sequence converges to XAl ; XBl in each
(Xl )
of these three cases. De…ne the variable (Xl )
for Xl > 0. From Assumption
Xl
0
2 it follows that (Xl ) < 0. Proceed to establish convergence:
Case 1 Xl1 < 1 and Xl10 = 0.
Show …rst that group l0 stays out of entrepreneurship in industry 1 for good. By
contradiction: if not, then there exists a time t where Xlt+1
= 0 and Xlt+2
> 0. Since
0
0
t+1
t+2
supply must satisfy (6) it then follows that Xl > 0 and Xl = 1. The change in the
output of industry 1 can then be written as:
Qt+2
1

Qt+1
= Nl
1

Xlt+1

Xlt+1

Xlt

+ Xlt+2
Nl 0
0

Xlt+1
:
0

(11)

This di¤erence is strictly positive if the …rst term is positive. Clearly this is the case if
Xlt+1 Xlt . If, instead, Xlt+1 < Xlt , then again focusing on the …rst term:
Xlt+1

Xlt+1

Xlt

=

Xlt+1 Xlt+1

= Xlt+1

Xlt+1

Xlt+1

Xlt Xlt

(12)

Xlt Xlt > 0:

This establishes that Qt+2
> Qt+1
. Since the output production of both industries must
1
1
move in the same direction to clear the market, because of perfect complementarity, it
follows that the output of industry 0 also increases from t + 1 to t + 2. This in turn
requires that the number of workers in industry 0 increases, or equivalently, that the
number of self-employed entrepreneurs in industry 1 decreases:
Xlt+2 Nl + Xlt+2
Nl0 < Xlt+1 Nl + Xlt+1
Nl0 :
0
0

(13)

Nl0 <
= 0, this inequality can be simpli…ed as Nl + Xlt+2
Since Xlt+2 = 1 and Xlt+1
0
0
t+1
Xl Nl . This inequality is a contradiction and establishes that group l0 stays out
of self-employed entrepreneurship in industry 1 for good. The stationary equilibrium
must consequently be of the form Xll ; 0 .
7

> Ql1 > Qt+2
Assume …rst that Xlt > X , in which case it is easy to show that Qt+1
1
1
t+2
as well as Xlt+1 < Xll < Xlt+2 . Since Qt+1
>
Q
it
follows
that:
1
1
Xlt+1 NA
Xlt+1

Xlt

> Xlt+2 NA

Xlt Xlt > Xlt+2
Xlt

Xlt

> Xlt+2

Xlt+1

(14)

Xlt+1 Xlt+1
Xlt+1 :

The last line implies that Xlt > Xlt+2 . The exact same argument, but with reverse
inequalities, can be made for Xlt < Xll . Therefore, having established that Xlt >
Xlt+2 > Xll when Xlt > Xll , and vice versa when Xlt < Xll , it has been shown that Xlt
approaches the stationary equilibrium value Xll over time. This establishes convergence
in Case 1.
Case 2 Xl1 = 1, Xl10

0, Xl2 = 1 and Xl20

0.

Show …rst that in this case, group l stays specialized for good. By contradiction:
if not, then there exists a time t when Xlt = 1, Xlt+1 = 1 and Xlt+2 < 1. Since supply
must satisfy (6), it follows that Xlt+2
= 0. The change in the output of industry 1 can
0
be written as
Qt+2
1

Qt+1
= Nl Xlt+2 (1)
1

(1)

Xlt+1
Nl 0
0

Xlt < 0:

(15)

Since the supply of output of both industries must move in the same direction to clear
the market, it follows that the output of industry 0 also decreases, which requires that
the number of self-employed entrepreneurs in industry 1 increases:
Xlt+2 Nl + Xlt+2
Nl0 > Xlt+1 Nl + Xlt+1
Nl0 :
0
0

(16)

Since Xlt+2
= 0 and Xlt+1 = 1, this inequality can be rewritten as Xlt+2 Nl > Nl +
0
t+1
Xl0 Nl0 , which is a contradiction. This establishes that group l stays specialized in
industry 1 for good. The stationary equilibrium must consequently be of the form
1; Xll0 . By the same argument as in Case 1, the sequence can be shown to approach
the stationary equilibrium value Xll0 over time, both if Xlt0 > Xll0 and if Xlt0 < Xll0 . This
establishes convergence in Case 2.
Case 3 Xl1 = 1 and Xl10

0 and Xl2 < 1 and Xl20 = 0.

By the same argument in Case 1, it follows that group l0 stays out of entrepreneurship in industry 1 permanently. Repeating the arguments in Case 1, convergence can
then be established also in Case 3.
Consequently, in all three cases there is convergence.
8

This also implies that the stationary unspecialized equilibrium XAU ; XBU is unstable. If the minority group is slightly more specialized initially, then the economy
converges to minority specialization XAA ; XBA , and if the opposite is true, then the
economy converges to majority specialization XAB ; XBB . Over time, social segregation
ampli…es initial group di¤erences.

2.2

Initial Conditions and Multiple Groups

Depending on the initial conditions, as is clear from Proposition 3, either of the two
groups A and B can specialize as self-employed entrepreneurs in industry 1. Social
interaction ampli…es initial di¤erences, but it does not explain why they are there
to begin with. The di¤erence in group size has some implications for what initial
conditions to expect, however.
Consider an economy with more than two groups. As before, the group with more
self-employed entrepreneurs in industry 1 initially will specialize in the long run. If
the initial industrial distribution is subject to randomness, one of the smaller groups is
likely to be the most specialized initially. To see why, let the initial distribution be generated by random draws, where each person becomes a self-employed entrepreneur in
industry 1 with probability .5 This probability structure results in the same expected
initial degree of specialization for all groups, but since the population size varies across
groups, the variance in the degree of specialization also varies. The smallest groups
have the largest variance, and therefore, the smallest groups are most likely to exhibit
the lowest and also the greatest initial degrees of specialization. Consequently, with
the smallest groups the most likely to specialize initially, as interaction ampli…es initial
di¤erences over time, the smallest groups are also the most likely to specialize in the
long run.

2.3

Assimilation

Our model does not feature assimilation of immigrants and their o¤spring and thus
yields permanent social and industrial segregation. In our framework, assimilation
would reduce the social isolation of an ethnic group (or some members of it) to the
majority group. Our framework then predicts the industry choices of the assimilated
individuals to look like those of the majority, especially if another ethnic group shows
strong social isolation.
5

These draws can be partially correlated within groups with the assumption that the correlation
is the same for every group.

9

2.4

Heterogeneity and Earnings

Social complementarities also have implications for earnings. To examine how interaction e¤ects would show up in earnings data, it is necessary to move away from the
framework of identical skills. Returning to a static environment, endow each person i
with entrepreneurial skills relevant to self-employment in industry 1, s1 (i), and with
another set of skills necessary for industry 0, s0 (i). Self-employed entrepreneurial earnings in industry 1 are now a function of both interactions and skills. Denote the earnings
of individual i in group l when she is a self- employed entrepreneur in industry 1 as
y1 (Xl ; i) = p1 (Xl ) s1 (i), and when she is a member of industry 0 as y0 (i) = p0 s0 (i).
p0
s1
De…ning the ratios s
, p
, and q
p yy01 , the earnings-maximizing industry
s0
p1
choice of individual i is to consider becoming a self-employed entrepreneur in industry
1 if:
q (Xl ; i) p
(17)
and to consider working in industry 0 if q (Xl ; i)
p. Here the term q (Xl ; i) =
(Xl ) s (i) summarizes the individual’s comparative advantage in self-employed entrepreneurship in industry 1, at parity prices, as a function of social interaction and skills.
When individuals have di¤erent skills, the character of the price equilibrium depends crucially on the marginal self-employed entrepreneur and how her comparative
advantage changes as more and more untalented people also become entrepreneurs in
industry 1. If the bene…ts of interaction are weak and the marginal entrepreneur “deteriorates”as more intrinsically untalented people enter the industry, then the economy
reduces to a standard Roy model, or sorting model, with a unique unspecialized equilibrium. Only if the interaction e¤ect is strong enough to overcome skill heterogeneity
can interaction change the character of the equilibrium.
Without loss of generality, order individuals from the greatest to the smallest comparative advantage in industry 1-style entrepreneurship, so that the skill ratio is decreasing in i, s0 (i) 0. The marginal entrepreneur is then the individual indexed by
i = Xl , and her comparative advantage is q (Xl ; Xl ). To prevent the economy from
reducing to a sorting model, assume that the interaction e¤ect trumps heterogeneity:
Assumption 3 Interaction dominates at the margin:

d
q
dXl

(Xl ; Xl ) > 0.

This assumption implies that the solid line in Figure A3 is upward sloping. The
equilibrium distribution (XA ; XB ) must be competitively supplied and enough output
must be produced by both industries to meet demand. Using a similar line of reasoning
as in the previous section, based on V being strictly increasing in both arguments, it
follows from Assumption 3 that there are three equilibria: one unstrati…ed, denoted
XAU ; XBU ; one where the minority group A specializes, denoted XAA ; XBA ; and one

10

where the majority group B specializes, denoted XAB ; XBB .6
In the equilibrium where minority A specializes as self-employed entrepreneurs in
industry 1, the mean earnings of members of group A are higher than the mean earnings
of members of group B, and vice versa in the equilibrium where group B specializes.
To see why, let y = max (y0 ; y1 ) be actual individual earnings, and denote mean group
R1
earnings as = 0 ydi.
Proposition 4 Earnings covary with self-employed entrepreneurship in industry 1:
(Xl ) > (Xl0 ) if Xl > Xl0 .
Proof: Since people sort into industries, mean earnings can be rewritten as
Z 1
Z Xl
(y1 (Xl ; i) y0 (i)) di
(Xl ) =
y0 (i) di +
0

(18)

0

Rearranging, the di¤erence in mean earnings between the two groups is:
Z Xl
Z Xl0
0
0
(y1 (Xl ; i) y0 (i)) di
(y1 (Xl ; i) y1 (Xl ; i)) di +
(Xl )
(Xl ) =

(19)

Xl 0

0

where both parts of the expression are positive. The …rst part is strictly positive due to
(Xl ;i)
the interaction e¤ect, @y1@X
> 0, and the second part is positive because of sorting,
l
y1 (Xl ; i) y0 (i) for all i Xl .
This unequivocal e¤ect on mean earnings at the group level does not carry through
to the industry level. Depending on the joint distribution of skills, mean earnings
in either industry can increase or decrease as interaction increases self-employed entrepreneurial productivity in industry 1 and shifts people of di¤erent ability between
industries. The e¤ect of interaction on industry earnings is similar to the e¤ect of
changing skill prices, which cannot be signed for a general skill distribution (Heckman
and Honore, 1990).
The di¤erence in mean earnings, normalized in units of industry 0 output, is shown
in Figure A4 for the equilibrium with minority specialization. The exact derivation
is included below. The relative price of industry 0 to industry 1 outputs is always
such that the marginal entrepreneur is indi¤erent between industries. Keeping track
of whether the marginal entrepreneur is in group A or in group B depending on the
industrial distribution, the equilibrium price can be expressed as:
p=

q (Xl ; Xl ) if Xl > Xl0 and Xl0 = 0, or Xl < Xl0 and Xl > 0
q (Xl0 ; Xl0 ) if Xl > Xl0 and Xl0 > 0, or Xl < Xl0 and Xl = 0

6

(20)

Note that Assumptions 2 and 3, when combined, put both an upper and a lower bound on the
ln s
ln
interaction e¤ect: ddX
< ddX
< X1l .
l
l

11

When increasing the number of self-employed entrepreneurs in industry 1 in equilibrium
with minority specialization, the relative price of industry 0 output to industry 1 output
increases continuously as the marginal entrepreneur in group A becomes more and more
productive. This increase in price continues until all As are self-employed entrepreneurs
in industry 1. To expand industry 1’s self-employed entrepreneurial sector further from
the point where everyone in group A are entrepreneurs, the price has to drop discretely
from p = q (1; 1) to q (0; 0), to lure the unproductive Bs into the sector as well. The
earnings di¤erential between groups A and B moves accordingly, as shown in Figure
A4, increasing continuously until all As are self-employed entrepreneurs in industry
1, at which point earnings jump in response to the discontinuous drop in the relative
price.
Derivation of Earnings Di¤erential in Figure A4: Mean earnings denominated in
terms of industry 0 outputs are:
Z 1
Z Xl
(Xl )
1
s0 (i) di:
(21)
p
(Xl ) s1 (i) di +
=
p0
Xl
0
Replace the relative price of industry 0 output to industry 1 output, p = pp10 , with the
comparative advantage of the marginal entrepreneur, q, since these two are equal in
(Xl ) (Xl0 )
. It can be
equilibrium. Denote the earnings di¤erential as (Xl ; Xl0 )
p0
expressed as:
Z Xl
Z Xl 0
1
q 1 (Xl ) s1 (i) s0 (i) di:
q ( (Xl )
(Xl0 )) s1 (i) di +
(Xl ; Xl0 ) =
Xl 0

0

(22)
For Xl < 1 and Xl0 = 0, where q = q (Xl ; Xl ), and q (Xl ; Xl ) = (Xl ) s (Xl ), di¤erentiating with respect to Xl gives
Z Xl
@ (Xl ; 0)
2
0
= s (Xl ) s (Xl )
s1 (i) di > 0:
(23)
@Xl
0

For Xl = 1 and Xl0 = 0, the drop in price from q (1; 1) to q (0; 0) results in a jump in
the mean earnings di¤erential equal to
Z 1
1
1
(1; 0)jp=q(0;0)
(1; 0)jp=q(1;1) = q (0; 0)
q (1; 1)
(1)
s1 (i) di > 0: (24)
0

For x = 1 and Xl0 > 0, where q = q (Xl0 ; Xl0 ), di¤erentiating with respect to Xl0 gives
@

(1; Xl0 )
=
@Xl0

dq
q
dXl0

2

(1)

Z

0

1
0

s1 (i) di+s (Xl0 ) s (Xl0 )

12

2

Z

0

Xl 0

s1 (i) di 2s0 (Xl0 ) < 0:
(25)

3

Relationships in a Social Network

Since interactions have been restricted to be random, the analysis has so far abstracted
from changes in the social structure that could arise in response to the productive value
of interaction. The most interesting question is whether the majority will split up into
smaller social groups, formed around choice of industry, to capitalize on interaction. If
such splinter groups could form costlessly, then social interaction would no longer be
able to generate industrial strati…cation along ethnic lines.
By developing a utility-based theory of interaction, explicitly stating social preferences and characterizing the optimal social structure, this section shows that splinter
groups will not arise so long as preferences are su¢ ciently diverse, and so long as different social relationships are not close substitutes for one another. Under these two
premises it is costly to con…ne social interactions to within a small group since the
quality of social matches deteriorates with decreasing group size.
The theory developed in this section is constructed around a standard marriage
market as in Becker (1973). In addition to spousal matching, people are also related
by birth, which yields a larger social structure where individuals are interrelated not
just pairwise but in a social network. Since the social network is derived as the outcome of matching, the problem analyzed here is di¤erent in nature from the problems
most commonly analyzed in the social network literature, for example in Jackson and
Wolinsky (1996), which focuses on strategic interaction between identical agents.

3.1

The Marriage Market

Take a very large …nite population i = 1; :::; N , which is divided into mutually exclusive
and exhaustive families by birth, with each family consisting of d > 3 individuals.
Every person i independently draws a trait ti , which could be for example beauty or
intelligence, uniformly distributed between zero and one:
Assumption 4 Individual traits ti are independent draws.
The independence of the draw signi…es what can be thought of as maximal diversity:
even within families people have di¤erent traits.
Based on realized traits, each person is assigned a spouse. To simplify, there are
no gender restrictions and spouses can belong to the same family.7 Traits are assumed
to be complementary inputs in marriage. A marriage between i and j yields utility
u (ti ; tj ), where the function u is symmetric and strictly increasing with a positive
cross-derivative:
7

Removing gender restrictions maps this problem into a one-sided assortative matching problem.
One-sided assortative matching is used in a di¤erent context in Kremer (1993).

13

Assumption 5 Inputs are complementary: u (ti ; tj ) = u (tj ; ti ), u1 > 0, u2 > 0 and
u1;2 > 0.
Since di¤erent relationships produce di¤erent utility, social relationships are not
perfect substitutes and there is an optimal matching of spouses. Assume that utility
is transferable, in which case the e¢ cient spousal matching has to maximize aggregate
utility. Labelling individuals according to rank, so that t1 < t2 < :::,8 it follows that
the e¢ cient matching is positively assortative: person one marries person two, person
three marries person four, ..., and person N 1 marries person N . To see this, let
the matching function v be symmetric and the cross-derivative positive. For traits
t1 < t2 < t3 < t4 , we show that the only e¢ cient matching is (t1 ; t2 ) and (t3 ; t4 ). As in
Becker (1973), we use a property of v when the cross-derivative is positive,
v (a; d) + v (c; b) < v (a; b) + v (c; d)

(26)

for a < c and b < d. Take an arbitrary e¢ cient matching (x1 ; x2 ) and (x3 ; x4 ), which
is a permutation of the traits t1 ; t2 ; t3 and t4 . Without loss of generality, relabel these
traits pairwise so that x1 < x2 and x3 < x4 . Also without loss of generality, relabel
the pairs so that x1 < x3 . This implies that x1 < x3 < x4 . Using the symmetry
of v, the aggregate utility from the arbitrary e¢ cient matching can be written as
v (x1 ; x2 ) + v (x4 ; x3 ). Since x1 < x4 it follows from (26) that x2 < x3 , otherwise
aggregate utility could be increased by interchanging x2 and x3 , just as b and d were
interchanged in (26). Consequently, with x1 < x2 < x3 < x4 , the arbitrarily chosen
e¢ cient matching (x1 ; x2 ) and (x3 ; x4 ) is identical to the e¢ cient matching (t1 ; t2 ) and
(t3 ; t4 ).

3.2

Splinter Groups

Say that two people i and j are related if they are married and/or belong to the same
family. De…ne a splinter group as a proper subset of the population where no one in
the subset is related to anyone outside of that subset. Given an e¢ cient assignment of
spouses in a very large population where traits are independently distributed, it follows
that:
Proposition 5 The probability that splinter groups exist is zero.
Proof: De…ne a d-regular multigraph with loops, where every vertex corresponds to
a family, and every edge corresponds to a marriage. A splinter group is equivalent to
an unconnected component of this graph. Assortative marriages on independent traits
generate a random con…guration of vertices. A random con…guration is equivalent to
8

Since having equal-valued traits, ti = tj , is of measure zero, this possibility is ignored.

14

a regular random multigraph, as de…ned in Janson et al. (2000). A regular random
multigraph is asymptotically almost surely Hamilitonian for d > 3 (Janson et al. 2000).
Connectivity follows from Hamiltonicity, which rules out the existence of unconnected
components, and consequently, the existence of splinter groups.
A partial explanation for this result is that if person i marries person j, then because
of the independence of traits, it is unlikely that anyone else in i’s family marries into
j’s family as well. As the population grows larger, it becomes less and less likely that
there is more than one marriage between the families of i and j. This “mismatch”
prevents i and j, and their families, from socially isolating themselves from the larger
population. The problem is more interesting than what this partial intuition conveys,
however. The likelihood of more than one marriage between two particular families
decreases as the population grows larger, but on the other hand, the number of families
for whom this event could occur increases. If, for example, d had been equal to two,
then these two e¤ects would have balanced, so that small splinter groups would have
formed even as the population approached in…nity. This proof most likely also goes
through for d
3, since it really only needs connectivity and since connectivity is
closely related to cubic graphs. The fourth edge is necessary in the case of multigraphs
to ensure Hamiltonicity, but Hamiltonicity is stronger than connectivity.
In addition to the above proof, we can provide a more structured intuition for no
splinter groups by using a branching tree to trace out relationships in the population.
Let be the set of all families. De…ne an arbitrary family in as the singleton set
(0). Let (1) be the set of families in = (0) with at least one family member
married to someone in the original family (0). De…ne (2) as the set of families in
= ( (0) [ (1)) with at least one family member married to someone in (1). Continuing by iteration to more and more distant relations, let (r) be the set of families
in = ( (r 2) [ (r 1)) married to someone in (r 1). The variable r denotes
what is sometimes called the degree of separation between the initial family (0) and
the families in (r). The degree of separation is a measure of the social distance between individuals; compare Milgram (1967). The collection of these sets, [rq=0 (q),
constitutes a branching tree. The sets in this collection are mutually exclusive, but if
there are splinter groups, the sets are not exhaustive even as r ! 1. Denote by s (r)
the cardinality of the set (r). Since each family in (r) is composed of d family members, where at least one member in each family by de…nition is married into (r 1),
the expansion of the tree [rq=0 (q) is bounded by
s (r + 1)

s (r) (d

1) :

(27)

If equation (27) holds with equality, then as r increases s (r) very soon encompasses
the entire population. It turns out that the equation generally holds as an inequality,
however. The reason for this slowdown is threefold. First, a person in (r) could marry
15

another person in (r). Second, a family in (r) could have more than one family
member married to someone in (r 1). Thirdly, several people in (r) could marry
into the same family. These three types of events combine to prevent each family in
(r) from contributing a full d 1 new families to (r + 1), and consequently cause
(27) to hold as an inequality.
Applying the branching tree [rq=0 (q) to the e¢ cient assortative matching, the
branching tree is overwhelmingly likely to grow to encompass the entire population in
the limit. Since the branching tree only expands to include people who are directly
or indirectly related, this limit result is equivalent to Proposition 5 that there are no
splinter groups. To see why the entire population is included in the limit, consider what
would happen if it were not true, if the branching tree died out without having reached
a positive fraction of the population. If this were the case, then (r) would eventually
have to grow arbitrarily small relative to the remainder set = ( (r 2) [ (r 1)),
and therefore the likelihood that someone in (r) married someone else in (r) rather
than in the remainder set, or that several people in (r 1) married into the same
family in (r) rather than in the remainder set, or that several people in (r) married
into the same family in the remainder set, must also grow arbitrarily small. But then
equation (27) should hold as an equality, implying that s (r + 1) > s (r), which contradicts the premise that the branching tree died out without having reached the entire
population. Consequently, everyone in the population is either directly or indirectly
related, and there are no splinter groups.

3.3

Implications for Productivity

The social network developed here allows more individual choice than the random interaction model analyzed earlier, since here industry choice can be made contingent
on every aspect of the social structure. The main results from the random interaction
model continue to hold nevertheless. A large group cannot align social relationships so
as to maximize productivity in a small industry where social interaction and productivity are complementary, without incurring the cost of deteriorating social matches
that comes from breaking up into smaller groups. This follows from the result that no
splinter groups arise under …rst-best matching on social traits. Since the social choice
set of ethnic minority groups is restricted anyway, these groups can limit their social
interactions to a single industry at no alternative cost. Ethnic minorities are therefore
well suited for social interaction-intensive industries.
A social network with the same properties could also be derived from a meeting
technology where spouses meet and marry at random. The social structure derived
here can therefore equally well be thought of as arising in a rigid environment where
people meet randomly, as arising from e¢ cient matching. Since randomness is likely to
play a role in who marries whom, this adds additional strength to the result. Breaking
16

up into smaller groups does not only carry a social utility cost, but also carries the cost
of bypassing random marriages.

3.4

Future Model Extensions

An interesting extension for future work is to include both general and speci…c skills
in the same framework. In such a model of spillovers between sectors, it should be
possible to derive strati…cation in overall entrepreneurial activity as well as industry
strati…cation between di¤erent forms of self-employed entrepreneurship at the same
time. This would correspond to the current situation in the United States, where
groups like the Koreans are strongly clustered in a few business sectors, while at the
same time being overrepresented as self-employed owners in almost all other business
activities as well.

4

Additional Appendix References:

Heckman, James and Bo Honore. 1990. The empirical content of the Roy model.
Econometrica 58: 1121-1149.
Jackson, Matthew, and Asher Wolinsky. 1996. A strategic model of social and economic
networks. Journal of Economic Theory 71: 44-74.
Janson, Svante, Tomasz Luczak, and Andrzej Rucinski. 2000. Random Graphs. New
York: John Wiley.
Kremer, Michael. 1993. The O-ring theory of economic development. Quarterly Journal of Economics 108: 551-575.
Milgram, Stanley. 1967. The small world problem. Psychology Today 22: 61-67.

17

θ (X)
A

B
U

X

Figure A1. Individual productivity and the three
stationary equilibria: one specialized equilibrium with
minority specialization (A), one specialized equilibrium
with majority specialization (B), and one unstratified
equilibrium (U).

θ (X)

p t+1

p t+2

X t+1

X* X t+2 X t

X

Figure A2. Stable dynamics when the internal effect
dominates.

q(X,X)
q(b,X)
q(a,X)
0

a

b

1

X

Figure A3. Sorting versus interaction effects in
individual productivity. The dotted lines illustrate how
the interaction effect raises productivity at all ability
levels when specialization increases from a to b. The
solid line shows the productivity of the marginal
entrepreneur, for whom i=X at every level of X.

μ(XA ) - μ(XB)
p0

0

V(1,0)

v*

V(0,1)

v

Figure A4. The difference in mean earnings between
group A and group B, for different values of v, when
minority group A specializes.

