NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

DOES ELIMINATING THE EARNINGS TEST INCREASE THE INCIDENCE OF
LOW INCOME AMONG OLDER WOMEN?
Theodore Figinski
David Neumark
Working Paper 21601
http://www.nber.org/papers/w21601

NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
October 2015

This paper was presented at the 17th Annual Joint Meeting of the Retirement Research
Consortium, August 6-7, 2015, Washington, DC. The authors gratefully acknowledge support
from the Social Security Administration (SSA). The findings and conclusions are solely those of
the authors and do not represent the views of SSA, the U.S. Department of the Treasury or any
other agency of the federal government, or MRRC. We are grateful to Howard Iams, Richard
Johnson, and Randall Mariger for helpful comments and discussions.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.
© 2015 by Theodore Figinski and David Neumark. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not
to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit,
including © notice, is given to the source.

Does Eliminating the Earnings Test Increase the Incidence of Low Income Among Older Women?
Theodore Figinski and David Neumark
NBER Working Paper No. 21601
October 2015, Revised April 2016
JEL No. H2,J14,J22
ABSTRACT
Reducing or eliminating Social Security’s Retirement Earnings Test (RET) can encourage labor
supply of older individuals receiving benefits. However, these reforms can encourage earlier
claiming of Social Security benefits, permanently lowering future benefits. We explore the
consequences, for older women, of eliminating the RET from the Full Retirement Age to age 69
(in 2000), relying on the inter-cohort variation in exposure to changes in the RET to estimate these
effects. The evidence is consistent with the conclusion that eliminating the RET increased the
likelihood of having very low incomes among women in their mid-70s and older – ages at which
the lower benefits from claiming earlier could outweigh higher income in the earlier period when
women or their husbands increased their labor supply.

Theodore Figinski
U.S. Department of the Treasury
1500 Pennsylvania Avenue, NW
Washington, D.C. 20220
Theodore.Figinski@treasury.gov
David Neumark
Department of Economics
University of California at Irvine
3151 Social Science Plaza
Irvine, CA 92697
and NBER
dneumark@uci.edu

I. Introduction
The Social Security retirement earnings test (RET) establishes a threshold for which earnings in
excess of the threshold cause a reduction in benefits. Prior to 2000, the RET reduced benefits by $1 for every
$3 earned above the threshold, for beneficiaries from the Full Retirement Age (FRA, then 65) to age 69
(Social Security Administration, 2010). Beneficiaries age 62 to the FRA are subject to a more restrictive
RET, reducing benefits by $1 for every $2 earned above the threshold, with a lower threshold. The Senior
Citizens’ Freedom to Work Act of 2000 repealed the RET for beneficiaries who had attained the FRA (as
well as making the RET less stringent in the year an individual reached the FRA). There were earlier reforms
of the RET in the 1980s.
The RET is viewed as a tax (Liebman and Luttmer, 2011), despite the fact that the lost benefits are
provided in the future. As a result, the predicted effect of the removal of the RET on labor supply (and hence
earnings) depends on where the beneficiary was on the budget constraint prior to the elimination of the RET
(Haider and Loughran, 2008). Figure 1 provides the budget constraints with and without the RET.
Beneficiaries choosing low hours prior to 2000 (locating on segment DC in Figure 1) should be unaffected
by the elimination of the RET. Among those affected, beneficiaries whose labor supply led to the elimination
of all their Social Security benefits (locating on segment BE in Figure 1) experience an income effect, hence
likely decreasing their hours worked. Those bunching just at or below the RET threshold (point D in Figure
1) should increase their hours worked through the substitution effect. 1 And for those receiving reduced
benefits due to earning above the threshold (locating on segment DE), there is both an income and a
substitution effect, so the net effect is ambiguous.
Thus, the average effect of the 2000 removal on beneficiaries’ labor supply decision and earnings is
unclear from the theoretical predictions. But earlier research on either primary beneficiaries or only men
finds bunching of earnings just below levels where the RET applies (Friedberg, 2000; Gruber and Orszag,
2003; Song and Manchester, 2007; Haider and Loughran, 2008), and net increases in labor supply and
earnings from eliminating the threshold. Recent work focused on the 2000 reforms studies female primary
1

Gelber et al. (2015) provide evidence of such bunching (and that when the RET was removed this bunching was slow
to dissipate, consistent with costs of adjusting labor supply/earnings).

1

and spousal beneficiaries (Figinski, 2013), and finds that, like men, female primary beneficiaries affected by
the removal of the RET increased their labor supply and earnings, although there was no change for spousal
beneficiaries. 2
Concomitant with changes in labor supply, however, are effects on benefit claiming and hence on
benefit levels. Men or women working enough to be subject to the RET have an incentive to delay claiming,
and conversely to claim earlier when the RET is eliminated or reduced, resulting in lower monthly Social
Security benefits. In particular, with the 2000 policy changes, there should be some people who move the age
of claiming benefits from above the FRA down to the FRA, because the RET was eliminated for those
attaining the FRA. Looking at reforms in the 1980s, Gruber and Orszag (2003) find this for men, and
Figinski (2013) also finds that women – both primary and spousal beneficiaries – claimed benefits earlier
when the RET was eliminated in 2000, for certain age groups. (See also Song and Manchester, 2007.) Those
who claim benefits early and continue to work will be able to supplement their wage income with Social
Security benefits. Yet these individuals may not save for the time when they can no longer work and thus,
especially when they stop working, may have lower incomes – including Social Security payments – than if
they had not claimed benefits earlier in response to the elimination of the RET. As explained below, this
problem may be particularly severe for older women.
As a consequence of these responses, removing the RET could have the unintended effect of
increasing poverty – or the incidence of low-income more generally – among much older individuals. Gruber
and Orszag (2003) were the first to point this out, suggesting that the removal of the RET for younger
beneficiaries “could produce a non-trivial increase in elderly poverty” (p. 771). Of course there is a potential
offsetting response, if the elimination of the RET implies that people work longer and therefore run down
their assets more slowly, with positive implications for resources available at older ages.
It is this potential for longer-term response of changes in the RET that we explore in this research.
We know from past work (e.g., Sandell and Iams, 1997) that old-age poverty is common among women,

2

The absence of a labor supply response among female spousal beneficiaries could reflect low skills, or careers where it
is difficult to re-enter the labor market or increase earnings, as well as an income effect in response to husband’s
higher earnings stemming from removal of the RET

2

beginning around age 75. Smeeding and Sandstrom (2005) and Gornick et al. (2009) discuss the persistent
problem of poverty among older women who live alone, pointing to very high incidence of low incomes in
the United States (and providing comparisons with other high-income countries). In the United States, this
problem may stem in part from how Social Security benefits change with early claiming, such that women,
who generally outlive men, will face actuarially unfair benefit reductions from early claiming (by them or
their husbands) – a problem that is exacerbated by the structure of spousal and survivor benefits (Sass et al.,
2007). 3
We focus on women, in particular, because they generally outlive men. Hence, women – and
especially older women – are more likely to reach the point where reliance on Social Security benefits is
higher. In this case, the lower benefits from claiming earlier are more likely to outweigh the higher earnings
or saving from increased labor supply in response to the elimination of the RET.
Although the research, of necessity, looks backwards at responses to past changes in the RET, it has
potential implications for the future, if policymakers were to eliminate or further reduce the RET at age 62 in
an effort to encourage more work beyond age 62. The positive labor supply response of female primary
beneficiaries, coupled with the results from the previous literature showing labor supply increases of men
and primary beneficiaries (regardless of sex), may suggest that, as the FRA rises further (beginning with the
1955 birth cohort), the RET should be removed for all beneficiaries. 4 Yet as the FRA increases further,
individuals who claim benefits at age 62 will receive a greater reduction in benefits for claiming benefits
early. For those who claim benefits early and do not continue to work, the lower benefit level will make it
more difficult to make ends meet. Those who claim benefits early and continue to work will have both
earned income and Social Security benefits. But these individuals may not save for the time when they can
no longer work and become dependent on Social Security payments for their income. Thus, creating
incentives to work more by eliminating the RET – because it also increases incentives to claim benefits at an
earlier age – may increase poverty, or the incidence of low-income more generally, among older individuals,

3

For example, husbands who are much older than their wives may not take account of the increase in the value of
survivors’ benefits for their wives from delayed claiming.
4
See, e.g., https://www.govtrack.us/congress/bills/113/hr174/summary (viewed April 6, 2016).

3

and especially older women.
II. Past Research
The earnings increases that Figinski (2013) finds for male and female primary beneficiaries are
similar – around 19-20 percent. If people claim benefits one year earlier, the benefit reduction is generally
6.7 percent. 5 But the latter effect persists for every year after benefits are claimed. Thus, it seems unlikely
that extra earnings of 19-20 percent for perhaps a year or two would be nearly enough to offset the benefit
reduction, even if we were just considering a surviving (female) spouse with lower costs of living. There is
the potential for higher benefits for some because of benefit re-computation replacing higher earnings with
lower earnings, although that is likely only for certain occupations for which the earnings profile implies
favorable re-computation.
Song and Manchester (2007) find that the effect on earnings of removing the RET at the FRA is
concentrated among high earners (for both males, and for female primary beneficiaries), suggesting that there
may be little effect on those more likely to be poor at old ages. But the elimination of the RET could still
encourage earlier benefit claiming among those with lower incomes, for those whose earnings prior to the
change exceed the earnings test threshold, and hence were not claiming benefits, but who have little ability to
increase or manipulate their earnings in response to changes in the RET. In contrast, if low earners simply
are unlikely to have earnings after age 65, then we would not expect much claiming response for them.
III. Empirical Approach
The fundamental goal of the empirical analysis is to test whether the 2000 reforms eliminating the
RET had adverse consequences for the incomes of much older women whose own behavior or spouse’s
behavior was affected by the elimination of the RET. The challenge in estimating this kind of effect is the
usual one of the counterfactual. We would like to compare observed outcomes for cohorts affected by the
elimination of the RET to what their outcomes would have been had the RET not changed. An inherent
difficulty of this approach in studying the elimination of the RET, however, is that the policy change applies
to everyone in the affected cohort. Thus, identification is less compelling than in a case with, for example,
5

For cohorts born in 1938 and after, it is slightly more complicated, with a smaller reduction in benefits for benefits
claimed more than three years before the FRA; see Neumark and Song (2013).

4

geographic policy variation so that only some members of particular cohorts are affected.
We estimate reduced-form models in which we identify the effect of the elimination of the RET from
inter-cohort changes. To keep things simple, consider first a world without couples, in which women in
different cohorts face different RET rules, choose when to claim benefits in part based on these rules, and
then for whom we subsequently observe Social Security benefits and other sources of income. The
corresponding reduced-form equation for age at claiming, for example, is of the form:
AgeClaimiw = α + βEETiw + Xiw γ + εi ,

(1)

where AgeClaimw is the age of the woman/wife when she claimed Social Security benefits, EETw is a dummy
variable equal to one for cohorts of women for which the RET from the FRA through age 69 was eliminated,
and Xw is a vector of demographic control variables (race/ethnicity, educational attainment, and marital
status). Xw also includes a dummy variable for cohorts reaching age 65 in 2003 or later, for which the FRA
was greater than 65 and benefits before the FRA were lower than for earlier cohorts. 6 We also estimate
versions of this model in which EETw is broken up into five dummy variables for those aged 69 in 2000, aged
68, aged 67, aged 66, and aged 65 or younger. The youngest group had the highest “exposure” to the
elimination of the RET, whereas the oldest group was exposed only at age 69, and hence should have
changed its behavior less.
This regression identifies the effects of the elimination of the RET from differences in outcomes
between cohorts that were and were not affected by the elimination of the RET. It is estimated for
subsamples of women aged 70 or older, all of whom should have claimed their Social Security benefits,
albeit at ages that may differ because of exposure to the elimination of the RET. If we had policy variation
across states then we could identify the policy effects from interactions at the ages and cohorts affected by
the policy change in the states where the policy change occurs, with the unaffected cohorts controlling for
other cohort-specific changes. 7 Identification of the effect of the elimination of the RET in equation (1)
6

These individuals would be predicted to claim benefits later and have lower benefits conditional on age (see Neumark
and Song, 2013).
7
By way of contrast, for example, Krueger and Pischke’s (1992) paper on the “notch babies” (born 1917-1921) who
faced much lower Social benefits than either immediately older or immediately younger cohorts, which allows the
researchers to infer the effect of lower benefits on labor supply by looking for a break in the longer-term time-series
behavior of labor supply for this narrow cohort (which turns out to be weak). Snyder and Evans (2006) present a

5

requires the identifying assumption that there are not other sources of differences in these outcomes across
cohorts. One could imagine introducing some function of year of birth and including this as a control to
allow for other sources of change by birth cohort. However, because the actual effect of the elimination of
the RET is to introduce variation in years of exposure to the elimination of the RET that goes from one for
those aged 69 in 2000, to five for those aged 65 or younger in 2000, it can be difficult to distinguish between
the effects of the elimination of the RET by cohort and other cohort effects. We provide evidence on whether
the effect we estimate is real by asking whether the changes correspond to what we would expect if the crosscohort changes are driving by changes in the RET. As one approach, we compare results for a wider and
narrower range of birth cohorts, to ensure that the results are generated from the affected cohorts; with the
narrower range, it is less likely that other sources of cross-cohort differences are important. We can also learn
something from the estimates of the specification in which EETw is broken up into five dummy variables that
capture differences in the number of years and youngest age of “exposure” to the elimination of the RET.
The effect should be stronger the younger an individual was at the time of the elimination of the RET
because there was more time to adjust behavior; that is, if the effect is causal then there is an expected “doseresponse” function reflecting at least this general behavior. Finally, we show descriptive graphs that permit
the reader to form their own impression of how compelling the evidence is that the elimination of the RET is
largely responsible for the effects we estimate. Nonetheless, there is no denying the fact that simply using
cohort variation might be viewed as not entirely compelling, although for reasons discussed above it is the
best we can do this in this case.
We estimate this model for age at claiming as explained above, to establish a baseline for our
analysis and to touch base with the earlier literature. In particular, we expect those exposed to the elimination
of the RET to claim benefits earlier. We are more interested, however, in the consequences for income – and
more specifically the incidence of low income. We therefore also estimate similar specifications for Social
similar analysis of the effect of the benefits change on mortality (and also report higher post-retirement labor supply
for the affected cohorts). And closest to this paper, Disney and Smith (2002) study the effect of the elimination of the
earnings test in the United Kingdom. However, they look only at employment, and hence can do difference-indifferences estimation between those younger than and older than the affected ages, using the younger group as a
control. Because we focus on claiming Social Security benefits and the value of those benefits, the younger group is
not usable as a control. (Moreover, it is not entirely clear the younger group’s behavior would not be affected by the
policy change.)

6

Security benefits, and then for income below thresholds that are multiples of the poverty line.
The indexation of Social Security benefits has implications for how to construct the counterfactual
benefits used in equation (1) when we study benefits or all income. To be concrete, consider the example of
using data only on the 1931 and 1930 birth cohorts; because these cohorts are aged 69 and 70, respectively,
in 2000, the first is affected by the elimination of the RET, and the second is not affected. Because of the
change in the policy, members of the 1931 birth cohort would be expected, on average, to claim benefits
earlier, resulting in lower benefits. The reduced-form regression uses unaffected cohorts – in this example,
the 1930 birth cohort – as a counterfactual for what benefits would have been (and when they would have
been claimed) – for the 1931 birth cohort.
For the age at claiming, there is no inherent problem. As long as we assume there were no other
cohort effects aside from the elimination of the RET that would have led to different ages at claiming across
these cohorts – which is the key identifying assumption – the estimate of β identifies the cohort effect.

However, when the outcome is benefits, getting the counterfactual right is more complicated. As in

the analysis of the effect on the age at claiming, we want to use outcomes for the 1930 cohort as the
counterfactual. But the indexation of Social Security benefits implies that benefits for the 1930 cohort may
not correctly estimate the counterfactual for the 1931 cohort had the RET not been eliminated. In particular,
there is a two-step indexation process. First, for each individual, the average wage index (AWI) as of age 60
is used to bring earnings prior to age 60 up to current nominal levels in setting the primary insurance amount
(PIA) based on the average indexed monthly earnings (AIME). In our two cohort example, this means that
the PIA of the older 1930 birth cohort would have to be inflated by the AWI for 1991 relative to 1990 to get
the right “counterfactual PIA” for the 1931 birth cohort. This is important because otherwise the benefits of
the 1931 birth cohort may appear too high – masking the reduction in benefits from claiming earlier because
of the elimination of the RET. The PIA is subsequently indexed by the CPI-W, which implies that we have to
use this index from age 60 to the year of observation to have comparable current dollar benefits for the two
cohorts. 8

8

For more on indexation of Social Security benefits, see http://www.ssa.gov/oact/cola/AWI.html,

7

Thus, when we look at Social Security benefits, we first multiply by the ratio of the AWI in 1995 to
the AWI when the person was age 60. The year 1995 is chosen somewhat arbitrarily, but this means that we
put all workers’ benefits on an equivalent footing, in terms of the AWI, to a worker who was age 65 in 2000
(the first cohort exposed to the elimination of the RET beginning at the FRA). Then, because benefits are
observed at different years depending on age and when a person is observed in the Health and Retirement
Study (HRS), we multiply this adjusted figure by the ratio of the CPI-W in 2013 to the CPI-W in 1995, to
express all benefits in 2013 dollars. Benefits can still vary across individuals (and couples) based on when
they claimed benefits – which affects the relationship between PIA and benefits. But by doing this
indexation, we isolate the variation in benefits due to age at claiming.
In general, we cannot simply use the values of the AWI in the different years people turned 60 to
equate the values of their AIMEs if they had different earnings streams. However, this adjustment does
isolate the role of the AWI for workers with otherwise identical earnings streams, which is all we want to do
to construct the counterfactual. To see this, Table 1 presents a simple example, in which there are workers in
two different, successive cohorts, each of whom works for three years (using the last year as the analogy to
age 60). They have identical nominal earnings streams (Y1, Y2, Y3) except for the difference reflected in the
AWI (W(t)). In this case, adjusting the AIME of the younger worker for indexation by the AWI requires only
the ratio W(4)/W(3), or, more generally, the AIME for each cohort at age 60. To see this, note that given the
earnings streams in Table 1, using the AWI to construct the AIME for each worker yields:
AIME worker 1, retiring in year 3, in year 3

(2)

= Y3 + Y2⋅(W(3)/W(2) + Y1⋅(W(3)/W(1))
and
AIME worker 2, retiring in year 4, in year 4

(3)

= Y3⋅(W(4)/W(3)) + Y2⋅(W(3)/W(2))⋅(W(4)/W(3)) + Y1⋅(W(2)/W(1))⋅(W(4)/W(2))
= Y3⋅(W(4)/W(3)) + Y2⋅(W(4)/W(2)) + Y1⋅(W(4)/W(1))
Note, though, that equating the two earnings streams then just requires multiplying the last
expression in equation (2) by W(3)/W(4), which is equivalent more generally in our case to multiplying by
http://www.ssa.gov/oact/cola/Benefits.html, http://www.ssa.gov/oact/cola/latestCOLA.html, and
http://www.ssa.gov/oact/COLA/colaapplic.html (viewed March 29, 2015).

8

the ratio of the AWI in 1995 to the AWI when the person was age 60. (If the person turned 60 after 1995, this
ratio will be less than one, and if the person turned 60 before 1995, this ratio will exceed one.)
For our main analysis of the effects of the elimination of the RET on poverty or low-income, we
have to construct total income across Social Security benefits and other sources. For non-Social Security
income, we simply index by the CPI-U to express all amounts in 2013 dollars (since the same counterfactual
issue arising from wage indexing of benefits does not arise). But we still use benefits indexed as described in
the previous paragraph.
The indexing of Social Security benefits by the AWI, however, has important implications for the
measurement of poverty and hence for estimating the effects of eliminating the RET on the incidence of low
income relative to the poverty line. In particular, the AWI generally rises faster than the CPI, reflecting
growth in real wages. Given that the poverty threshold in the United States is an absolute rather than a
relative measure, one can view the indexation of Social Security benefits by the AWI as building into the
system a long-term reduction in poverty as successive generations get benefits that reflect the real wage
growth their birth cohort experienced. This implies, though, that when we index Social Security benefits as
described above to construct our counterfactual – applying the AWI for younger cohorts to older cohorts –
the implied poverty rate for samples of older women will be lower than actually observed. As a result, when
we estimate the effect of eliminating the RET on old-age poverty, we use an adjusted poverty measure that
preserves the observed poverty rate, by adjusting the poverty threshold for each sample so that the poverty
rate based on indexed benefits and other income is identical to the observed poverty rate absent the
counterfactual adjustment. (That is, for observed poverty rate p in any sample we study, we define the pth
percentile of the indexed income distribution as the adjusted poverty threshold.) Note that the implication of
this adjustment is that, ceteris paribus, the counterfactual poverty rate for an older cohort were it instead born
later, and hence benefited from the higher AWI for younger cohorts, is always lower – which we interpret as
exactly the purpose of using the AWI in setting Social Security benefits.
To this point we have described models that are estimated for women only. We also, however,
estimate models that capture the effects of the elimination of the RET for both women and their husbands,
since both can affect benefits (depending on whether the woman is claiming her own benefits or
9

spousal/survivor benefits).
The reduced-form equation incorporating the exposure of both husbands and wives to the elimination
of the RET is simple, and takes the form:
AgeClaimiw = α + βEETiw + β’EETih + Xiw γ + εi .

(4)

EETh is the dummy variable indicating that the husband was younger than age 70 in 2000. 9

IV. Data
To study the effects of the elimination of the RET, we use the Health and Retirement Study
(HRS). 10 The HRS is a longitudinal survey administered every two years, interviewing a nationally
representative sample of individuals older than age 50. The HRS began collecting data in 1992 and the most
recent available data in the HRS is from the 2012 survey wave.
We impose several sample restrictions on the data to obtain the final samples. We begin by limiting
the HRS data to individuals whose Social Security claiming age is not missing and is between ages 62 and
71. We remove observations that report receiving annual Social Security benefits less than $6,000 or greater
than $35,500. 11 Finally, for most of the analyses presenting our main results, we limit our data to women in
two age ranges. Our “age 70+ sample” consists of women ages 70 and 71, and our “age 75+ sample” consists
of women ages 75 and 76. We use a two-year window because the HRS is conducted every two years. The
age of the individual is measured at the end of the reference year, typically the calendar year prior to the
interview year.12 This results in a sample of 2,974 women in the age 70+ sample and 1,958 women in the age
75+ sample. The first four columns of Table 2 contain the number of observations by age in these two
samples, and by whether the person’s birth cohort made them less than age 70 in 2000 and hence subject to
the elimination of the RET, and older than 70. Later, we report on the robustness of our key conclusions –
especially changes in the results as women age – to looking at a much broader range of ages.
We also create subsamples that include only women who can be matched to a unique husband;

9

We also estimated some versions of this specification where we included two sets of five dummy variables – one for
the woman and one for her husband – indicating one, two, three, four, or five years of exposure to the elimination of
the RET.
10
We use the RAND version of the HRS.
11
These limits are imposed based on the CPI-U inflation adjusted Social Security benefits to 2013 dollars.
12
For the HRS income questions, the reference year is typically the calendar year prior to the interview year.

10

observations that report multiple husbands complicate matters because it is unclear which husband’s age –
and hence exposure to the elimination of the RET – affects the woman’s Social Security benefits. We use
these subsamples to study the effects of the husband’s claiming decision on the family’s and wife’s
outcomes. To construct this sample, we removed women from the sample who never report a spouse or
report multiple spouses during the HRS sample. 13 We also limit this sample to women whose husband’s
Social Security claiming age is not missing and is between ages 62 and 71. The corresponding sample sizes
by age and cohort are also reported in Table 2 (last four columns).
One of the primary outcomes of interest is whether or not a woman’s income is below particular lowincome thresholds, such as the poverty line or a multiple of it. Unfortunately, the HRS does not provide a
measure of whether household income is below the poverty line or a multiple of it until the 2002 wave. For
data prior to 2002, we construct measures of poverty (or income below thresholds based on the poverty line)
using the Census Bureau’s definition of poverty. To determine whether the household has income below the
poverty line or other thresholds, the Census Bureau uses the number of individuals residing in the household,
the total income of the members of the household, and the age of the related children residing in the
household. The HRS only includes the total income of the respondent and spouse (if one is present) in its
measure of household income. To obtain the age of the related children, we merge in the RAND HRS family
data (which includes information on the number of children residing with the respondent from 1992 to 2008).
However, in line with the earlier discussion of the correct construction of Social Security benefits for the
counterfactual, we use a constructed income measure, which is whether adjusted benefits (as described
earlier) plus other household income is below the poverty line or a multiple of it. 14
Descriptive statistics are reported in Table 3. These reflect features we would expect. For example,
13

In implementing this method, we require women to be observed as “married” at least once during the HRS sample.
We also exclude same-sex couples because all of the data occurs before the U.S. Supreme Court’s decision in United
States v. Windsor in 2013, which allowed same-sex married couples to claim on their spouse’s work history in the
same manner as heterosexual married couples do.
14
In order to check how accurate our calculated low-income measures are at predicting the incidence of poverty or low
income, we apply our measure to the entire HRS sample for the 2002 to 2008 waves and compare the incidence of
poverty to the HRS calculated poverty measure. (Observations with a zero weight are excluded to avoid including
observations residing in nursing homes.) The calculated measure is able to accurately predict whether or not the
household resides in poverty in 96 percent of cases, and whether or not the household is below 200 percent of the
poverty line in 93 percent of cases. (This calculation is done without our adjustment of benefits by the AWI.) Note
that our key results for older women (e.g., the age 75+ sample), are not affected by this imputation because all
observations come from 2002 or later.

11

the average age at claiming benefits (self-reported) is between 63 and 64. The widowhood rate is much
higher for the all women sample than for the women with husband’s sample, regardless of age. While the
sample of women for whom we observe a husband during the sample period has a lower widowhood rate
than women overall, the probability of being widowed in this sample dramatically increases between age 70
and 75 (from 0.17 to 0.27).
One thing to note in Table 3 is the much lower incidence of poverty (or being below other lowincome thresholds) in the samples of women with unique husbands observed, in the last two columns –
although, as expected, these percentages of women living below low-income thresholds increase sharply
between the ages of 70 and 75. The sample of women with unique husbands has a much lower incidence of
low income because they were married at some point in the period covered by the HRS, and also because if
they were divorced they have not had multiple husbands in the period covered by the HRS. 15
As a consequence of the very low share of women in the sample of women with unique husbands
observed who are below the poverty line, we focus our analysis on whether women are below 150 percent or
200 percent of the poverty line. The proportions living below these thresholds are higher, as Table 3 shows,
likely in part because the sample selection necessary to define the treatment of husbands is not as severe for
this threshold. These thresholds are still of considerable interest because they would still be considered to be
low-income thresholds. In addition, the results may differ for these somewhat higher income thresholds,
because – as Figure 1 shows – those with higher earnings initially are more likely to increase labor supply in
response to the elimination of the RET. That is, at these thresholds we may be somewhat less likely to see
older women affected by the elimination of the RET having very low incomes; the fact that we, nonetheless,
find such an effect for these above-poverty thresholds, thus strengthens our conclusions.
Our analysis uses the public HRS data, in which we cannot identify what kind of benefits women are
claiming. 16 Ideally, we would also (or instead) use the confidential administrative Social Security records

15

For example, the unadjusted poverty rates for the women we drop to obtain our women with husbands sample at age
70 are as follows: 11 percent live below the poverty line, 25.5 percent live below 150 percent of the poverty line, and
38.6 percent live below 200 percent of the poverty line. At age 75, the unadjusted poverty rates for these individuals
are as follows: 12.7 percent live below the poverty line, 31.8 percent live below 150 percent of the poverty line, and
46.7 percent live below 200 percent of the poverty line.
16
Appendix Table A1 gives information on the type of benefits women earned over the 1995-2013 period. In addition

12

that are available for many HRS respondents, which would give us an administrative measure of the age at
claiming, and also identify what kind of benefits women are claiming and thus perhaps better pin down
whose exposure to the elimination of the RET (a woman’s or her husband’s) are driving benefits. 17
However, the administrative data are complicated, and our work with these data has identified two
issues pointing to problems with identifying the relevant claiming date in the administrative data. First, there
are substantial discrepancies between self-reported age at claiming and the age at claiming calculated using
the administrative data.18 The number of discrepancies is large, and many are four months or larger or even
13 months are larger. There is a difference between cohorts born before 1931 – for whom claiming dates are
almost always based on recall before the first survey for the relevant cohort – and those born in 1931 or later
– for whom claiming dates come from recall limited to the two years between interviews and should be more
accurate. 19 The errors are larger for those born before 1931, as we might expect. But there are many large
errors for the younger cohorts as well. The difference across birth cohorts is particularly problematic because
birth year 1931 is the dividing line between those who are or are not affected by the elimination of the RET.
We could of course assume the administrative data are correct. But this leads to the second issue.
Specifically, when we try to replicate the Song and Manchester (2007) results using the HRS administrative
data, we are unable to replicate their findings. Yet, when we use the HRS public data and the self-reported
age at claiming, we are able to replicate the Song and Manchester (2007) findings. This is reported in
Appendix Table A3.
To create a sample similar to Song and Manchester (2007), we limit the administrative data to men
to showing the percentage of women claiming on their own work histories, Table A1 displays the fraction claiming
“spousal” or “survivor” benefits. Spousal benefits are equal to one-half the husband’s benefit amount. When the
husband dies, the wife can choose to continue her current benefits (either own or spousal) or claim survivor benefits,
which are equal to the husband’s benefit. Typically, the highest benefit amount is claimed. While men can claim
either spousal or survivor benefits, it is typically women who receive these benefit types. Table A1 shows a
substantial share of women are receiving benefits based on their own earnings histories, especially in more recent
years.
17
Even for a woman claiming her own benefits her age at claiming may be affected by her husband’s decision and
hence his exposure to the elimination of the RET – for example because of leisure complementarities. For work on
this topic see Hurd (1990) and Coile (2004). For a more recent study using French data see Stancanelli and van Soest
(2012).
18
See Appendix Table A2.
19
The HRS cohort was born 1931-1941 (although spouses can be born in different years), and was first interviewed in
1992. The AHEAD and CODA cohorts were born earlier, but not interviewed until later (first in 1993 for the
AHEAD cohort, and 1998 for the CODA cohort). Thus, claiming dates for those born before 1931 are generally
recalled.

13

and women who are observed claiming benefits and who have not claimed disability benefits. In the public
data, we limit the sample to individuals who report a claiming age of age 62 or older to avoid including
individuals who are receiving disability benefits. Song and Manchester (2007) conduct the analysis for two
treatment groups. One of the treatment groups includes those who had attained ages 65 to 69 by January 1 of
the calendar year. The second treatment group includes those who turn age 65 during the year. We focus on
replicating the estimates for the first group because the RET is completely eliminated for these individuals.
While the estimates for those turning age 65 during the calendar year are informative, these individuals face
a pro-rated RET during the months prior to turning age 65. 20 In contrast, the RET is completely eliminated
for those who have reached age 65 prior to January 1 of the calendar year.
Appendix Table A3 provides our estimates using the HRS administrative and public sample. Using
the HRS public data we find statistically significant increases in claiming for the treatment group that are in
line with the Song and Manchester (2007) findings. Using the HRS administrative data, however, we find
small and statistically insignificant changes in claiming behavior for the treatment group. Together, these
findings lead us to proceed using the public HRS data. 21
V. Results
Individual Benefits
We begin with models estimated for Social Security benefits and the age at claiming, to test for the
expected effects (in some cases reflected in earlier literature as well) that the RET leads to earlier claiming
and lower benefits. As a precursor, Figure 2 reports the average age at claiming by birth year for the
narrower birth cohort range (women born between 1925 and 1940). The first vertical line in the figure shows
the oldest and youngest cohorts affected by the elimination of the RET, from left (1930) to right (1935). The
oldest cohort was only exposed beginning at age 69 (under age 70 when the policy change occurred), and this
fell to age 65 for the 1935 cohort – where it remained for all subsequent cohorts. Thus, if age at claiming
were driven only by changes in the RET, we would expect age at claiming to begin to decline for the 1930
20

Note this assumes that the FRA is age 65. The same is true for FRAs above age 65. In the year the individual reaches
the FRA, the individual faces a pro-rated earnings test during the months prior to reaching the FRA.
21
The administrative Song and Manchester replication sample and the public-use Song and Manchester replication
sample are very similar with regard to age, race, and marital status.

14

birth cohort, to decline relatively more for the subsequent birth cohorts out to 1935, and then to stabilize. The
figure does show a sharp decline beginning with the 1931 birth cohort, and age at claiming stays low. The
figure does not suggest that there is no variation other than that driven by the elimination of the RET, with a
dose-response function indicating a clear increased response for each affected birth cohort from 1930 to
1935. But the figure does qualitatively fit this story.
In Table 4, we report OLS estimates, for women in isolation, of regressions for the age at claiming
benefits (for the cohorts covered in Figure 2, and a broader range). The specifications vary in two ways: first,
whether we include a single dummy variable for “exposure” to the elimination of the RET (less than age 70
in 2000), or instead five dummy variables that capture the age at which the elimination of the RET occurred;
and second, whether we use the full sample, or a more restricted range of birth cohorts. As columns (1) and
(3) of Table 4 show, for both samples we find that the elimination of the RET reduces the age at claiming by
about 8 to 9 months – estimates that are statistically significant at the one-percent level. In columns (2) and
(4), where we instead use the richer characterization of exposure to elimination of the RET, we find, for the
most part, that the younger the woman was when the RET was eliminated, the earlier she claimed. The
estimates range from 6.5 to 7.8 months for those who were 69 when the RET was eliminated, to about 8.2 to
9.6 months for those who were aged 65 or less. The expected dose-response of earlier claiming for the
younger cohorts who were the most affected is partially evident, but not every estimate fits this pattern. This
partly monotonic relationship suggests that we are not picking up spurious cohort effects unrelated to the
elimination of the RET, although a clearer monotonic relationship would be more assuring. We also note that
the estimated effects do seem large, if, especially the older affected cohorts, only those who have not claimed
benefits by age 65 are affected by the elimination of the RET; it is possible, though, that some claiming prior
to age 65 is also affected, perhaps because of the forward-looking and/or joint nature of decisions regarding
claiming and labor supply.
We next turn to the analysis of benefits. We again begin with a figure depicting the raw data – Figure

15

3. To be sure, the data are quite noisy. 22 However, there is a detectable pattern of benefits declining as the
RET was eliminated, and being lowest for the cohorts born 1935 or after that experienced the elimination of
the RET beginning at age 65.
The regression estimates (for the cohorts covered in Figure 3, and a broader range) are reported in
Table 5. The estimates reflect what we would expect based on the results for age at claiming, as well as what
we saw in Figure 3. In columns (1) and (3), we see that benefits (annual) are lower by about $650-$800 for
cohorts for whom the RET was eliminated. In columns (2) and (4), the expected dose-response of lower
benefits for the younger cohorts who were the most affected is partially but not fully evident. The big
exception is for some anomalous results for those aged 66 in 2000, corresponding to the spike for the 1934
birth cohort in Figure 3). However, the estimate for the cohorts aged 65 or younger in 2000 (born 1935 or
later) are the largest (negative). Some of the inconsistent dose-response relationships for other cohorts may
reflect imprecise estimates for small cell sizes for single-year birth cohorts. In contrast, we get the most
observations on those who were 65 or younger in 2000, reflected in considerably lower standard errors.
Family Benefits
Having established these results for women in isolation, we next turn to the effects of the elimination
of the RET on poverty or low-income status of older women. In this case, we estimate specifications for
family Social Security benefits and income relative to poverty. The approach parallels the above analysis for
women only, except that we now study a sample of women with one husband observed during the period
covered by our HRS data so that we can determine the birth cohort of the husband that would have
determined his exposure to the elimination of the RET. 23 In addition, we estimate models including variables
capturing both the wife’s and the husband’s exposure to the elimination of the RET.
We begin with the analysis of the age at claiming Social Security benefits. First, again for the
22

We considered using the administrative data on Social Security benefits available for many HRS records, but given
the difficulties encountered in trying to use age at claiming in these data, we thought it preferable to do all the
analysis with a consistent data set.
23
Note that the subsample of women we use is smaller because of this restriction. In results not reported in this paper,
we verified that the results for this subsample, but looking only at women’s benefits, estimating the same
specifications as in Tables 4 and 5, qualitatively replicated the results for the larger sample of women covered in
those tables, although the estimated effects on benefits were a bit smaller and less often statistically significant. On
the other hand, these results sometimes better matched the expected dose-response relationships with years of
exposure to the elimination of the RET.

16

narrower cohort range, Panel A of Figure 4 reports the average age at claiming by birth year for women
(wives). More so than in Figure 2, this figure clearly shows a sharp decline in age at claiming beginning with
the 1931 birth cohort, and age at claiming remains low. There is not a prominent dose-response function
except for the first couple of affected cohorts. Panel B shows the same results for men (husbands). In this
case, there is a clear downward trend, and no obvious break with the elimination of the RET. That does not
mean there was not an effect, but this evidence for men highlights the identification issue we raised earlier –
that inferring an effect from cross-cohort changes can be problematic when there are pre-treatment changes.
This paper focuses to a large extent on women, and emphasizes the sample in which we do not necessarily
see women matched to a unique husband, so the problematic evidence in Panel B of Figure 4 does not
underlie all of our results. Nonetheless, the evidence suggests some caution in interpreting our results on the
incidence of low income, since income is defined at the family level.
Table 6, columns (1)-(4), turns to the regression estimates for age at claiming. From this point, we
report results only for the (slightly) narrower birth cohort range of 1925 through 1940; results were similar
for the 1918-1942 range for which we reported results in Tables 4 and 5. We report estimates for both
women and their husbands, using the single treatment effect for each (e.g., for women, “Less than age 70 in
2000”), and then five separate dummy variables for each breaking out the age at which the RET was first
eliminated. Columns (1) and (2) report results for wives’ age at claiming, and columns (3) and (4) for
husbands’ age at claiming. In columns (1) and (3) we see, not surprisingly, that the wife’s age at claiming is
affected by whether she was less than age 70 in 2000, and the husband’s age at claiming by his age in 2000.
Both estimates are negative and statistically significant at the one-percent level, indicating earlier claiming
among those for whom the RET was eliminated. There is no evidence of “cross” effects between spouses. In
columns (2) and (4) we see evidence of the expected dose-response function, with the effect rising the
younger the age at which one was exposed. The estimate is nearly monotonic for wives; it is not quite so
clean for husbands, but the two largest effects are for those aged 66, or aged 65 and younger, with the latter,
as expected, the larger of the two.
Column (5) of Table 6 turns to evidence on family Social Security benefits, again taking account of
both husbands’ and wives’ exposure to the elimination of the RET. However, recall our earlier caveat that
17

these results are based on a highly selected sample of women with a unique husband observed in the HRS.
We find fairly strong evidence that when husbands were exposed to the elimination of the RET, family
benefits are lower. Conditional on the exposure of husbands, the effects are the opposite sign for women’s
exposure. This finding is a bit puzzling, and may reflect other influences on benefit levels associated with
whether the wife was less than age 70 in 2000, conditional on whether the husband also was less than age 70
in 2000. Another way to think about the estimates, though, is that both spouses are likely to be affected
similarly by the policy, given small age differences between most husbands and wives. Alternatively, the
“experiment” of thinking about the partial effect of eliminating the RET only for wives, or only for husbands,
is of limited interest and potentially hard to interpret – more a reflection of the age gap between husbands
and wives than of the policy change. In this case, the fact that the effects for husbands are larger indicates
that, on net, family benefits are likely to be lowered somewhat because of the elimination of the RET.
Indeed, this is shown in the last row of the table, where we report the combined effect of eliminating the RET
for both husbands and wives, leading to significantly lower annual benefits of around $1,500. Given the
perspective that the separate effects for husbands and wives may be less meaningful than the combined
effects, the dose-response relationship is harder to characterize, and hence we do not report such
specifications. 24
The Incidence of Low Income Relative to Poverty
Finally, we turn to estimated effects on the incidence of low-income as defined by multiples of the
poverty threshold. For reasons discussed earlier, we focus on the thresholds set at 150 and 200 percent of the
poverty line in our regression analysis, although our figures also include data for the poverty line (100
percent) threshold. Panel A of Figure 5 shows the share below each threshold by birth cohort for the sample
of all women first observed at 70 or older, for whom we have already seen evidence of earlier claiming and
lower benefits from the elimination of the RET. For the 100-percent threshold, there is no clear pattern of an
increase in poverty, whereas for the higher thresholds it appears that the share with incomes below those
thresholds is a bit lower for cohorts more affected by the elimination of the RET, although the evidence is far

24

And for the same reason, the types of figures discussed earlier are less meaningful.

18

from clear. Panel B shows the same kind of information, but for an older sample of women first observed at
age 75 or older – when women are likely to depend more exclusively on Social Security benefits, and hence
for whom we might be more apt to see the emergence of adverse effects of the elimination of the RET on
family income. (For example, as reported in Table 3, for the sample of women for whom we observe a
husband, Social Security benefits make up 59.5 percent of total household income at age 70 and 68.6 percent
of total household income at age 75.) In Panel B there is, indeed, more evidence of an uptick in the incidence
of low income, and more so for the 150- and 200-percent thresholds. Moreover, many of the graphs in Figure
5 are suggestive of the expected dose-response relationship, with the incidence of low-income rising for
cohorts affected by the elimination of the RET at a younger age.
Table 7 reports the regression results for these latter two thresholds. 25 Columns (1)-(4) report results
for the sample of all women, and columns (5) and (6) for the women with husbands observed. The top panel
reports results for the sample of first observations on women aged at least 70, and the bottom panel for
women aged at least 75. Looking first at the all women sample first observed aged at least 70, for the simpler
specifications in columns (1) and (3), the estimates indicate that exposure of women to the elimination of the
RET is associated with a lower probability of living below either 150 or 200 percent of the poverty line. Both
estimates are significant at the 10-percent level, and indicate that this probability is lower by about 2.4 to 3.3
percentage points.
Interestingly, however, in the bottom panel that turns to the older sample of women first observed at
age 75 or older, the results are reversed. Women’s exposure to the elimination of the RET is now associated
with a higher probability of living below either 150 or 200 percent of the poverty line – by 2.7 to 3.7
percentage points, also statistically significant at the 10-percent level. The differences in the results for the
older sample relative to the sample first observed at age 70 suggest that as women move into their mid-70s,
the effect of lower Social Security benefits from early claiming may come to dominate the effects of higher
earnings (and whatever effect those higher earnings had on income from savings).
Columns (2) and (4) provide evidence on the dose-response relationship with regard to the age at
25

For all of the income-threshold analyses, we report linear probability estimates, but verified that the results we report
are similar using probit models.

19

which the RET was eliminated. For the sample first observed aged at least 70, in Panel A, the expected
relationship is not clear for the 150-percent threshold, but for the 200-percent threshold, although not
monotonic, the effects are largest for the women exposed relatively longer. In Panel B, for the older sample,
the effect is always largest (and only statistically significant) for the women exposed the longest; this
evidence is also reflected in Figure 5.
Finally, in columns (5) and (6) we turn to the sample of women with husbands observed, and include
the effects of husbands’ exposure to the elimination of the RET as well. In Panel A, for the sample of women
first observed at age 70 or older, the estimated effects of women’s exposure to the elimination of the RET is
weaker, although still negative (as in columns (1) and (3)). For the 150-percent threshold, there is a positive
estimated effects of husbands’ exposure on the incidence of low income. Earlier, though, we argued that the
combined effects are of greatest interest, and the last row of Panel A indicates small and insignificant effects.
In Panel B, for the older sample of women, the estimated effect of women’s exposure to the elimination of
the RET is always positive, and significant (at the 10-percent level or better). The estimated effect is 0.036
for the 150-percent threshold, and nearly twice that for the 200-percent threshold. The estimated effects of
husbands’ exposure to the elimination of the RET are near zero, so the summed effects are similar to the
estimated effects for women alone. Again, the differences relative to the results for the sample first observed
at age 70 or older suggest that, as women age into their mid-70s, the effect of lower Social Security benefits
from early claiming comes to dominate the effects of higher earnings (and whatever effect those higher
earnings had on income from saving). 26
We have interpreted the differences between the age 70+ and age 75+ samples as indicating that the
effect of the elimination of the RET in generating low family incomes emerges at older ages for women,
when the effects of lower benefits are more likely to outweigh additional labor income. To gauge whether
this is a plausible interpretation, rather than simply a difference that emerges for these two specific age

26

One might view as contradictory the evidence in Table 6 that family benefits are negatively affected by the husband’s
exposure to the elimination of the RET, and the evidence in Table 7 that higher poverty (for the older sample) is
driven by the wife’s exposure. However, there can be both claiming/benefit and labor supply responses, and greater
effects on income than on benefits of women’s exposure to the elimination of the RET may be explained by less of a
labor supply response for them than for husbands, resulting in lower income by the ages at which the labor supply
response has dissipated.

20

thresholds, Figure 6 reports results for a much wider range of age cutoffs, for both samples of women.
In these graphs, the estimates for ages 70-71 and 75-76 correspond to those reported in the tables
(columns (1), (3), (5), and (6) of Table 7). The other estimates come from estimating the exact same
specifications, but for the age ranges shown in the figures. What we see in the figures is that, in general, as
women age over this range there is a rising likelihood of having income below either the 150-percent or 200percent threshold (relative to poverty). And clearly the rising positive effect on the incidence of low-income
as women age is not an idiosyncratic finding that occurs only for the comparison between the 70-71 and 7576 year-old samples. We interpret these figures as providing additional evidence that as women reach quite
old ages, adverse effects of the elimination of the RET on their incomes emerge.
VI. Conclusion
The elimination of the RET for those between the FRA and age 69, in 2000, was intended to boost
employment of those in this age range who might be deterred from working because of the reduction in
Social Security benefits owing to the RET. At the same time, the elimination of the RET makes those who
are working more likely to claim early. Thus, this policy change is expected to increase earnings in the shortrun, but reduce Social Security benefits in the longer-run, and possibly also influence the time-path of
retirement assets, saving, and income from those assets, with uncertain effects on family income (including
benefits) at older ages – perhaps in particular older women who are likely to outlive their spouses, and likely
to reach the point where any extra labor income from the positive work incentives of eliminating the RET are
no longer evident. Finding out whether this change in the RET increased the incidence of low income for
older women is important not only for understanding the effects of the 2000 policy change, but also the
potential effects of additional efforts to encourage work by eliminating or reducing the RET between age 62
and the FRA, which currently reduces benefits by $1 for every $2 of earnings.
Our findings support a few conclusions. First, we confirm past findings that the elimination of the
RET led to earlier claiming of benefits for women. Second, coupling this evidence with other evidence that
men also claim benefits earlier, Social Security benefits at the individual and family level are generally lower
as a result of the elimination of the RET. Third, the results for poverty and low-income status tend to fit the
conjecture about a lower incidence of low income initially – when women are at or just above age 70 – but a
21

higher incidence of low income as women get into their mid-70s and beyond. These findings suggest that the
incidence of low income among old women was increased by the elimination of the RET.
At the same time, we caution that the evidence should be viewed as suggestive, because
identification comes from cross-cohort differences, rather than the kind of quasi-experiment that is often
preferred in policy analysis because of the greater scope for controlling for other changes across cohorts. In
the absence of such a quasi-experiment, we discuss the extent to which there is evidence of the expected
dose-response – with younger cohorts exposed to the elimination of the RET at younger ages exhibiting
stronger changes in behavior. There is indeed some evidence of these kinds of responses for most of the
outcomes we study, although perhaps not as clear and consistent as to be completely compelling. On the
other hand, forward-looking or joint husband-wife responses to the RET might dilute the expected doseresponse relationship.
This type of analysis could be extended in ways that may yield additional insight, including:
examination of labor income, saving, and other sources of income that might be affected by the elimination
of the RET; identification of the role of widowhood, which increases substantially after age 70; 27 and
identification of individuals and families more likely to be affected in one direction or the other by the
elimination of the RET from the FRA through age 69, which may provide more useful information on the
expected effects of eliminating or reducing the RET for those between 62 and the FRA, which may be more
likely to affect behavior of those who are lower-skilled and have lower past earnings.

27

The percentages widowed in our “married” sample are 16.6 percent at age 70 and 26.5 percent at age 75 (see Table
3). For the “all women” samples, the percentages are 25.5 percent at age 70 and 38.2 percent at age 75.

22

References
Coile, Courtney. 2004. “Retirement Incentives and Couples’ Retirement Decisions.” The B.E. Journal of
Economic Analysis & Policy 4 (1), 1−30.
Disney, Richard, and Sarah Smith. 2002. “The Labour Supply Effect of the Abolition of the Earnings Rule
for Older Workers in the United Kingdom.” Economic Journal 112 (478), C136−C152.
Figinski, Theodore F. 2013. “Women and the Social Security Earnings Test.” Unpublished manuscript.
Friedberg, Leora, 2000. “The Labor Supply Effects of the Social Security Earnings Test.” Review of
Economics and Statistics 82 (1), 429–450.
Gelber, Alexander M., Damon Jones, and Daniel W. Sacks. 2015. “Earnings Adjustment Frictions:
Evidence from the Social Security Earnings Test.” Unpublished manuscript.
Gornick, Janet C., Teresa Munzi, Eva Sierminska, and Timothy M. Smeeding. 2009. “Income, Assets, and
Poverty: Older Women in Comparative Perspective.” Journal of Women, Politics & Policy 30 (2-3),
272-300.
Gruber, Jonathan, and Peter Orszag. 2003. “Does the Social Security Earnings Test Affect Labor Supply
and Benefit Receipt?” National Tax Journal 56 (4), 755–773.
Haider, Steven J., and David S. Loughran. 2008. “The Effect of the Social Security Earnings Test on Male
Labor Supply: New Evidence from Survey and Administrative Data.” Journal of Human Resources 43
(1), 56–87.
Hurd, Michael D. 1990. “The Joint Retirement Decision of Husbands and Wives.” In David A. Wise, ed.,
Issues in the Economics of Aging. Chicago: University of Chicago Press, 231−258.
Krueger, Alan, and Jörn Steffen Pischke. 1992. “The Effect of Social Security on Labor Supply: A Cohort
Analysis of the Notch Generation.” Journal of Labor Economics 10 (4), 412−437.
Liebman, Jeffrey B., and Erzo F.P. Luttmer. 2011. “Would People Behave Differently if They Better
Understood Social Security? Evidence from a Field Experiment.” NBER Working Paper 17287.
Neumark, David, and Joanne Song. 2013. “Do Stronger Age Discrimination Laws Make Social Security
Reforms More Effective?” Journal of Public Economics 108, 1–16.
Sandell, Steven H., and Howard M. Iams. 1997. “Reducing Women’s Poverty by Shifting Social Security
Benefits from Retired Couples to Widows.” Journal of Policy Analysis and Management 16 (2), 279–
297.
Sass, Steven A., Wei Sun, and Anthony Web. 2007. “Why Do Married Men Claim Social Security Benefits
So Early? Ignorance or Caddishness?” Boston College Center for Retirement Research Working Paper.
Smeeding, Timothy M., and Susanna Sandstrom. 2005. “Poverty and Income Maintenance in Old Age: A
Cross-National View of Low Income Older Women.” Feminist Economics 11 (1), 163−197.
Snyder, Stephen E., and William N. Evans. 2006. “The Effect of Income on Mortality: Evidence from the
Social Security Notch.” Review of Economics and Statistics 88 (3), 482−495.
Social Security Administration. 2010. Annual Statistical Supplement to the Social Security Bulletin, 2009.
Social Security Administration, Washington, D.C.
Song, Jae G., and Joyce M. Manchester. 2007. “New Evidence on Earnings and Benefit Claims Following
Changes in the Retirement Earnings Test in 2000.” Journal of Public Economics 91 (3-4), 669–700.
Stancanelli, Elena G.F., and Arthur van Soest. 2012. “Joint Leisure Before and After Retirement: A Double
Regression Discontinuity Approach.” IZA Discussion Paper No. 6698.

Figure 1: Budget Constraint

Notes: Prior to the 2000 removal of the retirement earnings test (RET), all Social Security beneficiaries younger than
age 70 faced a budget constraint of CDEB. If beneficiaries younger than age 70 chose to work past the threshold
(point D), these beneficiaries received a reduction in benefits (ET). After the 2000 elimination of the RET,
beneficiaries who had attained the Full Retirement Age (FRA) faced a budget constraint of CDF (ignoring other taxes
and benefits). Beneficiaries age 62 to the FRA continue to face a budget constraint like CDEB even after the 2000
changes.

63

Average Age at Claiming
63.33
63.67
64
64.33

64.67

Figure 2: Average Age at Claiming by Birth Year, All Women Sample, at Age 70, Born between 1925 and
1940

1925

1928

1934
1931
Birth Year

1937

1940

Notes: Cells with fewer than 50 observations are suppressed. The first vertical line indicates those born
in 1930, who were age 70 in 2000 and unaffected by the elimination of the RET. The second vertical
line indicates those born in 1935, who were age 65 in 2000 and were exposed to five years of the
elimination of the RET.

14000

Average Social Security Benefits
17000
16000
15000

18000

Figure 3: Average Social Security Benefits (AWI/CPI-U Adjusted) by Birth Year, at Age 70, All Women
Sample, Born between 1925 and 1940

1925

Notes: See notes to Figure 2.

1928

1931
1934
Birth Year

1937

1940

Figure 4: Average Age at Claiming by Birth Year, Women with Husbands Sample, at Age 70, Born
between 1925 and 1940

63

Average Age at Claiming
63.33
63.67
64
64.33

64.67

A. Wives

1925

1937

1934
1931
Birth Year

1928

1940

63

Average Age at Claiming
63.33
63.67
64
64.33

64.67

B. Husbands

1925

1935

1930
Birth Year

Notes: See notes to Figure 2.

1940

Figure 5: (Adjusted) Poverty/Low-Income Rates by Birth Year, All Women Sample, at Ages 70 and 75,
Born between 1925 and 1940

0

5

Percentage in Poverty
10 15 20 25 30

35

A. Women first observed age 70 or older

1925

1928

1931
1934
Birth Year

1937

1940

Below 100 Percent Poverty Line
Below 150 Percent Poverty Line
Below 200 Percent Poverty Line

0

5

Percentage in Poverty
10 15 20 25 30 35 40 45

B. Women first observed age 75 or older

1925

1928

1931
1934
Birth Year

1937

Below 100 Percent Poverty Line
Below 150 Percent Poverty Line
Below 200 Percent Poverty Line

Notes: See notes to Figure 2.

1940

Figure 6: Results on the Incidence of Low Income Relative to Poverty, Additional Ages, All Women
B. 200 Percent of the Poverty Line, All Women

-.1

-.1

Effect of being wife less than age 70
-.05
0
.05

Effect of being wife less than age 70
.05
-.05
0

.1

.1

A. 150 Percent of the Poverty Line, All Women

71-72

70-71

72-73

73-74
74-75
Ages in Sample

75-76

76-77

70-71

77-78

70-71

72-73

73-74
74-75
Ages in Sample

75-76

76-77

77-78

D. 200 Percent of the Poverty Line, Women with Husband Observed
Combined effect of husband and wife less than age 70
-.1
-.05
0
.05
.1
.15

Combined effect of husband and wife less than age 70
-.1
-.05
0
.05
.1
.15

C. 150 Percent of the Poverty Line, Women with Husband Observed

71-72

71-72

72-73

73-74
74-75
Ages in Sample

75-76

76-77

77-78

70-71

71-72

72-73

73-74
74-75
Ages in Sample

75-76

76-77

77-78

Notes: 90 percent confidence intervals are shown. Only results for those born between 1925 and 1940 are shown. The results graphed for ages 70-71
and 75-76 in the top row correspond to the estimates in Panels A and B, columns (1) and (2), of Table 7, and those in the bottom row correspond to
columns (5) and (6) in Table 7.

Table 1: Hypothetical Adjustment of Earnings Streams by AWI for Workers in Successive Cohorts
Year 1
Year 2
Year 3
Year 4
Worker 1 earnings
Y1
Y2
Y3
Worker 2 earnings
Y1⋅(W(2)/W(1))
Y2⋅(W(3)/W(2))
Y3⋅(W(4)/W(3))
AWI

W(1)

W(2)

W(3)

W(4)

Notes: Worker 2’s earnings stream is identical except for the nominal growth captured by the index W(t), t

= 1, 2, 3, 4.

Age
70
71
75
76
Total

Table 2: Number of Observations in Each Sample by Age and Birth Cohort
Women
Women with husbands
Age 70+ sample
Age 75+ sample
Age 70+ sample
Age 75+ sample
Less than age
Age 70 or
Less than age
Age 70 or
Less than age
Age 70 or
Less than age
Age 70 or
70 in 2000
older in 2000
70 in 2000
older in 2000
70 in 2000
older in 2000
70 in 2000
older in 2000
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
(5)
(6)
(7)
(8)
336
1,187
166
661
509
942
248
564
543
542
256
345
406
467
188
274
949
1,009
845
2,129
414
1,225
444
619

Notes: The sample is limited to individuals who are currently claiming Social Security benefits, who report Social Security benefits of greater than $6,000 but
less than $35,500 in 2013 dollars, and who report an age at claiming of between ages of 62 and 71. For the “Women with husbands” sample, we further limit the
sample by removing women who never report a spouse or report multiple spouses during the HRS sample, and requiring that husband’s Social Security claiming
age is not missing and is between ages 62 and 71.
Source: Data from the RAND Health and Retirement Study from the 1992 to 2012 waves.

Table 3: Descriptive Statistics for Different Samples

Variable
Individual annual Social Security
benefits, adjusted
Family annual Social Security benefits,
adjusted
Share below poverty line
Unadjusted
OASI Benefits Adjusted
Share below 150% of poverty line
Unadjusted
OASI Benefits Adjusted
Share below 200% of poverty line
Unadjusted
OASI Benefits Adjusted
Family income excluding Social
Security benefits
Social Security benefits (adjusted) as
share of family income
Age
Age at claiming
Median Year of Birth
< High school
High school grad or GED
Some college
College degree (BA) or higher
White
Black
Other
Current marital status: married
Current marital status: partnered
Current marital status: widowed
Current marital status: divorced
Number of observations

All women
Age 70+
Age 75+
sample
sample
(1)
(2)
15,547
19,142

Women with husbands
observed
Age 70+
Age 75+
sample
sample
(3)
(4)
14,480
17,885

…

…

33,259

37,419

0.0588
0.0588

0.0728
0.0728

0.0172
0.0172

0.0276
0.0276

0.1500
0.1500

0.2060
0.2060

0.0646
0.0646

0.1120
0.1120

0.2620
0.2620
…

0.3460
0.3460
…

0.1620
0.1620
48,772

0.2460
0.2460
40,125

…

…

0.595

0.686

70.94
63.54
1934
0.196
0.428
0.225
0.151
0.845
0.123
0.033
0.556
0.016
0.255
0.143
2,974

75.89
63.67
1931
0.207
0.423
0.228
0.142
0.854
0.115
0.031
0.468
0.012
0.382
0.110
1,958

70.95
63.39
1934
0.154
0.464
0.228
0.155
0.906
0.066
0.028
0.818
0.004
0.166
0.012
1,639

75.88
63.45
1931
0.163
0.451
0.234
0.152
0.908
0.068
0.025
0.721
0.006
0.265
0.008
1,063

Notes: See notes to Table 2. Reported Social Security benefits are multiplied by the ratio of the Average Wage Index
(AWI) in 1995 to the AWI when the person was aged 60, and by the ratio of the CPI-W in 2013 to the CPI-W in 1995.
Other sources of income are adjusted to 2013 dollars using the CPI-U. We use an adjusted poverty measure that
preserves the observed poverty rate, by adjusting the poverty threshold for each sample so that the poverty rate based
on indexed benefits and other income is identical to the observed poverty rate absent the counterfactual adjustment.
(That is why we show both the unadjusted and adjusted figures, even though they are the same.) The samples for
“Women with Husbands” are slightly larger than those reported below for the income threshold regressions because
observations that reside in a nursing home are assigned a missing value for the income threshold/poverty variable.

Table 4: The Effect of the 2000 Elimination of the Retirement Earnings Test on the Age at Claiming
Benefits in Months, Women First Observed Age 70 or Older, OLS Estimates
Born 1918-1942 Born 1918-1942 Born 1925-1940 Born 1925-1940
Age at claiming
Age at claiming
Age at claiming
Age at claiming
Dependent variable:
in months
in months
in months
in months
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
Less than age 70 in 2000
-9.03***
-7.72***
(0.87)
(0.87)
Aged 69 in 2000

-7.83***
(1.56)

-6.54***
(1.53)

Aged 68 in 2000

-7.96***
(1.57)

-6.67***
(1.55)

Aged 67 in 2000

-10.03***
(1.61)

-8.73***
(1.59)

Aged 66 in 2000

-8.83***
(1.59)

-7.53***
(1.57)

Aged 65 or younger
in 2000

-9.55***
(1.07)

-8.23***
(1.06)

Number of observations

2,974

2,974

2,742

2,742

Notes: See notes to Tables 2 and 3. Asterisks denote levels of significance: 1% (***) level of significance; 5% (**)
level of significance; and 10% (*) level of significance. The outcome variable is the age in months that the individual
began claiming Social Security benefits. The sample includes the first observation of the individual at ages 70 or 71.
Only female observations are included in the sample. The specification also includes dummy variables for education
(high school or GED, some college, college degree (BA) and above), race (black, white), marital status (married,
partnered, widowed), and FRA greater than age 65.

Table 5: The Effect of the 2000 Elimination of the Retirement Earnings Test on Women’s Benefits,
Women First Observed Age 70 or Older, OLS Estimates
Born 1918-1942
Born 1918-1942
Born 1925-1940
Born 1925-1940
Dependent variable:
Annual benefits
Annual benefits
Annual benefits
Annual benefits
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
Less than age 70 in 2000

-807.68***
(246.89)

-642.46***
(246.87)

Aged 69 in 2000

-803.03*
(439.92)

-645.20
(435.72)

Aged 68 in 2000

-546.91
(444.36)

-388.36
(440.12)

Aged 67 in 2000

-698.78
(455.28)

-532.52
(450.93)

Aged 66 in 2000

6.94
(449.12)

162.88
(444.79)

-1,192.34***
(301.51)

-1,019.94***
(300.15)

Aged 65 or younger
in 2000
Number of observations
Notes: See notes to Tables 2, 3, and 4.

2,974

2,974

2,742

2,742

Table 6: The Effect of the 2000 Elimination of the Retirement Earnings Test on the Age at Claiming Benefits in
Months, and Family Benefits, Women with Husband Observed, Women First Observed Age 70 or Older, Born 19251940, OLS Estimates
Age at
Age at
Husband’s age
Husband’s age
Annual
claiming in
claiming in
at claiming in
at claiming in
family
Dependent variable:
months
months
months
months
benefits
(5)
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
Less than age 70 in 2000

-10.31***
(1.35)

-0.11
(1.62)

2,740.26***
(656.54)

Aged 69 in 2000

-7.57***
(2.08)

-2.56
(2.50)

Aged 68 in 2000

-10.49***
(2.04)

-1.53
(2.45)

Aged 67 in 2000

-10.33***
(2.13)

5.06**
(2.55)

Aged 66 in 2000

-10.87***
(2.20)

2.97
(2.63)

Aged 65 or younger in 2000

-11.93***
(1.69)

-1.51
(2.02)

Husband less than age 70
in 2000

1.79
(1.22)

-7.92***
(1.46)

-4,243.99***
(593.42)

Husband Aged 69 in 2000

1.58
(1.98)

-7.73***
(2.38)

Husband Aged 68 in 2000

-0.75
(2.13)

-5.35**
(2.55)

Husband Aged 67 in 2000

4.33*
(2.28)

-6.03**
(2.73)

Husband Aged 66 in 2000

3.77*
(2.26)

-8.26***
(2.70)

Husband Aged 65 or younger in
2000

3.49*
(1.80)

-9.70***
(2.16)

Combined effect of husband
and wife less than age 70 in
2000

-1,503.73**
(655.68)

Notes: N = 1,530. See notes to Tables 2, 3, and 4. The sample is further limited to women whose husband’s age at claiming age
is not missing and is between the ages of 62 and 71, and who report a unique husband. Those observations that report multiple
husbands complicate matters because it is unclear which husband’s age affects the woman’s benefit. Women who only report a
spouse when “partnered” are also excluded from the sample. A separate control is included for husband’s FRA greater than age
65.

Table 7: The Effect of the 2000 Elimination of the Retirement Earnings Test on Poverty, Women First Observed and
Women with Husband Observed Age 70 or Older and 75 or Older Samples, Born 1925-1940, OLS Estimates
Income
Income
Income
Income
Income
Income
< 150% of
< 150% of
< 200% of
< 200% of
< 150% of
< 200% of
Dependent variable:
poverty line
poverty line
poverty line poverty line
poverty line
poverty line
Husband
Husband
Women:
All
All
All
All
observed
observed
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
(5)
(6)
A. Women first observed age 70 or older
Less than age 70 in 2000
-0.0265*
-0.0314*
-0.0165
-0.0104
(0.0136)
(0.0162)
(0.0147)
(0.0227)
Aged 69 in 2000
-0.0118
-0.0166
(0.0239)
(0.0286)
Aged 68 in 2000
-0.0163
-0.0028
(0.0243)
(0.0290)
Aged 67 in 2000
-0.0491**
-0.0090
(0.0248)
(0.0296)
Aged 66 in 2000
-0.0392
-0.0659**
(0.0245)
(0.0293)
Aged 65 or younger in
-0.0236
-0.0418**
2000
(0.0165)
(0.0198)
Husband less than age 70
in 2000
Combined effect of
husband and wife less
than age 70 in 2000
Number of observations
2,721
B. Women first observed age 75 or older
Less than age 70 in 2000
0.0283*
(0.0167)
Aged 69 in 2000
Aged 68 in 2000
Aged 67 in 2000
Aged 66 in 2000
Aged 65 or younger in
2000
Husband less than age 70
in 2000
Combined effect of
husband and wife less
than age 70 in 2000
Number of observations

1,781

2,721

2,721

2,721

0.0369*
(0.0190)
0.0230
(0.0291)
0.0211
(0.0284)
0.0256
(0.0352)
0.0014
(0.0291)
0.0503**
(0.0228)

1,781

0.0295**
(0.0133)
0.0130
(0.0146)

-0.0040
(0.0205)
-0.0143
0.0226

1,522

1,522

0.0360*
(0.0208)

0.0660**
(0.0280)

-0.0031
(0.0212)
0.0328
(0.0211)

0.0007
(0.0285)
0.0667**
(0.0284)

1,003

1,003

-0.0207
(0.0329)
0.0085
(0.0321)
0.0258
(0.0397)
-0.0048
(0.0329)
0.1087***
(0.0257)

1,781

1,781

Notes: N = 1,781. See notes to Tables 2, 3, 4, and 6. Poverty is based on the sum of adjusted Social Security benefits and other
income relative to the poverty line (all in 2013 dollars). Note that relative to the corresponding earlier tables, we lose a small number
of observations because they reside in a nursing home and are assigned a missing value for poverty. (The RAND HRS provides an
indicator for whether those living in institutionalized facilities are living in poverty. We view this measure as less salient for policy
analysis regarding income support provided by Social Security. Individuals residing in institutionalized facilities are likely worse off
due to considerations other than income and may be required to spend a large amount of resources on care.) All women in the age 75
sample (Panel B) have an FRA equal to age 65. As a result, the “FRA greater than age 65” variable is excluded from the
specifications in this panel.

Appendix Table A1: Percentage of Women Age 62 or Older by Type of Entitlement and Year
Entitled worker only
Dually-entitled
Spouse only
Survivor only
1995

36.2

Spouse
11.5

Survivor
14.4

14.3

23.6

2000

38.0

12.0

15.6

12.9

21.5

2005

41.4

12.0

16.0

11.4

19.3

2010

46.3

12.1

15.5

9.6

16.4

2011

47.5

12.0

15.3

9.3

15.9

2013

48.7

11.9

15.1

9.0

15.3

Source: Data from the Social Security Administration’s Annual Statistical Supplement, 2013, Table 5.A14.
Appendix Table A2: Discrepancies between Claiming Ages/Dates in Self-Reported and Linked Administrative Data

Diff = Public – Admin.
Less than -12 months
-4 to -12 months
-1 to -3 months
No difference
1 to 3 months
4 to 12 months
13 or more months

Full sample
(1)
49
138
367
1,134
1,707
699
427

Respondents born before
1931
(2)
26
37
77
291
219
292
272

Respondents born in 1931 or
later
(3)
23
101
290
843
1,488
407
155

Mean
3.9
8.8
2.1
Standard Deviation
10.9
17.0
6.7
Notes: The sample in the table contains all individuals who have agreed to have their Social Security records linked to
their HRS survey responses. The sample is limited to those individuals who have never claimed disability benefits and
whose current and initial claiming type is equal to a retired worker benefit. Any individuals who are receiving a second
benefit based on another individual’s account, whose beneficiary date of birth is not equal to the account holder’s date
of birth, whose “historical current entitlement code” is equal to disabled, whose date of current entitlement does not
equal the date of initial entitlement, or whose age at claiming in the administrative data is calculated to be less than age
62, are removed from the sample. Finally, the sample is limited to those whose self-reported age at claiming (in
months) is between 744 and 851 (inclusive).
Appendix Table A3: The Effect of the 2000 Elimination of the Retirement Earnings Test on Benefit Entitlement, Song
and Manchester (2007) Replication, Probit and OLS Estimates
Song and Manchester
(2007) results:
Between 0.0219 and 0.0502
OLS
Probit
Public data
SSA admin. data
Public data
SSA admin. data
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
Attained ages 65-69

0.0469***
-0.0082
0.0669***
0.0022
(0.0102)
(0.0106)
(0.0113)
(0.0094)
Number of observations
19,644
13,779
19,644
13,779
Notes: The samples include both men and women. The Song and Manchester results presented in the table are from
Table 4, p. 686, Model II (the base model). In their analysis, Song and Manchester (2007) use two separate control
groups. One group of the treatment groups includes those who had attained ages 65 to 69 by January 1 of the calendar
year. The second treatment group includes those who turn age 65 during the year. The younger control group contains
those who turn age 62 to age 64 during the year. The older control group contains those who have attained ages 70 to
72 as of January 1 of the calendar year. Their regressions include interaction of treatment status with year dummies,
dummies for being in the younger or older control group, calendar year dummies, an indicator for whether the personyear observation is male, and an indicator for whether the person-year observation is white. In the above replication
analysis, standard errors are clustered at the individual level. For probit estimates, marginal effects evaluated at sample
means and varying the treatment variable from zero to one are reported.

