                                NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                          HEALTH EFFECTS OF ECONOMIC CRISES

                                         Christopher J. Ruhm

                                        Working Paper 21604
                                http://www.nber.org/papers/w21604


                      NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                               1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                 Cambridge, MA 02138
                                     October 2015




I thank participants of the Workshop on Consequences of the Economic Crisis on Health and Health
Care Systems held at UNED, Madrid, Spain and seminar participants at the Erasmus University Health
Economics Group for helpful comments. The views expressed herein are those of the author and do
not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.

© 2015 by Christopher J. Ruhm. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs,
may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to
the source.
Health Effects of Economic Crises
Christopher J. Ruhm
NBER Working Paper No. 21604
October 2015
JEL No. E32,I1,I12,I18,J68

                                             ABSTRACT

This analysis summarizes prior research and uses national, state and county level data from the United
States from 1976-2013 to examine whether the mortality effects of economic crises differ in kind from
those of the more typical fluctuations. The tentative conclusion is that economic crises affect mortality
rates (and presumably other measures of health) in the same way as less severe downturns: namely,
they lead to improvements in physical health. The effects of severe national recessions in the United
States, appear to have a beneficial effect on mortality that is roughly twice as strong as that predicted
due to the elevated unemployment rates alone while the higher predicted rate of suicides during typical
periods of economic weakness is approximately offset during severe recessions. No consistent pattern
is obtained for more localized economic crises occurring at the state level – some estimates suggest
larger protective mortality effects while others indicate offsetting deleterious consequences.


Christopher J. Ruhm
Frank Batten School of
Leadership and Public Policy
University of Virginia
235 McCormick Rd.
P.O. Box 400893
Charlottesville, VA 22904-4893
and NBER
ruhm@virginia.edu
       Research from a variety of countries and time periods conducted over the last 15 years shows

that mortality is procyclical – rising when economic conditions improve and falling when they

deteriorate. Following Ruhm (2000), most of these studies utilize longitudinal data and panel

techniques to control for many confounding factors, including time-invariant area-specific

determinants and characteristics that vary over time in a uniform manner across locations. The

question addressed here is whether the mortality effects of economic crises differ in kind from those of

the more typical fluctuations that have been previously examined. A particular challenge is that, to

borrow from Leo Tolstoy, while all “regular” business cycles are (somewhat) alike, each economic

crisis may differ in its own way. One reason is that crises could potentially involve the partial or

complete collapse of economic or social institutions, including those affecting health and mortality.

Operationalizing the analysis of crises is therefore likely to be somewhat idiosyncratic and the results

obtained should be viewed as exploratory. The empirical portion of this investigation considers

whether severe national and localized recessions in the United States have mortality effects that go

beyond, fall short of, or move in the opposite direction from those anticipated based on more typical

macroeconomic fluctuations.

       Drawing on prior research and the empirical results below, the tentative conclusion is that

economic crises affect mortality rates (and presumably other measures of health) in the same direction

as less severe downturns – leading to improvements in physical health. Moreover, the beneficial effects

of severe national recessions in the United States appear to be roughly twice as strong as those

predicted due to higher unemployment rates alone and the increase suicide rates usually associated

with worsening economic conditions is roughly offset by the severe recession effect. However, no

consistent pattern of effects is obtained for economic crises occurring at the state level.

1. What We Know So Far




                                                   Page 1
          The conventional wisdom, prior to the turn of the 21st century, was that health deteriorates

when the economy weakens and improves when it strengthens.1 An important adherent of this view,

Harvey Brenner conducted a series of studies (e.g. Brenner 1971, 1979, 1987) using lengthy national

time-series, showing that recessions and other sources of economic instability increased overall

mortality and deaths from many causes, as well as morbidity, alcoholism and admissions to mental

hospitals. This research was been widely criticized on technical grounds (e.g. Kasl, 1979; Gravelle, et

al., 1981; Wagstaff, 1985) and studies addressing the concerns (e.g. Forbes & McGregor, 1984;

McAvinchey, 1988), obtained results that were sensitive to the choice of countries, time periods and

proxies for health.2 Some subsequent investigations continued to use time-series methods (e.g. Joyce &

Mocan, 1993; Laporte, 2004; Gerdtham & Johannesson 2005; Tapia Granados & Ionides, 2008), albeit

with more sophisticated approaches designed to correct problems with earlier studies. However, these

methods have not provided robust results, most probably because any lengthy time-series may yield

biased estimates due to omitted factors that are spuriously correlated with economic conditions and

health.

          As an alternative, most researchers now use panel data methods containing information on

health or mortality outcomes for multiple locations over several time periods. Consider a panel of

aggregate state-level with mortality as the outcome of interest. A typical estimation equation is:

                                   ln(Mkst) = ks + Xst + Ust + kt + Tkst + kst,                       (1)

where Mkst is the mortality rate from source k in state s at year t, U is the proxy for macroeconomic

conditions, X a vector of state characteristics, a state fixed-effect,  a general time effect, T a state-

specific time trend,  is the error term, and ߛො provides the estimated macroeconomic effect of interest.

          Mortality rates are often studied because they represent the most severe negative health

outcome, are well measured (although there can be errors in the assigned cause of death) and diagnosis
1
  This was true even though analyses undertaken as early as the 1920s (Ogburn & Thomas, 1922; Thomas, 1927),
uncovered positive relationships between economic activity, total mortality and several specific causes of death.
2
  See Ruhm (2012) for an in-depth discussion.

                                                          Page 2
generally does not require access to the medical system.3 Unemployment rates are the most common

proxy for macroeconomic conditions but employment-to-population ratios, per capita GDP or similar

variables are sometimes used. Supplementary regressors vary but often include measures of age,

education and race/ethnicity. Some analyses add lags of the macroeconomic variables or use other

methods to capture dynamics of the adjustment process.

         In (1), the year effects (kt) hold constant time-varying determinants that are national in scope

(e.g. advances in widely used medical technologies or behavioral norms); the state fixed-effects (ks)

account for those that differ across states but are time-invariant (such as persistent lifestyle disparities

between residents of Nevada and Utah) and the state-trends (Tst) control for some location-specific

time-varying determinants. The macroeconomic impact is identified from within-location variations in

mortality rates, relative to changes in other states and controlling for demographic characteristics and

state-trends. This presents potential issues for examining the effects of economic crises, to which I

return below. However, at this point, it is worth emphasizing that unemployment rates are included in

(1) to proxy for macroeconomic conditions, and ߛො does not indicate the mortality effects of job loss or

movements into unemployment.4

         Investigations using the methods just described (or slight variations) and data from a variety of

locations strongly indicate that total mortality and several important causes of death rise during

expansions and fall in times of economic weakness. In Ruhm’s (2000) analysis of state-level U.S. data

from 1972 to 1991, a one percentage point increase in the state unemployment rate lowered predicted

total mortality rates by 0.5% and motor vehicle and cardiovascular disease (CVD) deaths by 3.0% and

0.5%, respectively, with reductions also observed for fatalities from influenza/pneumonia, liver


3
  However, changes in non-life-threatening health conditions (e.g. arthritis) will not be accounted for. A few analyses (e.g.
Ruhm, 2003 and Charles & DeCicca, 2008) have used similar models to examine effects on morbidities.
4
  Thus, it is quite possible for macroeconomic downturns to be associated with improved health, even while rigorous
previous research (e.g. Sullivan & von Wachter, 2009) shows that job loss is associated with increases in individual
mortality rates. Modrek et al. (2013) provides a comprehensive literature review that carefully distinguishes between the
health effects of changes in macroeconomic conditions from those of individual unemployment.

                                                            Page 3
disease, non-vehicle accidents and homicides. By contrast, cancer mortality was unaffected and

suicides were estimated to rise by 1.3%. This last result suggests that physical and mental health move

in opposite directions.

         The procyclicality of total mortality has been confirmed using data for 16 German states from

1980-2000 (Neumayer, 2004), 50 Spanish provinces from 1980-1997 (Tapia Granados, 2005), 96

French depártments from 1982-2003 (Buchmueller, et al., 2007), 31 Mexican states from 1993-2004

(Gonzalez & Quast, 2011), 10 Canadian provinces from 1977-2009 (Ariizumi & Schirle, 2012), 23

OECD countries from 1960-1997 (Gerdtham & Ruhm, 2006), and 8 Pacific-Asian nations from 1976-

2003 (Lin, 2009).5 Motor vehicle and CVD fatalities exhibit similar patterns in almost all studies, with

more variation for mortality from other causes.6

         There is evidence that, at least in the U.S., mortality has become less procyclical in recent

years. Using state-level data from 1978-2006, Stevens et al. (2011) find that a one percentage point

increase in the unemployment rate predicted a 0.40% reduction in total mortality from 1978-1991, but

a smaller 0.19% decrease from 1978-2006.7 McInerney & Mellor (2012) indicate that a one-point rise

in joblessness lowered predicted mortality rates of seniors (65 and over) by 0.3% during 1976-1991,

but raised them 0.5% from 1994-2008. Ruhm (2015) provides the most complete analysis of this issue.

Using state-level data for 1977-2010, he estimates that total mortality shifted over time from strongly

procyclical to being largely unrelated to macroeconomic conditions. These secular changes vary across

causes, with deaths from CVD remaining as strongly procyclical at the end of the sample period as at

the beginning of it, but with countercyclical patterns emerging for cancer mortality and external



5
  Economou et al. (2008) find that total mortality is negatively but insignificantly related to unemployment rates for 13 EU
countries from 1977-1996, and that the predicted effect reverses sign when controlling smoking, drinking, calorie
consumption and pollution rates (suggesting that these may provide important mechanisms for some of the effects).
6
  Stuckler et al. (2009) obtain evidence from 26 EU countries for 1970-2007 of positive, negative and neutral relationships
between unemployment rates and suicides, deaths from transport accidents, and total mortality. Their statistical methods
focus on rates of changes in mortality and unemployment and so are not completely comparable to the other research
discussed in this section.
7
  The estimated reduction rises to 0.33% over the 1978-2006 period when using age-adjusted mortality rates.

                                                           Page 4
sources of death, especially for non-transport accidents. Finally, he demonstrates that reliable estimates

are unlikely to be obtained when using relatively short (less than 15-year) analysis periods.

       Health lifestyles provide a potential mechanism for the macroeconomic effects. There is

considerable evidence that harmful behaviors – like heavy drinking and smoking – decrease in bad

economic times, whereas health-enhancing activities such as exercise and social interactions increase

(e.g. Ruhm & Black, 2002; Ruhm, 2005; Gruber & Frakes, 2006; Edwards, 2011; Xu, 2013). However,

research for recent periods (e.g. Charles & DiCicca, 2008; Arkes, 2007; Dávlos et al., 2012; Colman &

Dave, 2013) raises questions about some of these relationships or indicates that the patterns may have

changed over time, although such results should be interpreted cautiously because the analysis periods

are short (eight years or less).

2. What We Don’t Yet Know

       Despite a large and growing body of research examining how macroeconomic conditions affect

health, we know surprisingly little about whether the patterns observed during “standard” economic

fluctuations are reinforced, weakened or reversed in times of crises. To some degree, this may be

because the basic estimation model, described by equation (1), is poorly formulated to answer this

question. Two shortcomings are worth noting. First, the specification treats the macroeconomic proxy

(usually unemployment rates) as being linearly related to the outcome (log mortality rates). For

example, a one percentage point increase in the unemployment rate is assumed to have the same effect,

but in the opposite direction, as a one point decrease, and the impact of it rising from 4% to 5% is

constrained to be the same as a change from 10% to 11%. Neither assumption is necessarily true and

economic crises generally involve substantial increases in joblessness to unusually high rates. Second,

the inclusion of year dummy variables in the basic model absorbs all effects that are national in scope,

so that it is not possible to estimate how national recessions affect mortality. (The models are identified

based on changes in state-level economic conditions.) Both issues will be at least partially addressed in



                                                  Page 5
the econometric analysis below. However, before turning to the original empirical work, I discuss what

can be learned from prior investigations.

       Some information may be gained by examining how estimates of macroeconomic effects

obtained using standard panel data methods differ when analyzing samples that do and do not include

severe downturns. While somewhat inconclusive, such investigations suggest that the mortality

declines observed during times of general economic weakness do extend to periods of crisis. Spanish

provincial unemployment rates during the 1980-1997 timespan examined by Tapia Granados (2005)

varied between 7% and 24%, with the latter constituting an economic crisis by almost any measure.

His estimates indicate that a one percent point increase in the unemployment rate lowered total

mortality by around 0.11%. While this effect is smaller than in other countries (e.g. compared to the

0.3% to 0.5% change often estimated for the U.S.) Spanish unemployment rates were both high and

variable (averaging 19.3% with a standard deviation of 7.2 percentage points) so that, for example, a

one standard deviation increase in unemployment lowers the predicted death rate by around 8%.

However, Tapia Granados did not explicitly test for nonlinearities in the effects during times of

economic crisis.

       Several studies examine periods that include or are centered on the Great Recession. van Gool

& Pearson’s (2014) analysis of 34 OECD countries from 1997-2011 indicates that unemployment rates

are negatively, but somewhat weakly, associated with overall mortality rates and deaths from several

sources, with suicides varying in the opposite direction: a one point increase in unemployment predicts

a 0.18% reduction in all-cause mortality. Drinking, smoking, and the expected use of several types of

medical care also decline, although the estimates are often statistically insignificant. Toffolutti &

Suhcke (2014) uncover extremely large procyclical variations in total and most causes of mortality




                                                   Page 6
(with suicides again the exception) using data for 23 EU countries from 2003-2010.8 Tekin et al.

(2013) examine U.S. state-level data from 2005-2011 and find that unemployment rates are negatively

associated with smoking, drinking and obesity, and positively correlated with exercise. However, the

estimates are often small and imprecise (particularly when controlling for state-specific trends),

leading them to conclude that there are at most weak relationships. An alternative interpretation is that

the 7-year analysis period is too short to provide reliable estimates.

        Ruhm (2015) examines how the unemployment rate coefficients vary during all 20-year

periods occurring between 1976-2010. At first glance, the dramatic reduction over time in the

procyclicality of mortality (the unemployment coefficient falls from a statistically significant -0.0043

for 1976-1995 to an insignificant -0.0010 for 1991-2010) might suggest weaker macroeconomic

effects for analysis periods that include the Great Recession. However, this interpretation is probably

incorrect because the magnitude of the estimated effects begin to attenuate long before the Great

Recession and increase slightly during the last two 20-year periods (1990-2009 and 1991-2010), which

include data from the Great Recession.

        Researchers have also investigated the effects of economic crises other than the Great

Recession. Fishback et al. (2007) used data for 114 cities from 1929-1940 to examine how the Great

Depression (which lasted from 1929-1939 and was at its worst in 1932-1933) affected mortality and

whether these impacts were buffered by spending on New Deal relief programs. Particularly relevant

to this investigation is the evidence of procyclical variations in the overall non-infant death rate and in

mortality from homicides, infectious and parasitic diseases, cancers, degenerative diseases and motor

vehicle fatalities, with suicides again varying countercyclically.9 Similarly, Stuckler et al. (2012), using

data for 36 U.S. states from 1929-1937, showed that worse state economies were associated with lower


8
  A one percentage point increase in unemployment is predicted to reduce total mortality by 2.6%-3.7%. While these effects
seem implausibly large, they note that extending the sample period to 1991-2010 reduces the predicted effect by more than
two-thirds. This provides further evidence of the fragility of the estimates to the use of short analysis periods.
9
  They also find that New Deal relief programs reduced many types of mortality.

                                                         Page 7
rates of overall (detrended) mortality and deaths from many sources, although they believe these

patterns oftren reflect factors other than macroeconomic conditions. Tapia Granados & Roux (2009),

using time-series methods for the U.S. from 1920-1940, examined how trend deviations in national

mortality rates and life expectancy covary with annual macroeconomic conditions. They provide

evidence that most causes of mortality fall and life expectancies rise (relative to trend) when economic

conditions weaken, with suicides again a notable exception. An issue for all three studies is that

mortality rates were falling sharply in the years prior to the start of the Great Depression; a failure to

correctly adjust for preexisting trends could therefore lead to erroneous estimates.

         Ásgeirsdóttir et al. (2014) examine health behaviors just before and after the 2008 Icelandic

economic crisis. Since the crisis was sudden, severe and unanticipated, the estimates are unlikely to be

biased by unobserved confounding factors or longer-term trends.10 They find that most behavioral

responses to the crisis were health-enhancing, including reductions in smoking, indoor tanning and the

consumption of alcohol, soft drinks and sweets at the same time that (beneficial) sleep and fish oil

consumption increased. However, not all effects were positive as fruit and vegetable consumption also

declined. Price changes provided an important mechanisms for the effects. The overall price index rose

27% between, 2007 and 2009, while prices of (mostly imported) tobacco, alcohol, soft drinks, sweets,

fruits and vegetables increased by 40%, 49%, 57%, 50%, 92% and 38%, whereas those of

(domestically produced) fish oil grew just 19%.11

         The research just summarized suggests that the relationship between macroeconomic

conditions and mortality observed during “typical” economic fluctuations is likely to persist to periods

of crisis. However, this need not always occur. An important counter-example is Russia following the

breakup of the Soviet Union. Brainerd & Cutler (2005) note that life expectancy fell 6.6 years for
10
   According to Ásgeirsdóttir et al., Iceland’s three largest banks had assets 14 times larger than GDP before the crisis.
These three banks collapsed in October of 2008, leading to an economic crisis that resulted in widespread business
bankruptcies, a quadrupling of the unemployment rate and a 36% fall in the exchange rate.
11
   A follow-up analysis by Ásgeirsdóttir et al. (2015), which added data from 2012, after Iceland’s economy had
substantially recovered, found that most of the unhealthy behaviors (smoking, binge drinking, soft drink and fast food
consumption) remained below pre-crisis levels. A likely reason is that prices for these products remained relatively high.

                                                           Page 8
males and 3.3 years for females between 1989 and 1994, an enormous decrease. After examining

possible causes, they attribute key importance to increases in drinking problems, brought on by falling

alcohol prices, and the higher stress associated with the poor outlook for the future (although evidence

for this is mostly indirect).12 Notice that price changes led (mostly) healthier behaviors during

Iceland’s economic collapse, whereas the opposite was true for Russia’s economic upheaval.

3. Methods

         When using state level data, the basic estimation model was previously described, by equation

(1), with the unemployment rate coefficient (ߛො) providing the estimated macroeconomic effect. When

counties are the unit of analysis, the basic model will be modified as:

                                    ln(Mkct) = kc + Xct + Ust + kt + Tkct + kct,                                  (1’)

with the c subscript indicating the county. State, rather than county, unemployment rates are controlled

for in (1’) because Lindo (2015) identifies important spillover effects across sub-state areas, such that

controlling for county-level conditions understates the macroeconomic effects. Conservative

assessments of statistical significance will be provided by clustering robust standard errors by state

rather than county.13

         When using state-level data, the effects of national economic crises will be estimated from:

                                    ln(Mkst) = ks + Xst + Ust + Nt+ Tkst + kst,

                                    (2)

and the corresponding specification using county-level data is:

                                    ln(Mkct) = kc + Xct + Ust + Nt+ Tkct + kct,                                 (2’)

where Nt is a dummy variable indicating whether the national economy is in severe recession in year t.

ߜመ then indicates whether national crises have mortality effects beyond those expected due to the

associated higher rates of unemployment; ߛො here shows the macroeconomic effect during non-crisis
12
   Other potential mechanisms they examined, and concluded were not of primary importance, were: breakdown of the
medical care system, increases in smoking or obesity, worse diets or material deprivation.
13
   County-clustered standard errors are typically one-half to two-thirds the size of the state-clustered standard errors.

                                                            Page 9
periods. The year dummy variables (kt) must be excluded from (2) and (2’), since they are perfectly

collinear with N, raising the possibility omitted variables bias. However, I show below that results

from the basic specification (equations (1) and (1’)) are insensitive to the exclusion of the time-specific

effects, so that this is unlikely to be a major issue.

        The effects of state economic crises are estimated from:

                                   ln(Mkst) = ks + Xst + Ust + Sst +kt +Tst + kst,                           (3)

when using state-level data and for county data from:

                                   ln(Mkct) = kc + Xct + Ust + Sst +kt +Tct + kct,                           (3’)

where Sst is a dummy variable indicating whether state s is in crisis during year t. Once again, we are

most interested in ߜመ , and also in ߛො.

4. Data

        Mortality data come from the Center for Disease Control and Prevention’s Compressed

Mortality Files (CMF) which contain death certificate information for U.S. residents. Data prior to

1988 are publicly available; those from 1989-2013 were obtained by special agreement with the CDC.

Population data (the denominator in the mortality rate calculations) come from the National Cancer

Institute’s Surveillance Epidemiology and End Results (SEER) program.14 The SEER data were also

used to construct independent variables for the share of the state or county population who were

female, black, other (nonblack) nonwhite, and aged <1, 1-19, 45-54, 55-64, 65-74, 75-84 and ≥85

years old.

        Annual average state unemployment rates, the proxy for macroeconomic conditions, were

obtained from the U.S. Department of Labor’s Local Area Unemployment Statistics (LAUS) Database



14
  Additional information on the CMF and SEER data are available at: www.cdc.gov/nchs/data_access/cmf.htm and
http://www.seer.cancer.gov/data. The SEER data are designed to supply more accurate population estimates for intercensal
years than standard census projections, and to adjust for population shifts in 2005, resulting from Hurricanes Katrina and
Rita. Differences between the SEER and CMF population estimates are miniscule prior to 2000 but are sometimes
reasonably large (up to 3%) after 2003.

                                                          Page 10
(www.bls.gov/lau/lauov.htm).15 The 1976-2013 analysis period reflects the availability of consistent

data on unemployment and mortality rates.

        In addition to total annual death rates, cause-specific mortality was examined. This introduces

complications. From 1976-1978, cause of death was categorized using the 8th revision of the

International Classification of Diseases (ICD-8 codes). ICD-9 codes were used between 1979 and

1998, and ICD-10 categories since 1999. Crosswalks have been established between ICD-8 and ICD-9

and between ICD-9 and ICD-10 coding systems; however, the correspondence is imperfect. These

issues are typically minor when looking at broad causes of death (e.g. those from cardiovascular

disease) but are important for many specific sources of mortality.

        The National Center for Health Statistics has calculated “estimated comparability ratios”

indicating the relative number of deaths in 1996 attributed to a specific cause using ICD-9 and ICD-10

classifications (Anderson, et al., 2001) and for 1976 using ICD-8 versus ICD-9 codes (Klebba & Scott,

1980). When the estimated comparability ratios are close to one (i.e. a similar number of deaths are

reported using either ICD system), issues of data comparability are likely to be minor and well

captured by the inclusion of regression year fixed-effects. For example, the estimated comparability

ratios are 1.013 and 1.003 for CVD and cancer fatalities, when using ICD-8 and ICD-9 codes, and

0.998 and 1.007 for ICD-9 and ICD-10 categories. The potential problems are greater for some

numerically important causes of death, and for others that have been analyzed in previous research.16

For this reason, the analysis is restricted to major causes of death, which are likely to be comparable

across ICD coding systems. Specifically, I decompose total mortality into that from diseases versus

external causes and then break down diseases into cardiovascular (CVD), malignant neoplasms

(cancer), and all other diseases. Similarly, important subcategories of external deaths – transport

15
   A consistent series on county level unemployment rates begins in 1990 and the Department of Labor cautions against
using county level data prior to that time. As mentioned, county unemployment rates would probably not be appropriate for
this analysis, even if a consistent data series were available, because of spillovers effects across economic regions.
16
   For instance, the ICD-10 to ICD-9 comparability ratios are 0.698, 1.232 and 1.554 for influenza/pneumonia, kidney
disease (nephritis, nephrotic syndrome, nephrosis) and Alzheimer’s disease.

                                                         Page 11
accidents, non-transport accidents, intentional self-harm (suicide), and homicide/legal intervention –

are separately considered.

        The county data contain 118,326 observations from 3,142 counties. However, many counties

are quite small. For example, the median population is less than 24,000 and the 25th and 10th

percentiles are below 11,000 and 6,000 respectively. By contrast, county population at the 90th

percentile exceeds 160,000. This implies that many counties contribute little to the national population

and that weighting will be necessary if there is unaccounted for heterogeneity in effects by population

size. Measurement error (which is a particular issue in fixed-effect models) is also likely to be

especially problematic for small counties. I address these issues in two ways. First, I test the sensitivity

of the results to weighting the data and focus most attention on the weighted estimates. Second, the

sample for most county-level estimates will be restricted to “large” counties, defined as those with a

population average 25,000 or more during the 1976-2013 analysis period. This restriction eliminates

52 percent of county-year observations (reducing the sample size to 57,097) but just 7% of the national

population.17 I also show that similar total mortality estimates are obtained for all and large counties,

when using weighted data.

        Appendix Table A.1 details the ICD-8, ICD-9 and ICD-10 codes used to classify causes of

death. Appendix Table A.2 shows sample averages for the mortality outcomes, state unemployment

rates and state/county level demographic characteristics. The means are weighted by location-specific

populations and are shown using state-level data, from the full sample of 3.142 counties and for the

1,515 “large” counties. As expected, given the big sample sizes, standard errors are quite small. Also,

as anticipated, the variable averages computed using the samples of states and all counties are




17
 An additional benefit of the smaller sample sizes is that the computational time declines from approximately 70 to eight
minutes per regression.

                                                         Page 12
similar.18 After weighting, large counties have 2% to 3% lower rates of most types of mortality, but

similar demographic characteristics.

5. Defining Economic Crises

        Examining whether the health effects of economic crises differ from those of more “normal”

downturns requires arriving at a reasonable definition of the former. I operationalize this by

considering relatively extreme negative macroeconomic events occurring either nationally or at the

state level, although this treatment is certainly arguable since the identified national recessions or state-

level downturns fall short of a complete collapse of the economy.

        The United States experienced five national recessions during the analysis period (see Table 1).

The first two occurred within months of each other –January through July of 1980 and July of 1981

through November of 1982. Given the relatively brief interval separating them, I treat these as a single

recession below. Together, they were lengthy, totaling 22 months, and deep: GDP declined 2.2% in the

first and 2.7% in the second; annual unemployment rate rose almost four percentage points from the

preceding trough (from 5.8% in 1979 to 9.7% in 1982). The next two recessions, in 1990/91 and 2001,

were brief (8 months each) and relatively shallow, with GDP declines of 1.4% and 0.3% and

unemployment rate increases of 2.2 and 2.0 percentage points. Finally, the “Great Recession”,

beginning in December of 2007, was lengthy (18 months) and deep, with GDP falling more than 4%

and unemployment growing from 4.6% in 2007 to 9.6% in 2010. The analysis below treats the

combined 1980-82 recessions and the Great Recession of 2007-09 as “severe” and uses these to

examine the effects of national economic crises. The 1990/91 and 2001 recessions are classified as

“mild” and are not treated as national crises, although controls for them are sometimes included.

        Unemployment rates lag other measures of economic performance and often reach a maximum

after recessions officially end. For instance, the annual unemployment rate was 5.8% in 2008 and 9.3%

18
 They are not exactly equal because there are 393 county-year observations (out of 118,807) where the SEER populations
were not matched to the CMF mortality rates, and another 88 observations where some information on population ages
were missing.

                                                        Page 13
in 2009, during the Great Recession, but peaked at 9.6% in 2010.19 Given this, most of the analysis

will use a “broad” definition whereby severe recession are defined to begin in the first year when the

economy was in recession for at least six months – using official dates determined by the National

Bureau of Economic Research (NBER) – and to continue through the year of the peak annual

unemployment rates. By this definition, severe recession years included 1980-83 and 2008-2010, and

mild recessions occurred during 1991-1993 and 2001-2003.20 I examined whether the results were

sensitive to this dating scheme by estimating specifications using “narrow” definitions restricted to

formal recession years according to the NBER (e.g. 1980-82 and 2008-09 for severe recessions).

        Table 2, which shows (population-weighted) average state unemployment rates during

recession and non-recession years, provides further justification for focusing on severe recessions.

Using the broad definition, state unemployment rates were 2.3 percentage points higher during severe

recessions than in other years (8.4% versus 6.1%) and under the narrower definition they were 1.6

points greater. Conversely, joblessness barely increased during mild recessions using the broad

definition (6.3% versus 6.0%), and rates were actually slightly lower in these periods when using the

narrow definition.

        State-level economic crises are even harder to define and so three alternative classifications are

considered. Two of these focus on of high unemployment, relative to the state average. This is

operationalized by considering the unemployment rate ratio (UN ratio), defined as the (annual)

unemployment rate divided by the average (annual) state unemployment rate from 1976 through 2013.

Crisis 1 is a dummy variable set to one if UN Ratio exceeds 1.377, which is the 90th percentile of

population-weighted UN Ratio. Crisis 2 indicates more severe crises, and equals one if the UN Ratio is

greater than 1.541, corresponding to the 95th percentile. Crisis 3 considers both the UN Ratio and


19
   The peak monthly unemployment rate was 10.0% in October of 2009 (www.bls.gov/data/), four months after the formal
end of the recession.
20
   The annual unemployment rate was actually slightly higher in 1982 than 1983 (9.7% vs. 9.6%); however, since these are
so similar, 1983 is also included in the broad definition of that severe recession.

                                                        Page 14
absolute level of unemployment. Specifically, this dichotomous variable is set to one if the UN Ratio is

above the 90th percentile (>1.377) and the annual unemployment rate exceeds 9.3%, which is the 90th

percentile for all (population-weighted) state-year observations.

        Table 3 provides summary information on these three variables. By construction, Crisis 1 and

Crisis 2 are set to one for around 10% and 5% of state-year observations; Crisis 3 equals one in around

7% of (population-weighted) cases. Unemployment rates average 10.2% to 11.5% during crisis periods

(compared to around 6% at other times) and are 57% to 67% above state averages. Unemployment

rates and ratios are higher for Crisis 2 than Crisis 1, by definition, but the differences are not huge

(10.9% versus 10.2% and 1.67 versus 1.57). Since Crisis 3 also conditions on absolute unemployment

rates, the high (11.5%) average rate when this variable equals one is unsurprising; however,

unemployment ratios are also quite elevated.

6. Economic Crises and Total Mortality: Estimates Using National Data

        Figure 1 provides a first indication the relationship macroeconomic conditions and total

mortality, showing national annual values, detrended (using a linear trend) and standardized to have a

mean of zero and a standard deviation of one. In this and later figures, the vertical dotted lines show

official starting and ending dates of recessions (the narrow definition), with the 1980 and 1981/82

recessions combined. These results are illustrative only, since they do not control for potential

confounding factors.

        The figure suggests the inverse relationship between unemployment and mortality rates, that

has been obtained in previous research.21 Two aspects are noteworthy. First, the mortality declines

appear to be more pronounced during the severe than mild recessions. Second, unemployment rates

typically peak after the recessions officially, as discussed, and mortality rates usually reach a trough

near the end of them.


21
  Regressing detrended standardized mortality on the corresponding unemployment rate yields an unemployment rate
coefficient of -0.453 with a robust standard error of 0.122.

                                                       Page 15
           Table 4 provides an econometric investigation of these relationships, and a first indication of

whether the effects of national crises go beyond those expected due to the associated higher rates of

unemployment. The dependent variable in each regression except model 6 is the natural log of the total

mortality rate. In addition to unemployment rates, all models include a time trend constructed to have a

value of zero in 1976 and one in 2013. Column (1) shows that a one-percentage point rise in

unemployment predicts a 0.5% reduction in total mortality. The time trend coefficient of -0.087 of

implies a ceteris paribus 8.3% secular decline in mortality between the beginning and end of the

analysis period.

           Model (2) adds a control for severe recessions to model, using the broad definition. Doing so

attenuates the unemployment rate coefficient by 60%, so that a one-point increase is predicted to

reduce mortality by 0.3% during typical periods; however, there is an additional 1.4% decrease in

deaths expected during severe recessions. Model (3) shows that the severe recession effect is virtually

the same when using the narrow definition (based on official NBER timing) and model (4) shows that

it is modestly attenuated when also controlling for mild recessions.22 Column (5) indicates that the

protective effect of national economic crises was greater during the Great Recession than for the

somewhat less traumatic, but still severe twin recessions occurring of the early 1980s. This is

consistent with a dose-response relationship where larger mortality reductions occur when the severity

of the national economic crisis deepens.

           The dependent variable in model (6) is the level, rather than natural log, of the total death rate.

Unemployment rates are again inversely related with mortality, with an additional protective effect

observed during severe recessions. Since the total mortality rate is 846.5 per 100,000 individuals, a

2.42 predicted fall per one point increase in unemployment and an additional 11.82 decrease during

severe recessions correspond to 0.3% and 1.4% reductions, respectively. These are essentially identical



22
     The mild recession coefficient in model (4) is positive and significant (0.0104 with a standard error of 0.0051).

                                                              Page 16
to the effects obtained from the corresponding specification (model 2) using log mortality rates as the

outcome.

7. Panel Data Estimates

7.1 “Standard” Models, Without Economic Crisis Variables

         Table 5 uses the methods described by equations (1) and (1’) to examine the predicted effect of

within-location changes in unemployment rates on (the log of) total mortality. These estimates

correspond to those used in most previous research, except for the inclusion of more recent data, and

do not contain additional controls for periods of economic crises. The top panel shows results using

state level data; the middle and lower panels display corresponding findings for samples consisting of

all counties and counties with populations averaging more than 25,000. Models (1) and (2) use

unweighted data; observations are weighted by location-specific average populations in models (3) and

(4). All models control for location-fixed effects, population characteristics and time-trends, as well as

state unemployment rates. Year dummy variables also included in columns (2) and (4).

         Using state level data, all specifications indicate that a one-percentage point increase in the

unemployment rate correlates with around a 0.3% reduction in total mortality. Estimates using county-

level data reveal somewhat larger effects – typically around a 0.4% decrease – and more sensitivity to

the use of sample weights, as expected if the macroeconomic effects differ between small (mostly

rural) and larger counties.23 For this reason, weighted results are focused upon below. With weighting,

virtually identical estimates are obtained for the all-county and large county samples, and the estimates

are not sensitive to the inclusion of year dummy variables. The latter is important since time effects

will be excluded from models examining effects of national economic crises, and suggests that such

estimates are unlikely to be seriously biased by omitted time-specific factors.




23
  Standard errors are virtually the same as when using state-level data, probably because the robust standard errors are
clustered at the state level.

                                                          Page 17
         I next consider how the macroeconomic effects vary over time by estimating equation (1) or

(1’) for sub-periods of the data. Specifically, Figure 2 shows the unemployment coefficients where

(log) total mortality is the outcome, for all available 15-year periods (i.e. the earliest window is 1976-

1990 and the latest is 1999-2013). If the reductions in mortality predicted by higher unemployment

rates were occurred only during “typical” business cycle fluctuations, and not during severe national

crises, we would expect the negative predicted effects of higher unemployment on mortality to be

reduced or eliminated for analysis windows including the beginning or end of the sample period, since

these included the severe twin recessions of the early 1980s and the Great Recession of 2007-2009.

Instead, we observe almost the opposite pattern. The unemployment coefficient (robust standard error)

is -0.0037 (0.0007) for 1976-1990, increases in magnitude to -0.0042 (0.0009) in 1984-1998 and

declines in absolute value steadily thereafter, prior to the Great Recession, to -0.0004 (0.0011) in

1991-2005. The predicted protective effect of unemployment subsequently rises for most analysis

windows, including those containing the Great Recession, reaching -0.0025 (0.0015) for the 1999-

2013 analysis window (see Figure 2A). Figure 2B shows that similar results are obtained using county-

level data but with, if anything, somewhat larger beneficial effects of unemployment estimated during

periods of severe national recessions.24

         Figure 3 shows corresponding results for deaths from disease and external causes separately.25

The figure confirms evidence by Ruhm (2015) that the macroeconomic effects are larger and more

variable for external than disease sources of mortality. (Note the different scale of the y-axis in Figures

3A and 3B). However, there is no indication that the severe national recessions have negative effects

on mortality. For disease mortality there is little discernable evidence of any change over time.26 By


24
   Ruhm (2015) showed that mortality has become much more procyclical over time, using data for 1976-2010. Figure 2
demonstrates that these conclusions are somewhat modified by extending the analysis through 2013, since the magnitude of
the unemployment coefficient increases for the most recent data windows. For instance, it was -0.0010 in 1993-2007 and -
0.0025 in 1999-2013 with state data, and changed when using large county data – from -0.0008 to -0.0035.
25
   External causes include non-disease deaths due to causes like accidents, intentional self-harm, legal intervention or wars.
26
   The unemployment rate coefficient varies over 15-year analysis windows within a narrow range (-0.0012 to -0.0039) and
most of the coefficients are not statistically distinguishable from each other.

                                                           Page 18
contrast, while the unemployment rate coefficients vary widely for external mortality (from -0.0189 in

1976-1990 to 0.0148 in 1991-2005), severe national recessions, if anything, appear to have a protective

effect, as evidenced by the relatively strong negative unemployment coefficients in the early sample

years (that contain the 1980-82 recession) and the elimination of the positive coefficients (implying

that unemployment and external deaths were positively related) as data from the Great Recession is

included towards the end of the sample timespan.

7.2 Severe National Recessions and Total Mortality

        Table 6 provides more comprehensive evidence of the protective effect of severe national

recessions by summarizing estimates of equations (2) and (2’), using data from states and large

counties, and the broad recession definition. The negative severe recession coefficient implies that total

mortality rates fall farther during such periods than would be anticipated from the reduction in (state)

unemployment rates alone: is an additional 0.5% decrease in total mortality is predicted when using

state data and a 0.9% reduction when using large counties. These results are largely insensitive to

weighting.

        Inclusion of the severe recession indicator somewhat attenuates the unemployment rate

coefficient, as expected since the former absorbs a portion of the effect of the latter. The estimated

severe recession effect is equivalent to the mortality reduction predicted by a two to three percentage

point increase in joblessness.27 Since, state unemployment rates were 2.3 percentage points higher, on

average, during severe recessions than in other years, the total mortality reduction expected during

such periods is approximately twice that predicted by higher unemployment rates alone.

        I tested the sensitivity of these results to a variety of alternative specifications (with weighted

and unweighted data) including: 1) using narrow versus broad definitions of recessions; 2) adding a

supplementary control for mild recessions; 3) controlling for all recessions, rather than just severe


27
  The severe recession coefficient is approximately twice the unemployment parameter estimate for the state sample and
three times as large in the large county sample.

                                                        Page 19
recessions. The findings were generally robust to these changes, with severe recessions always

strongly predicted to reduce mortality rates.

7.3. State Economic Crises

       The effects of state economic crises are considered in Table 7, which summarizes estimates of

equations (3) and (3’) using unweighted and weighted state or large county data. For each panel,

column (1) repeats results for the base specification, without the state crisis variable, while columns (2)

through (4) add controls for Crisis 1 through Crisis 3. As a reminder, Crisis 2 indicates more severe

downturns than Crisis 1 (unemployment rate ratios above the 95th rather than the 90th percentile), while

Crisis 3 requires high absolute unemployment rates as well as ratios.

       Overall, state economic crises have modest and inconsistent independent effects on total

mortality. The strongest predicted impacts are for Crisis 1 – unemployment rate ratios greater than the

90th percentile – which, with weighting, reduce predicted death rate by around 0.4% (0.3%) when

using state (large county) data. To provide perspective, such changes are equivalent to those

anticipated from a 0.75 to 1.5 percentage point rise in unemployment, compared to an average increase

during crisis periods of over four points (see Table 4). Thus, most of the mortality reduction is

captured by the more general macroeconomic effect. Moreover, using classifications focusing on more

severe state crises – Crisis 2 or Crisis 3 – the estimated effect is attenuated or becomes slightly (and

insignificantly) positive. Thus, while national crises appear to have additional protective effects on

mortality, state crises, as measured here, do not.

7.4 Cause-specific Mortality

       Table 8 considers cause-specific mortality. For each cause, the first row shows the coefficient

(and state-clustered robust standard error) on the state unemployment rate. Column (2) shows results

for models that also control for severe national recessions (with year effects excluded). Columns (3)

through (5) add covariates for the three state economic crisis variables: Crisis 1 through Crisis 3. To



                                                     Page 20
avoid making the table overly cumbersome, I present results only for models using weighted state-

level data; similar results were obtained for analyses of large counties.

         National crises are estimated to have a protective effect on mortality from both diseases and

external causes, beyond that predicted by the accompanying elevation of unemployment. This is shown

by the negative and significant severe recessions coefficients in column (2) of the first table panel: -

0.0045 for diseases and -0.0211 for external causes. Both are equivalent to the mortality reductions

predicted from around a 2.5 percentage point increase in unemployment which, as with total mortality,

implies that the protective effect is roughly twice that predicted due to the higher rate of joblessness

alone.

         State economic crises have less consistent effects. Crisis 1 is negatively associated with

mortality rates, and the predicted effects are strong and significant, particularly for external deaths.

However, the more severe local downturns, represented by Crisis 2 and 3, yield either smaller negative

or insignificantly positive predicted effects.

         The second panel of Table 8 decomposes disease mortality into cardiovascular sources (CVD),

cancer and all other diseases, which respectively account for 44%, 24% and 32% of disease fatalities

and 41%, 23% and 30% of all mortality. Severe national recessions have strong protective effects on

deaths from cancer or other diseases but, interestingly, the coefficient is positive and marginally

significant for CVD deaths. This does not imply that cardiovascular deaths increase in such periods,

since the total effect combines the predicted negative overall unemployment rate effect with the

positive severe recession estimate, but it does suggest that the pathways may vary across types of

diseases. Similarly, the negative severe recession coefficient for cancer offsets a more general positive

effect of rising unemployment rates. However, deaths from other diseases are estimated to fall

dramatically during severe national recessions. The parameter estimates once again suggest

inconsistent effects of state economic crises, with negative and usually fairly large (but not always



                                                   Page 21
significant) coefficients for Crisis 1 but frequently positive and sometimes significant effects predicted

for Crisis 2 and Crisis 3.

       The last panel of Table 8 separately examines four components of external deaths: transport

accidents, other (non-transport) accidents, suicides (intentional self-harm) and homicides or other legal

intervention. These account for 30%, 36%, 20% and 13% of external deaths (with a small residual

category) but just 2.1%, 2.5%, 1.4% and 0.9% of all mortality; however, they are of considerable

importance given the large cyclical fluctuations.

       The patterns for from transport and non-transport accidents are generally similar to those

discussed above, with fairly strong (but here statistically insignificant) additional protective effects of

severe national recessions, but inconsistent estimates for state crises. Homicides follow a different

pattern, with little evidence of a separate severe national recession effect but a stronger and more

consistent pattern of extra benefits during state economic crises (although the estimates are less precise

than would be desirable).

       Perhaps most interesting are the results for suicides. Many earlier analyses have found that

suicides are countercyclical, and the positive unemployment rate coefficients here are consistent with

that. However, this appears to be substantially offset by the strong and statistically significant negative

coefficients for severe national recessions and all three state economic crisis covariates. For instance,

at the national level, the severe recession coefficient of -.048 reverses approximately a four percentage

point rise in state unemployment rates. Since the latter increase less than three points on average

during severe national downturns, suicides are predicted to fall slightly during such periods. The

negative coefficients on Crisis 1 through Crisis 3 similarly more than offset the positive unemployment

coefficients (recall that joblessness rises by an average of four to five percent during state crises), so

that suicides are again predicted to decline slightly.

       Appendix Table A.3 summarizes state-level models examining differences in cause-specific

mortality effects for the 1980-83 versus the 2008-2010 severe national recessions. The findings are not
                                                    Page 22
completely consistent with a dose-response relationship. Specifically, the point estimates suggest

larger protective effects during the Great Recession than for the somewhat less harsh twin recessions

of at the beginning of the 1980s for deaths from all diseases, cardiovascular disease, transport

accidents and homicides, but not for mortality due to cancer mortality, other diseases, non-transport

accidents or suicides.28

8. Discussion

         The empirical analysis above confirms previous findings of a procyclical fluctuation in U.S.

mortality that has declined somewhat over time, particularly during the period of reduced

macroeconomic volatility lasting from the early 1980s until the start of the Great Recession. What is

new is evidence that the severe national recessions occurring at the beginning of the 1980s and the end

of the first decade of the 21st century had a protective effect on total mortality that was around twice as

large as that predicted by the higher unemployment rates occurring during such periods alone. These

impacts vary across sources of death and it is noteworthy that the national recession coefficients were

of the opposite sign for cardiovascular deaths and homicides, suggesting that the protective effect of

higher unemployment rates was partially offset during such periods for these causes. Also interesting is

that for suicides, which unlike other causes of death are generally countercyclical, the reductions

associate with national crises were large enough to fully reverse the general effects of higher rates of

unemployment.

         These estimates with an important caveat. When using the panel data methods that have now

become standard for this type of analysis, year dummy variables are typically included to account for

time-varying confounding factors. This is not possible when considering national crises, since the

impacts would be absorbed by the vector of time effects, raising the possibility of omitted variables
28
   I examined the effects of state economic crises in models without time dummy variables. The protective effects of state
crises were more pronounced in these specifications, but again without evidence of stronger effects for the more severe
crises (i.e. Crisis 2 or 3 versus Crisis 1). I also estimated models with national and state crises, and interactions between
them, simultaneously included. When doing so, severe recessions had large and significant predicted protective effects,
state crises less consistent (but sometimes protective) impacts, while the interaction coefficient was of inconsistent sign and
statistically insignificant.

                                                           Page 23
bias. There are reasons to doubt that importance of this concern. First, the unemployment coefficients

obtained from models similar to those used in prior research were generally not sensitive to the

inclusion of year dummy variables. Second, most estimates indicate a “dose-response” relationship in

the severe recessions, whereby the effects of the Great Recession were somewhat greater than those of

the still severe but somewhat less devastating twin downturns occurring during the early 1980s.

However, this was not true for all of the cause-specific models. The exceptions provide an additional

reason for interpreting the results with caution.

       There was not a consistent pattern of findings for the three variables used to proxy state

economic crises. When these were defined as unemployment rates ratios (current unemployment rates

divided by state average rates) greater than the 90th percentile, a protective effect on mortality was

usually obtained, just as with national crises. However, when using more stringent classification

criteria, the predicted effects were generally weaker or opposite signed.

       Further research is needed to better understand the differences between the effects of national

versus more localized economic traumas observed here, and to identify the sources of heterogeneity

across sources of death. More fundamentally, the definition of economic crisis is not clear-cut and it

would be useful to ascertain whether the results are sensitive to the use of reasonable alternative

definitions. Also, these determinations should be tempered by the understanding that economic crises

may contain idiosyncratic elements that affect mortality. For instance, the breakup of the Soviet Union

had enormous negative effects on Russian life expectancy, in part, because declines in alcohol prices

led to increases alcohol-related problems. Conversely, the Icelandic banking collapse in 2008 resulted

in a currency devaluations that raised alcohol and cigarette prices, leading to reductions in drinking and

smoking.

       These caveats notwithstanding, this analysis, when combined with previous related research,

provides reasonably strong evidence that the protective effect of economic downturns on physical

health is generally not restricted to “typical” business cycle fluctuations, but also extends to crisis
                                                    Page 24
periods, at least when the latter do not lead to a the collapse of the health infrastructure or large

changes in relative prices.



                                                References
 Anderson, Robert N., Arialdi M. Miniño, Donna L. Hoyert and Harry M. Rosenberg (2001)
   “Comparability of Cause of Death Between ICD-9 and ICD-10: Preliminary Estimates.” National
   Vital Statistics Reports 49(2), 1-32.
 Ariizumi, Hideki and Tammy Schirle (2012) Are Recesions Really Good for Your Health? Evidence
    from Canada Social Science and Medicine 74, 1224-1231.
 Arkes, Jeremy (2007) “Does the Economy Affect Teenage Substance Use?” Health Economics 16(1),
   19-36.
 Ásgeirsdóttir, Tinna L., Hope Cormon, Kelly Noonan, Pórhildur Ólafsdóttir and Nancy Reichman.
   (2014) “Was the Economic Crisis of 2008 Good for Icelanders? Impact on Health Behaviors”,
   Economics and Human Biology, 14, 1-19.
 Ásgeirsdóttir, Tinna L., Hope Cormon, Kelly Noonan, and Nancy Reichman. 2015. “Lifecycle
   Effects of a Recession on Health Behaviors: Boom, Bust, and Recovery in Iceland”, NBER
   Working Paper No. 20950, February.
 Brainerd, Elizabeth and David Cutler. 2005 “Autopsy on An Empire: Understanding Mortality in
   Russia and the Former Soviet Union” Journal of Economic Perspectives, 19(1), 107-130.
 Brenner, M. Harvey (1971) “Economic Changes and Heart Disease Mortality.” American Journal of
   Public Health 61(3), 606-611.
 Brenner, M. Harvey (1979) “Mortality and the National Economy.” The Lancet 314(8142), 568-73.
 Brenner, M. Harvey (1987) “Economic Change, Alcohol Consumption and Heart Disease Mortality
   in Nine Industrialized Countries” Social Science and Medicine 25(2), 119-32.
 Buchmueller, Tom, Michel Grignon and Flrence Jusot (2007) “Unemployment and Mortality in
   France, 1982-2002” Center for Health Economics and Policy Analysis Working Paper 07-04,
   McMaster University.
 Charles, Kerwin Kofi and Philip DeCicca (2008) “Local Labor Market Fluctuations and Health: Is
   there a Connection and For Whom?” Journal of Health Economics 27(6), 1532-1550.
 Colman Gregory J and Dhaval M. Dave (2013) “Exercise, Physical Activity, and Exertion Over the
   Business Cycle.” Social Science and Medicine 93 (September), 11-20..
 Dávlos María E, Hai Fang and Michael T. French (2012) “Easing the Pain of an Economic
   Downturn: Macroeconomic Conditions and Excessive Alcohol Consumption” Health Economics
   21(11) 1318-1335.
 Economou, Athina, Agelike Nikolau, and Ioannis Theodossiou (2008) “Are Recessions Harmful to
   Health After All? Evidence from the European Union.” Journal of Economic Studies 35(5), 368-
   384.
 Edwards, Ryan (2011) “American Time Use Over the Business Cycle.” Mimeo, City University of
   New York.

                                                   Page 25
Eyer, Joseph (1977) “Prosperity as a Cause of Death.” International Journal of Health Services 7(1),
  125-150.
Fishback, Price V., Michael R. Haines and Shawn Kantor (2007) “Births, Deaths and New Deal
   Relief During the Great Depression.” Review of Economics and Statistics 89(1), 1-14.
Forbes John F. and Alan McGregor (1984) “Unemployment and Mortality in Post-War Scotland”
  Journal of Health Economics 3(3), 239-57
Gerdtham, Ulf-G and Magnus Johannesson (2005) “Business Cycles and Mortality: Results from
  Swedish Microdata” Social Science and Medicine 60(1), 205-218.
Gerdtham, Ulf-G and Christopher J. Ruhm (2006) “Deaths Rise in Good Economic Times: Evidence
  from the OECD.” Economics and Human Biology 43(3), 298-316.
Gonzalez, Fidel and Troy Quast (2011) “Macroeconomic Changes and Mortality in Mexico.”
  Empirical Economics 40(2), 305-319.
Gravelle, H.S.E., G. Hutchinson and J. Stern (1981) “Mortality and Unemployment: A Critique of
  Brenner’s Time-Series Analysis.” The Lancet 318(8248), 675-679.
Gruber, Jonathan and Michael Frakes (2006) “Does Falling Smoking Lead to Rising Obesity?”
  Journal of Health Economics 25(2), 183-197.
Joyce, Theodore J. and H. Naci Mocan (1993) “Unemployment and Infant Health: Time-Series
   Evidence from the State of Tennessee” Journal of Human Resources 28(1), 185-203.
Kasl, Stanislav V. (1979) “Mortality and the Business Cycle: Some Questions about Research
  Strategies When Utilizing Macro-Social and Ecological Data.” American Journal of Public Health
  69(8), 784-788.
Klebba A. Joan and Joyce H. Scott (1980) “Estimates of Selected Comparability Ratios Based on
  Dual Coding of 1976 Death Certificates by the Eighth and Ninth Revisions of the International
  Classifications of Diseases.” Monthly Vital Statistics Report 28(11), 1-19.
Laporte, Audrey (2004) “Do Economic Cycles Have a Permanent Effect on Population Health?
  Revisiting the Brenner Hypothesis” Health Economics 13(8), 767-79.
Lin, Shin-Jong (2009) “Economic Fluctuations and Health Outcome: A Panel Analysis of Asia-
   Pacific Countries.” Applied Economics 41(4), 519-530.
Lindo, Jason M. (2015) “Aggregation and the Relationship Between Unemployment and Health,”
   Journal of Health Economics, 40, 83-96.
McInerney Melissa and Jennifer M. Mellor (2012) “Recessions and Seniors’ Health, Health
  Behaviors, and Healthcare Use: Analysis of the Medicare Beneficiary Survey.” Journal of Health
  Economics 31(5), 744-751.
Modrek, Sepideh, David Stuckler, Marin McKee, Mark R. Cullen and Sanjay Basu (2013) “A
  Review of Health Consequences of Recessions Internationally and a Synthesis of the US Response
  During the Great Recession.” Public Health Reviews 35(1), 1-33.
Neumayer, Eric (2004) “Recessions Lower (Some) Mortality Rates.” Social Science & Medicine
  58(6), 1037-1047.
Ogburn, William F. and Dorothy S. Thomas (1922) “The Influence of the Business Cycle on Certain
  Social Conditions.” Journal of the American Statistical Association 18(139), 324-340.


                                              Page 26
Ruhm, Christopher J. (2000) “Are Recessions Good For Your Health?” Quarterly Journal of
  Economics 115(2), 617-650.
Ruhm, Christopher J. (2003) “Good Times Make You Sick.” Journal of Health Economics 22(4),
  637-658.
Ruhm, Christopher J. (2005) “Healthy Living in Hard Times.” Journal of Health Economics 24(2),
  341-63.
Ruhm, Christopher J. (2012) Understanding the Relationship Between Macroeconomic Conditions
  and Health. In Andrew M. Jones (ed.) Elgar Companion to Health Economics, 2nd Edition.
  Cheltenham, UK: Edward Elgar, 5-14.
Ruhm, Christopher J. (2015) “Recessions, Healthy No More?” Journal of Health Economics 42, 17-
  28.
Ruhm, Christopher J. and William E. Black (2002) “Does Drinking Really Decrease in Bad Times?”
  Journal of Health Economics 21(4), 659-678.
Stevens, Ann Huff, Douglas L. Miller, Marianne Page and Mateusz Filipski (2011) “The Best of
   Times, The Worst of Times: Understanding Procyclical Mortality.” NBER Working Paper No.
   17657.
Stuckler, David, Sanjay Basu, Marc Suhrcke, Adam Coutts, and Martin McKee (2009) “The Public
   Health Effect of Economic Crisis and Alternative Policy Responses in Europe: An Empirical
   Analysis.” The Lancet 374(9686), 315-323.
Stuckler, David, Christopher Meissner, Price Fishback, Sanjay Basu and Martin McKee (2012)
   “Banking Crisis and Mortality During the Great Depression: Evidence from US Urban
   Populations, 1929-1937.” Journal of Epidemiology and Community Health 66(5), 410-19.
Sullivan, Daniel and Till von Wachter (2009) “Job Displacement and Mortality: An Analysis Using
   Administrative Data.” Quarterly Journal of Economics 124(3), 1265-1306.
Svensson Mikael (2007) “Do Not Go Breaking Your Heart: Do Economic Upturns Really Increase
  Heart Attack Mortality?” Social Science and Medicine 65(4), 833-841.
Tapia Granados, José A. (2005) “Recessions and Mortality in Spain, 1980-1997.” European Journal
  of Population 21(4), 393-422.
Tapia Granados, José A. and Edward L. Ionides (2008) “The Reversal of the Relationship Between
  Economic Growth and Health Progress: Sweden in the 19th and 20th Centuries” Journal of Health
  Economics 27(3), 544-563.
Tapia Granados, José A. and Ana V. Diez Roux (2009) “Life and Death During the Great
  Depression.” Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences 106(41), 17290-17295.
Tekin, Erdal, Chandler McClellan and Karen Jean Minyard (2013) “Health and Health Behaviors
  During the Worst of Times: Evidence from the Great Recession” NBER Working Paper No.
  19234.
Thomas, Dorothy Swaine (1927) Social Aspects of the Business Cycle. New York: Alfred A. Knopf.
Toffolutti, Veronica and Marc Suhcke (2014) “Assessing the Short Term Health Impact of the Great
  Recession in the European Union: A Cross-County Panel Analysis.” Preventive Medicine 64, 54-
  62.



                                             Page 27
van Gool, Kees and Mark Pearson (2014) “Health, Austerity and Economic Crisis: Assessing the
   Short-term Impact in OECD Countries” OECD Health Working Papers No. 76, OECD Publishing.
Wagstaff, Adam (1985) “Time Series Analysis of the Relationship Between Unemployment and
  Mortality: A Survey of Econometric Critiques and Replications of Brenner’s Studies” Social
  Science and Medicine 21(9), 985-96.
Xu Xin (2013) “The Business Cycle and Health Behaviors.” Social Science and Medicine 77, January
  2013, 126-136.




                                             Page 28
Table 1: Recession Dates and Characteristics

                                                          Annual Unemployment
                                      % GDP                       Rate
                      Duration        Decline
Recession Dates                                                                      Classification
                      (months)        (peak to                        % Point 
                                                          Peak %
                                      trough)                           (from
                                                           (year)
                                                                       trough)

1/1980 – 7/1980           6              -2.2               9.7
                                                                         3.9%            Severe
7/1981 –11/1982           16             -2.7             (1982)

                                                            7.5
7/1990 – 3/1991           8              -1.4                            2.2%             Mild
                                                          (1992)

                                                            6.0
3/2001 – 11/2001          8              -0.3                            2.0%             Mild
                                                          (2003)

                                                            9.6
12/2007 – 6/2009          18             -4.3                            5.0%            Severe
                                                          (2010)
Note: 1980 and 1981/82 are treated as a single recession. Peak unemployment rate refers to the
year with the highest annual unemployment rate either during or immediately following the
recession. Change from trough refers to the increase in unemployment from the lowest annual
unemployment rate prior to the start of the recession. The last column shows the classification of
recession severity used below. Sources: http://www.nber.org/cycles.html;
https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/List_of_recessions_in_the_United_States;
http://www.gpo.gov/fdsys/pkg/ERP-2015/pdf/ERP-2015-table12.pdf.




                                                Page 29
Table 2: Average State Unemployment Rates in Recession and Non-Recession Years
                          Narrow Recession Definition         Broad Recession Definition
Category
                               No                Yes              No               Yes

Any Recession                6.31%             7.27%            6.01%             7.41%

Mild Recession               6.31%             5.78%            6.01%             6.30%

Severe Recession             6.28%             7.87%            6.07%             8.36%

Note: Table shows the average state unemployment rate in recession and non-recession years,
with the data weighted by state-specific average populations. For mild recessions, severe
recessions are excluded from the calculations of unemployment rates in non-recession years.
Data are for 1,938 observations from the 50 states and District of Columbia, from 1976-2013.
Narrow definition of Recessions refers to the years: 1980-82, 1991, 2001 and 2008-09. The
broad definition includes these years plus immediate post-recession years with unemployment
rates higher than the peak recession year: 1980-83, 1991-93, 2001-05, 2008-10. Narrow
definition of Mild Recession refers to 1991 and 2001 and the broad definition to 1991-93 and
2001-2003. Narrow definition of Severe Recession refers to years 1980-82 and 2008-09, and the
broad definition to 1980-83 and 2008-10.




                                            Page 30
Table 3: Unemployment Rates, Ratios and Changes by State Economic “Crisis” Status
                                                              Share of Observations                 Sample Means
Variable   Description                             Status
                                                             Unweighted     Weighted          UN Rate            UN Ratio

                                                     No         89.5%         90.0%            6.07%               0.937
Crisis 1   UN Ratio: >90th percentile (>1.377)
                                                     Yes        10.5%         10.0%           10.23%               1.567

                                                     No         95.0%         94.9%            6.25%               0.964
Crisis 2   UN Ratio:>95th percentile (>1.541)
                                                     Yes        5.0%           5.1%           10.94%               1.669

           UN Ratio: >90th percentile (>1.377) &     No         94.5%         93.1%            6.25%               0.956
Crisis 3
           UN Rate: >90th percentile (>9.30%)        Yes        5.5%           6.9%           11.48%               1.601

Note: Unemployment rate ratio (UN Ratio) is the current year state unemployment rate (UN Rate) divided by the average state
unemployment rate over the full (1976-2013) time period. UN rate is the state unemployment rate. For sample means, observations are
weighted by state average populations. For Crisis 3, the unemployment rate percentile refers to all state-year unemployment rates.




                                                              Page 31
 Table 4: National Total Mortality Regressions

 Regressors                          (1)               (2)                (3)            (4)             (5)              (6)

 Unemployment Rate               -0.0050***        -0.0030**          -0.0040***      -0.0032**       -0.0029*         -2.4176*
                                   (0.0014)         (0.0014)            (0.0013)       (0.0014)       (0.0015)         (1.1977)
 Severe Recession                                  -0.0141***         -0.0134***      -0.0115**                      -11.8153***
                                                     (0.0047)           (0.0043)       (0.0047)                        (3.9422)
 Severe Recession: 1980-83                                                                             -0.0077
                                                                                                       (0.0073)
 Great Recession: 2008-10                                                                            -0.0224***
                                                                                                       (0.0056)
 Time Trend                      -0.0871***        -0.0867***         -0.0878***     -0.0879***      -0.0810***      -72.7576***
                                   (0.0092)          (0.0090)           (0.0092)       (0.0087)        (0.0118)        (7.5311)

                                                                    Narrow Severe     Mild
                                                                                                                     Mortality in
 Additional Details/Notes            N/A              N/A             Recession    Recessions            N/A
                                                                                                                      Levels
                                                                      Definition  Controlled For

Note: Table shows regression coefficients where the dependent variable is the natural log of the national total mortality rate per
100,000, except in model (6) where it is the mortality rate per 100,000 in levels. Sample period is 1976-2013 (n=38). Severe
Recession is a dummy variable indicating the years 1980-1983 and 2008-2010, except in model (3), where the years are 1980-82 and
2008-2009. Mild recession refers to the years 1991-1993 and 2001-2003. All models also control for a linear national time trend. ***
p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1.




                                                                Page 32
Table 5: State and County Total Mortality Regressions
                                   (1)                   (2)             (3)                (4)

States                         -0.0035***         -0.0033***         -0.0030***         -0.0032***
                                 (0.0004)           (0.0007)           (0.0003)           (0.0008)

Counties                       -0.0045***         -0.0032***         -0.0042***         -0.0044***
                                 (0.0004)           (0.0008)           (0.0003)           (0.0009)

“Large” Counties               -0.0042***         -0.0038***         -0.0041***         -0.0044***
                                 (0.0003)           (0.0008)           (0.0003)           (0.0009)

Sample Weights                     No                    No              Yes               Yes
Year Effects                       No                    Yes             No                Yes

Note: Dependent variable is the natural log of the total mortality rate. Table displays coefficient
on the state unemployment rate. Data are for the 50 states plus the District of Columbia
(n=1,938) for 1976-2013 in the first panel, for all 3,142 counties the second (n=118,326), and for
the 1,515 “large” counties with a population size averaging more than 25,000 persons over the
entire period in the third (n=57,097). The regressions also include vectors of location dummy
variables, location-specific linear time trends, and controls for the share of the county population
who are: female, black, other nonwhite, and aged <1, 1-19, 45-54, 55-64, 65-74, 75-84 and ≥85
years old. Year dummy variables are included in columns (2) and (4), and the data are weighted
by location-specific average populations in columns (3) and (4). Robust standard errors,
clustered at the state level, are in parentheses. *** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1.




                                               Page 33
 Table 6: Total Mortality Regressions with Controls for Severe National Recessions
                                                     Unweighted                                          Weighted
 Regressor
                                         (1)              (2)                (3)            (4)              (5)              (6)

                          States
 Unemployment Rate                  -0.0035***       -0.0031***        -0.0031***      -0.0030***       -0.0025***       -0.0025***
                                      (0.0004)         (0.0005)          (0.0005)        (0.0003)         (0.0004)         (0.0004)

 Severe Recession                                    -0.0048***                                         -0.0053***
                                                       (0.0018)                                           (0.0015)
 Severe Recession: 1980-83                                                 -0.0039                                         -0.0041*
                                                                           (0.0025)                                        (0.0023)
 Great Recession: 2008-10                                              -0.0058***                                        -0.0068***
                                                                         (0.0020)                                          (0.0014)
               “Large Counties
 Unemployment Rate                  -0.0042***       -0.0032***        -0.0032***      -0.0041***       -0.0031***       -0.0033***
                                      (0.0003)         (0.0004)          (0.0004)        (0.0003)         (0.0004)         (0.0004)

 Severe Recession                                    -0.0100***                                         -0.0093***
                                                       (0.0017)                                           (0.0020)
 Severe Recession: 1980-83                                             -0.0095***                                         -0.0072**
                                                                         (0.0028)                                          (0.0030)
 Great Recession: 2008-10                                                -0.0107***                                          -0.0120***
                                                                           (0.0010)                                            (0.0013)
Note: Dependent variable is the natural log of the total mortality rate. First row of each panel displays coefficient on the state
unemployment rate. Second row shows coefficient on an indicator of severe national recessions, corresponding to the years 1980-83
and 2008-10. Third and fourth rows break these recessions out separately. State data are for 1,938 observations from the 50 states and
District of Columbia for 1976-2013. “Large” county data are for the 57,097 observations in 1,515 counties with a population size


                                                                 Page 34
averaging more than 25,000 persons over the entire period. Severe Recession is a dummy variable indicating the years 1980-1983 and
2008-2010. The regressions also include vectors of location dummy variables, location-specific linear time trends and controls for the
share of the county population who are: female, black, other nonwhite, and aged <1, 1-19, 45-54, 55-64, 65-74, 75-84 and ≥85 years
old. The data are weighted by location-specific average populations in columns (4) through (6). Robust standard errors, clustered at
the state level, are in parentheses. *** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1.




                                                                Page 35
Table 7: Total Mortality Regressions with State Economic “Crisis” Covariates
Sample/Regressors             (1)                 (2)                 (3)                 (4)

States: Unweighted
 Unemployment Rate        -0.0033***          -0.0027***          -0.0032***          -0.0035***
                            (0.0007)           (0.0008)            (0.0008)            (0.0008)
 Economic Crisis                               -0.0046**           -0.0006              0.0026
                                                (0.0021)           (0.0029)            (0.0023)
States: Weighted
 Unemployment Rate        -0.0032***          -0.0027***          -0.0034***          -0.0035***
                            (0.0008)           (0.0009)            (0.0009)            (0.0009)
 Economic Crisis                               -0.0041**            0.0019              0.0021
                                                (0.0017)           (0.0021)            (0.0020)
“Large” Counties: Unweighted
 Unemployment Rate        -0.0038***          -0.0032***          -0.0037***          -0.0041***
                            (0.0008)           (0.0009)            (0.0009)            (0.0008)
 Economic Crisis                               -0.0048*            -0.0017              0.0025
                                               (0.0024)            (0.0034)            (0.0024)
“Large” Counties: Weighted
 Unemployment Rate        -0.0044***          -0.0040***          -0.0045***          -0.0048***
                            (0.0009)           (0.0010)            (0.0010)            (0.0010)
 Economic Crisis                               -0.0028              0.0016              0.0033
                                               (0.0021)            (0.0024)            (0.0021)
Crisis Variable              None         Crisis 1: UN Ratio Crisis 2: UN Ratio Crisis 3: UN Ratio
                                           >90th percentile   >95th percentile & UN Rate >90th
                                                                                    percentile
Note: Dependent variable is the natural log of the total mortality rate. First row of each panel
displays the coefficient on the state unemployment rate. The second row shows the coefficient on
the economic “crisis” variable displayed on the last panel of the table. Crisis 1 is a dummy
variable indicating observations >90th percentile (>1.377)) of the unemployment rate ratio (UN
Ratio). Crisis 2 indicates unemployment rate ratios >95th percentile (>1.541). Crisis 3 indicates
that both the UN Ratio and UN Rate are >90th percentile (>1.377 and >9.3%). State data are for
1,938 observations from the 50 states and District of Columbia for 1976-2013 (first two panels).
“Large” county data are for the 57,097 observations in 1,515 counties with a population size
averaging more than 25,000 persons over the entire period (third and fourth panels). Regressions
also include location and year dummy variables, location-specific linear time trends and controls
for the share of the county population who are: female, black, other nonwhite, and aged <1, 1-19,
45-54, 55-64, 65-74, 75-84 and ≥85 years old. Data are weighted by location-specific average
populations in the second and fourth panels. Robust standard errors, clustered at the state level
are in parentheses. *** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1.


                                             Page 36
Table 8: Cause-Specific Mortality Regressions with National & State Economic “Crisis” Covariates
Source/Regressors              (1)             (2)           (3)            (4)           (5)
Diseases
 Unemployment Rate        -0.0029***     -0.0019***      -0.0024**    -0.0030***    -0.0031***
                            (0.0008)       (0.0004)       (0.0009)      (0.0009)      (0.0009)
 Economic Crisis                          -0.0045**      -0.0033**        0.0024        0.0023
                                           (0.0017)       (0.0016)      (0.0020)      (0.0020)
External Causes
 Unemployment Rate        -0.0080***     -0.0085***     -0.0056***    -0.0075***    -0.0081***
                            (0.0020)       (0.0014)       (0.0021)      (0.0022)      (0.0022)
 Economic Crisis                         -0.0211***      -0.0180**       -0.0062       0.0008
                                           (0.0070)       (0.0071)      (0.0075)      (0.0080)
Cardiovascular Disease
 Unemployment Rate        -0.0044***     -0.0034***     -0.0040***    -0.0045***    -0.0044***
                            (0.0010)       (0.0007)       (0.0013)      (0.0011)      (0.0011)
 Economic Crisis                           0.0047*         -0.0032        0.0003       -0.0007
                                           (0.0025)       (0.0032)      (0.0028)      (0.0033)
Cancer
 Unemployment Rate         0.0017***      0.0015***      0.0022***     0.0018***      0.0016**
                            (0.0005)       (0.0004)       (0.0006)      (0.0006)      (0.0006)
 Economic Crisis                         -0.0050***      -0.0035**       -0.0015       0.0011
                                           (0.0018)       (0.0017)      (0.0027)      (0.0023)
Other Disease
 Unemployment Rate         -0.0042**     -0.0029***       -0.0041*     -0.0049**     -0.0055**
                            (0.0017)       (0.0008)       (0.0021)      (0.0019)      (0.0022)
 Economic Crisis                         -0.0207***        -0.0011       0.0079*       0.0106*
                                           (0.0041)       (0.0044)      (0.0042)      (0.0059)
Transport Accidents
 Unemployment Rate        -0.0269***     -0.0311***     -0.0258***    -0.0262***    -0.0278***
                            (0.0032)       (0.0016)       (0.0038)      (0.0036)      (0.0038)
 Economic Crisis                            -0.0096        -0.0081       -0.0086       0.0073
                                           (0.0117)       (0.0099)      (0.0092)      (0.0101)
Other Accidents
 Unemployment Rate           -0.0031      -0.0064**        -0.0011       -0.0032       -0.0033
                            (0.0044)       (0.0027)       (0.0048)      (0.0046)      (0.0046)
 Economic Crisis                            -0.0112        -0.0154        0.0013        0.0018
                                           (0.0073)       (0.0116)      (0.0094)      (0.0092)
Suicides
 Unemployment Rate         0.0114***      0.0121***      0.0144***     0.0128***     0.0143***
                            (0.0038)       (0.0020)       (0.0046)      (0.0043)      (0.0047)
 Economic Crisis                         -0.0477***      -0.0234**     -0.0168**     -0.0244**
                                           (0.0041)       (0.0092)      (0.0080)      (0.0112)
Homicides
 Unemployment Rate         -0.0142**       -0.0057*        -0.0099      -0.0116*      -0.0125*
                            (0.0056)       (0.0032)       (0.0068)      (0.0063)      (0.0071)
 Economic Crisis                             0.0027       -0.0324*       -0.0304       -0.0145
                                           (0.0126)       (0.0190)      (0.0199)      (0.0226)
Crisis Variable               None           Severe        Crisis 1      Crisis 2      Crisis 3
                                          Recession


                                             Page 37
Note: See note on Table 7. Data are for 1,938 state-year observations, and are the regressions are
weighted by state average populations. Models also include location dummy variables, location-specific
linear time trends and controls for the share of the state population who are: female, black, other
nonwhite, and aged <1, 1-19, 45-54, 55-64, 65-74, 75-84 and ≥85 years old. Year dummy variables are
also controlled for, except in model (2). The Severe Recession and Crisis 1 through Crisis 3 variables are
described in Table 4 and the note to Table 6. *** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1.




                                                  Page 38
             Figure 1: Standardized Detrended Unemployment and Mortality Rates




Note: Figure shows national unemployment and mortality rates that have been detrended (with a
linear trend) and standardized to have mean of zero and standard deviation of one.




                                           Page 39
Figure 2: Total Mortality Estimates, 15-Year Analysis Windows
               Fig. 2A: State-Level Estimates




             Fig. 2B: States vs. “Large” Counties




                           Page 40
Note: Figure shows unemployment rate coefficient using 15-Year analysis windows and
population-weighted data. Dashed lines show 95 percent confidence intervals. Vertical dotted
vertical lines show recession periods. “Large” counties refer to those averaging more than 25,000
persons over the 1976-2013 analysis period.




                                             Page 41
Figure 3: Disease and External Mortality Estimates, 15-Year Analysis Windows

                         Fig 3A: Disease Mortality




                      Fig 3B: External Cause Mortality




                                  Page 42
Note: Figure shows unemployment rate coefficient from models using 15-year analysis windows
and population weighted data for the 50 states plus the District of Columbia (n=1,938). The
regressions also control for state and year dummy variables, state-specific linear time trends, and
controls for the share of the county population who are: female, black, other nonwhite, and aged
<1, 1-19, 45-54, 55-64, 65-74, 75-84 and ≥85 years old. Dashed lines show 95 percent
confidence intervals. Vertical dotted vertical lines show recession periods.




                                              Page 43
                                       Appendix
Table A.1: Definitions of Specific Causes of Mortality
                                        ICD-8                ICD-9            ICD-10
Description
                                      (1976-1978)         (1979-1998)       (1999-2013)

Diseases                               000 - 796            000-799           A00-Q99

 Cardiovascular Disease (CVD)           390-448             390-448           I00-I78

 Malignant Neoplasms (Cancer)           140-209             140-208           C00-C97

 Other Disease                       000-136, 210-       000-136, 210-     A00-B99, D00-
                                     389, 450-796        389, 450-799      G99, J00-Q99

External Causes                         800-999             800-978           V01-Y89

 Transport Accidents                 800-848, 940-       800-848, 929.0,   V02-V99, Y85
                                          941                929.1

 Other Accidents                     850-939, 942-       850-928, 929.2-   W00-X59, Y86
                                          949                 949

 Suicide (Intentional Self-Harm)        950-959             950-959        X60-X84, Y87.0

 Homicide/Legal Intervention            960-978             960-978          X85-Y09,
                                                                            Y87.1, Y35,
                                                                              Y89.0




                                         Page 44
Table A.2: Descriptive Statistics for Selected Analysis Variables
                                                                                Large County
                                        State Sample        County Sample
Variable                                                                           Sample
                                         Mean        SE     Mean         SE     Mean     SE
 Mortality Rates
 All Deaths                              846.5       2.7     847.6       0.6     829.9        0.9
 All Diseases                            785.9       2.6     787.1       0.6     771.0        0.8
  Cardiovascular Disease (CVD)           343.6       1.9     343.6       0.4     334.8        0.5
   Malignant Neoplasms (Cancer)          191.7       0.7     192.0       0.1     189.1        0.2
  Other Diseases                         250.7       1.3     251.5       0.2     247.1        0.3
 External Causes                          60.1       0.3      60.1       0.1      58.5        0.1
   Transport Accidents                    18.0       0.1      18.0     3.1 E-2    17.0     3.7 E-2
  Non-Transport Accidents                 21.5       0.1      21.6     3.0 E-2    20.9     3.8 E-2
   Suicide                                11.9       0.1      11.9     1.6 E-2   11.7      1.9 E-2
   Homicide/Legal Intervention             7.7       0.1       7.7     2.1 E-2    7.8      3.0 E-2
State/County Characteristics
 State Unemployment Rate (%)               6.5     4.7 E-2     6.5     6.0 E-3     6.5     8.7 E-3
 % Female                                 51.1     1.6 E-2   51.1      3.8 E-3   51.1      5.0 E-3
 % Black                                  12.7       0.2      12.7     3.8 E-2    13.0        0.1
 % Other Nonwhite                          4.7       0.1       4.6     1.9 E-2     4.8     2.7 E-2
 % <1 Year Old                             1.4     4.3 E-3    1.4      7.5E-4     1.4      1.1 E-3
 % 1-19 Years Old                         27.5       0.1      27.4     1.0 E-2   27.4      1.4 E-2
 % 45-54 Years Old                        12.2     4.7 E-2    12.2     6.6 E-3   12.2      1.0 E-2
 % 55-64 Years Old                         9.6     3.5 E-2    9.6      5.8 E-3    9.5      8.1 E-3
 % 65-74 Years Old                         6.9     2.4 E-2    6.9      5.6 E-3    6.8      7.8 E-3
 % 75-84 Years Old                         4.1     1.8 E-2    4.1      3.9 E-3    4.0      5.4 E-3
 % ≥85 Year Olds                           1.4     9.3 E-2     1.4     1.7 E-3     1.4     2.3 E-3
Sample Size                                    1,938              118,414              57,097
Note: Data cover the period 1976-2013 and are for the 50 states plus the District of Columbia
(n=1,938) in the state sample, for all 3,142 counties (n=118,326) in the county sample, and for
the 1,515 (n=57,097) with a population size averaging more than 25,000 persons over the entire
period in the large county sample. Mortality rates are per 100,000 population. Observations are
weighted by location-specific populations.
Data Sources. Mortality rates: CDC Compressed Mortality Files
(http://www.cdc.gov/nchs/data_access/cmf.htm); unemployment rates: DOL Local Area
Unemployment Statistics (LAUS) database (http://www.bls.gov/lau/data.htm); age, sex and race-
specific population shares: Surveillance, Epidemiology, and End Results Program
(http://seer.cancer.gov/popdata/).




                                              Page 45
Table A.3: Cause-Specific Mortality Regressions with Separate Estimates for Early and Late Severe National Recessions
                                                       Cardiovascular
Regressors                         All Diseases                                  Cancer            Other Diseases
                                                          Disease
Unemployment Rate                  -0.0019***            -0.0034***             0.0015***            -0.0029***
                                     (0.0004)              (0.0006)              (0.0004)              (0.0008)
Severe Recession: 1980-83            -0.0030              0.0245***            -0.0098***            -0.0423***
                                     (0.0028)              (0.0034)             (0.0024)               (0.0066)
Great Recession: 2008-10           -0.0063***            -0.0201***               0.0011              0.0062**
                                     (0.0013)              (0.0033)              (0.0018)             (0.0029)
                                   All External           Transport
                                                                            Other Accidents           Suicides             Homicides
                                     Causes               Accidents
Unemployment Rate                  -0.0085***            -0.0311***             -0.0063**             0.0122***             -0.0057*
                                     (0.0014)              (0.0015)              (0.0027)              (0.0018)             (0.0032)
Severe Recession: 1980-83           -0.0230**               0.0157               -0.0127             -0.0799***              0.0087
                                     (0.0100)              (0.0154)              (0.0111)              (0.0063)             (0.0182)
Great Recession: 2008-10           -0.0187***            -0.0412***              -0.0094               -0.0076              -0.0047
                                     (0.0068)              (0.0102)              (0.0077)              (0.0069)             (0.0148)
Note: Dependent variable is the natural log of the cause-specific mortality rate. First row of each panel displays coefficient on the state
unemployment rate. Second and third rows show coefficients on indicators of the 1980-83 and 2008-2010 severe national recessions.
corresponding to the years 1980-83 and 2008-10. Data are for 1,938 observations from the 50 states and District of Columbia fir 1976-
2013. The regressions also include vectors of state dummy variables, state-specific linear time trends and controls for the share of the
county population who are: female, black, other nonwhite, and aged <1, 1-19, 45-54, 55-64, 65-74, 75-84 and ≥85 years old. The data
are weighted by state-specific average populations in columns (4) through (6). Robust standard errors, clustered at the state level, are
in parentheses. *** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1.




                                                                  Page 46
                            Figure A.1
 Fig. A.1A: Disease Mortality - State vs. “Large” County Estimates




Figure A.1B: External Mortality - State vs. “Large” County Estimates




                              Page 47
Note: See note on Figure 3. “Large” counties refer to those averaging more than 25,000 persons
over the 1976-2013 analysis period.




                                            Page 48
