NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

USING BEHAVIORAL INSIGHTS TO INCREASE PARENTAL ENGAGEMENT:
THE PARENTS AND CHILDREN TOGETHER (PACT) INTERVENTION
Susan E. Mayer
Ariel Kalil
Philip Oreopoulos
Sebastian Gallegos
Working Paper 21602
http://www.nber.org/papers/w21602

NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
October 2015

The authors gratefully acknowledge financial support from the Center for Human Potential and Public
Policy and the Harpel Initiative at the University of Chicago and from an anonymous foundation. The
authors would like to thank André Richter and Martin Eckhoff Andresen and other members of the
Behavioral Insights and Parenting Lab Ph.D. workshop for helpful comments as well as Keri Lintz
and Jill Gandhi for their contributions to the study design and fieldwork. This study was registered
in the American Economic Association Registry for randomized control trials under Trial number
804. The views expressed herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of
the National Bureau of Economic Research.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peerreviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.
© 2015 by Susan E. Mayer, Ariel Kalil, Philip Oreopoulos, and Sebastian Gallegos. All rights reserved.
Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided
that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.

Using Behavioral Insights to Increase Parental Engagement: The Parents and Children Together
(PACT) Intervention
Susan E. Mayer, Ariel Kalil, Philip Oreopoulos, and Sebastian Gallegos
NBER Working Paper No. 21602
October 2015
JEL No. D03,I20,I28,J24
ABSTRACT
Parent engagement with their children plays an important role in children’s eventual economic success
and numerous studies have documented large gaps in parent engagement between low- and higher-income
families. While we know remarkably little about what motivates parents to engage in their children’s
development, recent research suggests that ignoring or discounting the future may inhibit parental
investment, while certain behavioral tools may help offset this tendency. This paper reports results
from a randomized field experiment designed to increase the time that parents of children in subsidized
preschool programs spend reading to their children using an electronic reading application that audio
and video records parents as they read. The treatment included three behavioral tools (text reminders,
goal-setting, and social rewards) as well as information about the importance of reading to children.
The treatment increased usage of the reading application by one standard deviation after the six-week
intervention. Our evidence suggests that the large effect size is not accounted for by the information
component of the intervention and that the treatment impact was much greater for parents who are
more present-oriented than for parents who are less present-oriented.

Susan E. Mayer
Harris School of Public Policy
University of Chicago
1155 E. 60th Street
Chicago, IL 60637
smayer@uchicago.edu

Philip Oreopoulos
Department of Economics
University of Toronto
150 St. George Street
Toronto, ON M5S 3G7
Canada
and NBER
philip.oreopoulos@utoronto.ca

Ariel Kalil
Harris School of Public Policy
University of Chicago
1155 E. 60th Street
Chicago, IL 60637
a-kalil@uchicago.edu

Sebastian Gallegos
Harris School of Public Policy
University of Chicago
1155 E. 60th Street
Chicago, IL 60637
sebagallegos@uchicago.edu

A randomized controlled trials registry entry is available at:
https://www.socialscienceregistry.org/trials/804
An online appendix is available at:
http://www.nber.org/data-appendix/w21602

2
1. Introduction
A large research literature documents the substantial differences in parental engagement
between advantaged and disadvantaged parents and the importance of parental engagement to
children’s future economic outcomes. Yet, existing programs intended to increase parental
engagement have at best met with little success and sometimes at a high per child cost.
To address these issues we developed an experimental intervention designed to increase
the amount of time that low-income parents spend reading to their children using an app on an
electronic tablet. The intervention is based on principles from behavioral science that have been
shown to be successful in changing behaviors such as financial savings, smoking cessation, and
weight loss.
Over the past few decades, a growing research literature has demonstrated that decisionmaking is influenced by a variety of cognitive biases. A cognitive bias is a type of thinking that
occurs when people focus too much on the present or adhere too much to routine such that
opportunities for greater expected lifetime welfare are missed (Gilovich, Griffin, and Kahneman
2002; Lavecchia, Liu, and Oreopoulos 2014). For example, a substantial research literature has
established that, in a variety of settings, individual responses deviate from those predicted by a
time-consistent intertemporal utility model that assumes a constant discount rate (Stanovich,
West, and Toplak 2012): future gains are discounted more than future losses; small changes to
outcomes are discounted more than large changes (Frederick, Lowenstein, and O’Donoghue
2002); small probability events, when emphasized, are discounted less than when not
emphasized; and responses depend on context, emotional state (Rick and Loewenstein 2008) and
perceived social identity (Benjamin, Choi, and Strickland 2010; Galvan 2012). These cognitive
biases result in suboptimal decision-making. In the case of parenting, decisions made today have
associated payoffs in the distant future, expressed in terms of the child’s future economic and
social success. In this behaviorally-informed intervention we were especially focused on the
cognitive biases in decision-making resulting from discounting the future.
Our main results indicate that the treatment increased the number of minutes that parents
read to their children using an electronic application by one standard deviation, which equals
twice as much reading time compared to the control group mean. The increase was much greater
for parents with a high discount rate for the future as measured on a time preference task that we

3
administered. Our findings are suggestive of substantial promise for the application of behavioral
tools to parenting interventions that promote investments in children's human capital.
The remainder of this paper proceeds as follows. Section 2 provides background on
differences between advantaged and disadvantaged parents in both children’s skills and parental
engagement. Section 3 provides details about the intervention. Section 4 describes the results and
Section 5 concludes.
2. Background
2.1 Socio-economic Gaps in Children’s Skills and in Parenting
Substantial differences between the skill development of economically advantaged and
disadvantaged children emerge well before the start of formal schooling. For example, preschool age children from families in the poorest income quintile score on average at the 34th
percentile in a test of literacy compared to children in the richest quintile who score at the 69th
percentile (Waldfogel and Washbrook 2011). These gaps remain through the school years. In
addition, conventional measures of school quality (teacher/pupil ratios and teacher salaries) have
small effects on creating or eliminating gaps after the first few years of schooling (Carneiro and
Heckman 2003; Cunha and Heckman 2007). It is perhaps not surprising that differences in
measured school quality account for little of the difference in adult incomes because the variance
in school quality is relatively small in the United States (Mayer 2010). Children spend the vast
majority of their time from birth to adulthood in a family or other environment selected by
parents and not in schools. For example children in the United States will spend only about 1518 percent of their waking hours in school between birth and age 18.1 Finally the
intergenerational persistence of schooling reflects parent-child similarities in traits influencing
educational attainment, such as orientation towards the future, sense of personal efficacy, work
ethic, and other characteristics sometimes referred to as “non-cognitive skills” (see e.g. Cunha
and Heckman 2007; Carneiro and Heckman 2003; Heckman and Kautz 2012). These skills are
largely shaped by family influences and not by schools.

1

In the United States the average length of the school day was 6.4 hours in the 2009-2010 school year and the
average length of the school year was 180 days according the National Center Educational Statistics, Schools and
Staffing Survey for that year. If we assume that this number is constant over all the years that a child attends school
and that he number of years including kindergarten is 13, then (6.4*180)13 =14,976 is the total number of hours
spend in school over the first 18 years of a child’s life. If we assume that children average 16 hours awake each day
the number of waking hours in the first 18 years is 18(16*364) = 104,832. Thus 14,976/104,832 = 13.2 percent of a
child’s waking hours in the first 18 years is spent in school.

4
Children’s experiences prior to the start of primary school clearly play a large role in
their futures. This insight has led to an emphasis on pre-kindergarten programs for disadvantaged
children. Benefit-cost assessments of the Perry Preschool and the Abecedarian program and
recent research in brain science showing the importance of early brain development support the
notion that early child development is crucial to children’s eventual success (Knudsen, Heckman,
Cameron and Shonkoff 2006). However, although small-scale model preschool programs have
resulted in important gains in children’s educational attainment, earnings, and lower rates of
getting in trouble with the law, Head Start, which is the primary preschool program for
disadvantaged children in the United States, has produced at best small benefits for children.
This is partly because even children enrolled in full-day preschool programs will spend only
about 22% of waking hours from the age of 3 to 5 in preschool, and virtually no time at all
between the ages of 0 and 3. Adding a program like Early Head Start will still leave parents with
much more influence on children’s development than school settings. Consequently attempts to
substitute school-based programs for parents’ engagement with their children cannot alone
succeed in diminishing the effects of family background unless they are very intensive, extensive
and expensive.
Across disciplines, dozens of studies have demonstrated many differences in the way
advantaged and disadvantaged parents engage their children and how these differences matter to
children’s adult success. Among other things, advantaged parents spend more time, in particular
on educational activities, with their children (Guryan, Hurst, and Kearney 2008; Kalil, Ryan, and
Corey 2012) and produce more cognitively stimulating home learning environments (Harris,
Terrel, and Allen 1999). In observational data these types of parenting practices explain large
shares of the gaps between poor children and their more advantaged counterparts in cognitive
and non-cognitive skills (Waldfogel and Washbrook 2011). In several papers James Heckman
and his colleagues conclude that more engaged parents have greater success in producing both
cognitive and non-cognitive skills in their children, and that both types of skills are crucial to
social and economic success (see e.g. Cunha, Heckman, Lochner, and Masterov 2006; Heckman
and Masterov 2004).
The gaps in parental time investment are important because research suggests that
spending time with a child has a direct and causal effect on children’s cognitive test scores
(Villena-Rodán and Ríos-Aguilar 2012) and that it is the most productive input for cognitive skill

5
development (Fiorini and Keane 2014). Price (2010) finds that an additional year of daily
mother–child reading would increase children’s reading test scores in the early school grades by
41 percent of a standard deviation on average. By comparison, the Perry Preschool Program,
which is widely upheld as a model preschool program, had effect sizes on arithmetic
achievement at age 14 equal to 34% of a standard deviation but at a cost of $20,500 (in 2013
dollars) for each participant (Schweinhart et al. 2005). Yet substantial numbers of parents do not
read to their children on a regular basis. In 2007, 16% of all parents of a child aged 3-5 years and
29% of parents living below the poverty line reported that neither they nor other family members
read to their children at least three times per week (Noel, Stark, and Redford 2015). This
represents an increase since 2001 when the number was 26% of poor parents. In addition, the
gap in the amount of time that parents spend with their children overall and in educationally
relevant activities has widened over the last 20 years because the rate at which highly educated
mothers have increased amount of time in they spend in educational activities with their children
has exceeded the rate at which mothers with less education increased such time with their
children (Altintas 2012; Ramey and Ramey 2010; Hurst 2010).
Many parenting interventions have aimed to increase the amount of time that
disadvantaged parents spend in educationally enriching activities with their children. However,
these programs at best have had modest success. For example, many practitioners and policy
makers believe that home visiting programs are the best way to improve parental engagement in
disadvantaged families. Yet evaluations of these programs find little improvement in parent
engagement or other aspects of the home environment (Olds, Henderson, and Kitzman 1994;
Wagner, Spiker, and Linn 2002). This is important because the average cost to serve a family for
45 weeks in a home visiting program is about $6,500; the Nurse Family Partnership program is
on average more expensive and can cost up to almost $14,000 for each participant (Zaveri,
Burwick, and Maher 2014).
The lack of parental participation and persistence in home visiting programs is an
important problem that is also found with other programs intended to increase parental
engagement with their children. For example, almost half of families left the home-based Early
Head Start program before their child was 30 months old (the program was designed to last until
the child was 36 months old), and more than a third dropped out before they had been enrolled
for 18 of the 36 months (Roggman, Boyce, and Innocenti 2008). Only 40% of families stayed

6
enrolled in Early Head Start home-based programs until graduation or transition. Other programs
intended to change parenting behaviors experience similarly high attrition rates (Baker,
Piotrkowski, and Brooks-Gunn 1999; Gomby 1999). Even if parents are motivated to invest in
their children, many are apparently not motivated to participate in programs intended to increase
their investment.
2.2 Obstacles to Parent Engagement: Insights from Behavioral Science
There are multiple theories that try to explain the difference in parental engagement with
their children. Perhaps the dominant explanation for differences in parenting by family
advantage is that disadvantaged parents expect a lower return for the time they spend with their
children. Agee and Crocker (1996) use parent's decision about whether to treat high levels of
lead found in their children’s blood as an instrument for the parents’ discount rate for child
investments. They find that less educated and lower income parents discount their investments at
about twice the rate as more advantaged parents and that both have discount rates that are high
compared to other investments. Cunha, Culhane, and Elo (2013) find that the median subjective
expectation about the elasticity of child development with respect to investments is between 4%
and 19% for mothers of very young children who receive Medicaid. In comparison, the “true”
elasticity estimated from CNLSY/79 data is between 18% and 26%. This means that on average
disadvantaged parents underestimate the return to their investment in their children but still
estimate a substantial positive return. Differences in expected returns could account for some of
the difference in the amount of time that parents spend with their children, although a lower
expected return could lead to either less or more investment.
It is also possible that the difference between advantaged and disadvantaged parents in
time investments in their children stems from disadvantaged parents’ experiencing less positive
affect from interacting with their children. But Kalil, Mayer, Delgado, and Gennetian (2015)
show that in fact mothers with less than a college education report more enjoyment from
spending time with their children than do mothers with at least a college education.
Disadvantaged parents could also be time constrained. However, as we noted above factors such
as work hours or number of children account for little of the SES-based differences in time
investments in children.
It could be that disadvantaged parents engage their children less because they lack
information about how to invest or lack the resources (e.g. books, games) to engage their

7
children in educational activities. York and Loeb (2014) used a text-messaging program for
parents of preschoolers designed to convey to parents specific steps they could take to increase
their child’s literacy skills. Their year-long intervention increased primary school students’
scores on assessments of early literacy at the end of the intervention by between 0.21 to 0.34
standard deviations. They conclude that specific and repeated information on what to do, perhaps
combined with reminders on how to use that information, may be effective at improving that
outcome, at least in the short run. However, it is unclear whether the text messages were
effective because of the information content of the messages or because they focused parents’
attention in a way that increased their literacy engagement with their children.
Our approach is based on a rapidly growing research literature in psychology and
behavioral economics that has focused on understanding why adults often fail to do things that
they know they should do such as exercise, save, eat healthy foods, and how to change these
behaviors. A leading explanation focuses on problems related to discounting the future such as
impatience and present-bias (Thaler 2015). It is well known that future outcomes are underemphasized (discounted) relative to immediate outcomes. This means that it is hard for people to
give up things they enjoy today for the (under-valued) future and the result is problems of selfcontrol. In the context of parenting it is hard to give up leisure today for a distant return on
children’s human capital. Discounting the future induces procrastination and impatience, which
affects activities in many domains, such as in financial choices (savings and credit card
borrowing, e.g. Meier and Sprenger 2010; Eckel, Johnson, and Montmarquette 2005), healthrelated behaviors like dieting and exercising, smoking and nutrition intake (e.g., Chabris et al.
2008), or education-related behavior like investments in human capital, studying, or behaving at
school (Sutter et al. 2013; Castillo et al. 2011).
Some research has documented that low-income individuals discount the future more
heavily than higher income individuals (Golsteyn, Grónqvist, and Lindahl 2013; Lawrance 1991;
Dohmen et al. 2010). Other research suggests that this might help account for differences in child
rearing behavior. For example Pabilonia and Song (2013) find that even after controlling for
parental differences in income, employment, and education, single mothers who are more
present-oriented spend significantly less time with their children overall and less time engaged
with their young children in educational activities. Their children also have lower scores on
reading comprehension tests.

8
Differences in time preferences may arise because disadvantaged parents face a host of
stressors such as income instability, child care problems, car breakdowns, and the like, all of
which place cognitive and emotional demands on their attention in the present and leave little
energy for thinking about the future (Spears 2011; Mani et al. 2013; Gennetian and Shafir 2015).
Differences in time preferences may arise for other reasons and may contribute to disadvantaged
parents having lower education and income. Impatient individuals may prefer jobs with flat wage
paths, as opposed to careers that promise high wages only after a period of training or education.
Research has shown that certain behavioral tools such as commitment devices, reminders, and
social rewards can help overcome impatience and procrastination and lead to better decisions.
Behavioral scientists have proposed a number of approaches for addressing present-bias.
A commitment is a pledge to carry out a specific behavior or take actions necessary to achieve a
specific goal (see Ashraf 2013; Bryan, Karlan, and Nelson 2010 for recent relevant studies).
People are strongly motivated to be consistent with their own past actions, especially actions
taken publicly. For this reason, when a commitment formalizes a person’s pledge to do
something or achieve an objective, it increases the chance that he or she will do it by increasing
the psychological cost of not doing the behavior to which the individual committed. Research
suggests that even the act of writing down a commitment to doing an activity can increase the
likelihood of actually doing it (Giné, Karlan and Zinman 2010). Commitment devices reduce
procrastination and impatience by focusing attention on the actions that the individual pledged to
take.
Reminders can also reduce procrastination and impatience by inducing people to attend to
tasks by refocusing attention on the task. A reminder can change time allocation today by
focusing attention on the relationship between future outcomes and current choices. Text
messages are the most common way to communicate reminders and they are now a common
feature of many interventions (Richburg-Hayes et al. 2014). Castleman and Page (2013) and
Bergman (2015) also show that text message reminders to parents and adolescents can improve
educational outcomes.
Immediate incentives are designed to shift preferences by increasing the utility of the
current behavior, often by increasing its monetary value but sometimes by increasing the cost of
the alternative behavior. While a large research literature documents the importance of monetary
incentives for changing behavior, a growing body of research also documents the importance of

9
nonmonetary incentives for changing behavior. This is not surprising because most people
recognize that both praise and disapproval can be powerful motivators. Nonmonetary incentives
may be at least as effective as monetary incentives at changing a behavior that an individual
believes is pro-social or normatively desirable (Gneezy and Rustichini 2000; Benabou and Tirole
2003, 2006; Besley and Ghatak 2005; Dixit 2002). Parenting is more like a social than a
monetary market and the time parents spend in educational activities with their children is
generally believed to be a pro-social and normatively desirable behavior. Social incentives, like
commitment devices, can reduce procrastination and impatience by focusing attention on the
rewarded behavior.
3. The Parents And Children Together Intervention
We called our intervention the Parents And Children Together (PACT) program. Parents
with children aged 3-5 enrolled in a subsidized preschool program (e.g. Head Start) in Chicago
were given an electronic tablet to borrow for the six-week intervention. The tablet had an
application pre-loaded on it that included over 500 children’s books in English and Spanish.
Within each preschool center, parents were randomized to either a treatment group or control
group.2 3 The treatment included three behavioral tools (a commitment device, reminders and a
social incentive) plus information on the importance of parents’ reading to their children. The
intent of the intervention was to increase the time that parents spent reading to their children
using the app on the electronic tablet.
We use what Bryan, Karlan, and Nelson (2010) call a soft commitment device. At the
beginning of each week a research assistant asked each parent in the treatment group to set a goal
for how much time he or she would spend using the reading app during the next week. The
research assistant recorded this number in the “virtual goal keeper” (VGK), which is a web site
that we developed for the project. At the end of the week the research assistant showed the parent
a bar chart on the VGK (or sent a text message with the information) that displayed the parent’s

2

We recruited parents when they dropped off or picked up their children at the centers. We spent between 6-10
hours in each center inviting parents to participate. Parents received different tablets depending on whether they
were in the treatment or control group. The tablet number indicated the group to which they belonged. The
recruitment process is explained in detail in the Online Appendix.
3
Together the preschool programs served about 965 children at the time we began recruiting. Based on
conversations with the staff of the preschools we estimate that about 15 percent of the 965 children were not eligible
due to the language condition. We estimate that an additional 15 percent are siblings of another child in the center
and only one sibling could be a focal child in PACT. Therefore, across the 8 centers, about 580 children were
eligible to participate in PACT.

10
goal relative to how much the parent actually read. Parents were then asked to set a goal for the
next week. This was repeated for every week during the intervention.
Parents in the PACT treatment group received a text message reminder every weekday.
Text messages combined reminders to work toward the parent’s goal of using the tablet to read
to their child and messaging about the importance of reading. There were a variety of texts that
repeated after the third week. Some examples were, “Are you working towards your goal this
week? Remember that reading with your child is very important to your child's future.” “What’s
your child’s favorite book? Find some books your child loves and have fun reading them
tonight!”
As a social reward if a parent met her reading goal she received a congratulatory text
message, and if she viewed her reading minutes and goal on the Virtual Goal Keeper a cartoon
bear did a celebratory dance. In addition, each week a text message went to all parents in a center
saying, “This week in your group, the parent with [tablet number] did the most reading with their
child! Congratulations to that parent!” The parent with that tablet number would therefore know
that she had done the most reading but other parents would not know who that parent was.
We provided information on the importance of reading to treated parents while parents in
the control group received `placebo’ information. In particular, tablets for parents in the
treatment group included 13 videos and 2 .pdf documents about parenting, language
development and the importance of parents’ reading to their children. Tablets for parents in the
control group included 14 videos and 1 .pdf document about nutrition, health and dental hygiene.
If a document was opened this information was stored on the tablet so we could identify whether
parents opened the documents.
Parents in both the treatment and control group were asked to designate a “focal” child in
case they had more than one child in preschool and they were instructed to use the reading app
with this child. Parents were told that other children could be present when they used the app but
that we were most interested in their use of the app with the focal child.
We observed parents using the app to read to their child over a six-week period. When a
book from the app was opened on the tablet an audio and video recording of the parent reading to
the child automatically began and continued until the parent finished the book or closed the app.
We identified the number of minutes that parents read to their children by using the time
stamps provided in the reading application. We implemented the intervention in two six-week

11
rounds to minimize the number of electronic tablets that we needed to purchase. The first round
was in the autumn semester of the preschool programs and the second was in the winter
semester. As we describe below, we implemented two short follow-ups with participants to test
whether the effect of PACT persisted after the intervention ended.
Parents whose primary language was either English or Spanish, who had a child enrolled
in one of eight subsidized preschool programs in Chicago, Illinois, who were willing to sign a
consent form and a pledge to borrow, safeguard, and return an electronic tablet at the end of the
program were eligible for the intervention. 4 The preschool programs were located throughout the
city and have a racially and ethnically diverse population. 5
We collected data in 3 surveys. Survey 1 was administered when parents first received
the electronic tablets. It asked parents to report general characteristics of the child, the
household, and themselves. Survey 2 was administered in the middle of the intervention period
and consisted of a time preference assessment that we discuss below. Survey 3 was administered
at the end of the six-week intervention. It asked questions about parenting beliefs and practices.
4. Results
4.1 Do Parents Read More to Their Children?
A total of 169 parents participated in the PACT intervention. Among this group about
half were randomized to the treatment (N=84) and half to the control (N=85) group. Of these,
160 took the first survey (80 treated, 80 control). Overall the parents participating in the PACT
intervention are similar to a national sample of parents of children in Head Start programs on
characteristics collected in the Head Start Family and Child Experiences Survey (FACES) except
that a higher proportion of PACT families are Spanish speaking. Table 1 describes the main
characteristics of the total sample and the treatment and control samples. No differences between
the treatment and control group is statistically significant at the 5% level. Three differences were
significant at the p=0.10 level, which is about what we would expect by chance.6 The focal child
from the treatment group was more likely to have been born early (p=.07). Treatment group
parents were more likely to have a GED (p=.10) while control group parents were more likely to
4

Besides the instructional videos, all tablets had 6 instructional videos (each in Spanish and English) pre-loaded on
them. Two of these were on how to use the reading app and four were an introduction to the PACT study, the
consent form, and the tablet agreement form that participants were asked to sign.
5
A map of the City of Chicago with the geo-referenced preschool can be found in the Online Appendix.
6
We compare differences in 22 variables in Table 1, so we expected 2.2 of them to be significant at the 10% level
due to chance.

12
have some college (p=.10). Conditioning on these observed variables makes virtually no
difference to the results.
Our main outcome of interest is the time parents spend reading to their children using the
reading app on the tablet.7 We also have information on related outcomes like the number of
stories read by the parents; the average time spent reading each story, and whether parents read
the same or different stories. We estimate the following equation:
1
where

is an outcome variable, and T is an indicator for random assignment to our treatment.

Our parameter of interest if , which equals the average difference for parents randomized to the
treated group compared to those randomized to the control group. Below we add relevant
covariates to this model to test the robustness of the results to their inclusion.
Column 1 in Table 2 shows results for the estimation of equation (1) with the number of
minutes parents read to their children using the app as the outcome. On average, the treatment
group read 88.3 minutes more than the control group over the six weeks of the intervention, more
than doubling the amount of time spent read to the child using the app (an increase from an
average of 63.3 to 151.7 minutes). This represents a one standard deviation difference. Column 2
shows that the average number of books read during the 6-week period was 14.8 for the control
group and 31.4 for the treatment group. In other words, parents in the treatment group read an
average of almost one book per weekday compared to two or three books per week for the
control group.8 The last column in Table 2 shows that the treatment also increased the fraction of
parents ever using the app to read a story to a child from 84 percent for the control group to 96
percent for the treatment group.
We conducted short-term follow-ups of parents who participated in PACT. One group of
parents kept the tablets for an additional three weeks immediately after the intervention ended
and another group got the tablets back for three weeks three months after the intervention ended.

7

Some parents may “outsource” the time investment to another family member, such as an older sibling, father, a
grandparent or someone else. While in principle we could distinguish who was reading to a child in practice this
became burdensome. In addition, there is no reason to expect that there would be differences between the control
and treatment group in the tendency to outsource reading to others. Therefore, we counted all minutes in which the
app was being used for actual reading. We spot checked videos to assure that there was both an adult and a child in
them.
8
We also found that there was no statistically significant difference in the average time spent reading each story, or
in the number of different books read by parents. These results suggest that the treatment effect occurred mostly
through reading more books.

13
No behavioral tools were used during either of the three week follow-ups. We then compared the
amount of time that treatment and control group parents spent using the reading app during the
follow-up period. Although the effect sizes remained very large for the follow-ups, these results
were inconclusive because of the small sample sizes and selection into the follow-up groups.
These results are available in the Online Appendix.
4.2 Do Parents Who Discount the Future Respond More to Reminders?
As noted, reminders and commitment devices are designed to overcome the
procrastination that arises from discounting the future. If discounting the future reduces parents’
engagement with their children and if these behavioral tools mitigate the discount rate on the
future then we should observe that the parents who discount the future more read less to their
children and respond more to the intervention. To explore this hypothesis, we implemented a
time-preference task designed to measure parents' time discount rate.9 We use the Convex Time
Budget (CTB)10 method (first introduced by Andreoni and Sprenger 2012) to estimate both a
discount rate for parents and their present bias, which have been shown to best predict outcomes
in previous research (Burks et al. 2012). We then examine whether parents with a higher
discount rate read less and responded more to our treatment.
Parents were asked to choose between an amount of money that they could receive
immediately or a different amount that they could receive later. In total, each parent answered 15
of these questions with four choices each (two inner solutions and two corner solutions), as in
Andreoni, Kuhn, and Sprenger (2013). The first five questions gave parents the choice of
receiving payments immediately or three weeks later, the next five questions gave parents the
choice of receiving payments immediately or six weeks later, and the last five questions offered
the choice of receiving payments in three or six weeks. Within each time horizon, each question
presented an increasing price for the earlier payment. The set of choices is shown in the Online
Appendix. The 3- and 6-week time horizons were chosen because the intervention lasted six
weeks so the payout could be made during or at the end of the intervention. Comparing decisions
with a delay of 21 days to those with a delay of 42 days allows us to identify the discount rate, or
9

The time preference task was administered on electronic tablets after random assignment to parents in both the
treatment and control groups. See the Online Appendix for more on details, procedures and the questionnaire.
10
The CTB method identifies the curvature in the utility function over time by estimating a respondent’s sensitivity
to changing interest rates. The key in using this approach is to vary the implicit interest rate in the options presented
across subsequent sets of options. The sensitivity to changing interest rates across the question sequences identifies
the utility curvature; the time preference is identified through the stated preference over the timing of payments.

14
degree of “patience.” Less patient (more patient) parents are defined as those with an estimated
discount rate above (below) the sample median. The degree of patience among parents is
balanced by treatment status.
Of the 169 participants who were eligible to participate in the time preference task, 112
participated. Of these, 59 were in the treatment group and 53 were in the control group and
participation was not correlated with treatment status.11 To understand how representative of our
original 169 parents these 112 parents are, we first repeat the treatment regression shown in
Table 2 for the 112 parents who participated in the time preference task. The first column of
Table 3 repeats the result from Table 2 and the second column shows the results for the 112
parents who participated in the time preference task. The coefficient on the treatment condition is
82.1 in that model compared to 88.3 for our baseline estimation (the difference between these
coefficients is not statistically significant).12 We also compared parents who did and did not
participate in the time preference task on the characteristics shown in Table 1. On these 22
characteristics no difference between the two groups was statistically significant at p=0.05.
Column 3 in Table 3 shows that the treatment effect for less patient parents was 124.52
minutes and column 4 shows that the treatment effect for more patient parents was only 42.26
minutes. The constant indicates the amount of reading net of the treatment. It shows that more
patient parents read 97.26 minutes compared to less patient parents who read only 68.33 minutes.
Thus, absent the treatment more patient parents read more than less patient parents but the
treatment has a greater effect for less patient than for more patient parents. These results are
consistent with the theory that parents who discount the future more invest less in their children's
future but that the behavioral tools in PACT help these parents more.
4.3 Did Parents Learn from Goal-Setting?
Each week parents were asked, “How many days and how many minutes per day do you
commit for your goal this week?” Anecdotally we know that parents in PACT attended to the
goals that they set because they often told members of the research team that they were sorry that
they did not meet their goal and expressed determination to meet the goal. In theory, goal setting

11

70% of the treated parents participated in the time preferences task, while 62% of the control group parents did.
The mean difference of eight percentage points (pp.) has a standard error of 7.3 pp., and is therefore not significant
at the .05 level.
12
The z-test for the difference is given by z = (B1 - B2) / √(seB1^2 + seB2^2) = .203, and hence non-significant.

15
both focuses attention on the behavior that is the object of the goal thus reducing procrastination
or impatience and by imposing a psychological cost to not meeting the goal.
If not meeting the goal is psychologically costly then we would expect that over the six
weeks of the intervention the difference between the goal and the actual amount of reading time
would decline. This in fact happened. In week one the average actual reading time for parents in
the treatment group was 23 percent of the average goal. By week 6 the average actual reading
time was 65 percent of the average goal. The convergence mainly occurred because the goals
decreased each week (from an average of 93 minutes in week 1 to an average of 49 minutes in
week 6). The actual reading time varied from 26 minutes per week to 34 minutes per week but
there was no clear trend in the amount of reading over the intervention period.13 Although
parents became more realistic about how much they would actually read in the coming week,
after six weeks the difference between the goal and actual reading time was still sizable.
4.4 Did Information about Reading Matter?
We explore whether information about the importance of parental engagement and
reading in particular was an important part of the treatment effect by examining the responses to
the survey that was administered at the end of the intervention. As noted the electronic tablets for
parents in the treatment group had videos and .pdfs on the importance of parental engagement
and especially reading while the tablets for the control group had placebo videos and .pdfs.
However, only 15 parents in the treatment group and 15 in the control group ever opened a video
or .pdf during the six-week intervention. Informal discussions with parents suggest that they
mainly opened these as part of their exploration of what was on the tablet and not to engage in
the content.
In addition, the survey that we administered at the end of the intervention asked three
questions about parental engagement that were the subject of the informational material on the
treatment group tablets. These questions were on parents’ expected return to the time they spend
reading to their children, their beliefs about whose job it is to teach reading to their children, and
whether they think their child’s ability is set at birth or not.
If the information on the tablets made a difference we would expect parents in the
treatment group to report a higher expected return to their time compared to the control group
13

The Online Appendix describes the process for estimating the average weekly goals and the average weekly actual
amount of reading time.

16
parents. In the survey at the end of the intervention we asked the following question: “If you
were to spend 15, 30, 45 or 60 more minutes per day in educational activities with your child,
how do you think your child’s reading skills would compare to all other children of the same age
across the United States, on a 0-10 scale?” Figure 1 shows that parents in both the treatment and
control group believe that investing more time in educational activities would increase their
children’s skills. However, we found no statistically significant differences between treated and
control parents on this measure.
In the same survey we also asked parents, “Whose job is it to teach math and reading to
preschool children.” 14 If parents think it is mainly the job of the preschool to teach math and
reading it implies that they do not believe that they need to spend educational time with their
child in order to improve these skills. But only 1 percent of parents in the treatment and control
groups combined reported that it was “only” or “mostly” the job of the preschool to teach math
and reading to preschoolers and there were no differences between the treatment and control
group on this measure.
In the same survey we also asked, “Think about a child’s ability to talk and use language.
How much do you think this ability is set from birth and how much is based on what parents
teach the child?” If the information provided on the tablets is an important part of the treatment
effect we would expect that parents in the treatment group would be less likely to answer that
they believe ability is set. Only 6% of the parents indicated that child ability was set all or mostly
at birth and there was again no difference between the treatment and control group.
The survey results suggest that parents in both the treatment and control groups believe
that spending educational time with their child will increase their child’s skills and that it is the
parents’ job to do this. A fuller description of these results can be found in the Online Appendix.
It is perhaps not surprising that there is so little difference in the responses to these questions
given that an important mission of Head Start is to convey to parents the importance of engaging
their children and especially the importance of reading to their children. Parents clearly hear the
message but many do not act on the information that they receive. From this we conclude that
additional information about reading and parental engagement as presented in the PACT
intervention played almost no role in the treatment effect.

14

In a pretest we asked separately about math and reading. Because parents almost always gave the same answer for
math as they did for reading we combined them in the survey for the whole PACT sample.

17
4.5 Robustness Checks
To test the robustness of our estimates we estimate several different specifications for our
main outcome of interest. In the Online Appendix, we estimate the same specifications for
additional outcomes.
4.6 Drop-Outs
Of the 169 parents, eleven returned their tablets and stopped their participation in PACT
before the end of the intervention. Six of these parents belonged to the control group and all of
them stopped during the first week of the intervention. Two of them recorded some reading. Of
the five treated parents who stopped, three did so during the first week and two did so during the
second week. We asked all eleven parents why they dropped out. The reasons included that they
did not enjoy the check-ins (when we downloaded data from the tablets); that the child was too
young to use the tablet; that the child was not interested in reading on a tablet; that the children
in the home were fighting over the tablet; that the intervention felt like an invasion of privacy;
and that the child was sick.
The results in Table 2 include the parents who dropped out and count them as not
spending any time on the app after they dropped out. If we omit the eleven parents who dropped
out, the treatment effect on the number of minutes spent reading with the app increases from 88.3
to 92.3 minutes.
4.7 Outliers
Figure 2 shows the distribution of reading time in 10-minute intervals, by treatment
status. It shows that the control group’s average total minutes of reading over the six weeks is
clustered at the lower end of reading time. It also shows that for both the control and treatment
groups there are individual parents who are on the far right tail of the distribution. Table 4 shows
the sensitivity of our results on reading time to the omission of outliers. Column 1 shows our
estimation for the effect of the treatment on reading time for the full sample. Columns 2, 3 and 4
exclude parents who read more than 600 minutes (three standard deviations (SD) above the
treated group mean), 450 minutes (two SD) and 300 minutes (one SD), respectively.15 Not
surprisingly the coefficient on the treatment declines as we omit outliers. However, the effect
sizes remain very large, ranging from 1.38 in the second column to 1.00 in the fourth column.

15

The standard deviation for the treated group is 148 minutes.

18
We also tested the sensitivity of the results to omitting those who did not read at all, as
shown in Column 5 in Table 4. Among parents who read at all, parents in the treatment group
read 83.4 more minutes than those in the control group, which equals an effect size of .92.
4.8 Covariates, School Fixed Effects and Clustering
Of the 169 parents, 160 answered our initial survey. From those 160 parents, 151 have
complete information (i.e., non-missing values) for the set of covariates described in Table 1
(except family income and race and ethnicity because these had a large number of missing data).
The 18 parents with some missing information include 10 in the treatment group and 8 in the
control group. The first column in Table 5 shows the baseline estimation for the 169 parents
(from Table 2). The second column shows the results for the sample with complete information
in the set of covariates in Table 1. The coefficient on treatment drops from 88.3 to 79.5. Column
3 adds school fixed effects, column 4 controls the covariates from Table 1 and column 5 adds
school clusters. The results in column 5 show that the treatment effect and its statistical
significance remains virtually unchanged when we condition on a large set of covariates, use
school fixed effects and when we cluster on schools.
5. Conclusions
The PACT intervention increased the amount of time that parents in the treatment group
read to their children by over 88 minutes over six weeks. We speculated that one reason that
disadvantaged parents do not read more to their children is that they discount the future, resulting
in impatience. Our evidence that less patient parents read the least to their children but that the
intervention had the greatest impact on less patient parents supports this hypothesis.
A primary motivation for this intervention was the fact that programs to help parents
engage with their children have largely been unsuccessful in either encouraging parents to
participate in the program or in changing their level of engagement with their children.
Consequently we were mainly interested in motivating parents to engage in the specific task of
using the app to read and not necessarily in increasing parents’ total reading time. However,
increasing total reading time is also an important goal and as such it raises the question of
whether parents substituted reading on the tablet for reading non-electronic books. For many
parents and children the tablets may have been new and fun and the number and variety of books
on the tablet may also have made substitution of the tablet for paper books likely. Such
substitution is possible and we have no direct evidence of the degree of substitution. However,

19
some evidence suggests that little substitution occurred overall or at least that it did not occur
differentially for treatment and control group parents. First, the amount of time that the parents in
our sample spend reading to their children is very small. As Table 2 shows the control group read
only 63.3 minutes over the entire six-week intervention. This equals about 1.5 minutes per day of
reading. Parents in the control group all had the tablet with the reading app, so if these were
enticing the amount of reading absent the behavioral tools must be close to zero leaving little
room for substitution. We have no reason to believe that the pre-intervention reading time of the
treatment group was any greater than the control group’s reading time during the intervention.
Thus it does not seem unreasonable to assume that prior to the intervention the amount of time
that parents who participated in PACT read to their children was extremely small, and therefore
that there was little room for substitution.
Assuming little or no substitution we can put the results from PACT in perspective using
the results from Price (2010) in which he used an instrument for reading time based on birth
order. Using the sample of mothers in the NLSY he estimates that an extra half hour of parents’
reading to a child per week would raise children’s reading scores by about 5% of a standard
deviation per year and consequently that over 10 years the difference would be half a standard
deviation. Over a six-week period parents in the PACT treatment group read on average 14.5
more minutes per week than the parents in the control group. Using Price’s estimates this would
imply that if these differences were maintained over a year the difference in reading scores
would be about 2.5% of a standard deviation and over 10 years .25 standard deviations.
However, Price’s sample is all mothers in the NLSY so the sample probably has a higher mean
for reading time. If we assume that the relationship between reading time and test scores is
concave downward, then the effect of the PACT treatment on test scores would be much greater
than is suggested by Price’s results.
This paper has demonstrated that low-cost goal setting and reminders can motivate
parents to do things that they want to do but often fail to do. This is important because many
interventions have tried to change parental behavior with little success. Because these behavioral
tools can be cost effective, they provide a promising way to help parents engage their children
more often and more productively.
Supplemental Material
An Online Appendix for this paper can be found at NBER online (www.nber.org).

20
References
Agee, Mark, and Thomas Crocker. 1996. “Parents' Discount Rates for Child Quality. ” Southern
Economic Journal 63: 36-50.
Altintas, Evrim. “Parents’ Time with Children: Micro and Macro Perspectives.” PhD diss.,
Nuffield College, University of Oxford, UK, 2012.
Andreoni, James, and Charles Sprenger. 2012. “Estimating Time Preferences from Convex
Budgets.” American Economic Review 102(7): 3333–3356.
Andreoni, James, Michael A. Kuhn, and Charles Sprenger. 2013. “On Measuring Time
Preferences.” NBER Working Paper 19392, National Bureau of Economic Research.
Ashraf, Nava. 2013. “Rx: Human Nature: How Behavioral Economics is Promoting Better
Health Around the World.” Harvard Business Review 91(4).
Baker, Amy J.L., Chaya S. Piotrkowski, and Jeanne Brooks-Gunn. 1999. “The Home
Instructional Program for Preschool Youngsters (HIPPY).” The Future of Children 9(1):
116-133.
Bénabou, Roland, and Jean Tirole. 2003. “Intrinsic and Extrinsic Motivation.” The Review of
Economic Studies 70: 489-520.
_____________

. 2006. “Incentives and Prosocial Behavior.” The American Economic Review 96(5):
1652-1678.

Benjamin, Daniel J., James J. Choi, and A. Joshua Strickland. 2010. "Social Identity and
Preferences." American Economic Review 100(4): 1913-28.
Bergman, Peter. 2015. “Parent-Child Information Frictions and Human Capital Investment:
Evidence from a Field Experiment.” CESifo Working Paper 5391.
Besley, Timothy, and Maitreesh Ghatak. 2005. “Competition and Incentives with Motivated
Agents.” American Economic Review 95(3): 616-636.
Bryan, Gharad, Dean Karlan, and Scott Nelson. 2010. “Commitment Devices.” Annual Review
of Economics 2(1): 671-698.
Burks, Stephen, Jeffrey Carpenter, Lorenz Götte, and Aldo Rustichini. 2012. “Which Measures
of Time Preference Best Predict Outcomes: Evidence from a Large-Scale Field
Experiment.” Journal of Economic Behavior & Organization 84 (1): 308-320.
Carneiro, Pedro and James J. Heckman. 2003. "Human Capital Policy.” In Inequality in
America: What Role for Human Capital Policies?, edited by James J. Heckman, Alan B.
Krueger, and Benjamin M. Friedman. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.

21
Castillo, Marco, Paul Ferraro, Jeffrey Jordan, and Ragan Petrie. 2011. “The Today and
Tomorrow of Kids: Time Preferences and Educational Outcomes of Children.” Journal of
Public Economics 95(11): 1377–1385.
Castleman, Benjamin L., and Lindsay Page. 2013. “Summer Nudging: Can Personalized Text
Messages and Peer Mentor Outreach Increase College Going Among Low-Income High
School Graduates?” Center for Education Policy and Workforce Competitiveness
Working Paper 9, Charlottesville, VA: University of Virginia.
Chabris, Christopher F., David Laibson, Carrie L. Morris, Jonathon P. Schuldt, and Dmitry
Taubinsky. 2008. “Individual Laboratory- Measured Discount Rates Predict Field
Behavior.” Journal of Risk and Uncertainty 37(2/3).
Cunha, Flavio, and James J. Heckman. 2007. "The Technology of Skill Formation." American
Economic Review 97(2): 31-47.
Cunha, Flavio, James J. Heckman, Lance J. Lochner, and Dimitriy V. Masterov. 2006.
“Interpreting the Evidence on Life Cycle Skill Formation.” In Handbook of the
Economics of Education, edited by Eric A. Hanushek and Frank Welch. Amsterdam:
North-Holland.
Cuhna, Flavio, Jennifer Culhane, and Irma Elo. 2013. “Eliciting Maternal Expectations about
the Technology of Cognitive Skill Formation.” NBER Working Paper 19144. National
Bureau of Economic Research.
Dixit, Avinash. 2002. “Incentives and Organizations in the Public Sector: An Interpretative
Review.” Journal of Human Resources 37(4): 696-727.
Dohmen, Thomas, Armin Falk, David Huffman, and Uwe Sunde. 2010. “Are Risk Aversion and
Impatience Related to Cognitive Ability?” American Economic Review 100(3): 1238–
1260.
Eckel, Catherine, Cathleen Johnson, and Claude Montmarquette. 2005. “Saving Decisions of
the Working Poor, Short- and Long-Term Horizons.” In Field Experiments in Economics,
Research in Experimental Economics, edited by Jeffrey P. Carpenter, Glenn W. Harrison,
and John A. List. Greenwich, CT: JAI Press.
Fiorini, Mario, and Michael P. Keane. 2014. “How the Allocation of Children's Time Affects
Cognitive and Noncognitive Development.” Journal of Labor Economics 32(4): 787-836.
Frederick, Shane, George Loewenstein, and Ted O’Donoghue. 2002. “Time Discounting and
Time Preference: A Critical Review.” Journal of Economic Literature 40: 351–401.
Galvan, Adrianna. 2012. "Risky Behavior in Adolescents: The Role of the Developing Brain."
In The Adolescent Brain: Learning, Reasoning, and Decision Making, edited by Valerie
F. Reyna, Sandra B. Chapman, Michael R. Dougherty and Jere Confrey. Washington,
D.C.: American Psychological Association.

22
Gennetian, Lisa A., and Eldar Shafir. 2015. “The Persistence of Poverty in the Context of
Financial Instability: A Behavioral Perspective.” Journal of Policy Analysis and
Management 34(4): 904-936.
Gilovich, Thomas, Dale Griffin, and Daniel Kahneman, D. (Eds.). 2002. Heuristics and Biases:
The Psychology of Intuitive Judgment. New York: Cambridge University Press.
Giné, Xavier, Dean Karlan, and Jonathan Zinman. 2010. “Put Your Money Where Your Butt Is:
A Commitment Contract for Smoking Cessation.” American Economic Journal: Applied
Economics 2(4): 213-235.
Gneezy, Uri, and Aldo Rustichini. 2000. “Pay Enough or Don't Pay at All.” Quarterly Journal
of Economics 115(3): 791-810.
Golsteyn, Bart, Hans Grónqvist, and Lena Lindahl. 2013. “Time Preferences and Lifetime
Outcomes.” IZA Discussion Paper 7165. The Institute for the Study of Labor (IZA) in
Bonn.
Gomby, Deanna S. 1999. “Understanding Evaluations of Home Visitation Programs.” Future of
Children 9 (1): 27–43.
Guryan, Jonathan, Erik Hurst, and Melissa Schettini Kearney. 2008. “Parental Education and
Parental Time with Children.” Journal of Economic Perspectives 22(3): 23-46.
Harris, Yvette R., Denise Terrel, and Gordon Allen. 1999. “The Influence of Education Context
and Beliefs on the Teaching Behavior of African American Mothers.” Journal of Black
Psychology 25(4): 490-503.
Heckman, James J., and Dimitriy V. Masterov. 2004. “The Productivity Argument for Investing
in Young Children.” Technical Report Working Paper 5. Washington, DC: Committee on
Economic Development.
Heckman, James J., and Tim Kautz. 2012. "Hard Evidence on Soft Skills." Labour Economics
19(4): 451-64.
Hurst, Erik. 2010. Brookings Papers on Economic Activity. Comments and discussion.
Washington, DC: The Brookings Institution.
Kalil, Ariel, Rebecca M. Ryan, and Michael R. Corey. 2012. “Diverging Destinies: Maternal
Education and the Developmental Gradient in Time with Children.” Demography 49(4):
1361-1383.
Kalil, Ariel, Susan E. Mayer, William Delgado, and Lisa Gennetian. “How Parents Feel When
They Parent: Explaining Education Based Differences in Time Spent with Children.”
Unpublished paper, Harris School of Public Policy, University of Chicago, Chicago, IL,
2015.

23
Knudsen, Eric I., James J. Heckman, Judy Cameron, and Jack P. Shonkoff. 2006. "Building
America's Future Workforce: Economic, Neurobiological and
Behavioral Perspectives on Investment in Human Skill Development." Proceedings of the
National Academy of Sciences 103(27): 10155-10162.
Lavecchia, Adam M., Heidi Liu, and Philip Oreopoulos. 2014. "Behavioral Economics of
Education: Progress and Possibilities." NBER Working Paper 20609. National Bureau of
Economic Research.
Lawrance, Emily C. 1991. “Poverty and the Rate of Time Preference: Evidence from Panel
Data.” The Journal of Political Economy 99 (1), 54–77.
Mani, Anandi, Sendhil Mullainathan, Eldar Shafir, and Jiaying Zhao. 2013. “Poverty Impedes
Cognitive Function.” Science 30: 976-980.
Mayer, Susan E. 2010. “The Relationship between Income Inequality and Inequality in
Schooling.” Theory and Research in Education 8 (1): 5-20.
Meier, Stephan, and Charles Sprenger. 2010. “Present-Biased Preferences and Credit Card
Borrowing.” American Economic Journal - Applied Economics 2(1):193–210.
Noel, Amber, Patrick Stark, and Jeremy Redford. 2015. “Parent and family involvement in
education, from the National Household Education Surveys program of 2012: First
look.” (NCES 2013- 028.REV). Washington, DC: U.S. Department of Education.
Olds, David, Charles Henderson, and Harriet Kitzman. 1994. “Does Prenatal and Infancy Nurse
Home Visitation Have Enduring Effects on Qualities of Parental Caregiving and Child
Health at 25 to 50 Months of Life?” Pediatrics 93: 89–98.
Pabilonia, Sabrina W., and Younghwan Song. 2013. “Single Mothers’ Time Preference,
Smoking, and Enriching Childcare: Evidence from Time Diaries.” Eastern Economic
Journal 39(2): 227-255.
Price, Joseph. 2010. “The Effect of Parental Time Investments: Evidence from Natural WithinFamily Variation.” Brigham Young University and National Bureau of Economic
Research.
Ramey, Gary, and Valerie A. Ramey. 2010. “The Rug Rat Race.” Brookings Papers on
Economic Activity 129-176.
Richburg-Hayes, Lashawn, Caitlin Anzelone, Nadine Dechausay, Saugato Datta, Alexandra
Fiorillo, Louis Potok, Matthew Darling, and John Balz. 2014. “Behavioral economics and
social policy: Designing innovative solutions for programs supported by the
Administration for Children and Families.” (OPRE Report N. 2014-16a). Washington,
DC: Office of Planning, Research and Evaluation, Administration for Children and
Families, U.S. Department of Health and Human Services.

24
Rick, Scott, and George Loewenstein. 2008. "The Role of Emotion of Economic Behavior." In
Handbook of Emotions, edited by Michael Lewis, Jeannette Haviland-Jones, and Lisa
Feldman Barrett. New York: Guilford Publications.
Roggman, Lori, Lisa Boyce, and Mark S. Innocenti. 2008. “Developmental Parenting: A Guide
for Early Childhood Practitioners.” Baltimore: Paul H. Brookes Publishing.
Schweinhart, Lawrence, Jeanne Montie, Zongping Xiang, W. Steven Barnett, Clive R. Belfield,
and Milagros Nores. 2005. Lifetime Effects: The HighScope Perry Preschool Study
Through age 40. Ypsilanti, MI: High/Scope Press.
Spears, Dean. 2011. “Economic Decision-Making in Poverty Depletes Behavioral Control.” The
B. E. Journal of Economic Analysis & Policy 11(1) .
Stanovich, Keith E., Richard F. West, and Maggie E. Toplak. 2012. "Judgment and Decision
Making in Adolescence: Separating Intelligence From Rationality." In The Adolescent
Brain: Learning, Reasoning and Decision Making, edited by Valerie F. Reyna, Sandra B.
Chapman, Michael R. Dougherty, and Jere Confrey. Washington, DC: American
Psychological Association.
Sutter, Matthias, Martin G. Kocher, Daniela Glaetzle-Ruetzler, and Stefan T. Trautmann. 2013.
“Impatience and Uncertainty: Experimental Decisions Predict Adolescents’ Field
Behavior.” American Economic Review 103(1):510–531.
Thaler, Richard. 2015. Misbehaving: The Making of Behavioral Economics. New York: W.W.
Norton & Company, Inc.
Villena-Rodán, Benjamín, and Cecilia Ríos-Aguilar. 2012. “Causal Effects of Maternal Time
Investment on Children’s Cognitive Outcomes.” Center for Applied Economics Working
Paper 285.
Wagner, Mary, Donna Spiker, and Margaret Inman Linn. 2002. “The Effectiveness of the
Parents As Teachers Program with Low-Income Parents and Children.” Topics in Early
Childhood Special Education 22(2): 67–81.
Waldfogel, Jane, and Elizabeth Washbrook. 2011. “Early Years Policy.” Child Development
Research 2011.
York, Benjamin, and Susanna Loeb. 2014. “One Step at a Time: The Effects of an Early
Literacy Text Messaging Program for Parents of Preschoolers.” NBER Working Paper
20659. National Bureau of Economic Research.
Zaveri, Heather, Andrew Burwick, and Erin Maher. 2014. Home Visiting: The Potential for
Cost Savings from Home Visiting Due to Reductions in Child Maltreatment. Washington,
DC: Casey Family Programs.

25
Table 1. Summary statistics: Total sample, treatment and control groups
Variable

Total Sample Treatment Control Difference p

Mother’s characteristics
Female (%)

0.92

0.91

0.94

-0.03

0.63

Single (No Husband/
Wife/Partner) (%)
Age (years)

0.61

0.62

0.60

0.03

0.78

31.13

31.55

30.71

0.96

0.39

Black or African American (%)

0.32

0.29

0.36

-0.03

0.72

Hispanic (%)

0.66

0.71

0.59

0.08

0.32

Less than high school (%)

0.28

0.25

0.30

-0.06

0.36

High school diploma (%)

0.12

0.15

0.09

0.06

0.30

GED (%)

0.06

0.10

0.01

0.09

0.10

Some college (%)

0.29

0.24

0.34

-0.10

0.10

Associate's degree (%)

0.13

0.14

0.12

0.02

0.78

Bachelor or higher (%)

0.13

0.12

0.14

0.00

0.97

Age (years)

3.76

3.74

3.77

-0.02

0.89

Boy (%)

0.44

0.47

0.41

0.07

0.28

Born early (%)

0.16

0.20

0.13

0.08

0.07

Born late (%)

0.13

0.11

0.15

-0.04

0.46

Born on time (%)

0.70

0.69

0.72

-0.04

0.41

<5 pounds at birth (%)

0.24

0.24

0.24

-0.01

0.90

Has disability (%)

0.12

0.13

0.11

0.02

0.71

1.99

1.94

2.05

-0.12

0.45

Number of adults in the
1.28
Adults in household (besides parent)
Household income last year ($1,000s) 20.85

1.38

1.18

0.18

0.28

18.82

22.59

-3.42

0.31

English spoken at home (%)

0.65

0.62

0.67

-0.01

0.71

Observations

160

80

80

Focal child’s characteristics

Household characteristics
Number of children in the household

Notes: Of the 169 parents, 160 answered our initial survey. From those 160 parents, 151 have complete information (i.e., nonmissing values) for the set of covariates described in Table 1 (except family income and race and ethnicity because these had a
large number of missing data). The 18 parents with some missing information include 10 in the treatment group and 8 in the
control group.

26
Table 2. The effect of the PACT treatment on measures of parents’ reading using the
electronic app

Treatment ( )
Constant ( )
SD Control
Group
Effect Size
Observations

Dependent Variable:
(1)
(2)
Minutes
Number of
Read
books
88.32***
16.66***
(18.79)
(4.50)
63.34***
14.78***
(9.49)
(3.00)

Any
Reading
0.12**
(0.05)
0.84***
(0.04)

87.48

27.68

.37

1.01
169

.60
169

.31
169

(3)

Notes: Robust standard errors in parentheses. Significance levels: * p<0.10, ** p<0.05, *** p<0.01. The table shows results for
the estimation of equation (1) using “Minutes Read”, “Number of Books” and “Any reading” as outcomes, each of which are
explained as follows. Column 1: “Minutes read” is the number of minutes parents read to their children using the app. Column
2: “Number of books” is the number of books parents read to their children using the app. Column 3: “Any reading” is the
fraction of parents who read at all to their children using the app. SD Control Group is the standard deviation of the control
group for the respective dependent variable. The effect size is the ratio of the coefficient for the treatment group to the standard
deviation of the control group.

27
Table 3. Treatment effects by level of patience

Treatment
( )
Constant ( )

Dependent Variable: Reading Time
(1)
(2)
(3)
Participated
Baseline:
in time
Less patient
All PACT
preference parents
Parents
task
88.32***
82.12***
124.52***
(18.79)
(24.08)
(33.25)
63.34***
83.61***
68.33***
(9.49)
(14.11)
(12.57)

SD Control
87.48
Group
Effect Size
1.01
Observations 169

(4)
More
patient
parents
42.26
(33.95)
97.26***
(24.19)

102.76

62.95

128.08

.80
112

1.98
54

.33
58

Notes: Robust standard errors in parentheses. Significance levels: * p<0.10, ** p<0.05, *** p<0.01. The table shows results for
the estimation of equation (1) using “Minutes Read,” as the outcome, on different samples, each of which are explained as
follows. Column 1: considers all PACT parents. Column 2: considers parents that participated in the time preference task.
Column 3 and 4: considers the sample of less and more patient parents, respectively. More patient (less patient) parents are those
whose score on the time orientation task is below (above) the median. SD Control Group is the standard deviation of the control
group for the respective dependent variable. The effect size is the ratio of the coefficient for the treatment group to the standard
deviation of the control group.

28
Table 4. Treatment effects, excluding outliers
Dependent Variable: Reading Time
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
Excludes parents who
Baseline:
read more
read more
read more
All PACT
than
600
than
450
than 300
Parents
minutes
minutes
minutes
***
***
***
86.48
72.48
51.30***
88.32
Treatment ( )
(18.79)
(15.57)
(13.74)
(10.75)
56.69***
63.34***
56.69***
52.67***
Constant ( )
(6.85)
(5.62)
(9.49)
(6.85)
SD Control
87.48
62.78
62.78
51.16
Group
Effect Size
1.01
1.38
1.15
1.00
School Fixed
No
No
No
No
Effects
Covariates
No
No
No
No
Observations
169
167
164
155

(5)
did not read
at all
83.42***
(19.77)
75.82***
(10.76)
90.68
.92
No
No
151

Notes: Robust standard errors in parentheses. Significance levels: * p<0.10, ** p<0.05, *** p<0.01. The table shows results for
the estimation of equation (1) using “Minutes Read”, as outcome, on different samples, each of which are explained as follows.
Column 1 includes all the total sample of 169 parents. Column 2 excludes parents who read more than 600 minutes (1 from the
control group, 1 from the treatment group). Column 3 excludes parents who read more than 450 minutes (1 from the control
group, 4 from the treatment group). Column 4 excludes parents who read more than 300 minutes (2 from the control group, 12
from the treatment group). Column 5 excludes parents who did not read at all (14 from the control group, 4 from the treatment
group). SD Control Group is the standard deviation of the control group for the respective dependent variable. The effect size is
the ratio of the coefficient for the treatment group to the standard deviation of the control group.

29
Table 5. The effect of the treatment on minutes read using covariates, preschool fixed effects,
and preschool clustering
Dependent Variable: Reading Time
(1)
(2)
(3)
Baseline: Sample with +Preschool
All PACT
complete
Fixed
Parents
information
Effects
79.50***
80.09***
88.32***
Treatment ( )
(18.79)
(20.00)
(19.27)
***
***
63.34
66.87
44.98***
Constant ( )
(9.49)
(10.25)
(14.26)
SD Control
87.48
89.89
89.89
Group
Effect Size
1.01
.88
.89
Complete
No
Yes
Yes
Information
School Fixed
No
No
Yes
Effects
Covariates
No
No
No
Clustering
No
No
No
Observations
169
151
151

(4)

(5)

+Covariates

+Preschool
clustering

83.03***
(21.07)
-40.30
(89.86)

83.03**
(26.06)
-40.30
(103.61)

89.89

89.89

.92

.92

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes
No
151

Yes
Yes
151

Notes: Robust standard errors in parentheses. Significance levels: * p<0.10, ** p<0.05, *** p<0.01. The table shows results for
the estimation of equation (1) using “Minutes Read”, as outcome, using covariates, preschool fixed effects, and preschool
clustering, explained as follows. Column 1 includes all 169 parents. Columns 2-5 exclude parents with missing covariates. The
covariates included in column 4 and 5 are all those listed in Table 2. SD Control Group is the standard deviation of the control
group for the respective dependent variable. The effect size is the ratio of the coefficient for the treatment group to the standard
deviation of the control group.

30
Figure 1. Parental expectations: Change in child's rank in kindergarten for each additional time
investment
How do you think your child’s reading skills would compare to
other children if you were to spend 15, 30, 45 or 60 more minutes
with her/him? (0 to 10 rank scale)
8.5
8.0
7.5
7.0
6.5
Rank

6.0

7.6
7.1

5.5

4.5

6.2

6.1

5.0

7.2

6.9

5.3

5.3

4.0
15

30

45

60

More Minutes per Day

Control group

Treatment Group

Notes: The data represents answers to the question: “If you were to spend 15, 30, 45 or 60 more minutes per day in educational
activities with your child how do you think this would change your child’s reading skills compared to all children of the same age
across the United States (on a 0-10 scale)?”

31
Figure 2. Distribution of reading minutes by control and treatment groups in 10-minute intervals

