NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

KEYNESIAN, NEW KEYNESIAN,
AND NEW CLASSICAL ECONOMICS

Bruce Greenwald
Joseph E. Stiglitz

Working Paper No. 2160

NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
February 1987

The research reported here is part of the NBER's research program
in Economic Fluctuations. Any opinions expressed are those of the
authors and not those of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER Working Paper #2160
February 1987

Keynesian, New Keynesian, and New Classical Economics

ABSTRACT

Much of the new theory of macro—economics that has been
built upon micro—economic models of imperfect information leads
to conclusions which are surprisingly close in spirit to Keynes'
original analysis.

This paper summarizes the macro—economic

implications of information—based models of efficiency wages,

credit—rationing and the breakdown of financial markets for
equity—type securities.

It shows how these models lead to

behavior by firms and interactions among economic agents that

account for many of the phenomena identified by Keynes in
qualitative terms which were
formalizations
information

of

the

largely

Keynesian model.

macro—models

provide

in subsequent

lost

These imperfect

consistent

theoretical

explanations in the Keynesian spirit in unemployment, investment
concentrated business cycles, rigid prices and the effectiveness

of monetary and fiscal policy interventions. In doing so, they
reconcile macro and micro—economic analysis in a way that has so

far been achieved neither by the traditional Keynesians, who
assumed away the micro—dimension of the problem, nor by the new
classical economists who assumed away the macro—dimension of the
problem.

Bruce Greenwald
Bell Communications Research
Economic Research Group
Room 2A-347
435 South Street
Morristown, NJ 07960—1961

Joseph E. Stiglitz
Department of Economics
Dickinson Hall
Princeton University
Princeton, NJ 08544

1

Keynesian, New Keynesian, and New Classical Economics
B. Greenwald and J. E. Stiglitz1

For more than two centuries, there have been two opposing
views of the capitalist economy.

One, which usually attributes

its origins to Adam Smith, emphasizes the efficiency of the
market economy, the ability of the price system to transmit vital

information from producers to consumers, and vice versa, and to

coordinate allocation decisions, in a manner far beyond the

capacity of any central planner.

The other has focused its

concern on the shortcomings of capitalism, particularly on the
periodic episodes of massive unemployment of capital and labor.

Surely, adherents of this view claim, these cannot be the
manifestations of an efficient economic system.

To the classical believers of the efficiency of market
economies, these

episodes

were

viewed

as disequilibrium

situations, temporary

aberations of an otherwise efficient

economy; market forces,

if left to themselves, would quickly

restore equilibrium.

Their modern day descendants, the New

Classical Economists, have gone one step further:

they deny the

very existence of a problem; the massive changes in employment

levels may best be interpreted, in their view, as a rational
response to changing relative prices (workers chose to take more

'Financial support from the National Science Foundation and
the Hoover Institution is gratefully acknowledged. Comments of
8. are gratefully acknolwedged.

2

leisure in 1932, because of the low relative wage).

The

unemployment of capital was no more serious than the fact that
the spare tire of a car is, for the most part, unused: the extra
capacity is held for those few times when it is really needed.

To Keynes' and his modern day followers, these views are not

just absurd: they make a mockery of the "scientific method"
which their adherents claim to follow.
irresponsible:

Worse still, they are

to the extent that governments follow the non-

interventionist policies often advocated, they not only condemn

those individuals who cannot obtain gainful employment to the
economic deprivation which results, but they also condemn the
society which condones this unemployment to a host of social and
economic consequences which follow from that unemployment.

One of Keynes' great contributions was,

in effect, a

reconciliation of the two opposing views of capitalism:

rather

than denying either the existence of the unemployment problem or

its importance, he confronted it head on, argued that limited
government intervention could correct this malady, and with this
one malady corrected, the economy would once again operate in an

efficient manner:

the classical view would then be restored.

Samuelson dubbed this, the Neo—classical synthesis.

The very reasons for the success of Keynes' approach
provided the basis for the eventual disillusionment which set in

3

so strongly, at least

in the United States, over the past two

decades. Keynes had attempted to retain as much of the classical
(neo—classical) apparatus as he could;

the standard model was

changed in minimal ways, with dramatic consequences.
classical synthesis,

The neo-

as attractive ideologically as it was for

those who believed in the market system, yet were disturbed by

massive unemployment, was taken as an article of faith, not
derived from any general theoretical structure: the fundamental

question of why the failures of the market economy should only

occur in the massive doses we associate with its periodic
recessions and depressions was never asked,

let alone answered.

Was it not more plausible that the Great Depression was but the

worse manifestation of a set of inefficiencies which, while
pervasive, were far harder to detect or prove?

The schizophrenia to which Keynesian economics gave rise was

reflected in the way that economics was taught:

micro—economic

courses, in which students were introduced to Adam Smith's
invisible hand and the fundamental theorems of welfare economics,

were followed by macro—economic courses, focusing on the failures

of the market economy and the role of the government in
correcting them.

Two sub—disciplines developed, with micro—

economists looking down upon the (lack of) rigor of the macro—
economists, and denigrating the lack of theoretical foundations,

while macro—economists castigated

micro—economists

obvious inappropriateness of their theories.

for the

4

Dissatisfaction with Keynesian economics was based not only
on this schizophrenia, but also on the lack of justification for
some of the central assumptions, e.g. wage and price rigidities.
Wages and prices were not rigid.

If they did not fall enough,

why didn't they? Why didn't firms who wanted to sell more simply
lower their prices? A quarter of a century of research failed to

provide convincing answers to these questions.2

affairs could not continue for long.

This state of

attempt at a

An

reconciliation between the two seemed inevitable.

There were,

broadly speaking, two ways by which the

alternative approaches could be reconciled:

to adapt macro—

theory to micro—theory, or the converse.

The New Classical

Economics took the first approach. It argued that what was wrong
with

macro—economics

was

its absence of rigorous micro—

foundations. Its advocates set out on an ambitious research
program, entailing deriving the dynamic, aggregative behavior of

the economy from the basic principles of rational, maximizing

2These were not the only objections to Keynesian theory, the
only sources of dissatisfaction. Historically, the inability to
cope with the simultaneous outbreak of inflation and unemployment
in the early seventies may have played as critical a role as the
more theoretical problems with which we have been concerned here.
The growth of monetarism during this period may, similarly, be
and clear
to
more due to its
simple
ability
provide
prescriptions, than to its ability to remedy the theoretical
deficiencies in Keynesian analysis.

Theorists were concerned, of course, not only by its
incompleteness and its inconsistency with traditional micro—
economic analysis, but also by its internal inconsistencies, e.g.
its inconsistent expectational assumptions.

5

firms and individuals.

The School recognized the importance of

dynamics for understanding macro-behavior, and it.

recognized the

central role of expectations in determining dynamic behavior.
focused its attention,

It

then, on the consequences of rational

expectations formation, and it is this aspect of their work which
has given the School its alternative name.

The name, "Rational Expectations"
misleading:

school is, however,

the central doctrines of the approach derive not

from its belief in rational expectations, however plausible or

implausible that assumption might be; but rather from its old

classical assumptions of market clearing.

And with those

assumptions, the conclusion that there is no unemployment, and
the irrelevance of government macro—policy,3
consequences.

These conclusions,

follow as trivial

it should be noted, would

follow were participants in the market far less rational than
postulated by the theory.

The other approach sees unemployment, credit rationing,
business cycles as real economic problems, phenomena which cannot
be reconciled with the standard micro—theory, and therefore seeks

3lndeed, Neary and Stiglitz (1983) have shown that with
rational expectations and price rigidities, government policy is
even more effective than with myopic expectations: multipliers
are even larger.
In the New Classical models, macro—policy is
irrelevant because it is unneeded.
Even with full employment
assumed, government policies will, in general, have real effects,
e.g., on capital accumulation. See Stiglitz (1981, 1983).

6

as its objective the development of a micro-theory which can
explain these phenomena.

For want of a better term, I shall

refer to this as the New Keynesian Economics. Work in this area

has centered on understanding the consequences of imperfect
information and incomplete markets, both for micro—economics and
for macro—economics.

Like the New Classical Economics, it seeks

a single theory, but unlike the New Classical Economics, it seeks

to explain unemployment, rather than to deny its existence. And

unemployment is shown to be just one manifestation of a much
wider set of market failures.

This paper attempts to present the broad outlines of the New

Keynesian economics, and to show in what ways it is similar to
traditional Keynesian economics, and in what ways it differs.

Keynes had a vision of how the economy worked that was markedly

different from

that of the standard neo—classical theory.

Decisions by firms were not based on rational calculations.
Keynes used picturesque language to describe the behavior of
entrepreneurs: they were moved by "animal spirits."

But when

Keynes came down to write a simple model, he resorted to more
traditional modes of thinking, and these aspects were reinforced

in the subsequent developments (e.g. by Hicks.)

It is our

contention that Keynes' problems arose from his inability to
break away from his neo—classical training, that his vision,
captured so well in many of his brilliantly written passages,

provides greater insight into understanding unemployment and

business cycles than does the formal Keynesian model.

8

Some Key Keynesian Insights

There are four insights of Keynes that we think of as
essential in constructing a model of unemployment and business
fluctuations:

1.

A general theory

must

explain

the

persistence of

unemployment, as well as the cyclicity in certain key economic
variables. To explain the persistent of unemployment, one has to

develop a theory of the labor market. Keynes resorted, at this

juncture, to

the assumption

of wage

(real or nominal?)

rigidities, an assumption which has been made the center of the
fixed price school, but has been attacked by critics of Keynesian

theory both on empirical grounds——wages, after all, fell by a
third in the Great Depression, and countries facing inflation,
with presumably some scope for changes in real wage, have faced

unemployment just as countries in which wages and prices have

fallen——and on theoretical grounds——no explanation for wage
rigidities, other than ad hoc institutional considerations is
provided.

What is required, however, for the Keynesian conclusions is

not absolutely rigid wages, but only that wages do not fall to
market clearing levels.4 The recently developed efficiency wage

4An alternative approach to that discussed here is that
though wages fall, prices fall, and at approximately the same
rate. Thus real wages do not fall. (This is the approach taken

9

theories5 provide such an explanation.

It

is based on the

hypothesis that there is imperfect information about the charact—

erjstjcs of workers; that the actions of workers cannot be
monitored; and that il is not possible to write contracts that
ensure that the worker bears all the consequences of his actions.

As a result, the quality of the labor force, its productivity
(and hence the firm's profits) may increase with the wage paid.

Similarly, labor turnover may decrease with an increase in the

wage, and since the firm must bear some part of the turnover
costs, again profits may increase with an increase in wages, up
to some point.

In the face of unemployment, wages may not fall,

for firms will recognize that if they lower wages, productivity
will decrease, turnover may increase, and profits will fall.

In

this perspective, firms are competitive; there are many firms in
by Solow—Stiglitz (1968)).

Though the falling wages and prices y give rise to an
increase in the demand for consumer goods——the Pigou—Patinkin
effect (in the absence of Barro—Ricardo considerations), there is

little doubt that in the short run, in the length of time for
which Keynesian analysis is appropriate, this effect is not of
quantitative significance.

One should note that in many macro—economic models, real
balance effects play a crucial, if slightly surreptitious, role.
Thus, in the fixed price model, unemployment is attributed to too

high a level of wages and prices; if wages and prices fell
(keeping real wages, say, constant) employment would increase;
but this is only because of an assumed important real balance
effect.
One should also note that in the short run, even if
there were real balance effects of the kind noted by Pigou and
Patinkin, these effects might be outweighed, in the short run, by
dynamic, intertemporal substitution effects; if prices fall, and
consumers come to believe that they will fall further, this may
reduce their current demand for consumption.
See Neary and
Stiglitz (1983) or Grandmont.
5For a survey, see Stiglitz (1986a, 1986b).

I0

the market.; but nonetheless firms are wage setters, at least

within a range.

If the Wairasian wage, where the demand for

labor equals the supply, is too low, any firm has the option of
raising its wage and thus increasing its profits. The efficiency

wage, the wage that maximizes the firm's profits, may of course
vary with economic circumstances; hence the wage is not absolute—

iy rigid. But wages need not fa1l to market clearing levels. 6

An objection to this theory—--as well as to standard Keynesi-

an theory——is that the presence of wage rigidities in some
sector(s) of the economy
unemployment.7

is

not

sufficient

to explain

So long as there is some sector with flexible

wages, any individual who chooses not
voluntarily unemployed.

to work

there is

We view this to be largely a semantic

objection: the fact is that individuals who are observationally

indistinguishable from

the unemployed individual are being

employed at higher wages; that the

market equilibrium is

inefficient; and that resources which could be productively
employed remain idle.

(Elsewhere, (Greenwald—Stiglitz (1986b))

6Thus, the policy implications of these theories may be
markedly different from those of the standard fixed wage—price
The latter assume that economic policy has no effect on
models.
The efficiency wage models recognize that
the wages paid.
certain policies (e.g. unemployment compensation) may have strong
effects on equilibrium wages, and the consequences of this need
to be taken into account.

7This is, of course, not the only objection to efficiency
wage theory.
(1986b).

For a more extended discussion, see Stiglitz

11

we have discussed at length a variety of reasons why it may be
rational for an individual not to accept a low wage currently, if

he believes that a better paying job, will becoming available in

the near future; these have to do with

asymmetric information,

with the information conveyed by the individual's willingness to

accept a low wage job, as well as with the fact that once an
individual is employed, he becomes "used labor" with adverse

effects on future wages similar to those which

arise in

Akerlof's lemons model. We have also discussed the reasons why a

worker might not be willing to accept a

low wage from an

employer, with a promise of a future higher wage if the firm
survives, because to do so would, in effect, make the worker take
an equity position in the firm; see below for a discussion of why
individuals would not wish to do so.)

2.

A macro—economic theory must not only explain the persisten-

ce of unemployment, but also its fluctuations. This is not as
easy a task as it might seem. There are two problems.

First, what are the sources of shocks to the economy which
give rise to such large perturbations in economic activity?8 It

is difficult to find shocks that are external to the economic
system, though occasionally

such shocks——such as wars and the

8The problem is not that there are not shocks, but the
magnitude of the shocks, and their correlations across sectors.

12

rise in oil prices9 ——do occur. And if there are not exogenous

shocks, what are the internal mechanisms which lead to such
variations in economic activity?'0

There is considerable

evidence that much of the fluctuations are due to variations in

the demand for investment, and in particular for inventories.
But in theory, with concave production functions, with the shadow

price of labor being low in recessions, with low real interest
rates, there should be production smoothing:

inventories should

serve to dampen economic fluctuations; they should not serve to
exacerbate them.''

Keynes was correct in stressing the importance of investment

for understanding economic fluctuations. To explain fluctuations

in investment, he had to rely on animal spirits, on unexplained
changes

in

expectations.

The expectational assumptions

9But even this should be viewed as endogenous: no change in
demand or supply occurred, though the formation of a cartel can
be viewed, from this perspective, as an exogenous shock to the
system.

'°The belief that the capitalist economic system could not
internally be flawed to the extent that it gave rise endogenously
to fluctuations provides much of the motivation for the search
for an external culprit, usually identified as the "government"
or "monetary authorities."
''There are other stabilizers in the economy which we have
not discussed. Savings serves to stabilize consumption.
In the absence of adequate savings, the insurance provided
by implicit contracts serves to stabilize incomes, and thus to
Thus, implicit contracts, rather than
stabilize consumption.
exacerbating business fluctuations, may actually serve to reduce

them. (For a more extensive discussion of this paper, see
Stiglitz (1986).)

13

underlying Keynes' analysis may be no worse than those underlying

the rational expectations school.

Yet, there is something

disquieting about relying so completely on the inexplicable or
the irrational for a theory of business cycles.'2

The second problem in explaining fluctuations
following:

is the

in the typical micro—economic model, changes in

prices (interest rates, wages) serve to dampen any disturbance to

demand or supply, just as we argued earlier that inventories
should stabilize the economy. Thus even large exogenous changes
(changes in demand curves or supply curves) may result in small
changes in equilibrium values.

Keynes had to explain not only why the demand for investment

l2Old style macro—economists explained these investment
fluctuations by reference to accelerators.

These accelerator

models implicitly were based on firms extrapolating current
levels of output into the future; that is, they were based on
These models may be descriptively
irrational expectations.
than
the rational
accurate
accurate, more
descriptively
expectations models; the question which we have posed for
ourselves is, however, can one explain the fluctuations in
investment without recourse to such irrational expectations.

forward a rather different
LaRoque has
recently put
He postulates rational
explanation for inventory behavior.
expectations, but non—market clearing. He argues the inventories
are held for speculative purposes, and assumes that speculators
have some priority over others in the event of an excess supply

of goods. He shows then that this can give rise to inventory
cycles.

We suspect that if one looked carefully at shadow wages

during recessionary periods, and asked whether, given those
shadow wages, would it have paid firms to invest in inventories,
were they store the goods until a period of high demand, taking
into account market rates of interest, the answer would be yes,

and indeed the profits from doing so would have exceeded the
speculative profits accruing during periods in which inventories
were actually accumulated.

14

curve shifted, but also why changes in the interest rate could

not offset the direct effects.

While his explanation of the

source of the shift in the demand for investment may have been
incomplete, his explanation for why interest rate changes could

not offset these effects was unpersuasive.13 In his theory, the
reduction in the demand for investment should have lead to a fall
in the real interest rate; yet during the recession real interest

And businessmen argued that interest rates had

rates rose.

little effect on their investment decisions.

Similarly, he failed to provide an explanation for why wages
did not change:

he simply asserted that they did not.

The efficiency wage theory explains why wages may not fall
to market clearing levels.

A similar theory of the capital

'3The liquidity trap theory was designed to explain a floor
But so long as money cannot be
on the nominal interest rate.

made to be negative—interest bearing, similar results would
follow simply from the non—negativity of nominal interest.

What

is relevant for investment should, ostensibly, be the real
interest rate. And the floor on nominal interest rates, combined
pressures of a recession, give rise to
with deflationary
increases in real interest rate. But the price rigidities, which
seem at the cornerstone of modern interpretations of Keynesian

analysis, would imply a fall in real interest rates in a
recession.

As we have already noted, prices did fall, real

interest rates did rise, but only to a limited extent.
In more recent recessions, however, prices have been rising,

sometimes at a sufficient rate to make real interest rates
negative (and after tax real interest rates very negative).
These decreases in the real interest rate were not sufficient to
restore investment. (This is not surprising; firms traditionally
require twenty to thirty percent expected returns to undertake an
investment project. A change in the real interest rate from 2?
to l is little more than rounding error.) In the end, it is the
interest inelasticity of investment which appears to be crucial;
no plausible changes in real interest rates suffice to
that is,
restore investment. Below, we provide an explanation for this.

15

market shows why interest rates may not fall (See Stiglitz—Weiss,

More generally, Akerlof and Yellen have

1981,1983, 1985).

pointed out that even when firms should change the wages they pay

they may not do so; they show that the loss of profits from this

near—rational behavior may be small, even though the loss to
society may be large.

Indeed,

if firms are risk averse (as we

argue below they will be), and if there is some uncertainty about

the consequences of wage changes, keeping wages unchanged in the
face of certain disturbances is fully—rational.

(Again, similar

arguments hold for the capital market.)

Moreover, the efficiency wage models further show why the
wages of firms are interdependent: the optimal wage for firm i

depends on

the wages

paid by

all other

firms.

This

interdependence may lead to multiple equilibria, in which no firm
changes its wage even in the face of changes in its demand.'4
Thus,

by

explaining

rigidities, these theories

wage, interest rate, and price
help

to

explain

why certain

disturbances are multiplied by the economic system rather than
dampened. 15

In the theory we present below, there is a further set of
'4Again similar arguments hold for the capital market and
the product market. See, for instance, Stiglitz (1986c).

'5Macro—economists, at least since Kahn's basic article,
have emphasized the role of multipliers, without recognizing how
inconsistent they are with standard micro—analysis. The critical
difference between economies which amplify disturbances and those

which dampen them seem to be price rigidities; our analyusis
exxplains these rigidities, and by doing so, puts the multiplier
on sound theoretical grounds.

16

reasons for the "multiplication" of disturbances.

In the

presence of incomplete markets and imperfect information, the
actions of one firm or individual exert externality—like effects

on others; the reduction of production by one firm, in response
to increased uncertainty or a reduction in its working capital,

increases the uncertainty and reduces the working capital of
other firms.

While

price

adjustments

tend

to dampen

disturbances, externality effects may (and in these instances do)
exacerbate them.16
3.

Keynes was correct in stressing the importance of the

dichotomy between

savings and investment.

In effect, he

recognized that funds within the firm were different from funds
in the household sector. Though he sensed the importance of this

distinction, when he came to write down his model, he wrote down
the standard neo—classical model, in which that distinction plays
no role.

The demand for investment was determined by the

interest rate. There was, for instance, no credit rationing.

This was all the more surprising, given his (implicit,
sometimes explicit) general recognition of the importance of
capital market imperfections.

Individuals' consumption was

'6There are other stabilizers in the economy which we have
not discussed. Savings serves to stabilize consumption.
In the absence of adequate savings, the insurance provided
by implicit contracts serves to stabilize incomes, and thus to
Thus, implicit contracts, rather than
stabilize consumption.
exacerbating business fluctuations, may actually serve to reduce
them.

(For a more extensive discussion of this paper, see

Stiglitz (1986).)

17

related to their current income, partly perhaps because current
income was a good forecast of future income, but partly because

of the lack of access to funds.

This failure to recognize

sufficiently the importance of capital market imperfections, and
the consequences which follow from that,

turns out to be his

most important error.

4.

Keynes needed, as we said, to find a source of fluctuations

It was

in economic activity.

apparent that

changes in

technology, in supply, could not account for what was occurring

in the Great Depression.

He therefore naturally turned to

changes in demand. Good economists brought up in the Marshallian

tradition had been taught to separate out disturbances to a
market into demand and supply disturbances.

Keynes was correct in focusing on demand disturbances, but

his reliance on the Marshallian demand/supply framework posed

problems which he, and his followers, never satisfactorily
resolved. For the Marshallian theory suggested that equilibrium

ought to be at the intersection of demand and supply; if firms

were on their supply curve, real product wages should rise as
employment falls.

This

was one of the first empirical

propositions of Keynesian economics to fall by the way—side. But
just as Marxian economics was never abandoned by its proponents,

simply because its predictions turned out to be false, so too
Keynesian economics was not to be abandoned simply because one of

its important empirical predictions turned out to be wrong. As

18

always in economics, there are three ways of dealing with
uncomfortable facts:

(a)

to deny them, e.g. by asserting that

wages and prices are measured incorrectly (just as the New
Classical economists approach the unemployment problem by denying

the relevance of the unemployment statistics); (b) to provide a
new interpretation, e.g. by asserting what is relevant is not the

spot wage, because of the existence of long term (implicit
contracts), ignoring the fact that real product wages of newly

hired workers or workers on spot contracts also did not rise
significantly; (c) to assert that the empirical proposition was

not central to the theory. Thus, a large literature developed,
asserting

that

firms,

while

solving

quite

complicated

intertemporal maximization problems, acted as if the price and
quantities they faced were fixed.17

It was simply asserted that

firms did not use price policy to affect sales, an implausible
and counterfactual assumption.18

the
back
to
sixties, with
contributions by Hansen (1951), Solow—Stiglitz (1967), and Barro—
The subsequent fixed—price literature is
Grossman (1971).

'7This literature dates

enormous.

'8Models which
postulate imperfectly competitive firms
explain why real wages may not equal the value of the marginal
little to
say about involuntary
they have
product; but
unemployment or its fluctuations. (Indeed, in contrast to models
with classical unemployment, with real wages in excess of the
value of the marginal product, here real wages are less than the
value of the marginal product; whether employment is higher or
lower in equilibrium simply depends on the (uncompensated) labor
Below, we provide an explanation for
supply elasticities.)
cyclical variability in mark—ups. See also Stiglitz (1984).

19

The New Keynesian Economics

The New Keynesian Economics begins with Keynes' basic
insights, but recognizes Keynes' excessive dependence on a
neoclassical framework, and his failure to fully recognize the
consequences of capital market imperfections, imperfections which
can be explained in terms of the costs of information.

The major ingredients of this new perspective are the
following:

1.

The efficiency wage model, which explains why wages, while

not rigid, do not fall to market clearing levels (see above).

2.

Capital market

information.

imperfections, derived

from imperfect

There are asymmetries of information between

managers of firms and potential investors, asymmetries which can

give rise to what we shall call "equity rationing." Equity
rationing is important because it implies that if firms wish to

obtain more capital, to invest or to increase production, they
must borrow the funds; and even if they are able to do so, they
must expose themselves to considerable risk, including the risk

of bankruptcy, i.e. the risk of not being able to pay back the
promised amounts.

The consequences of this are exacerbated by the absence of

20

futures markets.'9 Thus, firms cannot sell the goods which they

plan to produce until after they have produced them.2° Every
production decision is a risk decision, a risk which they (the

managers and equity holders) must bear, and which they cannot
easily shift on to others.

The absence of futures markets

implies that firms cannot sell their output at the time of
production.

Thus, an analysis of firm behavior must focus on its
willingness to undertake these risks. Unexpected changes in its
working capital base (caused for instance by unexpected changes

in the prices at which it can sell its goods) could, for
instance, have a deleterious effect on its willingness to
produce.

3.

While at times this limits the amount that firms are willing

to produce, at other times, firms' access to capital is limited;
l9Keynes did not explicitly comment on this, perhaps because

to him the absence was so obvious not to require comment. To
those brought up in the Arrow—Debrue framework, it has become a
ritual to attempt to identify in what ways the proposed model
differs from that paradigm

20There are, of course, industries in which goods are
This is particularly true of some
produced only on order.
Then, variations in
investment goods manufacturing industries.
the level of production must be traced back to variations in the
demands which they face; and these are related to the willingness
Thus, the supply
of other producers to invest (produce.)
responses of some firms are reflected in demands facing other
This is another reason why the simple Keynesian dichotomy
firms.
into demand or supply disturbances may be somewhat misleading.

21

there is credit rationing. The reasons that suppliers of capital

do not raise interest rates in the presence of an excess demand
for capital are analogous to the reasons that firms do not lower
wages in the presence of an excess supply of labor:

increasing

interest rates may lower the expected return to the supplier of

capital, either because of selection effects

(the mix of

applicants changes adversely) or because of incentive effects
(borrowers are induced to undertake riskier actions.)

4. Monetary policy exerts its influence——when it does——not so

much through

the willingness of individuals to hold cash

balances, but through the availability of credit. Asymmetries of

information imply that if banks decide to lend less, there are
not other potential lenders who are perfect substitutes.

Banks'

decisions to lend are analogous to those determining firms'
willingness to produce.

The monetary authorities can take

actions which affect banks' willingness to lend (or the terms
under which they are willing to lend.) Though, depending on the
economic

circumstances,

other

lenders may take partially

offsetting actions, their actions can never be fully offsetting.

The New Keynesian Economics provides a general theory of the

economy, derived

from micro—economic

integrates the two sub—disciplines.)

principles (and thus

It succeeds both in filling

the lacunae in traditional Keynesian theory (e.g. by explaining
partial wage rigidities, rather than simply assuming rigid wages)
and

resolving

the

paradoxes and inconsistencies of more

22

traditional
e.g.

Keynesian theory (both the internal inconsistencies,

concerning

how

expectations

are

formed,

and the

inconsistencies between its predictions and observations.)

provides an

It

explanation both for an equilibrium level of

unemployment (through the efficiency wage theories) and for
business fluctuations.2'
provides is simple:

The theory of business fluctuations it

in broad outline, certain shocks to the

economy affect the stock of working capital of firms. Even if
firms had perfect access to the credit markets (that is, they

could borrow as much as they wished, at the actuarially fair
interest rate), the amount they would be willing to borrow is
limited by their willingness to bear risk; the fixed commitments
associated with loan contracts imply that, as the working capital

which is available is reduced, the risk (bankruptcy probability)

associated with any level of borrowing increases. Thus, if their
working capital is reduced, their desired production level (given
that they do not have fixed commitments to sell their products22)

is reduced; and it takes a number of periods before the levels of

21This is not to say that there are not important gaps in
The theory developed so far does not
the theory which remain.
provide an entirely endogenous business cyle; it only explains
how the economy responds to certain shocks.
a controversy over whether an entirely
There remains

endogenous business cycle theory is required, or whether one
should be content with a theory which translates certain kinds of

shocks into disturbances in which the economy persists below
We do not take a
"full employment" for a number of periods.
position on that issue here.

22Even if they have commitments, potential purchasers may
not honor those commitments, particularly in the event of their

In recessions, the risk
bankruptcy.
"commitment" is increased.

associated with any

23

working capital are restored to normal. The theory provides an
explanation not only for why aggregate shocks (like an unexpected

decrease in the price level, resulting from a monetary shock)
have an aggregative effect on the economy, but also why sectoral

shocks (like an unexpected shift in demand, or the unexpected

formation of an oil cartel) would have aggregative effects:
willingness to produce will, in general, be a concave function of

working capital, and hence a redistribution of working capital
will have aggregative effects.23

In the discussion below, we shall show how this theory
provides an explanation for several of the phenomena which seemed
so hard for more traditional Keynesian theory to explain:

(a) it

explains why firms do not lower prices in recessions, i.e. it

explains cyclical movements in mark—ups;

(b)

it provides an

explanation of cyclical behavior of investment and inventories;
(c) it provides an explanation for why unemployed workers do not
succeed in getting hired by offering to work for lower wages, and

even in industries where efficiency wage considerations are not
important, it provides a partial explanation for why workers do

23These redistribution effects seem to be more important
e.g. sometimes postulated with
government debt policy (the change in the maturity structure of
the debt having either an intertemporal or an intrateinporal
than the redistribution effects,

redistribution effect) or with some forms of insurance.
The redistribution resulting from insurance associated with
implicit labor contracts, a redistribution from the corporate to
the household sector, operates essentially through the mechanism
described above. In the presence of perfect capital markets, the

only effects arising from that redistribution would be those
propensities to consume
associated with differing marginal
between capitalists and workers.

24

not offer to work for lower wages, in return for the promise of

higher wages in the future; and (d) it provides an explanation

for why an unanticipated wage—price reduction might actually
serve to exacerbate the recession, rather than alleviate it (by
further deteriorating the working capita1 base of firms).

25

Keynes' Errors

We have argued that Keynes' basic error was an excessive
reliance,

in

his

formal

on

modelling,

the

neo—

classical/Marshalijan tools which then, as now, were the style of

the day. The verbal stories which accompany the model captured

far more of his insights into what was going on.24
useful at this juncture to review what are,

it may be

in our perspective,

his fundamental errors, and to suggest how our theory corrects
these errors.

His most important errors lie,

in our judgment,

in his theory of the firm and in his explanation of the role of

money in determining the level of economic activity.

Both of

these can be related to his failure to understand fully the
nature of capital markets.

1. Keynes failed to recognize the importance of the distinction
between long term bonds and equities. He lumped the two together

as long term assets. Even in the absence of bankruptcy, the two

differ in their risk properties, with bonds rising in value in
recessions, equities falling.

The two securities are thus

complements, rather than substitutes, in individual's portfolios.

For our purposes, however, this distinction is not as important

as the differences in the nature of the firms' commitment: with
bonds and loans, the firm is committed to paying back a certain

24 He should not be judged too harshly: as we have said,
presumably he wished to make his ideas as palatable as he could
to his contemporaries, and to do this, he had to show that by
altering only a few of the basic assumptions of the standard
model, one could obtain dramatically different results.

26

amount on a particular date; with equities, no such commitment

exists. As a result, for firms as well as investors, these two

securities are far from perfect substitutes. Particularly in
recessionary periods, firms seldom resort to the equity market to

raise needed capital: investors suspect that any firm wishing to

do so is in bad straits, unable to obtain capital from banks or

other sources.

Elsewhere, we (Greenwald, Stiglitz, and Weiss

(1984)) have provided a simple adverse selection model (again, a

variant of the standard adverse selection model) showing that
only the worse firms will in fact resort to the equity market to
raise capital.

2.

Keynes' attempt to explain economic fluctuations in terms of

demand considerations alone not only posed the quandry we have
referred to before——why don't firms use price policy to increase
their sales——but posed another problem:

how could a small open

economy ever face Keynesian unemployment problems? Simply by
changing its exchange rate,

it could face unlimited demand for

its products.

In our theory, there is not a clean distinction between
demand and supply. Firms would be willing to produce more, if

they could have an assured demand. In this sense, demand is
limiting production. Firms are not willing to produce more,
given the risks associated with production in the absence of an
assured demand.

In this sense, firms are on their supply curve.

27

Our theory thus explains why the amount of goods firms are

willing to supply at any expected real product wage may change
over the business cycle.

Our theory can also explain why firms, in setting their
prices, might attempt to have a higher mark-up over costs in
recessionary periods.

In markets with imperfect competition and

imperfect information, firms must recruit customers. They do so

partially by using price policies. They thus face a trade—off,
lower prices today leading to higher future sales, higher future

profits, but lower current profits.

The price they choose

depends on the implicit cost of capital (not the market rate of
interest), and in the presence of equity rationing, this may be
higher in recessionary periods.

3. Keynes argued that the primary determinant of the level of
investment, given a set of expectations, was the interest rate.
Though there has always been some ambiguity about whether this is
the real or nominal interest rate, the only sense that modern day

economists can make of this is that it must have been the real
interest rate.

But real market interest rates have fluctuated

relatively little (until the 80s).

A good theory should never

take a constant (or an almost constant) as an explanatory
variable.

In our theory, credit availability at certain times is the
major determinant of the level of investment.

It is precisely at

those times that monetary policy can affect the level of economic
activity.

28

In recessionary periods, however, banks may be willing to
lend to any "good" prospect at the going interest rate, but there

is a shortage of willing borrowers.

In such circumstances,

monetary policy is likely to be ineffective.

The Keynesian—neoclassical theory simply cannot explain

inventory fluctuations, the fact that inventories serve to
exacerbate rather than to dampen fluctuations.

Our theory can.

Again, the increase in the effective cost of capital——the result

of equity rationing and the decrease in the supply of working
capital——implies

that

firms

will wish to decrease their

inventories in recessionary periods.

4. The mechanism by which the monetary authorities affected the
level of economic activity in Keynesian analysis is implausible.
There are three steps:

(a) the government takes actions which

affect the money supply; (b) given individuals' demand functions

for money (a function presumably of interest rates and income),
interest rates change; (c) as a result of interest rate changes,
investment changes.25

There are problems with each of the steps:

while the

25This is obviously an oversimplification. In some variants
of the theory, the demand for money depends only on income, and
hence, given rigid prices, a decrease in the supply of money must
No plausible mechanisms
be accompanied by a decrease in income.
by which this is effected have been put forward.
In other theories, the demand for investment is a function

of expected future incomes, which in turn are a function of
The fluctuations in investment then become as
current income.
much a consequence as a cause of income fluctuations. It is hard

to reconcile
behavior.

such naive

accelerator models with rational

29

government may be able to affect the supply of outside money,
there are close near money substitutes, at least for transactions

purposes. Moreover, money is not required for most transactions,

only credit. (This is what makes those models which are based on

the cash—in—advance constraint so implausible.)

And to the

extent that money is required for transactions purposes, one must

explain why that is so.
transactions and

Moreover, the relationship between

income is tenuous:

many, perhaps most,

transactions are exchanges of assets, and the kinds of economic
changes associated with the business cycle are often accompanied
by changes in wealth, and hence in asset distribution.

To the extent that money demand

is based

on asset

considerations, what is relevant, of course, is not income, but

wealth. And since there are short term bonds which are, except

for transactions purposes, perfect substitutes for money, the

relevant opportunity cost of holding money is the short term
money rate of interest; but if any interest rate is relevant for

investment, it should be the real rate of interest.26 Moreover,

as the recent development of Cash Management Accounts makes
clear,

it is clearly feasible to provide interest bearing

"money," in which case the only relevant question facing the

26Jt is not clear whether it should be the long term or
short term real interest rate. When the question is, when should
a project be undertaken, the short term real interest rate is
presumably relevant; when the question is, should a project be
undertaken, it is presumably the long term real interest rate.
Since the information relevant to undertaking a project (the set
of suppliers, the prices at which factors can be purchased, etc.)
becomes obsolete so rapidly, in many cases at least the question
posed by firms is more the latter than the former.

30

individual is the maturity structure of the debt which he wishes
to hold.

More recent Keynesians (e.g. Tobin) have proposed another
mechanism by which monetary policy affects economic activity: In

the general portfolio approach, different assets (short term,
long term bonds) are seen as imperfect substitutes, and changes
in the relative supply affect different interest rates, and, in
particular, the price of equities.
several grounds.

This can be criticized are

First, firms do not, for the most part, resort

Thus the price of

to the equities market to raise capital.

equities is not directly relevant.

How can we explain the

observed correlations? In our theory, optimistic expectations,

say about future sales, will be reflected in a high price of
equities (high future profits), and in managers' willingness to
produce. There is a correlation, but not causation.

To put

it another way, what managers and controlling

stockholders are concerned about is not the price of equities

today, but the price of equities when they go to sell their

shares. The current price may be a good forecast of future
prices, but businessmen are more likely to base their judgments
concerning particular investment projects not on the judgments of
some relatively uninformed outsider, but on their better informed
insider views.

Secondly, in theory, changes in the maturity structure of

the government's debt should have no effect on the market
equilibrium,

provided

that

there

are

not

significant

31

redistributive consequences of that change (and these seem
implausible. )

For those changes represent changes in the

(stochastic) future tax liabilities of individuals. Individuals,
in deciding on their optimal portfolios, should take into account

other aspects of the risks which they face, including wage and

tax risks; and if they do this correctly, there will be no
effects on real interest rates. The Tobin approach would, in a

perfect capital market, seem to rely on irrational behavior.
(See Stiglitz 1981)

Tobin might object to this on two grounds: first, that
individuals do not

really

include

their

stochastic tax

liabilities in their portfolio analysis; and secondly, that our
analysis assumed a perfect capital market.

We are inclined to

agree27; as a result, we also agree that the government can
change market rates of interest. But we remain unconvinced that
this is (an important) mechanism by which the government controls

economic activity.

Rather, we would argue that government

monetary policy affects bank's willingness to lend (and the terms

on which they are willing to lend), and it is through this
27This is not to say that individuals do not take some
account of their future tax liabilities; but what evidence there
is not does support the hypothesis that they take these future
tax liabilities "fully" into account.
We have not indicated all of the relevant assumptions in the

"Irrelevance Theorems," only what we view to be the most
important. Thus, for instance, the irrelevance theorems assume
that taxation is non—distortionary. But taxes are distortionary.
Reducing taxes today and increasing taxes in the future may have

a real welfare effect; but it seems implausible that the
differences in these Harberger distortionary triangles, each of
themselves being small, can account for monetary policy having
any signficant effect.

32

mechanism that investment may be affected.

33

Concluding Remarks
On methodology.

model is

Capitalist economies are complicated. A

supposed to capture their central features, not

reproduce them exactly. Decisions of individuals and firms today

are based on future expectations, and are affected by past
decisions. Individuals do not have perfect foresight or rational

expectations concerning the future.

The events which they

confront often appear to be unique, and there is no way that they
can

form

a

statistical model predicting the probability

distribution of outcomes. And there is little evidence that they

even attempt to do so.

At the same time, individuals are not

myopic. They do not simply assume that the future is like the
present.

Markets are not perfect.

But markets do exist. Prices do

adjust. Wages fall in the presence of massive unemployment.

These "facts" pose some important strategic decisions for
the modeler:

within the foreseeable future, it is not possible

to construct a dynamic model adequately reflecting all of them.

Polar cases are easier to study. Should one assume perfect wage

or price flexibility or no wage or price flexibility? Rational
expectations or myopia? Any set of choices is open to criticism,

but equally, can be defended as part of a long term research
strategy.

In our view, the choices must be dictated by the phenomenon

to be studied. The central problem we are interested in is
explaining unemployment. Thus, to begin the analysis by assuming

34

market clearing is to assume away what is to be explained.

While we agree about the importance of understanding the
dynamic maximization prob1eins individual and firms are engaged

in, ignoring the important constraints they face (e.g. on the
access to capital markets) results in models which are of little

relevance. We suspect that

in many instances, myopic models

focusing on the constraints are far better than "rational" models
ignoring them.

Indeed, in some cases, one can show that the

rational models with constraints look identical to the standard
myopic models (e.g. with rule driven behavior, all of profits and
none of wages saved. )28

2. On policy. There has been a long standing controversy
over what governments should do in the face of unemployment: (a)
nothing; (b) encourage wage reductions; (c) use monetary policy;

or (d)

increase government expenditures.

The success of

28The rational expectations school is often credited with
the observation that government policies, if anticipated, will
This seems to
have affects quite different from those intended.
In
the
60's,
during the
be giving them more credit than is due.
were
models
so actively
being
period in which dynamic
investigated, there was a considerable amount of work analyzing

perfect foresight models; included in these analyses was the
analysis of the consequences of fully anticipated government
actions. It was noted, for instance, that a temporary investment
tax credit would decrease investment prior to its effective date,
cause a surge of investment subsequently, cause another surge in
investment prior to its removal, and lead to depressed investment
immediately after its removal.
The contribution of the rational expectations analyses was

to investigate these questions in a stochastic environment.
While this was an important extension of the non—stochastic
perfect foresight models, the basic insights——at least the one
noted above——remain the same.

35

Keynesian theory has much to do with the fact that it provided a
theoretical justification for those who wished to take the fourth

course. The success of the New Classical theory has much to do
with the fact that it has provided a theoretical justification
for those who wished the government to do nothing.
In our view, Keynes' analysis was basically correct. Government policy can
affect the outcome; in recessionary periods, monetary policy is likely to be of
Z9

limited efficacy; and wage cuts may not be effective.

3.

On the efficiency of the market economy. We agree with

Keynes that unemployment is a real problem facing capitalist
economies.

Though a half—century of experience may make us less

sanguine about the government's ability to eliminate business
fluctuations, a half—century of experience with alternative forms

of economic organization have made us even less sanguine about
291n Keynesian theory, wage cuts reduce aggregate demand.
In more modern Keynesian theory, where consumption is based on
permanent income, such wage cuts might have a negligible effect
on demand. Our theory provides an explanation of why wage cuts

could have a significant effect:

imperfect capital markets
result in some individuals having to reduce their consumption.
On the other hand, there are circumstances in our theory where
when each firm chooses not to
a wage cut would be effective:

reduce its wage, given the wages paid by other firms, a
coordinated wage change can increase the demand for labor.

are other
that there
Our theory suggests, however,
circumstances where lowering real wages (below the efficiency
wage) would actually result in a reduction in the demand for
labor.

To the extent that lower wages lead to lower prices, wage
reductions can have future deleterious effects, in reducing the

working capital available to firms, and in making them more
reluctant to produce, if they extrapolate current declines in
prices to continue in the future.

36

the ability of these alternatives to provide the basis of a more

efficient system of resource allocation. Like the emperor's new
clothes, we may not be able to see the invisible hand because it
is not there;

or perhaps more accurately, because it is so

invisible, we do not see how palsied it is.

Unemployment is

but the worse manifestation of pervasive market failures which

arise in the presence of imperfect information and incomplete
markets. But if the invisible hand of the market is palsied, the

visible hand of the government

be far worse. Voltairewas

wrong: we do not live in the best of all possible worlds. We
live in an imperfect world. And we must learn to live with those
imperfections.

Limited government intervention——correcting the

worse manifestations

of market failures, including massive

unemployment—-may, after all, improve the efficiency of market

economics. In the end, Keynes, and Keynesian policies, are
vindicated.

37

References
Akerlof,

G.

[1970j,

"The Market for Lemons:

Qualitative

Uncertainty and the Market Mechanism," Quarterl_y Journal of
Economics, Vol. 84, PP. 288—300.

Akerlof, G. and J. Yellen, "A Near Rational Model of the Business

Cycle with Wage and price Inertia,"

Quarterly Journal of

Economics, 1985, pp. 832—38.

Barro,

R. J.,

and

Grossman,

H. I. (1971).

A

general

disequilibrium model of income and employment. American Economic
Review 61:82-93.

Blinder, A.

and J.

E. Stiglitz. "Money, Credit Constraints and

Economic Activity," American Economic Review, May 1983, pp. 297—
302.

Greenwald, B. [1979]. Adverse Selection in the Labor Market, New
York, Garland Press.

Greenwald, B. and J. E. Stiglitz.

Externalities in Economies

with Imperfect Information and rncomplete Markets, Quarterly
Journal of Economics, May 1986.

Greenwald, B., Stiglitz, J.E. [1986], "Information, Finance
Constraints and Business Fluctuations," Proceedings of the Taiwan

38

Cfeon

y_jLy Taipei,

Mon

Chung—Hua Institute.

Greenwald, B. and J. E. Stiglitz. "Money, Imperfect Information,

and Economic Fluctuations," paper presented at Conference on

1986, and to published in

Monetary Theory in Taipei, January,

Proceedings (Oxford University Press).

Stiglitz, J.E.

Greenwald, B.,

and Weiss,

A. M.

[1984],

"Informational Imperfections and Macroeconomic Fluctuations,"
American Economic Review, Papers and Proceedings, Vol. 74, pp.
194—99.

Hansen, B. (1951). A study in the theory of inflation. Allen
and Unwin, London.

Kalecki,

M.

[1939],

Essays

in

the Theory of Economic

Fluctuations, New York, Russell and Russell.

Myers, S. C. and Majluf, N. S. [1984], "Corporate Financing and
Investment Decisions When Firms Have Information that Investors
Do Not," Journal of Financial Economics, Vol. 11, pp. 187—221.

Neary, P., and J. E.
Keynesian Economics:

Stiglitz.

"Towards a Reconstruction of

Expectations and Constrained Equilibria,"

Quarterly Journal of Economics, Supplement 1983, pp. 199—228
(presented at the Athens meeting of the Econometric Society,

39

September 1979).

Phelps, E.

S. and Winter, S.

G. [1970], "Optimal Price Policy

Under Atomistic Competition" in E. S. Phelps, ed., Microeconomic
Foundations of Emplçyment and Inflation Theory, New York.

W. W.

Norton and Co.

Solow, R. ,

and J. E. Stiglitz. "Output, Employment and Wages in

the Short Run," Quarterly Journal of Economics, Vol. XLXXXII,
November 1968, pp. 537-560.

Stiglitz, J. E. (1986b) "The Causes and Consequences of the
Dependence of Quality on Price," Hoover, mimeo.

J. E. Stiglitz (1986a), "Theories of Wage Rigidities," paper
presented at a conference on Keynes' Economic Legacy, University
of Delaware, December 1983,

in Keynes' Economic Legacy, Preager

Publishers, 1986.

Stiglitz, J.

E.

[1985], "Credit Markets and the Control of

Capital," Journal of Money, Credit and Banking, Vol. 17, pp. 133—
152.

J. E. Stiglitz, "Price Rigidities and Market Structure," American
Economic Review, Vol. 74, No.

2, May 1984, pp. 350—56 (paper

presented to the American Economic Association, December 1983).

40

J. F. Stiglitz (1983), "Competition and the Number of Firms in a
Market: Are Duopolies More Competitive than Atomistic Markets?",
forthcoming in Journal of Political Economy.

J. E. Stiglitz (1983), "On the Relevance of Irrelevance of Public

Indexation, Price Rigidities and Optimal

Financial Policy:

Monetary Policy," paper presented to a Conference at Rio de
Janeiro, December 1981, published in proceedings, Inflation, Debt
and Indexation, R. Dornbusch and M. Simonsen, eds., M.I.T. Press,
1983), pp. 183—222.

Stiglitz, J. 5.

(1981) "The

Relevance

or

Irrelevance of

Government Financial Policies," NBER working paper (forthcoming

in M. Boskin, ed. Proceedings of lEA Roundtable on Budget
Deficits).

J. E.

Stiglitz and A. Weiss, "Credit Rationing and Collateral,"

paper presented at a conference sponsored by CEPH, Oxford,
September, 1985.

Stiglitz,

Joseph

and

A.

Weiss.

"Incentive Effects of

Terminations: Applications to the Credit and Labor Markets,"
American Economic Review, 73, (1983): 912—927.

Stiglitz, J.

E.

and Weiss,

A.

[1981], "Credit Rationing in

41

Markets with Imperfect. Information," Ameriçp_ Economic Review,
Vol. 71, pp. 393—410.

