                                NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                          LOCATE YOUR NEAREST EXIT:
                MASS LAYOFFS AND LOCAL LABOR MARKET RESPONSE

                                           Andrew Foote
                                           Michel Grosz
                                          Ann Huff Stevens

                                        Working Paper 21618
                                http://www.nber.org/papers/w21618


                      NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                               1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                 Cambridge, MA 02138
                                     October 2015




We are grateful to David Autor, Ben Hansen, and Giovanni Peri for their useful comments and suggestions,
and to Nancy Early for her generous help and data expertise. We also thank seminar participants at
Texas A&M, UC Davis, UCSD, the 2015 Population Association of America meeting, and the 2014
Western Economic Association meeting, This research was supported by the U.S. Social Security
Administration through grant #1DRC12000002-03 to the National Bureau of Economic Research as
part of the SSA Disability Research Consortium. The findings, opinions and conclusions expressed
herein are solely those of the author(s) and do not necessarily represent the views of the U.S. Census
Bureau, the SSA, any agency of the Federal Government, or the the National Bureau of Economic
Research. The research in this paper does not use any confidential Census Bureau information and
was undertaken while Foote was at University of California, Davis.

At least one co-author has disclosed a financial relationship of potential relevance for this research.
Further information is available online at http://www.nber.org/papers/w21618.ack

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.

© 2015 by Andrew Foote, Michel Grosz, and Ann Huff Stevens. All rights reserved. Short sections
of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full
credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
Locate Your Nearest Exit: Mass Layoffs and Local Labor Market Response
Andrew Foote, Michel Grosz, and Ann Huff Stevens
NBER Working Paper No. 21618
October 2015
JEL No. H55,J01,J63,R23

                                           ABSTRACT

Large shocks to local labor markets can cause long-lasting changes to employment, unemployment
and the local labor force. This study examines the relationship between mass layoffs and the long-run
size of the local labor force. It considers four main channels through which the local labor force may
adjust: in-migration, out-migration, retirement, and disability insurance enrollment. We show that
these channels account for over half of the labor force reductions following a mass layoff event. By
measuring the residual difference between these channels and net labor force change, we also show
that labor force non-participation accounted for much of the local labor force response in the period
during and after the Great Recession.


Andrew Foote                                      Ann Huff Stevens
U.S. Census Bureau                                Department of Economics
4600 Silverhill Road                              One Shields Avenue
Suitland, MD 20746                                University of California, Davis
andrew.foote@census.gov                           Davis, CA 95616
                                                  and NBER
Michel Grosz                                      annstevens@ucdavis.edu
University of California, Davis
One Shields Avenue
Department of Economics
Davis, CA 95616
mgrosz@ucdavis.edu
1       Introduction
        Over the course of the Great Recession, rates of job loss in the United States
reached record highs. As the recovery continues, understanding the nature and speed of
labor market adjustment is more important than ever. At the national level, much of the
public attention and media coverage has been on overall levels of job creation and
economic activity. Variation in the severity of the downturn across local areas points to a
need to focus the policy discussion on re-allocating workers to jobs. Well-known work
by Blanchard and Katz (1992) originally emphasized the importance of labor mobility in
this adjustment process, showing that local unemployment rates primarily adjust by
workers moving to areas where there are more jobs, as opposed to local job creation.
During the Great Recession, reports of significantly reduced mobility (Frey 2009) have
added to concerns that housing market factors and low mobility may prolong recovery
time.
        In this paper, we examine the relationship between negative local labor market
shocks—many of which occurred during the recent recession—and labor force changes.
Specifically, we ask whether, and to what extent, internal migration and other exits from
the local labor force follow negative shocks and facilitate adjustments in an area’s labor
supply. We measure changes in county labor force size, migration, retirement and
disability insurance enrollment that occur after large layoff events.
        There are several benefits to using mass layoffs as the measure of local labor
demand shocks. First, we avoid the endogeneity of local unemployment rates with
respect to changes in labor supply and migration patterns. Second, the mass layoffs
afford us the opportunity to analyze responses to local labor demand shocks that are
discrete and do not occur over the course of several years. Further, since mass layoffs are
defined as the permanent release of at least 50 workers from a single establishment, they
represent a concentrated shock to local labor demand.
        We first measure the net change in the size of the local labor force in response to
a mass layoff. While there are a variety of causes for these labor force changes, we focus
on four main channels of labor market exit—in-migration, out-migration, disability
insurance enrollment, and retirement—and estimate the relative importance of these
channels as exits from the labor force. These four exit channels jointly account for most

                                              1
of the observed net changes in labor force, and we argue that the residual mainly captures
labor force non-participation. We show that while migration is the predominant channel
of labor force exit, non-participation grew in importance during the Great Recession.
       This paper makes several contributions to the literature. First, we jointly consider
all potential labor force exit channels, and compare their relative importance in
explaining changes in labor force size. Second, we measure the role of migration as an
adjustment mechanism in the aftermath of significant mass layoffs affecting an area’s
residents. While the relationship between unemployment rates and migration has been
studied extensively, we are the first to directly and systematically link mass layoff events
to mobility into and out of areas. Finally, we document the rising importance of non-
participation following local labor demand shocks in recent years, and discuss potential
reasons for that change.


2      Literature Review
       There is a substantial literature on the effect of labor demand shocks on migration.
Blanchard and Katz (1992) show that after a negative employment shock, employment in
a local labor market falls and then recovers somewhat, but never returns to its original
level. They conclude that most of this effect is due to migration. Here, we update and
extend their approach in order to more directly document the size of these flows out of
labor markets following a negative labor demand shock.
       Bound and Holzer (2000) measure the responsiveness of specific populations
between the 1980 and 1990 Censuses to labor market shocks. They show that low-skilled
workers, particularly low-skilled black workers, migrate relatively little in response to
labor market shocks. We re-examine this issue using mass layoffs. We also include
measures of population changes by age and race groups, which allow us to examine how
labor force responses to mass layoffs affect an area’s demographic composition.
       Notowidigdo (2013) extends Bound and Holzer’s (2000) analysis and employs a
similar method, but argues that lower-skilled workers are less likely to migrate because
they bear a smaller incidence of local labor demand shocks. He shows that following
adverse labor demand shocks, public assistance program spending increases and housing
costs decline, which both disproportionately impact low-skilled workers and make them

                                             2
less likely to migrate. He also notes that some of the decline in local employment is due
to a decline in labor force participation, and cannot be entirely attributed to out-
migration. Our work directly measures these channels, in order to assess the importance
of non-participation.
       Saks and Wozniak (2011) show that migration is pro-cyclical at the national
level; in times of low national unemployment, the benefits from moving are higher,
inducing more people to migrate for job-related reasons. Additionally, when controlling
for national-level labor demand, they find that state-level labor demand is still a
significant determinant of migration.
       In this paper, we examine shocks that are more acute and localized than state-
level unemployment changes, by measuring mass layoff events at the county level. In
addition to migration, we explore how other channels of labor force exit are related to
aggregate economic cycles. The first of these is Social Security Disability Insurance
enrollment (hereafter DI), whose role as an alternative to job search in economic
downturns has been documented in various contexts (Black, Daniel and Sanders, 2002,
Burkhauser, Butler and Gumus, 2004, Autor and Duggan 2003). The second additional
channel of labor market exit is retirement, which we observe in take-up of Social
Security retirement benefits. Workers displaced from jobs late in their careers have
substantially lower employment rates than those who are not displaced, which suggests
that poor re-employment prospects after mass layoffs cause many workers to opt for
early retirement (Chan and Stevens, 2001; Stevens and Chan, 1999). Others suggest that
different aspects of the recent economic downturn–the housing market crash, the stock
market collapse, and rising unemployment–imply different incentives to either hasten or
delay retirement (Coile and Levine, 2011; Bosworth and Burtless, 2010; Goda, Shoven
and Slavov, 2012).
       Workers, especially those who have been laid off, may also exit the labor force
without migrating or substituting their former income with participation in government
programs. Especially in hard economic times, unemployed workers may become
discouraged and stop looking for work (Erceg and Levin 2013). In the Great Recession,
the labor market saw a surge in exits due to discouraged workers, only half of whom
eventually reentered the labor market (Ravikumar and Shao 2014, Kwok, Daly and

                                              3
Hobijn, 2010). Workers are also more likely to become discouraged or take longer to
reenter the labor force if part of a couple, since the other member of the couple may
increase job search or enter the labor market, a phenomenon dubbed the added worker
effect (Lundberg 1985, Mattingly and Smith 2010). In the Great Recession, as in other
economic downturns, labor force participation among teenagers also decreased, as more
pursued education or simply did not work or look for jobs (Kwok et al. 2010).
           Autor, Dorn and Hanson (2013) use differential exposure to import competition
from China to identify areas with adverse labor demand shocks. They find that these
shocks lowered labor force participation and increased unemployment, while also
increasing transfer payments. While we use a different labor market shock, we come to
similar conclusions, showing that non-participation is a key channel of adjustment
following a labor demand shock. In contrast, we find effects on the mobility of
individuals. Our results on mobility may differ from theirs because they use labor
demand shocks on lower-skilled workers, who are not as mobile.


3          Data
           We compile several datasets to construct a panel of counties spanning the years
1996-2013. Our identification strategy relies on variation in county-level labor demand
shocks, as measured by mass layoff events. To measure the size of these shocks, we
calculate the share of the county labor force in a given year that that was displaced due to
a mass layoff. Between 1996 and 2013, the Bureau of Labor Statistics (BLS) compiled
monthly reports on layoffs by observing the initial claims for unemployment insurance
filed by workers. The BLS identified a mass layoff event when more than 50 workers
filed claims against a single establishment within any five-week period. For these events,
the BLS contacted the establishment to determine whether these workers experienced a
layoff of at least 31 days. We use data on these mass layoff events at the county level for
1996-2013, including the number of workers directly affected.1 Our data are organized
by the affected workers’ county of residence, so that we measure the number of workers
living in a given county who were part of a mass layoff at their past establishment (which

1
    In March 2013, in order to abide by the sequestration imposed by the Balanced Budget and Emergency
     Deficit Control Act, the BLS eliminated the Mass Layoffs Statistics Program.
                                                     4
could be located in a different county). To normalize the magnitude of these layoffs we
use annual data on the size of the county labor force, compiled by the Local Area
Unemployment Statistics program of the BLS.
           Our main outcomes of interest are in-migration flows, out-migration flows, net
changes in DI caseload, and net changes in the number of retirees. We use information
on migration from the Internal Revenue Service (IRS) Statistics of Income files, which
calculate inflows and outflows based on address changes of individual tax filers. As in
other research, we use the number of tax returns in a county as an approximation for the
number of households, and the number of exemptions for the number of individuals
(Molloy, Smith and Wozniak, 2011). We use these data for 1996-2010 to construct
measures of the number of individuals moving into and out of a particular county.
           While these data are helpful in studying internal migration, they have a few
limitations. First and foremost, individuals who do not file taxes (most often the poor and
the elderly) do not appear in the data, nor do their households. Moreover, the data only
include filers who complete their tax returns at most five months following the April 15
deadline, which excludes some late filers. The data are also limited in their ability to
identify changes in filing status; for example, for a married couple that subsequently
divorces and files two separate returns, only the migration behavior of the individual who
was the primary taxpayer in the initial joint return will be recorded.2
           To calculate the number of individuals at the county level enrolled in DI and
retirement, we use data from the Social Security Administration’s Old Age, Survivors
and Disability Insurance (OASDI) program from 1999 to 2012. The data report total
numbers of beneficiaries each year, but we calculate net changes for use in the analyses.
While individuals can claim their retirement benefits almost immediately upon making
the decision to retire, DI enrollment occurs long after an applicant files the initial claim.
DI rules include a five month waiting period between when the worker meets conditions
for disability eligibility and when benefits begin. During these five months, workers
must earn less than the “substantial gainful activity” threshold of approximately $1,000




2
    A more extended discussion of these data, as well as their strengths and limitations, is in Gross
    (1999).
                                                         5
per month.3 Applications take many months to be accepted, and applicants can appeal
decisions, extending the process. The process lasts around nine months for applications
accepted on the first claim (Kreider, 1998), but often lasts more than a year when
applicants appeal (Autor et al 2015).
          Because of this attribute of the program, other studies that examine DI as a
response to labor market shocks (eg. Autor and Duggan, 2003, Black et al., 2002) tend to
focus on applications as opposed to acceptances. Thus, for an additional analysis, we use
county-level information on DI applications compiled by the Social Security
Administration. This dataset, created from the “Disability Research File,” includes
applications, appeals, and allowances at the county level, by broad age group and gender.
The age groupings correspond to those in the Mass Layoffs Statistics: under 30, 30-44,
45-54, and 55 and older. These data are described in more detail in section 5.3.
           We express our four outcome variables—in-migration, out-migration, DI
enrollment and retirement—as rates, which can be compared to the flows of newly
displaced workers from mass layoffs. We define in-migration and out-migration rates as
the number of in- or out-migrants to or from a county in a particular year as a share of
that county’s population that year. For both DI enrollment and retirement, we also divide
the net change in new cases by the county’s population the previous year, in order to not
include the change in the labor force during the same year as the mass layoff.
          We supplement these main sources of data with additional information on county
demographics and median income. We use county level information on the age, gender,
and racial composition of county populations as reported in the Surveillance,
Epidemiology, and End Results (SEER) program of the National Cancer Institute, which
includes annual data from 1969-2012, as well as county-level median income from the
Bureau of Economic Analysis (BEA).
          Given that these different datasets cover different time periods, our final dataset
spans the years 2000-2010, which are the years in which we have data on all the relevant
outcomes.




3   For more information on the waiting period, see Moulta-Ali (2013).
                                                   6
4       Methods
        Our goal is to measure the effect of mass layoffs on changes in the labor force,
and to quantify the channels of labor market exit and their relative importance. In this
section, we describe the outcomes of interest, which are the various types of labor force
exits, and how they relate to each other. After this description, we explain the rationale
for using mass layoffs as a measure of labor demand shocks. We discuss the limitations
of using the unemployment rate, but tie our results to the earlier literature by
instrumenting for unemployment rate with the share of the labor force involved in a mass
layoff. Second, we illustrate how mass layoffs act as well-defined shocks that are
plausibly exogenous with respect to pre-existing trends.


4.1     Decomposing Changes in the Labor Force
        Consider the following decomposition describing the components of a net labor
force change from one year to the next:




        The term         is a county c’s labor force in year t. The above equation shows that
changes in the labor force can arise from five different channels. The first two terms on
the right-hand side of equation (1) comprise the net migration of workers: in-migration
minus out-migration. Any individuals that enroll in DI or retire also change the size of the
labor force. The residual,        , includes all other flows into and out of the labor force not
captured by migration, DI, or retirement. Foremost among these other exits from the
labor force include individuals aging, workers dying, and new full-time students. Another
important component of           is individuals of working age not participating in any of
these explicit labor force exit channels.4




4
  While Sullivan and von Wachter (2009) show that job separations such as mass layoffs increase mortality
rates for those involved by approximately 50-100% in the few years following, this effect in aggregate
would be neglible; taking their reported baseline mortality, a 1 percent mass layoff would increase
mortality rates from 6.76 to 6.83 per 1000. For this reason, we do not expect our measure of non-
participation to be impacted by mortality following job loss.
                                                   7
          To compare the effect of layoff events across labor markets of different sizes, we
normalize the magnitude of these changes and express them as shares. Specifically, we
divide both sides of equation (1) above by the size of the population in previous period:




          This equation above describes the relationship between our five outcome
variables of interest. We estimate the effect of mass layoffs on the components of the
right-hand side of equation (2), as well as on the net change in labor force (i.e. the left
hand side of equation (2)). The residual         is just rescaled from the first equation. We
normalize in this way in order to avoid scale-effect bias, as described in Peri and Sparber
(2011).
          Note that in equation (2) above, the in-migration and out-migration specifically
refer to labor force participants. While the migration data we use do not separate out
workers from non-workers, if we assume that labor force participants and non-
participants migrate at the same rate, then those two terms do not have to be rescaled.


4.2       Mass Layoff Counts as an Alternative to County Unemployment Rates
          Understanding the relationship between local labor market shocks and labor force
exits presents several challenges. First, a typical approach involves relating local area
unemployment rates to local population changes or migration rates.5 However, the
unemployment rate is itself a function of current and past migration decisions, making
causal inference difficult and interpretation of descriptive relationships challenging.
Second, analyses are typically done at the state level, which may be too broad to capture
a single labor market. One the other hand, local unemployment measures for smaller
geographic areas raise serious measurement error concerns.




5
  For examples of this, see Greenwood (1997) and Davies, Greenwood and Li (2001). Additionally,
Wozniak (2010) uses both unemployment rates and Bartik instruments, while Saks and Wozniak (2011)
instrument for unemployment rates with Bartik-type instruments and oil shocks; these instruments are
discussed below.
                                                 8
       We begin our analysis by measuring the effect of the unemployment rate on labor
force exit, knowing the limitations of such an approach. In our context, with local labor
market changes measured at the county level, we estimate the following equation:




       Where yct is a particular type of labor market exit measured at the county level,
and URATEct is the unemployment rate in the county. We also include time fixed effects
δt and county fixed effects γc, as well as county-specific time trends ηc*t.
       Using the unemployment rate as above introduces three problems into the
estimation. First, the unemployment rate is endogenous since it captures labor supply
changes in addition to labor demand changes (Bartik 1996). Additionally, changes in the
labor force, which are in the denominator of the unemployment rate, are clearly
endogenous to migration rates in and out of a local area. Finally, for smaller geographic
units the unemployment rate published by the BLS is measured with error (see Bartik,
1996; Hoynes, 2000; Lindo 2015).
       For these reasons, researchers often rely on instruments for the unemployment
rate. The ideal instrument would address both the endogeneity concerns and concerns
with measurement error in the unemployment rate. One such instrument is the shift-share
or Bartik instrument (Bartik, 1991) that utilizes pre-existing, area-specific industry
structure and changes in industry outcomes at the national level. Such an approach been
used successfully at the state and MSA level (Saks and Wozniak, 2011; Bound and
Holzer, 2000). However, using a Bartik instrument may be difficult at the county-level
due to small samples for measuring county-level industry shares. Additionally, the Bartik
instrument does not provide intuition on the relative size of the shock for a county
compared to the size of the labor force.
       As an alternative, in this study we use the number of mass layoffs at the county
level as our measure of local labor demand shocks. In our main results, we move to using
mass layoffs directly in a reduced-form setting; this has a direct and substantively
interesting interpretation of the effect of a major layoff event on a local area labor force.
Mass layoffs are a good alternative to the unemployment rate because they resolve the

                                              9
problems that arise when using the county unemployment rate. First, they clearly measure
a change in labor demand, and thus are not hampered by endogenous labor supply
responses, a claim for which we provide more evidence in the next section. While
migration can mechanically reduce the unemployment rate over time, migration does not
directly generate mass layoffs. Second, measurement error in the mass layoffs data is
most likely uncorrelated with the measurement error in the county unemployment rate.
The main source of measurement error in the mass layoffs data comes from
establishments planning a certain number of layoffs and then changing these plans, and is
not due a direct result of small sample sizes, since these represent a census of all layoffs
of greater than 50 workers.
        Mass layoffs are also of independent interest as an observable indicator of a
shock to local labor markets that may concern policymakers. Focusing on mass layoffs
allows us to directly address the question of how a series of mass layoffs may
permanently change the size and composition of the local labor force. Similarly, we can
examine how the number of lost jobs translates into individuals leaving a local area.
       To establish that mass layoffs are strongly correlated with the unemployment rate,
we begin by regressing the unemployment rate on mass layoffs, including the
contemporaneous mass layoff share and two lags. Table 1 summarizes the first-stage
relationship between the county unemployment rate and mass layoffs as a fraction of the
county’s labor force. This approach also conditions on county fixed effects, year fixed
effects, and county-specific trends. The results suggest that if one percent of a county’s
labor force is laid off, the unemployment rate rises by 0.33 percentage points that year,
and 0.77 percentage points within three years. Not accounting for job creation and
changes in the labor force itself—which are our rationale for not using the unemployment
rate to begin with—a coefficient less than one suggests that not all the layoffs are
permanent. The F-statistic on the mass layoffs is 30.68, and the results clearly show that
mass layoffs are strongly correlated with the unemployment rate.
       We next estimate both OLS and instrumental variables versions of equation 3.6
We instrument the unemployment rate with a contemporaneous mass layoff rate as well


6
 Because the unemployment rate is a stock and not a flow, we only include the contemporaneous
unemployment rate, as in Saks and Wozniak (2011).
                                             10
as two lags.7 Our results from this estimation are in Table 2. In Table 2, the first column
is the OLS estimate, and the second column is the IV estimate; each outcome variable is
in a different panel. Starting with the first panel, we see that a higher unemployment rate
decreases the size of the labor force; however, some of that effect may be mechanical,
given that labor force is in the denominator of the unemployment rate, which may cause
division bias. However, when we instrument for the unemployment rate, in the second
column, we see a similar effect, such that a 1 percent increase in the unemployment rate
causes the labor force to shrink by approximately 0.2 percentage points.
        Additionally, we see small negative effects of the unemployment on rates of in-
migration. A one percentage point increase in the unemployment rate leads to a 0.1
percentage point decrease in the in-migration rate, but the IV results are smaller and not
statistically different from zero.
        For out-migration, the OLS estimates suggest that a one percentage point increase
in the unemployment rate increases the out-migration rate by about 0.06 percentage
points. The IV results suggest a larger initial effect of the unemployment rate on out-
migration, which is consistent with the unemployment rate being endogenous as well as
with measurement error pushing the OLS estimate towards zero.
        When we look at the effects of unemployment on flows into disability insurance
and retirement, we find, as might be expected, smaller responses. This expectation is
based on the fact that only a subset of workers in a local area will have an underlying
medical condition or be in an age range that is consistent with entering disability
insurance or retirement. Nevertheless, the estimated effects do suggest that higher
unemployment is associated with small (statistically insignificant) increases in the share
of a county’s labor force that is retired or using disability insurance, echoing much earlier
work. In the remainder of the paper, we focus on the reduced form relationship between
mass layoffs and labor force exits.




7
  In results not shown, we included different specifications of the number of lags of both the endogenous
regressor and the instrument. All the results were similar as the ones shown.
                                                   11
4.3 Mass Layoffs and Labor Force Exits
       Table 3 (panel A) shows summary statistics for mass layoff variables in the full
study period, as well as before and after the start of the Great Recession in 2007 (the
second and third columns, respectively). On average, 0.7 percent of a county’s labor
force was laid off in a mass layoff event each year, which translates to an average of 379
workers. Not surprisingly, these shares differ substantially before and after 2007. Panel B
of Table 3 shows the share of counties that experienced at least one year where the share
of the labor force involved in a mass layoff surpassed a certain threshold. Most counties
(61 percent) had at least one year where one percent of the labor force was laid off.
However, a large number of counties also experienced a higher percentage event. Panel C
of Table 3 shows the key variables that contribute to the decomposition of the change in
labor force as a share of the population. On average, the change in the size of the labor
force as a share of the population was 0.3 percent.
       To motivate our main analysis, we illustrate the relationships between labor force
exits and layoffs using an event study approach. For this analysis, we focus first on
counties that experienced large, discrete labor demand shocks, which allows us to
examine county trends prior to a major layoff. For these counties, the event study
analyses provide suggestive evidence that the large layoff events were unlikely to have
been preceded by long-term labor market decline.
       We limit the data to the subset of counties in our sample that experience a large
layoff event—of two, three, or four percent of the labor force—once between 2001 and
2007. We further limit the sample to counties for which this one-time event occurred
before 2007. Layoff rates increased dramatically during the Great Recession making it
more difficult to isolate counties with only a single large layoff event after 2007. In this
limited sample of 118 counties, these large and isolated layoff events were the most
likely to have been unanticipated to local workers and unrelated to local economic trends.
       We illustrate this relationship using the following simple event-study model:




                                              12
        The outcome variable yct is one of the following: in-migration rate, out-migration
rate, new DI enrollment, and new retirement enrollment. We include county and time
fixed effects, γc and δt, to control for fixed differences between counties and a non-
parametric national time trend. We define Tc as the year the county experienced layoffs
surpassing the relevant layoff threshold of two, three or four percent. The indicator 1(t −
Tc = i), then, takes a value of one when the observation year is i years from Tc. For
example, if the layoff event happened in 2004, then 1(t − Tc = i) would take value one in
year 2005 for i = 1. Observations earlier than six or later than six years from the event
are captured by dummies 1(t − Tc ≤−6) and 1(t − Tc ≥ 6). We omit the dummy for i =-1,
so all the coefficients are relative to the year before the major mass layoff occurred.
        Figure 1 displays the coefficients for our event study analysis using the counties
involved in a mass layoff of greater than 4 percent of the labor force. The top two graphs
of Figure 1 display the coefficients for in- and out-migration, as well as a 95 percent
confidence interval.8 Importantly, in neither the in-migration nor the out-migration case
does there seem to be a noticeable trend in migration rates before the mass layoff event.
In-migration and out-migration seem relatively flat in the years previous to the event.
Following the event, there does appear to be an increase in out-migration rates. Similarly,
there is a noticeable dip in in-migration, which is sustained in the years following mass
layoffs.
        The bottom half of Figure 1 displays the same analyses for DI and retirement.
The estimates are noisier, but the trends prior to mass layoff events do not suggest that
there were upward trends in exits to disability or retirement prior to the layoff events.
Although the estimates are not statistically significant, DI enrollment seems to increase
slightly three years after the layoff event. For retirement, the pattern is also not
statistically significant but consistent with our hypothesis of an increase in retirement.
        This visual analysis shows that for the counties that experienced only one major
mass layoff event in our time period, there were no pre-existing trends in labor force exit
paths before the mass layoff event occurred. This further motivates and provides support
for our statistical approaches below, which use mass layoffs directly as an indicator of


8
  Appendix Figures A1 and A2 shows these results for other lower thresholds for defining large mass
layoffs.
                                                13
local labor market shocks. In the next sections we extend the analysis to all counties in
the country—not just the ones that experienced particularly dramatic labor market
shocks—and quantify the size of these adjustment processes.


5        Results
         In the previous section, we estimated effects of mass layoff events on a subsample
of counties. Now, we estimate the effect for the full sample, using the following equation.




         Our key variable of interest is layoffc,t−i, which we define as the share of the labor
force of county c laid off in year t. We also include lagged values of the layoff indicators,
since responses to labor demand shocks may take time. Our outcome variable, yct, is
either the net labor force change or one of the components: out-migration rate, in-
migration rate, new DI enrollment rate, and new retirement rate, all normalized by lagged
county population.
         We include county fixed effects, γc, to control for systematic differences between
counties in their labor market, mobility of individuals, and the policy environment. We
include year fixed effects, δt, to control for national trends. In our preferred specification,
we also include county-specific trends, ηc t, in order to control for general trends in a
county’s labor market and demographic structure. Finally, to address the fact that mass
layoffs may be correlated within a state over time, we cluster our standard errors at the
state level.9
         Table 4 shows our main results for out-migration and in-migration. In column 1,
we include only the contemporaneous effect of mass layoffs, while columns 2 and 3 add
one and two lags, respectively. In column 3, the effect of mass layoffs is large and
significant for both out- and in-migration. Additionally, at the bottom of each panel, we
total the coefficients to show the total effect of a mass layoff. Our estimates in column 3
imply that when one percent of the county-level labor force is laid off in a mass layoff

9
 Clustering our standard errors by state may actually overstate our standard errors, since mass layoff events
are likely correlated with nearby counties, but not faraway counties.
                                                     14
event, the out-migration rate increases by about 0.06 percentage points within three
years.For in-migration, a one percent mass layoff increase leads to a decrease in in-
migration rates by about 0.06 percentage points.10
         In column 4, we include county-specific trends, which shrink the in-migration
estimates substantially, and slightly increase the out-migration estimates. The difference
in the coefficient on in-migration when controlling for trends is likely due to the relative
persistence and slow response of population flows into a county, and highlights the
potential importance of including county-specific trends in the analysis (Rappaport
(2004)).
         In the rest of the tables we focus on the total effect—that is, the sum of the
contemporaneous, lagged, and twice-lagged coefficients displayed in Table 4. Table 5
displays our results for each outcome that is part of the decomposition in the overall
labor force change. Given the sensitivity of the in-migration results to county trends,
Table 5 presents estimates both with and without county-specific trends. The trends only
change the estimates significantly for in-migration, and importantly our estimates for the
overall change in the labor force barely change at all. Thus, we focus on the results with
trends in most of the discussion.
         In column 1 of Table 5, we show that a mass layoff affecting 1 percent of a
county’s workers leads to a reduction of 0.20 percentage points in the size of the labor
force over the next three years. The majority of this change is driven by increased out-
migration and decreased in-migration (although the effect on in-migration is not
statistically significant). There are positive effects on both DI claims and new
retirements, but the estimates are small and not statistically significant. Combined, the
point estimates on DI and retirement suggest that these channels account for roughly 5
percent of the overall change in the size of the labor force following mass layoffs.
         Summing up our effects across columns, we can explain 53 percent of the change
in the labor force with these four channels when including trends, and 76 percent of the
change in estimates without trends. To quantify all of the labor market exit channels, we


10
  In results not shown we include additional lags to the key explanatory variable. These additional lags are
small and not statistically significant providing further evidence that the timeframe of adjustment to labor
market shocks is relatively quick.

                                                     15
also calculate the implied residual from equation 2, and display it in the sixth column. In
the results without trends, our results imply a residual of -0.0414. With trends, we find a
slightly larger residual of -0.0921, which suggests that for a 1 percent mass layoff, the
number of people that remain in the area but stop participating in the labor force
increases by about 0.09 percentage points.
        One important question in the wake of the Great Recession is whether non-
participation has changed over time. A number of recent papers have sought to
investigate this, noting that the labor force participation rate for 25-54 year olds in the
Great Recession fell precipitously, and then has not recovered even in the face of an
improving economy. Erceg and Levin (2013) show that the Great Recession contributed
a large amount to the decline in labor force participation. Charles, Hurst, and
Notowidigdo (2013) argue that despite being masked by the housing boom, non-
employment had been secularly increasing in the 2000s, which only revealed itself after
the housing market crash. Here, we examine whether labor force non-participation rates
increased in the recent recession.
        To see how non-participation has changed during the Great Recession, we
separate the study period into the years before and the years including and after the Great
Recession: 2000-2006 and 2007-2010. To estimate how the effect of a mass layoff
changed during the Great Recession, we interact our measure of mass layoffs with a
dummy for the year being after 2007. Our estimates from this approach are in Table 6,
allowing the effect of a mass layoff to be different before and after the Great Recession.
In the table, below the coefficient estimates, we list the total effect for the time period
before the recession and after the recession.11
        Our results show that the non-participation channel grew much larger during the
Great Recession. The effect of a 1 percent mass layoff in the pre-recession period caused
county labor force size to decrease by about 0.11 percentage points. Additionally, the
effect of the mass layoff is large for both out-migration and in-migration, and all the
estimates taken together imply a residual of approximately 0.026, implying that our
channels over-explain the labor force change.

11
  We also estimate each time period separately; however, given the short time period since the Great
Recession, if we estimate it separately we are unable to include trends, and so Table 6 shows our preferred
approach.
                                                    16
           The results are much different for the years after 2007. First, the labor force
response to a one percent mass layoff is more than twice as large as before 2007.
Second, the out-migration response after 2007 is muted, with a magnitude about half as
large as the response before 2007. Taken together, our estimates suggest that migration,
retirement, and disability explain only about 33 percent of the total change in the labor
force during the recession years, with the residual (non-participation) explaining 67
percent of the net labor force change. These results show that during the Great
Recession, migration was not a major channel for labor market adjustment to local
shocks. One possibility is that the Great Recession was unique given the role of the
housing crisis, which impeded mobility; we return to this possible explanation in a later
section. Another possibility is that during recessions more broadly, mobility plays a
more limited role in local labor market adjustment than in a non-recessionary period
(Saks and Wozniak, 2010). Results showing a limited role for migration are generally
consistent with the findings of Notowidigdo (2013), who suggests that migration is not
the primary mechanism in the adjustment of local labor markets. This suggests that
examinations of labor market adjustment may need to distinguish recessionary and
growth periods to understand the nature and speed of local labor force adjustments.
Another part of this interpretation is to recognize that a 1 percent mass layoff may
represent a larger change to net employment during a recession, since job creation rates
are pro-cyclical.


5.1        Geography of labor force exits
           In addition to exploring heterogeneity before and after the Great Recession, we
explore the potential for geographic heterogeneity in the response to labor demand
shocks. In particular, responses in urban counties may be different because of differences
in the density of job opportunities, distance to other potential jobs in adjacent counties, or
attitudes toward and availability of public assistance. Additionally, some counties that are
not near cities may be more dependent on a single firm or industry, leading mass layoff
events to have an outsized effect.12


12
     For instance, the economy of rural Greenlee County, Arizona depends on one of the largest copper mines
     in the world, which in 2001 and 2008 laid off a large number of workers and, thus, a substantial fraction
                                                       17
         We categorize counties by whether they were part of a metropolitan statistical
area (MSA) as defined in the 1990 Census. We use 1990 MSA definitions in order to fix
these definitions before the start of the study period.13 We find similar effects for MSA
and non-MSA counties, and suggestive evidence that non-participation is higher in rural
counties, although the differences are not statistically significant. Additionally, we test
whether the effects differ before and after the Great Recession for urban and rural
counties, and find similar patterns, but our results have large standard errors.14
         In addition to categorizing counties by their population, we also examine the
distance of movement for individuals who migrate. Fogli, Hill and Perri (2012) argue
that individuals displaced from work in one county may migrate to an adjacent county,
mechanically increasing its unemployment rate in the receiving county. One advantage
of the IRS migration data is that they allow us to decompose the migration response in
more detail and thus estimate the size of the different migration types.
         We explore whether workers undertake moves across state lines or to adjacent
counties. Table 7 shows the results of these decompositions. Column 1 displays the main
result from Table 5, while columns 2-5 examine the responses of the four types of
migration flows. The results suggest that the majority of people leaving the county
following layoffs tend to leave the state (82 percent). Similarly, 99 percent of moves are
to non-adjacent counties. These findings suggest that individuals seek moves to a
different labor market, rather than simply relocating to reduce housing arrangements or
costs.




5.2      Effects Moderated by County Features
         Following Notowidigdo (2013), we expect the response to a mass layoff to be
moderated by the strength of income supports in the local safety net. However, estimating
these effects is difficult; while counties vary dramatically in take-up rates of different

   of the county’s labor force. Likewise, a series of lumber mill closings in northern Idaho in 2000,
   especially in Benewah County, devastated the local economy, directly affecting four percent of the labor
   force.
13
   Overall, in 1996, about 25% of the US population resided in “non-MSA” counties, a share that decreased
only slightly during our study period.
14
   These results are available upon request.
                                                    18
social programs, these differences are often endogenous to other local economic
conditions. Additionally, there is very little cross-sectional variation in safety net
generosity. One notable exception is unemployment insurance (UI), since states are able
to adjust the replacement rate of UI benefits (Kuka 2015, Lalumia 2013). To this end, we
use the UI benefit calculator developed by Lalumia (2013) and divide our sample into
counties that are in states with UI replacement rates above or below the median in 1996.
We find that there are no statistically significant differences between these counties,
suggesting that higher UI replacement rates do not affect labor market exit.
       One of our key findings is that the pattern of labor force adjustment changed
during the Great Recession, and the recession was driven in large part by subprime
lending and foreclosures. Using county data from the Home Mortgage Disclosure Act
(HMDA),15 which compiles detailed information on loan originations, we ranked
counties as high or low in terms of the share of home purchase loans that were high-cost
(the difference between its APR and a Treasury security with the same maturity was at
least 3 percent), since these are loans that were at a higher risk to go into foreclosure. One
limitation is that HMDA only began tracking this information in 2004, and so we limit
the analysis to 2007-2010 and omit county trends. Overall, we find that counties with
above-median rates of high-cost loans also saw larger decreases in the size of the labor
force following mass layoffs, although the differences are not statistically significant.
Additionally the counties had identical rates of out-migration. The similar out-migration
rates are consistent with research finding that homeowners entering foreclosure usually
move very short distances (Molloy and Shan, 2013), which are not captured in our inter-
county migration data. These results show little evidence that high-cost mortgage
exposure played a major role in impeding labor market adjustment.


5.3    Disability Application Response
       So far we have focused on disability insurance enrollment as the measure of a
permanent exit from the labor force, and have found no significant effects. However,


15
  These HMDA data files (www.metrotrends.org/natdata/hmda/hmda_download.cfm) and the procedures
for constructing them were initially developed by the Urban Institute to support
DataPlace (www.dataplace.org). The data are licensed under the Open Database License
(http:/www.metrotrends.org/natdata/ODbL.cfm).
                                              19
there is a large and growing literature that documents the strong link between economic
conditions and disability insurance. To investigate this discrepancy further, we use
information on applications to disability insurance.
        There are two benefits to using application counts in addition to changes in
disability insurance enrollment. First, applications may be a more accurate representation
of the role of disability insurance as an outside option for workers struggling to find
employment. Second, certain elements of the disability insurance process cause there to
be factors that may delay enrollment in the program in ways unrelated to an applicant’s
characteristics, including the applicant’s decision of the timing of when to apply (Autor et
al., 2015). Delays may be caused by processing time determined exogenously by
assignment to an examiner, or due to lengthy appeals.
        The data we use was compiled from the Disability Research File, and contains
county-level counts of applications, appeals, and allowances by gender and broad age
groups. County-year cells that had a count of less than 10 were suppressed. More detail
about these missing data is described in an appendix. We calculated the share of
individuals in a county that applied for disability insurance by dividing the application
count by the lagged population in that age group in a county. To estimate how application
behavior responds to mass layoffs, we include these application rates on the left-hand
side of equation 5 in a manner similar to previous analyses.
        Panel A of Table 8 displays the effect of mass layoffs on disability insurance
application. Overall, the effects are not statistically significant, though positive. There is,
however, a statistically significant response among older workers: a one percent mass
layoff increases application rates by about 0.007 percentage points.
        One aspect of the mass layoffs data we have not exploited thus far is that mass
layoff counts are also separately reported by age bands. Thus, Panel B of Table 8 shows
the effect of age-specific mass layoffs—the share of those in a certain age band laid off—
on the application behavior of the same age band. Here, we find some evidence that very
young and very old workers are responding to age-group specific mass layoffs. Focusing
on those over 55, a layoff that affects one percent of the population over 55 in a county
increases the application rate by 0.02 percentage points.



                                              20
        We also test whether there are differences in the responses before and after the
Great Recession; these results are in Table 9. We find that individuals aged over 55
responded much more strongly during the Great Recession to layoffs, which is evidenced
both in the overall and age-specific results. Additionally, our results from Table 9 on
individuals aged 55 and older imply that a 1 percent mass layoff increased DI application
rates by 0.01 percentage points during the Great Recession. Given our results from Table
6, that a 1 percent mass layoff decreases the labor force size by 0.22 percentage points,
the DI application effect can explain almost 5 percent of the overall change in the labor
force following a mass layoff.


5.4     Robustness Checks
        We perform a number of robustness checks to our basic specification. First, we
re-estimate equation 5, but also include a lead of the layoff share. If the lead is
significant, it would suggest that counties experiencing mass layoffs were generally
declining in a way that was predictable to individuals, suggesting that mass layoffs are
not an unexpected labor demand shock. As shown in Table 10, we find that the lead
coefficients are small and statistically insignificant.
        Up to this point, our representation of the local labor market has been the county.
However, many individuals commute across county lines for work, and so the county is a
somewhat restrictive measure of the local labor market. To address this shortcoming, we
aggregated all of our outcomes to the commuting zone level, which is a more natural
definition of a local labor market, and includes all counties in the United States. Our
estimates for those regressions are in Table 11. Our results using commuting zone level
effects are very similar to our main results in Table 5, although we find a smaller
residual, and the four channels of labor market exit explain 90 percent of the change in
labor force due to mass layoffs. In results not shown, we allowed the effect of mass
layoffs to differ before and during the Great Recession, and found similar patterns to
Table 6: a larger decrease in labor force size during the Great Recession and a smaller
effect on out-migration, which led to a larger estimated residual during the Great
Recession.



                                              21
           The analyses so far quantify the channels of labor market exit and compared their
magnitudes, with migration being the predominant type of exit. Bound and Holzer
(2000) find that different segments of the population adjust to labor market changes to
different extents. With this heterogeneity in mind, we measure the extent to which an
area’s demographic composition changes with mass layoff events. We use the share of
the population in various age and race categories as the dependent variable in equation 5.
Table 12 displays the results. While the effects are not statistically significant, the signs
of the coefficients are consistent with previous literature on migration propensities, as
well as our key result that migration is the predominant labor market exit. The effects
imply that following a mass layoff, the share of youth and adults that are early-career age
decrease, suggesting that they are more likely to migrate in response to a mass layoff.
On the other hand, the positive coefficients for the share of people ages 45-59 implies
that older workers are less likely to migrate in response to a mass layoff. We also find
that the share of the county that is white decreases, while the share that is black
increases, suggesting differential likelihood of migration by race, similar to the results
from Bound and Holzer (2000).


6          Conclusion
           Researchers have long been interested in how individuals respond to adverse
labor market conditions, and how these responses serve to equilibrate the labor market.
Blanchard and Katz (1992) was the first paper to suggest that labor mobility was central
to this adjustment process. However, in the years since the Blanchard and Katz study,
relatively little work has directly examined mobility in the aftermath of specific local
labor market shocks, while mobility rates have been in secular decline.16 Additionally,
the role of mobility in labor market adjustment has taken center stage as we emerge from
the Great Recession and see evidence that labor mobility seems to be lower than at any
time in recent history. This study attempts to bring these two lines of literature together,
examining mobility and other labor force adjustments to county-level mass layoff
measures.



16
     A notable exception is Zou (2015).
                                               22
         We find that a layoff of one percent of a county’s labor force leads to a decrease
in the county labor force of 0.19 percentage points, and further find that migration
accounts for a large share of this change. In all, our four exit channels—in-migration,
out-migration, retirement, and DI—account for about 55 percent of the net labor force
change following a mass layoff. Additionally, we show that non-participation has
increased in the Great Recession.
         Our finding of increased non-participation during and following the Great
Recession raises two important questions for further research. First, while there is
anecdotal evidence of what non-participants do with their time, to our knowledge there is
no empirical work quantifying the specific nature of non-participation. These former
workers may be working in informal markets, or they may be members of households
with multiple earners. Additionally, it is unclear to what extent the non-participation we
observe in the Great Recession is temporary or permanent, and whether we should expect
these former workers to return to the labor force after labor market conditions improve.
As with the long-term unemployed, it is likely that the skills of these non-participating
individuals have decayed, and they may be less productive upon re-entering the labor
force.
         Second, our results on non-participation do not speak to the effects of non-
participation on the aggregate labor market. While some researchers have tried to address
this issue broadly (Smith, 2014), much more research needs to be done on the margin of
non-participation in response to negative shocks. In particular, many job search models
do not consider non-participation as a separate state from unemployment. Most critically,
it will be important to continue to study non-participation following the Great Recession
to understand whether this is a temporary or permanent feature of our local labor
markets.




                                              23
References
Autor, David H., David Dorn and Gordon H. Hanson. 2013. "The China Syndrome:
       Local Labor Market Effects of Import Competition in the United
       States." American Economic Review, 103(6): 2121-68.
Autor, David H., Nicole Maestas, Kathleen J. Mullen, and Alexander Strand. 2015.“Does
       delay cause decay? the effect of administrative decision time on the labor force
       participation and earnings of disability applicants.” NBER Working
       Papers20840, National Bureau of Economic Research, Inc
Autor, David H., and Mark G. Duggan. 2003 “The rise in the disability rolls and the
       decline in unemployment.” The Quarterly Journal of Economics, 118(1):157–
       205.
Bartik, Timothy J. 1991. "Who benefits from state and local economic development
       policies?." Books from Upjohn Press .
Bartik, Timothy J. 1996. “The Distributional Effects of Local Labor Demand and
       Industrial Mix: Estimates Using Individual Panel Data.” Upjohn Working Papers
       and Journal Articles, W.E. Upjohn Institute for Employment Research.
Black, Dan, Kermit Daniel, and Seth Sanders. 2002. “The impact of economic conditions
       on participation in disability programs: Evidence from the coal boom and bust.”
       American Economic Review, 92(1):27–50.
Blanchard, Olivier J., and Lawrence F. Katz. 1992. “Regional evolutions.” Brookings
       Papers on Economic Activity, 23(1):1–76.
Bosworth, Barry P., and Gary Burtless. 2010. “Recessions, wealth destruction, and the
       timing of retirement.” Working Papers, Center for Retirement Research at Boston
       College wp2010-21, Center for Retirement Research.
Bound, John and Harry J. Holzer. 2000. “Demand shifts, population adjustments, and
       labor market outcomes during the 1980s”. Journal of Labor Economics,
       18(1):20–54.
Burkhauser, Richard V., J.S. Butler and Gulcin Gumus. 2004. “Dynamic programming
       model estimates of social security disability insurance application timing.”
       Journal of Applied Econometrics, 19(6):671–685.



                                            24
Chan, Sewin and Ann H. Stevens. 1999. “Job loss and retirement behavior of older
       men.” NBER Working Papers6920, National Bureau of Economic Research, Inc.
Coile, Courtney C., and Phillip B. Levine. 2011. “The market crash and mass layoffs:
       How the current economic crisis may affect retirement.” The B.E. Journal of
       Economic Analysis & Policy, 11(1):1–42.
Charles, Kerwin K., Erik Hurst, and Matthew J. Notowidigdo. 2013. “Manufacturing
       decline, housing booms, and non-employment.” Working Paper 18949, National
       Bureau of Economic Research.
Davies, Paul S., Michael J. Greenwood, and Haizheng Li. 2001. “A conditional logit
       approach to US state‐to‐state migration.” Journal of Regional Science, 41(2),
       337-360.
Erceg, Christoper J., and Andrew T. Levin. 2013. “Labor Force Participation and
       Monetary Policy in the Wake of the Great Recession,” CEPR Discussion
       Papers 9668, C.E.P.R. Discussion Papers.
Fogli, Alessandra, Enoch Hill and Fabrizio Perri. 2012. “The geography of the great
       recession.” In NBER International Seminar on Macroeconomics 2012, NBER
       Chapters. National Bureau of Economic Research, Inc.
Frey, William H. 2009. “The Great American Migration Slowdown: Regional and
       Metropolitan Dimensions.” Mimeo.
Goda, Gopi S., John B. Shoven and Sita N. Slavov. 2012. “Does stock market
       performance influence retirement intentions?” Journal of Human Resources,
       47(4):1055–1081.
Greenwood, Michael J. 1997. “Internal migration in developed countries.” Handbook of
       population and family economics, 1, 647-720.
Gross, Emily. 1999. “Internal revenue Service area-to-area migration data: Strengths,
       limitations, and current trends.” IRS Statistics of Income (SOI) Bulletin.
Hoynes, Hillary. 2000. “Local Labor Markets And Welfare Spells: Do Demand
       Conditions Matter?” The Review of Economics and Statistics, 82(3):351-368.
Kreider, Brent. 1998. “Workers’ applications to social insurance programs when
       earnings and eligibility are uncertain.” Journal of Labor Economics, 16(4):848–
       77.

                                            25
Kuka, Elira. 2015. “Quantifying the Benefits of Social Insurance: Unemployment
       Insurance and Health.” Job Market Paper..
Kwok, Joyce, Mary Daly and Bart Hobijn. 2010. “Labor Force Participation and the
       Future Path of Unemployment,” FRB SF Economic Letter 2010-27.
LaLumia, Sara. 2013. “The EITC, Tax Refunds and Unemployment Spells.” American
       Economic Journal: Economic Policy. 5(2): 188-221.
Lindo, Jason M. 2015. “Aggregation and the estimated effects of local economic
       conditions on health.” Journal of Health Economics, 40: 83-96.
Lundberg, Shelly. 1985. “The added worker effect.” Journal of Labor
       Economics, 3(1), 11–37.
Mattingly, Marybeth J., and Kristin E. Smith. 2010. “Changes in wives’ employment
       when husbands stop working: a recession-prosperity comparison.” Family
       Relations, 59: 343-357.
Molloy, Raven, Christopher L. Smith, and Abigail Wozniack. 2011. “Internal Migration
       in the United States,” Journal of Economic Perspectives, vol. 25(3), pages 173-
       96.
Molloy, Raven and Hui Shan. 2013."The Post-foreclosure Experience of U.S.
       Households," Real Estate Economics, American Real Estate and Urban
       Economics Association, vol. 41(2), pages 225-254, 06.
Moulta-Ali, Umar. 2013. “Social Security Disability Insurance (SSDI): The Five-Month
       Waiting Period for Benefits.” Congressional Research Service Report.
Notowidigdo, Matthew J. 2013. “The incidence of local labor demand shocks.” Working
       Paper 17167, National Bureau of Economic Research.
Peri, Giovanni and Chad Sparber, 2011. “Assessing inherent model bias: An application
       to native displacement in response to immigration," Journal of Urban Economics,
       Elsevier, vol. 69(1), pages 82-91.
Rappaport, Jordan. 2004. “Why are population flows so persistent?”, Journal of Urban
       Economics, Volume 56, Issue 3, Pages 554-580.
Ravikumar, B. and Lin Shao. 2014. “Discouraged Workers: What Do We Know?”
       Federal Reserve Bank of St. Louis Economic Synopses, 2014, No. 6.



                                            26
Saks, Raven E., and Abigail Wozniak. 2011. “Labor reallocation over the business cycle:
       new evidence from internal migration.” Journal of Labor Economics, 29(4):697–
       739.
Smith, Christopher L. 2014. "The Effect of Labor Slack on Wages: Evidence from State-
       Level Relationships," FEDS Notes 2014-06-02. Board of Governors of the
       Federal Reserve System (U.S.).
Stevens, Ann H. and Sewin Chan. 1999. “Employment and retirement following a late-
       career job loss.” American Economic Review, 89(2):211–216.
Sullivan, Daniel and Till von Wachter. 2009. “Job displacement and mortality: an
       analysis using administrative data.” Quarter Journal of Economics. 124(3): 1265-
       1306.
Wozniak, Abigail. 2010. “Are college graduates more responsive to distant labor market
       opportunities?” Journal of Human Resources, 45(4), 944-970.
Zou, Ben. 2013. "The Local Labor Market Spillover Effects of Military Personnel
       Contractions." Job market paper.




                                          27
Appendix A: Issues of Weighting, Trends, and the Year 2000
           This appendix serves to explain why we have opted to display un-weighted
estimates in the main results throughout. We show first that the estimates for net labor
force are unchanged if we weight, but do not include county-specific trends. Then we
discuss differences in the results when including both weights and trends.
           The first column of Table A1 shows the estimate of the total effect of a mass
layoff (including lags) on net labor force change. Comparing the first, second, and third
rows show similar estimates. However, in the fourth row, where we include weights as
well as trends, our estimate shrinks considerably.
           One reason why the estimate changes so much when we include both weights and
trends is that the labor force changes in 2000 have some error built into them. The Bureau
of Labor Statistics incorporated major changes and revisions to the employment and labor
force numbers, which were adjusted between December 1999 and January 2000, and
December 2002 and January 2003. The former adjustment is the largest of these
adjustments, and also has the largest impact on our estimates.17 This suggests that the
year 2000 is problematic. To show why this would affect our estimates, we demonstrate
two main facts: (1) This adjustment differentially affected different sizes of counties
(which would affect estimates with weighting); and (2) This adjustment would have
affected the county-specific detrending of the estimates (which would be affect estimates
with trends). Taken together, this would suggest that dropping the year 2000 should
mitigate these problems. We show how this affects the estimates in the second column of
Table A1, which shows that omitting the year 2000 for net labor force changes our
estimates only when weighted with trends.
           Again, there are two key conclusions from this exercise. First, the BLS
adjustment differentially affected different sizes of counties. In order to see this fact,
consider Figure A3. Each panel shows the distribution of net labor force changes, by
quartile of county size in 1996. Most years (1999, 2001, and 2002) the distributions are
rather tight, and similar across county size. However, in 2000, everything is much more
disbursed, and importantly, becomes more disbursed for smaller counties than for larger



17
     (http://www.bls.gov/cps/cpscomp.pdf),
                                               28
counties. While we know this is true in other years as well, it is much more stark in 2000.
Therefore, this adjustment by the BLS differentially affected different sizes of counties.
          The second key finding is that the BLS adjustment affects county-specific trends,
differentially by size of county. The previous fact showed that the adjustment the BLS
made had different effects on changes between large and small counties. Figure A4
graphs the average net LF changes over time, once again by quartile of county population
in 1996. Notice that while the time series for counties in the fourth quartile of population
evolves smoothly over time from 1996 to 2010, counties in the other quartiles do not
follow the same smooth pattern. In fact, in 2000, the average for these counties spikes,
and then falls back to its normal level the year before (the numbers in 1999 and 2001 are
almost identical). For the smallest quartile, the 2003 adjustment is evident as well; but the
other quartiles are unaffected.
          If we include trends, then these changes for counties will change the value of the
ηc in equation 5, and adjust the slope of the county-specific trend. However, because this
effect is differential by county size, it will really only affect our estimates when we also
weight.
          One additional comment is warranted here. If only the smallest counties were
affected by this problem, then weighting would diminish of the issue; however, Figure
A4 shows that the bottom three quartiles of counties were affected, and so weighting does
not mitigate the problem.


Appendix B: SSDI Applications and Missing Data
          To maintain the confidentiality of SSDI applicants, the Social Security
Administration suppressed cells in the county-level aggregation of the Disability
Research File (DRF) if the count was less than 10. In order to allow us to observe
aggregate counts, however, the DRF had counts suppressed for all subgroups it at least
one subgroup had a count of less than 10, but reported the aggregate number.18



18
  For example, if in county X in year YYYY there were 5 males under 30 years old who applied and 15
females, the cell for males under 30 and the cell for females under 30 would be suppressed. However, the
cell for total applications under 30 would show a value of 20. This keeps the confidentiality of the cell
under 10 while allowing us to observe the aggregate count.
                                                   29
        Missing data are relatively common. In the study period, between 350 and 800
counties had missing totals each year, suggesting that this number of counties had fewer
than 10 applicants at all. For the age breakouts, the number of missing observations is
greater. For the older age groups (45-54, 55 and over) approximately a third of counties
were not reported, while in some years half of counties were not reported for the younger
age groups (under 30, 31-44). Approximately half (47 percent) of counties had non-
missing data in all years.
        These missing data do not reflect inconsistencies in the data, but are rather the
results of small numbers of applications. As such, our preferred specification, reported in
the body of this paper, drops these missing observations. For robustness we also explored
other strategies.
        Table A2 shows the results of various missing-data specifications. Panel A shows
a summary of the results from table A2. Panel B excludes any county that ever had
missing data. Panels C, D, and E assign values of 0, 1, and 9 to any missing cell,
respectively. Assigning a 0 to all observations would generate a result based on the lower
bound of missing data, while assigning a 9 would create a result based on the upper
bound. Panel F assigns a random number, chosen from a uniform distribution between 0
and 9. There are negligible differences between these panels.




                                             30
     Table 1: IV Results, First Stage

                    Unemployment Rate, t
Layoffs, t              0.3295***
                         (0.0546)

Layoffs t − 1               0.3322***
                             (0.0563)

Layoffs t − 2               0.1042***
                             (0.0392)
N                             26405
Standard errors in parentheses, clustered on state.
Dependent variable is the unemployment rate.
Each regression includes county and year fixed-
effects, and county-specific trends. * p <.10, ** p
< .05, *** p < .01
Table 2: Effect of Unemployment Rate on Labor Force Exits

                                     OLS                 IV
     Net Labor Force
     Unemp. Rate, t              -0.00292***       -0.00245***
                                  (0.000396)         (0.0009)

     In-Migration
     Unemp. Rate, t             -0.000904***          -0.00030
                                 (0.000238)          (0.00039)

     Out-Migration
     Unemp. Rate, t              0.000577***        0.00095***
                                  (0.000129)         (0.00023)

     Disability Insurance
     Unemp. Rate, t                0.000023          0.000082
                                  (0.000016)        (0.000072)

     Retirement
     Unemp. Rate, t               0.000049            0.00013
                                  (0.00003)          (0.00017)

     Standard errors in parentheses, clustered on state. Depen-
     dent variables are listed at the headings of each sub-panel.
     The first column is the OLS result, the second column
     is instrumenting the unemployment rate in year t with
     mass layoff share in years t, t − 1, t − 2. Each regression
     includes county and year fixed-effects, and county-specific
     trends. * p <.10, ** p < .05, *** p < .01
                          Table 3: Summary Statistics, 2000-2010

                                                  All Years       2000-2006          2007-2010
A: Summary Statistics
Layoffs per Labor Force                             0.0070          0.0059             0.0087
                                                   (0.0098)        (0.0084)           (0.0118)
Layoffs Number                                    378.9123        314.1393            492.4453
                                                 (1935.5590)     (1390.7880)        (2627.3110)

N                                                   33794            21518             12276

B: Incidence of Mass Layoffs
1% of LF                                            0.6059          0.4562             0.5269
                                                   (0.4887)        (0.4982)           (0.4994)
2% of LF                                            0.3351          0.2007             0.2663
                                                   (0.4721)        (0.4006)           (0.4421)
3% of LF                                            0.1772          0.0913             0.1354
                                                   (0.3819)        (0.2881)           (0.3422)
4% of LF                                            0.0932          0.0368             0.0717
                                                   (0.2908)        (0.1882)           (0.2580)
5% of LF                                            0.0504          0.0174             0.0387
                                                   (0.2188)        (0.1309)           (0.1929)

N                                                    3154            3154               3154

C: Components of Labor Force Change
Net Labor Force change                              0.0031          0.0040             0.0016
                                                   (0.0195)        (0.0216)           (0.0151)
Work-age Population change                          0.0041          0.0050             0.0025
                                                   (0.0108)        (0.0112)           (0.0099)
Inmigration-rate                                    0.0063          0.0064             0.0060
                                                   (0.0229)        (0.0230)           (0.0223)
Outmigration-rate                                   0.0061          0.0062             0.0059
                                                   (0.0199)        (0.0193)           (0.0206)
New DI                                              0.0012          0.0012             0.0013
                                                   (0.0046)        (0.0056)           (0.0017)
New Retired                                         0.0022          0.0017             0.0030
                                                   (0.0163)        (0.0199)           (0.0063)
Implied Residual                                    0.0016          0.0001             0.0042
                                                   (0.0336)        (0.0399)           (0.0177)
N                                                   33794           21518              12276
Incidence of mass layoffs refers to the share of counties that experienced at least one year where
layoffs affected the noted percentage of the labor force. Work-age population is the population aged
15-65. The implied residual is calculated as described in the text, equation 3.
          Table 4: Effect of Layoff Events on Migration

                     (1)            (2)           (3)            (4)

Dependent Variable:Out-migration Rate
Layoffs      0.0437∗∗∗   0.0414∗∗∗ 0.0392∗∗∗                  0.0446∗∗∗
              (0.0110)   (0.00952) (0.0107)                   (0.0114)

L.Layoffs                        0.0186∗∗     0.0144∗∗∗       0.0183∗∗∗
                                 (0.0059)     (0.0053)        (0.0063)

L2.Layoffs                                      0.0076       0.0181***
                                               (0.0058)       (0.0058)
Total Effect     0.0437***      0.0599***     0.0612***      0.0809***
                  (0.011)        (0.0133)      (0.0159)       (0.0192)

Dependent Variable:In-migration Rate
Layoffs      -0.0403∗∗∗ -0.0335∗∗ -0.0343∗∗                    -0.0192
              (0.0145)    (0.0134)   (0.0145)                 (0.0156)

L.Layoffs                        -0.0230∗       -0.0139        -0.0015
                                 (0.0116)      (0.0109)       (0.0118)

L2.Layoffs                                      -0.0133         0.0068
                                               (0.0082)       (0.0106)
Total Effect    -0.0403***      -0.0565**     -0.0615**        -0.0139
(se)             (0.0145)        (0.0232)      (0.0284)       (0.0323)
County FEs         YES             YES           YES             YES
Year FEs           YES             YES           YES             YES
Trends                                                           YES
N                  36755          33650         30566           30566
Standard errors in parentheses, clustered on state. Dependent variables are
listed at the headings of each panel. Layof f s is the number of extended
mass layoffs, divided by the lagged labor force. In-migration and out-
migration rates are number of migrants divided by the sum of out-migrants
and non-migrants. Each regression includes county and year fixed-effects;
county specific trends are included in column 4. * p <.10, ** p < .05, ***
p < .01
              Table 5: Total Effects of Mass Layoffs on Labor Market Exits

                          (1)           (2)          (3)           (4)         (5)       Estimated
                          LF          In-Mig       Out-Mig         DI          Ret        Residual

With Trends          -0.1975***       -0.0139     0.0809*** 0.0072            0.0034       -0.0921
                      (0.0718)       (0.0323)      (0.0192) (0.0052)         (0.0122)      (0.0821)

Without Trends       -0.1751***     -0.0615**      0.0612**     0.008**       0.0031       -0.0414
                      (0.0401)       (0.0284)      (0.0159)     (0.0034)     (0.0055)      (0.0521)

Y-Mean                  0.004         0.058         0.058         0.001       0.002
Observations            30566         30566         30566         30566       30566
Dependent variables are listed at the head of the column. The Total Effect displayed are the sum of the
contemporaneous and lagged effects, from estimates of equation 5. The first panel displays estimates
without trends, while the second panel displays estimates including county-specific trends. Standard
errors in parentheses, clustered on state. Each regression also includes county and year fixed-effects.
Estimated residual in bold calculated from Equation 2, and standard error calculated by summing up all
the total effect squared standard errors and taking the square root. * p <.10, ** p < .05, *** p < .01
        Table 6: Effect of Layoff Events, Interaction with Start of Great Recession

                                      (1)          (2)         (3)              (4)          (5)        Estimated
                                      LF         In-Mig      Out-Mig            DI         Retired       Residual

Layoffs, t                         0.0589       -0.00845      0.0488∗∗       0.00332       0.00553
                                  (0.0489)      (0.0246)      (0.0208)      (0.00396)     (0.00963)

Layoffs, t − 1                    -0.107∗∗∗     -0.00589     0.0282∗∗∗       0.00429        0.0126
                                  (0.0351)      (0.0122)     (0.00773)      (0.00662)      (0.0218)

Layoffs, t − 2                    -0.0595∗      -0.00191     0.0255∗∗∗       0.00114      -0.0119∗∗
                                  (0.0333)      (0.0124)     (0.00758)      (0.00231)     (0.00555)

Layoffs, t× Post-2007             -0.151∗∗       -0.0160      -0.00723       -0.00141      0.00191
                                  (0.0752)      (0.0277)      (0.0208)      (0.00324)     (0.00860)

Layoffs, t − 1× Post-2007          -0.0295      0.00713        -0.0179       -0.00248       -0.0181
                                  (0.0619)      (0.0220)      (0.0118)      (0.00785)      (0.0292)

Layoffs, t − 2× Post-2007          0.0620        0.0224        -0.0180       0.00196        0.0160
                                  (0.0578)      (0.0212)      (0.0110)      (0.00365)      (0.0102)

Total Effect, Pre                  -0.1076       -0.0163     0.1025***       0.0088         0.0062         0.0262
                                  (0.0836)      (0.0369)      (0.0285)      (0.0095)       (0.0297)        (0.101)
Total Effect, Post                -0.2266*       -0.0027     0.0594***      0.0068*         0.0060        -0.1517
                                  (0.1232)      (0.0498)      (0.0207)      (0.0040)       (0.0058)       (0.1347)

Y-Mean                              0.004        0.057         0.057          0.001         0.002
Observations                        30566        30566         30566          30566         30566
Dependent variables are listed at the head of each column. The coefficient estimates come from estimating
equation 5, while allowing the effect to differ before and after 2007. Standard errors in parentheses, clustered on
state. Each regression also includes county and year fixed-effects, as well as county-specific trends. Estimated
residual in bold calculated from Equation 2, and standard error calculated by summing up all the total effect
squared standard errors and taking the square root. * p <.10, ** p < .05, *** p < .01
                Table 7: Geographic Decomposition of Migration Rates

                     (1)          (2)       (3)                          (4)             (5)
              Total Migration In-State Out-of-State                    Adjacent      Non-Adjacent
                    Rate
 A: Out-Migration
Total Effect     0.0859***    0.01559   0.0703***                        0.0005         0.0854***
                  (0.0210)    (0.0105)   (0.0151)                       (0.0076)         (0.0184)
Y-Mean              0.058        0.03      0.028                         0.023             0.035
 B: In-Migration
Total Effect       -0.0357     -0.0058    -0.0300                        -0.0072          -0.0285
                  (0.0286)    (0.0141)   (0.0207)                       (0.0086)         (0.0251)
Y-Mean              0.059        0.03      0.028                          0.023            0.036
N                   39845       39845      39845                          39845            39845
Each panel is a different migration rate - the first is out-migration, and the second is in-migration.
Dependent variables are listed at the head of each column, and are components of the migration
rate listed at the head of the panel. The total effects come from the coefficients that come from
estimating equation 5. Standard errors in parentheses, clustered on state. Each regression also
includes county and year fixed-effects, as well as county-specific trends. * p <.10, ** p < .05, ***
p < .01
                 Table 8: Effect of Layoff Events on Disability Applications

                          (1)        (2)                 (3)           (4)               (5)
                        Total     Under 30            Age 30-44     Age 45-54          Age 55+
     Panel A: All Layoffs
     Total Effect       0.0052     0.0140               -0.0027       0.0119           0.0073***
                      (0.0039) (0.0092)                (0.0071)      (0.0083)           (0.0036)
     Panel B: Age-Specific Layoffs
     Subgroup Effect 0.0052 0.0269***                   -0.0027       0.0082           0.0286***
                      (0.0039) (0.0111)                (0.0071)      (0.0073)           (0.0085)
     Y-Mean             0.0058     0.0062               0.0067        0.0108             0.0066
     Observations       33599      19818                 24558        25476              25850
     Dependent variable for each column is the share of an age group that filed an application
     for disability insurance. The key independent variables in panel A are the number of laid off
     workers as a share of the county’s labor force. For panel B, the key independent variables
     are the number of age-specific laid off workers as a share of the age-specific population. The
     reported coefficients are the sum of contemporaneous and two lagged effects. Standard errors in
     parentheses, clustered on state. Each regression also includes county and year fixed-effects, as
     well as county-specific trends. * p <.10, ** p < .05, *** p < .01


Table 9: Effect of Layoff Events on Disability Applications, Before and After Great Recession

                                     (1)         (2)           (3)            (4)           (5)
                                    Total      Under 30     Age 30-44      Age 45-54      Age 55+
    A: All Layoffs
    Total Effect, Pre              0.0071      0.0183*        -0.0006        0.0121         0.0049
                                  (0.0045)     (0.0099)      (0.0088)       (0.0099)       (0.0043)

    Total Effect, Post             0.0021       0.0073        -0.0062        0.0119        0.0105*
                                  (0.0047)     (0.0114)      (0.0083)       (0.0113)       (0.0052)
    B: Age-Specific Layoffs
    Total Effect, Pre              0.0071      0.0361**       -0.0018        0.0068         0.0197
                                  (0.0045)     (0.0136)      (0.0087)       (0.0093)       (0.0110)

    Total Effect, Post             0.0021       0.0147        -0.0036        0.0099       0.0400***
                                  (0.0047)     (0.0149)      (0.0088)       (0.0110)       (0.0135)
    Y-Mean                         0.0058       0.0062        0.0067         0.0108         0.0066
    Observations                   33599        19818          24558         25476          25850
    Dependent variable for each column is the share of an age group that filed an application
    for disability insurance. The key independent variables in panel A are the number of laid off
    workers as a share of the county’s labor force. For panel B, the key independent variables
    are the number of age-specific laid off workers as a share of the age-specific population. The
    reported coefficients are the sum of contemporaneous and two lagged effects. Standard errors in
    parentheses, clustered on state. Each regression also includes county and year fixed-effects, as
    well as county-specific trends. * p <.10, ** p < .05, *** p < .01
                                  Table 10: Effect of Layoff Events, Including Leads

                     (1)           (2)           (3)           (4)            (5)             (6)         (7)           (8)
                        In-Mig                     Out-Mig                            DI                        Ret
Layoffs t         -0.0237∗   -0.0172         0.0439∗∗∗ 0.0434∗∗∗          0.000795          0.00184     0.00614    0.00576∗
                  (0.0128) (0.0149)          (0.0120)   (0.0125)          (0.00187)        (0.00205)   (0.00374) (0.00341)

Layoffs t − 1     -0.00979      -0.00985      0.0165∗∗     0.0254∗∗∗       0.00115          0.00108     0.00245      0.00448
                  (0.0104)      (0.0110)     (0.00684)     (0.00760)      (0.00232)        (0.00287)   (0.00518)    (0.00673)

Layoffs t − 2     -0.00362 -0.00942           0.00505       0.00781      -0.0000300        -0.000573 -0.00498∗       -0.00374
                 (0.00860) (0.00977)         (0.00732)     (0.00821)      (0.00140)        (0.00184) (0.00294)      (0.00372)

Layoffs t + 1                    -0.0154                    0.00259                         -0.00213                -0.000277
                                (0.0113)                   (0.00595)                       (0.00131)                (0.00259)
Total Effect       -0.0371       -0.0518     0.0655***     0.0792***        0.0019           0.0002     0.0036        0.0062
                  (0.0282)       (0.038)      (0.0182)      (0.0217)       (0.0041)         (0.0051)   (0.0088)      (0.0097)
Y-Mean               .059          .059         .058          .058           .002             .002       .004          .004
N                   39845         39838        39845         39838          39960            36877      39960         36877
Dependent variables are listed at the head of each column. The estimates come from estimating equation 5. Columns 2, 4, 6,
and 8 include a lead of layoffs share. Standard errors in parentheses, clustered on state. Each regression also includes county
and year fixed-effects, as well as county-specific trends. * p <.10, ** p < .05, *** p < .01
                Table 11: Effect of Layoff Events at Commuting Zone Level

                      (1)            (2)           (3)           (4)             (5)         Estimated
                      LF           In-Mig       Out-Mig           DI         Retirement       Residual
Layoffs t           -0.0393      -0.0486∗∗∗     0.0576∗∗∗      0.00201         0.0143
                   (0.0320)       (0.0125)      (0.0158)      (0.00348)       (0.0120)

Layoffs t − 1      -0.153∗∗∗       -0.0148      0.0220∗∗∗     0.00475∗∗        0.00797
                   (0.0333)       (0.0137)      (0.00798)     (0.00210)       (0.00521)

Layoffs t − 2       0.0294       0.00790         0.0112        -0.00626        -0.0222
                   (0.0364)      (0.0117)      (0.00811)      (0.00738)       (0.0245)
Total Effect      -0.1631**      -0.0555*      0.0908***        0.0005         0.0001         -0.0162
(se)               (0.0676)      (0.0291)       (0.0222)       (0.0037)       (0.0105)        (0.0777)
Y-Mean              0.0043        0.0579         0.0572         0.0009          0.0019
Observations         8664          8664           8664           8664            8664
Dependent variables are listed at the head of each column. The estimates come from estimating
equation 5, but the observation is the commuting zone-year. The total effects are the sum of the
layoffs coefficients. Standard errors in parentheses, clustered on state. Each regression also includes
commuting zone and year fixed-effects, as well as CZ-specific trends. Estimated residual in bold
calculated from Equation 2, and standard error calculated by summing up all the total effect squared
standard errors and taking the square root. * p <.10, ** p < .05, *** p < .01




             Table 12: Effect of Layoff Events on Demographic Composition

                      (1)            (2)            (3)            (4)              (5)
                   Age 0-18      Age 19-44      Age 45-59      Age 60 plus        Black        White
 Total Effect       -.0131         -.0165         .0157           .0139           .0068        -.0045
                   (0.0157)       (0.0166)       (0.0171)       (0.0152)         (0.0058)     (0.0075)
 Y-Mean              0.26           0.331          0.205         0.203            0.091         0.88
 Observations       39926          39926          39926          39926            39926        39926
 Dependent variable for each column is the share of the population fitting the description at the head
 of the column. The three panels are separate estimates for the whole time period, the effect before
 2007, and the effect after 2007 The estimates come from estimating equation 5. Standard errors in
 parentheses, clustered on state. Each regression also includes county and year fixed-effects, as well as
 county-specific trends. * p <.10, ** p < .05, *** p < .01
                                         Figure 1: Event Studies, 4% Mass Layoff Event (N=118 counties)
                  .01




                                                                                              .01
                         .005




                                                                                                      .005
 Effect (Percentage Points)




                                                                               Effect (Percentage Points)
               0




                                                                                            0
 −.005




                                                                             −.005
                  −.01




                                                                                              −.01
                                    −2    −1       0          1      2   3                                      −2   −1     0          1      2   3
                                                 Years since event                                                        Years since event



                                          In-migration                                                               Out-migration
                  .002




                                                                                              .002
                            .0015




                                                                                                        .0015
 Effect (Percentage Points)




                                                                             Effect (Percentage Points)
                    .001




                                                                                                .001
            .0005




                                                                                        .0005
     0




                                                                                 0
                  −.001 −.0005




                                                                                              −.001 −.0005




                                    −2    −1       0          1      2   3                                      −2   −1     0          1      2   3
                                                 Years since event                                                        Years since event



                                               Disability                                                             Retirement

Figures display coefficients from equation (5) in text, and a 95% point-wise confidence interval is shown, with
standard errors clustered at the state level. Outcome variables listed below each sub-figure. Event study
methodology is described in greater detail in the text. Sample is restricted to counties that experienced just
one layoff event surpassing four percent of the labor force in the years 2000-2007. Specifications include county
and year fixed effects.
Appendix Figures and Tables

                                         Figure A1: Event Studies, 3% Mass Layoff Event (N=196 counties)
                  .01




                                                                                               .01
                          .005




                                                                                                       .005
   Effect (Percentage Points)




                                                                                Effect (Percentage Points)
                0




                                                                                             0
 −.005




                                                                              −.005
                  −.01




                                                                                               −.01
                                    −2     −1       0          1      2   3                                      −2   −1     0          1      2   3
                                                  Years since event                                                        Years since event



                                           In-migration                                                               Out-migration
                  .002




                                                                                               .002
                            .0015




                                                                                                         .0015
 Effect (Percentage Points)




                                                                              Effect (Percentage Points)
                    .001




                                                                                                 .001
            .0005




                                                                                         .0005
     0




                                                                                  0
                  −.001 −.0005




                                                                                               −.001 −.0005




                                    −2     −1       0          1      2   3                                      −2   −1     0          1      2   3
                                                  Years since event                                                        Years since event



                                                Disability                                                             Retirement

Figures display coefficients from equation (5) in text, and a 95% point-wise confidence interval is shown, with
standard errors clustered at the state level. Outcome variables listed below each sub-figure. Event study
methodology is described in greater detail in the text. Sample is restricted to counties that experienced just
one layoff event surpassing three percent of the labor force in the years 2000-2007. Specifications include county
and year fixed effects.
                                         Figure A2: Event Studies, 2% Mass Layoff Event (N=254 counties)
                  .01




                                                                                               .01
                          .005




                                                                                                       .005
   Effect (Percentage Points)




                                                                                Effect (Percentage Points)
                0




                                                                                             0
 −.005




                                                                              −.005
                  −.01




                                                                                               −.01
                                    −2     −1       0          1      2   3                                      −2   −1     0          1      2   3
                                                  Years since event                                                        Years since event



                                           In-migration                                                               Outmigration
                  .002




                                                                                               .002
                            .0015




                                                                                                         .0015
 Effect (Percentage Points)




                                                                              Effect (Percentage Points)
                    .001




                                                                                                 .001
            .0005




                                                                                         .0005
     0




                                                                                  0
                  −.001 −.0005




                                                                                               −.001 −.0005




                                    −2     −1       0          1      2   3                                      −2   −1     0          1      2   3
                                                  Years since event                                                        Years since event



                                                Disability                                                             Retirement

Figures display coefficients from equation (1) in text, and a 95% point-wise confidence interval is shown, with
standard errors clustered at the state level. Outcome variables listed below each sub-figure. Event study
methodology is described in greater detail in the text. Sample is restricted to counties that experienced just
one layoff event surpassing two percent of the labor force in the years 2000-2007. Specifications include county
and year fixed effects.
  Figure A3: Distributions of Net Labor Force Change, by Quartile and Year


                                      1999                                            2000
           60




                                                                  60
           40




                                                                  40
           20




                                                                  20
           0




                                                                  0
                      −.1    −.05          0   .05        .1           −.1   −.05          0   .05        .1

                              Quartile 1         Quartile 2                   Quartile 1         Quartile 2
                              Quartile 3         Quartile 4                   Quartile 3         Quartile 4



                                      2001                                            2002
           60




                                                                  60
           40




                                                                  40
           20




                                                                  20
           0




                                                                  0
                      −.1    −.05          0   .05        .1           −.1   −.05          0   .05        .1

                              Quartile 1         Quartile 2                   Quartile 1         Quartile 2
                              Quartile 3         Quartile 4                   Quartile 3         Quartile 4




Figure A4: Average net LF changes over time, by quartile of county population
           .015 .01
   net_LF_share
       .0050
           −.005




                      1995                     2000                          2005                       2010
                                                               Year

                                                     Quartile 1               Quartile 2
                                                     Quartile 3               Quartile 4
Table A1: Effect of Layoff Events on Net Labor Force

              All years                Omitting 2000
  A: Un-weighted
  No Trends -0.1513                         -0.2107
              (0.0486)                     (0.0436)
  Trends        -.1501                      -0.2055
              (0.0610)                     (0.0602)
  B: Weighted
  No Trends -0.1463                         -0.1812
              (0.0681)                     (0.0606)
  Trends       -0.0527                       -.0999
              (0.0757)                     (0.0784)
  The dependent variable is change in labor force size. Each
  cell is a different regression, and the coefficients are the sum
  of the layoffs coefficients, estimated using equation 5. The
  first column includes all years, while the second column
  excludes the year 2000. Panel A displays estimates from
  unweighted regressions, while Panel B displays estimates
  from regressions weighted by lagged county population.
  Standard errors in parentheses are clustered on state. Each
  regression also includes county and year fixed-effects; the
  second row of each panel includes trends. * p <.10, ** p <
  .05, *** p < .01
Table A2: Robustness Check: Imputation of Missing Disability Application Data

                              Total      Under 30        31-44        45-54      55 over
   A. Preferred
   Total Effect               0.0089       0.0146       0.0009       0.0178       0.0047
                             (0.0037)     (0.0120)     (0.0059)     (0.0087)     (0.0057)
                              33599        20911        26406        27376        27733
   B. No-Missing
   Total Effect               0.0073       0.0010       0.0063       0.0213       0.0048
                             (0.0049)     (0.0171)     (0.0076)     (0.0116)     (0.0069)
                              19190        11533        20471        20627        20276
   C. Impute 0’s
   Total Effect               0.0107       0.0398       0.0088       0.0200       0.0087
                             (0.0044)     (0.0124)     (0.0064)     (0.0102)     (0.0068)
                              39921        39921        39921        39921        39921
   D. Iimpute 9’s
   Total Effect               0.0104       0.0731       -0.0139      0.0242       0.0127
                             (0.0043)     (0.0343)     (0.0069)     (0.0099)     (0.0054)
                              39921        39921         39921       39921        39921
   E. Random Impute
   Total Effect               0.0110       0.0553       -0.0006      0.0244       0.0117
                             (0.0042)     (0.0242)     (0.0065)     (0.0098)     (0.0052)
                              39921        39921         39921       39921        39921
   Dependent variable for each column is the share of an age group that filed an application
   for disability insurance. The reported coefficients are the sum of contemporaneous and
   two lagged effects. Panel A drops cells with missing data. Panel B drops counties with
   missing data in any year. Panel C and D impute a 0 (minimum) or 9 (maximum) for each
   missing observation, and panel E imputes a number chosen randomly between 0 and 9
   from a uniform distribution. Observations that were suppressed were randomly assigned
   a number between 0 and 9, uniformly. Standard errors in parentheses, clustered on state.
   Each regression also includes county and year fixed-effects, as well as county-specific
   trends. * p <.10, ** p < .05, *** p < .01
