NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

THE GIFT OF TIME? SCHOOL STARTING AGE AND MENTAL HEALTH
Thomas S. Dee
Hans Henrik Sievertsen
Working Paper 21610
http://www.nber.org/papers/w21610

NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
October 2015

We thank Paul Bingley, Björn Öckert, Kjell Salvanes, and seminar participants at SFI, Stanford University,
the fourth SOLE/EALE World Conference, the Copenhagen Education Network, and the CESifo Economics
of Education Conference for helpful comments and suggestions. This paper uses data from the Danish
National Birth Cohort (DNBC). The Danish National Research Foundation has established the Danish
Epidemiology Science Centre that initiated and created the DNBC. The DNBC is a result of a major
grant from this Foundation, as well as grants from the Pharmacy Foundation, the Egmont Foundation,
the March of Dimes Birth Defects Foundation, the Augustinus Foundation, and the Health Foundation.
Sievertsen acknowledges support from The Danish Council for Strategic Research, Grant DSF-09-070295.
The views expressed herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the
National Bureau of Economic Research.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peerreviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.
© 2015 by Thomas S. Dee and Hans Henrik Sievertsen. All rights reserved. Short sections of text,
not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit,
including © notice, is given to the source.

The Gift of Time? School Starting Age and Mental Health
Thomas S. Dee and Hans Henrik Sievertsen
NBER Working Paper No. 21610
October 2015
JEL No. I1,I2
ABSTRACT
In many developed countries, children now begin their formal schooling at an older age. However,
a growing body of empirical studies provides little evidence that such schooling delays improve
educational and economic outcomes. This study presents new evidence on whether school starting
age influences student outcomes by relying on linked Danish survey and register data that include
several distinct, widely used, and validated measures of mental health that are reported out-of-school
among similarly aged children. We estimate the causal effects of delayed school enrollment using
a "fuzzy" regression-discontinuity design based on exact dates of birth and the fact that, in Denmark,
children typically enroll in school during the calendar year in which they turn six. We find that a one-year
delay in the start of school dramatically reduces inattention/hyperactivity at age 7 (effect size = -0.7),
a measure of self regulation with strong negative links to student achievement. We also find that this
large and targeted effect persists at age 11. However, the estimated effects of school starting age on
other mental-health constructs, which have weaker links to subsequent student achievement, are smaller
and less persistent.

Thomas S. Dee
Stanford University
520 Galvez Mall, CERAS Building, 5th Floor
Stanford, CA 94305-3084
and NBER
tdee@stanford.edu
Hans Henrik Sievertsen
The Danish National Centre for Social Research
Copenhagen, Denmark
hhs@sfi.dk

1

Introduction

Over the last half century, the age at which children in the United States initiate their formal schooling has slowly increased. Historically, U.S. children attended kindergarten as
five-year olds and first grade as six-year olds. However, roughly 20 percent of kindergarten
students are now six years old (e.g., The New York Times, 2010; The Boston Globe, 2014).
This "lengthening of childhood" reflects in part changes in state laws that moved forward the
cutoff birth date at which 5 year olds were eligible for entering kindergarten (Deming and
Dynarski, 2008). However, most of the increase in school starting ages is due to academic
"redshirting"; an increasingly common decision by parents to seek developmental advantages for their children by delaying their school entry (i.e., the "gift of time"). Redshirting
is particularly common for boys and in socioeconomically advantaged families (Bassok and
Reardon, 2013).1 Delayed school starts are also common in other developed countries. For
example, in Denmark, one out of five boys and one out of ten girls have a delayed school
start.2 The conjectured benefits of starting formal schooling at an older age reflect two
broad mechanisms. One is relative maturity; students may benefit when they start school
at an older age simply because they have, on average, a variety of developmental advantages relative to their classroom peers. The second mechanism, absolute maturity, reflects
the hypothesis that formal schooling is more developmentally appropriate for older children. Specifically, a literature in developmental psychology suggests that children who start
school at a later age benefit from an extended period of informal, play-based preschool that
complements language development and the capacity for “self regulation” of cognitive and
emotional states (Vygotsky, 1978; Whitebread, 2011).
The decision of whether to delay a child’s formal schooling is a recurring topic in the
popular press (e.g., The New Yorker, 2013) with most coverage suggesting that there are
educational and economic benefits to delayed school entry. However, the available research
evidence largely suggests otherwise. A number of early studies (e.g., Bedard and Dhuey,
2006) did indeed show that children who start school later have, on average, higher per1

For example, according to the U.S. National Center for Education Statistics 14% of the children who
delayed school entrance in 2010 were children of parents in the lowest quintile of socioeconomic status, while
24% were children of parents in the highest quintile. The measure of socioeconomic status is based on parental
education, occupation, and household income at the time of data collection.
2
See Appendix Figure A.1 for the development of red-shirting in Denmark. Throughout this paper we refer
to school starting age as the age at which a child enters kindergarten, which in Danish is called grade zero or
"Børnehaveklasse".

2

formance on in-school tests (i.e., even after adjusting for the endogenous decision to redshirt). However, more recent studies suggest that these findings simply reflect the fact that
children who start school later are older when the test is given.3 For example, using Norweigan data, Black, Devereux, and Salvanes (2011) find that a higher school starting age
implies a small, negative effect on an IQ test taken outside of school at age 18. In a related
regression-discontinuity study using Swedish data, Fredriksson and Öckert (2013) conclude
that a higher school starting age increased educational attainment slightly but not lifetime
earnings.
In this study, we examine the causal effect of higher school starting age on different
dimensions of mental health among similarly aged Danish children. There is some limited
evidence that delays in school starting age improve measures of children’s mental health
(e.g., Black, Devereux, and Salvanes, 2011; Mühlenweg, Blomeyer, Stichnoth, and Laucht,
2012).4 Our study contributes to this literature in several ways. First, we base our study
on a unique source of data, a recent and large-scale survey of Danish children (the Danish
National Birth Cohort or DNBC). The DNBC includes, for children at age 7 and at age 11,
data from a widely used and validated mental-health screening tool (i.e., the Strengths and
Difficulties Questionnaire or SDQ). The SDQ was was explicitly designed for children and
generates measures of several distinct psychopathological constructs, some of which are
clearly related to the theorized effects of delayed school starts. Second, we are able to credibly identify the effects of a delayed school start through a "fuzzy" regression discontinuity
design based on exact day of birth. We identified the day of birth and school starting age of
children in the DNBC by matching these data to population data available in the Danish administrative registry and Ministry of Education records. In Denmark, children are supposed
to enter school in the calendar year in which they turn six. Using data on children’s exact
date of birth, we find that school starting age does indeed “jump” discontinuously for children born January 1st or later relative those born December 31st or earlier. We also avoid
confounds due to "age at test" because the DNBC data are based on children of roughly the
same age.5 Finally, the Danish context (i.e., a universal day-care system with a centrally
3
Angrist and Pischke (2008) offer this as an example of a “fundamentally unidentified” research question.
A student’s school starting age equals by definition their current age minus their time in school. So, for
measures of in-school performance, the effects of school starting age cannot be disentangled from age-at-test
and time-in-school effects.
4
Elder and Lubotsky (2009) also find that students who delay formal schooling are less likely to receive a
diagonsis of Attention Deficit/Hyperactivity Disorder (ADHD) but suggest that this is a diagnostic response to
the preschool differences of children who start late.
5
However, this does imply a potential collinearity with years of formal schooling. Children who start

3

specified structure) implies a fairly homogenous condition for students with higher school
starting ages.6
Our results indicate that a one-year increase in the school starting age leads to significantly improved mental health (i.e., reducing the “difficulties” scores at age 7 by 0.6 SD.
Interestingly, we find that these effects are largely driven by a large reduction (effect size
= -0.70) in a single SDQ construct: the SDQ’s inattention/hyperactivity score (i.e., a measure of self regulation). Consistent with a literature that emphasizes the importance of
self-regulation for student outcomes, we find that this construct is most strongly correlated
with the in-school performance of Danish children. This targeted effect is also consistent
with theoretical explanations from developmental psychology that stress the salience of extended play for the development of self regulation. We are also able to examine whether
these short-term effects persist using the most recently available data which tracks students
to age 11. We find that the large and concentrated effects largely persist to later childhood (i.e., an effect size for inattention/hyperactivity of -0.68). However, we also find
evidence that these effects are heterogeneous. Using an approach recently introduced by
Bertanha and Imbens (2014), we present evidence on the heterogeneity that distinguishes
the "compliers" from the "never takers" and "always takers" in our "intent to treat" (ITT)
design. We also find evidence that these effects are most pronounced among children with
higher-earning, better-educated parents.
This paper proceeds as follows: Section Two provides brief discussions of the theoretical relationships between school-starting delays and child outcomes and of the existing
empirical literature on this topic. Section Three introduces this study’s data, particularly
the DNBC and the SDQ measures. Section Four discusses the Danish setting, presents evidence on the discontinuous jump in school starting age for children whose birthday are past
the cutoff. This section also introduces our RD design and presents initial evidence on its
validity. Section Five presents the results. Section Six concludes this paper.
kindergarten late necessarily have fewer years of formal school when their outcomes are observed. We argue
that our pattern of results suggests effects related to a delayed school start. We also engage the question of
whether our results may be due to reference biases in the rating of children (Elder, 2010).
6
According to Statistics Denmark more than 95 percent of pre-school children are in daycare. In the US, in
contrast, 27 percent of the delayed school entrants in 2010 were not in a non-parental arrangement according
to the US National Center for Education Statistics.

4

2

Theoretical Framework and Prior Literature

One rationale for the growing number of parents who choose to delay their children’s school
starting age involves the perceived benefits of relative maturity for young children. This
conjecture, recently popularized by Malcolm Gladwell’s 2008 book, Outliers, turns on the
claim that children who are slightly older than their peers experience early successes that
are then followed by recursive processes of reinforcement and support.7 A second class
of rationales for delayed school starting age turns on the perceived benefits of increasing
the absolute maturity of children when they begin formal schooling. That is, a delay in
formal schooling may benefit student outcomes because slightly older children are more
developmentally aligned with the demands and opportunities of formal schooling.
Recent economic models of skill formation (e.g., Cunha, Heckman, Lochner, and Masterov, 2006) emphasize the relevance of such dynamics (i.e., the relevance of prior skill for
future skill formation). The importance of this alignment is also a longstanding theme in
developmental psychology that draws on the influential work of Vygotsky (1978). Specifically, this literature suggests that engagement with teachers and student peers is uniquely
effective when the skills to be learned fall within a student’s "zone of proximal development"
(i.e., they cannot be mastered individually but can with the guidance of a knowledgeable
person). Students who start school later and with more maturity may be more likely to
experience this productive instructional alignment. Another related and theorized benefit
to delayed school starting ages involves the conjectured importance of play in child development. Pretend play is thought to promote abstract and symbolic reasoning because it
demands the separation of actions and objects from reality (e.g., a banana as a phone).
Furthermore, pretend play necessitates intellectual and emotional self-regulation in that
children in play will sustain and bound their fictional realities. The developmental relevance of play is reflected in the oft-quoted line: “in play, it is as though [the child] were
a head taller than himself” (Vygotsky, 1978, p.102). Given that children who delay their
school starting age are typically in home care or less formal preschool, they may benefit
from an extended experience in relatively playful environments.
7

Though parents’ belief in the gains from relative maturity may be widespread, the empirical evidence
on the direct educational benefits from a higher relative age is at best equivocal. In particular, a randomassignment study by (Cascio and Schanzenbach, forthcoming) finds that students who are old for their cohort
may have poorer outcomes because of peer-group effects. To the extent that such effects exist in our Danish
data, it implies that we are understating the targeted mental-health benefits of a higher school starting age.

5

In recent years, several empirical studies have attempted to identify the reduced-form
effect of a higher school starting age (i.e., inclusive of relative and absolute age mechanisms)
on near-term child development and longer-run outcomes. For example, using data from a
sample of 20 countries, Bedard and Dhuey (2006) find that being older at school enrollment
generally increases fourth and eight grade test scores in mathematics and science. The
identification strategy in this study relied on a student’s predicted school starting age (i.e.,
using their birth date and country-specific cutoff dates) as an instrumental variable for their
actual school starting age. Using this basic approach, several other country-specific studies
find that students who start school later score substantially higher on in-school tests (e.g.,
Puhani and Weber, 2005; Crawford, Dearden, and Meghir, 2007; McEwan and Shapiro,
2008). However, a more recent literature has suggested that these estimated effects of
school starting age on in-school test performance are overstated because of the collinearity
between a student’s age at test and their school starting age. That is, students with higher
school starting ages may perform better on in-school tests simply because they are older
than those who started earlier.8
For example, Elder and Lubotsky (2009) show that older children perform substantially
better in the fall of their kindergarten year before the onset of formal schooling could have
had much effect. Furthermore, there is evidence that the effects of school starting age
decline over time (Elder and Lubotsky, 2009; Cascio and Schanzenbach, forthcoming). An
influential study by Black, Devereux, and Salvanes (2011) separately identifies the effects
of school starting age and age at test, using unique institutional circumstances and data
from Norway. In particular, they rely on IQ tests taken by males at 18 as part of their
mandatory military service. They identify the effects of school starting age and age at test
on these IQ scores, using each person’s birth month and the cutoff dates for entering school
and the age at which the IQ test is taken (i.e., akin to a regression-discontinuity design).
They find that age at test has large positive effects on measured IQ while school starting
age has quite small but statistically significant negative effects. They also find that school
starting age has no effect on educational attainment nor on long-run earnings. In a related
study, Fredriksson and Öckert (2013) use Swedish data on birth cohorts from 1935 to 1955
in a regression-discontinuity framework and show that being older at school enrollment
8

Aliprantis (2014) also argues that the instrumental variable used in these application may suffer from
monotonicity violations and states that "the best evidence on the effects of redshirting is likely to be found in
studies employing regression discontinuity designs."

6

increases educational attainment. Interestingly, their sample period spans the introduction
of a school reform that postponed tracking. They find that, when tracking was delayed,
the effects of a child’s school starting age are smaller. While they find that the effects on
discounted life-time earnings on average is very small to negative, they also find positive
earnings effects of school starting age for individuals with low-educated parents.
Studies that have examined the effects of school starting age on non-schooling and nonmarket outcomes produce similary equivocal evidence. For example, Black, Devereux, and
Salvanes (2011) find that a delayed school starting age increases the likelihood that a girl
will give birth within 12 years of starting her formal schooling (i.e., interrupting her humancapital accumulation). A regression-discontinuity study based on exact date of birth and
Danish data (Landersø, Nielsen, and Simonsen, 2013) finds that an increased school starting
age reduces the propensity to commit crime. However, this result appears to be driven by
incapacitation rather than a developmental effect.
In the context of this study, the limited, prior evidence that has focused on dimensions of mental health has particular relevance. For example, Elder and Lubotsky (2009)
find that children with delayed school starts are less likely to be diagnosed with Attention
Deficit/Hyperactivity Disorder (ADHD) between kindergarten and fifth grade. However,
they suggest that this effect reflects parents and schools responding to the prekindergarten
differences among students with differences in school starting ages, which fade at older
ages. A recent, small-scale study of 360 children from the Rhine-Neckar region in central
Germany (Mühlenweg, Blomeyer, Stichnoth, and Laucht, 2012) finds that later school starting ages imply more persistence and less hyperactivity at age 8 relative to the levels observed
prior to school entry. Finally, the study of Norwegian military records by Black, Devereux,
and Salvanes (2011) find that a year of delayed school entry reduces the chance that males
are reported as having mental health problems (i.e., half a percentage point where the mean
rate of poor mental health is 7 percent). This measure is based on a psychologist’s assessment from an interview to determine each young man’s suitability for military service.
In sum, this body of theoretical hypotheses and empirical evidence suggests a puzzling
contrast. Parents and policymakers are increasingly choosing to delay childrens’ school
starting ages. And there are several theoretical reasons to suspect that these delays confer
developmental advantages (e.g., relative age effects, the dynamic complementarity in skill
formation, extending pre-school periods of play). Yet there is not strong evidence that a

7

delayed school start meaningfully improves key educational and economic outcomes. In
contrast, there is some limited suggestive evidence that a higher school starting may improve
measures of psychological adaptation and mental health. This study presents new evidence
on the effects of school starting age on dimensions of mental health. This new evidence
advances this literature in several ways. First, we are able to rely on data from a widely
used and extensively validated mental health screening tool that is specifically designed for
children and teens and that measures several diagnostically relevant constructs. Second,
because these data are collected among children at the same ages (i.e., age 7 and again at
age 11), we avoid confounds related to "age at test." Third, we are able to match these unique
data to the students’ exact dates of birth and to implement a regression-discontinuity design
that provides credibly causal evidence on the effects of a delayed school start. Finally, we
also argue that our pattern of results speaks indirectly to the empirical salience of absolute
and relative-age mechanisms. In the next two sections, we describe these data and methods
in more detail before turning to our results.

3

Data

We create our analysis samples by matching children included in the Danish National Birth
Cohort Survey (DNBC, Olsen, Melbye, Olsen, Sørensen, Aaby, Andersen, Taxbøl, Hansen,
Juhl, Schow, et al., 2001) to data available for the full Danish population from the national
administrative registers. The DNBC provides detailed measures of children’s mental health
at ages 7 and 11. The national administrative registers provide information on the child’s
birthday (i.e., the forcing variable in our regression-discontinuity design) as well as data on
child and family traits at baseline. We describe each of these data sets in more detail below.

3.1

The Danish National Birth Cohort (DNBC)

The DNBC is a Danish nation-wide cohort study based on a large sample of women who were
pregnant between 1996 and 2002 (i.e., roughly 10 percent of the births in the population
during this period). Nearly 93,000 woman participated in the baseline interviews (i.e.,
during pregnancy). The fifth wave of the survey was fielded when the sampled child was
approximately 7 years old. And, in 2014, a sixth survey wave that elicited information

8

when the sampled children were age 11, concluded.9 These surveys included questions on
a diverse set of behaviors and traits such as risky behaviors (e.g., smoking and drinking),
employment, and the health status of the child and the mother. During the fifth survey
wave, the respondent was also asked to identify when the child first started kindergarten,
which we use to identify their school starting age.10 Critically, the fifth and sixth survey
waves also included the 25-item Strengths and Difficulties Questionnaire (SDQ), which we
describe in more detail below. It should be noted that the response rate to the DNBC does fall
with the follow-up surveys. For example, 57,280 mothers participated in the fifth interview
(child aged seven years), with 54,251 providing valid data on the SDQ and school starting
age. Nearly 36,000 of these respondents also participated in the sixth survey wave (child
aged 11 years). This survey attrition appears to be non-random and implies an externalvalidity caveat to our study. We provide data comparing the survey population and the full
population in the Appendix Table A.1. In brief, mothers in the follow-up samples are, on
average, more affluent (i.e., mothers with higher income, more schooling) and their children
had higher birth weights. These mothers are also more likely to be married and in the labor
force (Jacobsen, Nohr, and Frydenberg, 2010). However, we find that participation in these
surveys is balanced around the birthday threshold so this non-response does not appear to
threaten the internal validity of our RD design.

3.2

The Strengths and Difficulties Questionnaire (SDQ)

The SDQ is a mental-health screening tool designed specifically for children and teens and
is in wide use internationally both in clinical settings and in research on child development.
The questionnaire, which was developed by English child psychiatrist Robert N. Goodman
in the mid 1990s, consists of 25 items (Goodman, 1997) that may describe the child in
question. Examples of the items include "Restless, overactive, cannot stay still for long"
and "Good attention span, sees work through to the end." For each item, the rater is asked
to "consider the last 6 months" and to mark the description of the child in one of three
ways: Not True, Somewhat True, Certainly True. The established scoring procedure for the
9

Each survey wave was fielded on a rolling basis so as to get child data at roughly the same age. Differential
response times necessarily create some variation in the age at observation. However, we control for each child’s
age at the time of interview and find that this age is well balanced around the threshold in our RD design.
10
We find similar results when we use school starting age imputed from the subsequent National Test data
we describe below. However, these parent reports are our preferred source of data on school starting age
because repetition of kindergarten is not uncommon (i.e., roughly 10 percent), complicating the imputation
of school starting age based on birthdates and when grade-level tests are taken

9

SDQ links each of the 25 items to one (and only one) of five distinct subscores: emotional
symptoms, conduct problems, inattention/hyperactivity, peer problems, and a pro-social
scale. Each subscore has five uniquely linked items and the response to each item is scored
as 0, 1, or 2. The value for the subscore is simply the sum of the ratings for its five linked
items. So, each subscore has a range of 0 to 10. The total "difficulties" score is the sum of the
subscales, excluding the pro-social score, and can range from 0 to 40. For this difficulties
score, values between 0 and 13 are regarded as normal, while scores 14-16 are borderline
and scores from 17 to 40 are regarded as abnormal. For the pro-social scale 6-10 is normal,
5 is borderline, and 0-4 is abnormal. In our main analyses, we standardize each score
(i.e., using the full population in each survey wave) so that our coefficients of interest can
be interpreted as effect sizes. However, we also present linear probability models for the
probability of an abnormal rating. Figure 1 shows the distribution of SDQ scores in our

.12
.1
.08
Density
.06
.04
.02
0

10

20
Aggregated SDQ score

30

0

0

.02

.04

Density
.06

.08

.1

.12

DNBC samples.

40

(a) Age 7 Wave

0

10

20
Aggregated SDQ score

30

40

(b) Age 11 Wave

Figure 1: The SDQ Total Difficulties Score
The development of the SDQ items (and their scaling) was conducted with reference to
the main categories of child mental-health disorders recognized by contemporary classification systems like the Diagnostic and Statistical Manual of Mental Disorders, 4th edition
(American Psychiatric Association, 1994). Psychometric studies have generally confirmed
the convergent and discriminant validity of the five-factor structure of the SDQ in a variety of
populations (Achenbach, Becker, Döpfner, Heiervang, Roessner, Steinhausen, and Rothenberger, 2008), though some studies suggest there should be fewer subscores.11 Furthermore,
11

The standard aggregation procedure is described on the website, www.sdqinfo.com. We independently
examined the item-level responses in our DNBC data using a principal component analysis (PCA). The PCA
revealed the same five dimensions as the standardized procedure.

10

in both the parent and teacher versions, the SDQ has demonstrated satisfactory internal consistency, test-retest reliability, and inter-rater agreement (e.g., Achenbach, Becker, Döpfner,
Heiervang, Roessner, Steinhausen, and Rothenberger, 2008; Stone, Otten, Engels, Vermulst,
and Janssens, 2010). The SDQ produces scores that are highly correlated with those from
earlier prominent screening devices, the Rutter questionnaire and the Child Behavior Checklist (Goodman, 1997; Goodman and Scott, 1999). However, the SDQ also appears to have
some conceptual and practical advantages. For example, the SDQ includes items related to
strengths rather than just difficulties. The SDQ also has a strong comparative advantage
in identifying constructs of contemporary relevance such as inattentiveness and sociability.
The SDQ also has a practical advantage is that its 25-item format is substantially shorter
(e.g., the school-age CBCL has 120 items).
To understand the properties of the SDQ subscores in our particular research context,
we also examined how the SDQ scores of children in the DNBC predicted their in-school
test performance on the Danish National Tests in two subjects (Danish and mathematics).
These tests are obligatory annual assessment of children’s cognitive skills in grades two
through eight that are used as a tool for the teacher to assess the child’s development.
Specifically, we separately regressed the performance in three tests in Danish and two tests
in mathematics on the five SDQ subscores measured at age 7. In each regression we include
school fixed effects so that we are effectively making comparisons among students in the
same schools. We also control for age at test, both for the SDQ scores and the in-school
tests, by means of monthly indicators. Our results indicate that the peer-problems subscore
is unrelated to future test performance. There are also somewhat anomalous results. Prosocial scores predict lower test scores in both subjects and all grades (i.e., effect sizes of 0.04
and 0.05). And emotional symptoms predict higher performance in Danish (effect size =
0.03). However, our main finding is that the two constructs associated with "externalizing
behavior" - the conduct and inattention/hyperactivity constructs - strongly predict lower
test performance across all grades and subjects. The effect sizes for conduct problems range
from 0.05 to 0.07. And a 1 SD increase in the inattention/hyperactivity score predicts a
reduction in future test performance ranging from 0.14 SD to 0.16 SD.
The uniquely strong link between the inattention/hyperactivity subscore and future student performance is noteworthy but not necessarily surprising.The inattention/hyperactivity
construct is effectively synonymous with the concept of self regulation (i.e., the voluntary

11

control of impulses in service of desired goals; Blake, Piovesan, Montinari, Warneken, and
Gino (2014)). And an extensive literature has documented the importance of such selfregulation for student success (e.g., Duckworth and Carlson, 2013).12 Interestingly, one
of the theorized mechanisms through which higher school starting ages are thought to be
developmentally beneficial, involves self-regulation. In particular, the extended periods of
pretend play available to children who delay their school start may enhance their capacity
for this important psychological adaption.

3.3

The Danish administrative registers

The Danish administrative data actually consists of several individual registers including
the birth records, the income registers, and the education registers. All datasets are hosted
by Statistics Denmark and linked by a unique personal identifier. The critical variable we
draw from the registers forms the basis for the forcing variable in our RD design (i.e., the
exact date of birth). However, we also use the registers to construct a variety of other family
and child-specific control variables. For the children, we use information from the registers
on birth weight, 5 minute APGAR score, and gestational age.13 For the parents we use
information on gross annual income, educational attainment, civil status, origin and age.
We also record the number of siblings (living in the household) when the child is two years
old using register data. Before we link the children to their parents and siblings we adjust
the birth year to run from July to June instead of January to December. For example all
children born in the period July 2000 to June 2001 are merged to parents’ characteristics
for the calendar year January to December 1999.
In Table 1, we show descriptive statistics for the key variables from our linked DNBC
and register data, separately for both the age-7 and age-11 samples. These variables include our standardized SDQ measures, school starting age, a binary indicator for a delayed
school starting age (i.e., a school starting age greater than 6 years, 7 months), the birth date
centered on the January 1st threshold, a binary indicator for a birth date between January
1st and June 30 (i.e., our "intent to treat" measure), and a variety of baseline covariates.
We standardized our SDQ measures using the mean and standard deviation specific to each
12

The concept of self-regulation is also widely thought to be equivalent to the "Big 5" construct of conscientiousness, another highly outcome-relevant personality trait. Heckman and Kautz (2012) note "conscientiousness – the tendency to be organized, responsible, and hardworking—is the most widely predictive of the
commonly used personality measures."
13
The APGAR score is an evaluation of the infants’ health measured on a 0-10 scale (where 10 is the best).

12

measure and the full population in each survey wave. A total of 54,251 parents completed
both the SDQ and school starting age questions in the fifth wave of the survey (i.e., in years
2004-2010 when the sampled child was 7 years old). During the sixth survey wave (i.e.,
2010-2014 when the sampled child was roughly 11 years old) 35,902 of these respondents
participated in the DNBC.

4

Empirical framework

4.1

The Danish Context

Before they begin formal schooling, most children in Denmark (i.e., over 95 percent) are in
daycare that is publicly provided and organized at the municipal level. Child care consists
of center-based nurseries and family day care for children aged 1 to 3 years and daycare
for children aged 3 to 6. In addition to the center-based nurseries, municipalities also fund
family day care. The standards required of center-based day care and their staff are high
compared to other OECD countries (Datta Gupta and Simonsen, 2010). For example, there
is a high staff-child ratio and all permanent day care staff must have a pedagogical education.
The requirements of family day care are lower.
Compulsory schooling begins in "grade zero" (also called kindergarten class) in August
of the year in which the child turns six. Until 2009 grade zero was not mandatory, but 98%
of children attended anyway (Browning and Heinesen, 2007). Compulsory schooling ends
after ten years of schooling or in August of the year the child turns 17. Figure 2 summarizes
the timing of events in childhood. The children typically do not change institution or class
after they enrolled in grade zero (i.e., most children stay in the same class within the same
school from grade zero until grade nine). After leaving compulsory education, the individual
can choose between three-year upper secondary school (high school), vocational training
(apprenticeship), or the labor market. Completing high school also allows access to higher
education.
As children are supposed to enroll in school the year they turn six, school starting age
should jump discontinuously as birthdays change from December 31 to January 1. To illustrate this institutional feature, we compare the events in Figure 1 for a child born December
31 to a child born January 1 in Table 2. So, children who are born on January 1st and who
comply with the rules will have a school starting age that is one year higher (and one extra
13

Table 1: Descriptive Statistics
Mean

SD

N

6.31
0.22
0.50
-2.69
15.51
737.61
30.64
3560.36
0.49
9.79
7.16
-0.01
-0.01
-0.01
-0.01
-0.01
0.01

0.59
0.41
0.50
108.49
1.99
463.83
4.21
592.11
0.50
1.06
0.13
0.99
0.99
1.00
0.99
0.98
0.99

54,251
54,251
54,251
54,251
54,148
54,148
54,140
53,726
53,726
54,231
54,251
54,251
54,251
54,251
54,251
54,251
54,251

6.27
0.19
0.50
-2.66
15.68
747.03
30.83
3574.39
0.50
9.79
11.35
-0.03
-0.02
-0.02
-0.02
-0.03
0.01

0.58
0.39
0.50
108.97
1.95
478.18
4.16
582.07
0.50
1.06
0.56
0.98
0.99
0.98
0.99
0.97
0.98

35,902
35,902
35,902
35,902
35,825
35,825
35,821
35,555
35,555
35,888
35,902
35,902
35,902
35,902
35,902
35,902
35,902

— Age 7 Wave —
School starting age (years)
School starting age ≥ 6.5
Born in spring
Distance (in days) to January 1
Years of schooling, highest among parents
Parents gross income
Mother’s age when child was born
Birthweight (gr.)
Female
5min APGAR score
Age
Total Difficulties
Emotional Symptoms
Conduct Problems
Inattention/Hyperactivity
Peer Problems
Pro-social Behavior
— Age 11 Wave —
School starting age,(years)
School starting age ≥ 6.5
Born in spring
Distance (in days) to January 1
Years of schooling, highest among parents
Parents gross income
Mother’s age when child was born
Birthweight (gr.)
Female
5min APGAR score
Age
Total Difficulties
Emotional Symptoms
Conduct Problems
Inattention/Hyperactivity
Peer Problems
Pro-social Behavior

Notes: School starting age is parent reported. Born in spring is an indicator that takes the value of 1 if the
child is born in months January to June. Distance to January 1 is measure din days for the year going from
July to June (January 1=0). Non-western origin is an indicator that takes the value of 1 if at least one of the
parents is an immigrant from a non-western country (according to Statistics Denmark classification). Parental
characteristics are measured one year after birth for children born in spring and two years after birth for
children born in fall. SDQ scores are standardized by wave, before selecting on non-missing school starting
age.

14

Child with
parents

Child in
nursery/family care

Child in
day-care

Child aged 0-1

Child aged 0-2

Child aged 3-5

Child continues probably in
Child starts
in kindergarten
same school for 9 years
Year child turns 6

Figure 2: Timing of childhood

year of daycare) relative to the children born just one day earlier. However, compliance with
this rule is not mandatory. That is, it is possible to postpone enrollment in school. However,
this requires some effort of the parents, including meeting with representatives from the
future school and the municipality administration. Contingent on individual evaluations,
children may also enroll in grade zero one year earlier (i.e., if their birthday is before October 1). Kindergarten class is part of the primary school and free of charge in the public
schools.
Table 2: Timing of childhood for a child born December 31 and a child born January 1

Born
With parents
In nursery
In day-care
Enroll in grade zero

December 31st
Months 0-12
Months 13-36
Months 37-66
Month 67

January 1st
Months 0-12
Months 13-36
Months 37-78
Month 79

The kindergarten class year starts with an obligatory assessment of the child’s verbal
communication skills and the outlining of an individual teaching plan (in Danish, Elevplan).
Schools assign students to classes based on both pedagogical and practical considerations
(e.g., peer composition, class-size requirements), and the principle is the same or grades one
to seven. Kindergarten class has a formally specified curriculum by the Ministry of Education. The curriculum includes topics such as verbal and non-verbal communication, as well
as science and nature (The Danish Ministry of Education, 2009). The Ministry of Education
also specifies a minimum number of 600 teaching hours per school year (approximately 3
hours per school day). Interestingly, as almost all children attend daycare before they enroll
in school and the attributes of this daycare are centrally defined, the control condition in our
RD design is quite homogenous. However, the amount of time pre-school children spend in
daycare varies.
15

4.2

Regression Discontinuity (RD) Design

Our broad question of interest involves how school starting age (SSA) influences the SDQbased measures of mental health (Y ) for individual i with covariates Xi . We represent this
by the following linear specification:
Yi = β0 + β1 SSAi + φXi + ei

(1)

Credibly identifying the causal effect of school starting age on these outcomes is challenging because parents are likely to make decisions about when their child begins school
based on information unobserved by researchers. In particular, parents who know their
children face developmental challenges may be more likely to delay their child’s initiation
of formal schooling (i.e., negative selection into treatment). Naive OLS estimates of (1) are
consistent with this concern. For example, OLS estimates suggest that children who start
school late have substantially higher levels of inattention/hyperactivity.
We seek to identify the causal effect of SSA by leveraging the variation created by the
Danish rule that children are supposed to enroll in school the year they turn six. That is,
we implement an RD design that exploits the "jump" in SSA that occurs for children born
January 1st or later relative to those born earlier. So, the forcing variable in this RD design
(i.e., d a yi ) is the child’s exact birth date relative to the January 1st cutoff.14 Our reducedform equation of interest models the SDQ-based outcomes as a flexible function of this
forcing variable and a "jump" at the policy-induced threshold:

Yi = γ0 + γ1 1(da yi ≥ 0) + g(da yi ) + ρXi + εi

(2)

Our parameter of interest is γ1 , which identifies the discrete change in subsequent child
outcomes for those born January 1st or later, controlling for a smooth function of their day
of birth and other observed traits. Later, we assess the robustness of our results to the choice
of functional form for the forcing variable. For the full sample analysis, using a July to June
sample, we also discuss the selection of a polynomial function of the forcing variable based
on a graphical judgment and by comparing the Akaike Information Criteria (AIC) for various
14

That is, this forcing variables takes on values of 0, 1, 2, etc. for children born on January 1st, 2nd, and 3rd
respectively. For children born on December 31st, December 30th, December 29th, etc., the forcing variable
takes on values of -1, -2, -3, etc.

16

specifications. We also present local linear regressions based the data within increasingly
tight bandwidths around the threshold. We also report and discuss the corresponding IV
estimates of β1 from (1). These "treatment on the treated" estimates are equivalent to the
ratio of our reduced-form estimates to the first-stage effects we describe below. In general,
the causal warrant of such an RD design turns on whether the conditional change at the
January 1st cutoff implies (i) variation in SSA and (ii) that this variation is "as good as
randomized" (Lee and Lemieux, 2010). We now turn to evidence on both questions.

4.3

Assignment to Treatment

We first show that school starting age increases significantly for children whose birthdays
are at the January 1st cutoff or later. One straightforward and unrestrictive way to show
this is graphically as in Figures 3a and 3b. These figures illustrate the conditional means
of school starting ages for differently sized bins defined by date of birth (i.e., 15 and 1-day
bins) and for different bandwidths (i.e., the full sample and observations within 30 days of
the threshold). These graphs consistently show that school starting age jumps from 6.4 to
6.6 for children born around the threshold. Interestingly, for the full-year sample in Figure
3a, the quadratic trends capture the variation in school starting age reasonably well. In the
local specification in Figure 3b the linear trend seems sufficient to describe the relationship.
Interestingly, this pattern implies that children born January 1st or later generally comply
and begin school in August of the year they turn six. However, the compliance among
children born in late December is only partial. We examine some of the issues raised by this
non-compliance with respect to our "intent to treat" analysis.
We also present parametric and nonparametric estimates of this first-stage relationship
based on regressions of the following form:
SSAi = δ0 + δ1 1(da yi ≥ 0) + g(da yi ) + ρXi + ηi

(3)

Specifically, we begin with specifications that control for a linear function of the forcing
variable that is allowed to vary on either side of the threshold. We then add our baseline covariates as controls as well as quadratic splines of the forcing variable. Finally, we
also consider local linear regressions based only on data within a 30-day bandwidth of the
threshold and conditional on a linear spline of the forcing variable as in Landersø, Nielsen,

17

7
6

6.2

School starting age
6.4
6.6

6.8

7
6.8
School starting age
6.4
6.6
6.2
6
-200

-100

0
Date of birth (Jan1=0)

100

200

(a) Full year bandwidth & 3 day bins.

-30

-25

-20

-15

-10
-5
0
5
10
Date of birth (Jan1=0)

15

20

25

30

(b) 30 days bandwidth & one day bins.

Figure 3: Date of birth and school starting age
Table 3: RD Estimates, First-Stage Regressions

Age 7 wave
Age 11 wave
Sample
Specification
Controls

(1)

(2)

(3)

(4)

(5)

0.38∗∗∗
(0.01)
0.38∗∗∗
(0.01)

0.39∗∗∗
(0.01)
0.38∗∗∗
(0.01)

0.17∗∗∗
(0.02)
0.15∗∗∗
(0.02)

0.18∗∗∗
(0.03)
0.18∗∗∗
(0.04)

0.20∗∗∗
(0.03)
0.19∗∗∗
(0.04)

Full
Linear
No

Full
Linear
Yes

Full
Quadratic
Yes

Local
Linear
No

Local
Linear
Yes

Robust standard errors in parenthesis. ∗∗∗ p < 0.01 ∗∗ p < 0.05, ∗ p < 0.1. Each cell shows the estimate from a
single regression. Controls included are: indicators for birth year, age at interview, parents’ years of schooling,
parents’ gross income, mother’s age at childbirth, birth weight, gender, 5 minute APGAR score, and origin.
Missing values in covariates are replaced with zeros and indicators for missing variables are included.

and Simonsen (2013).
We present the results from these first-stage models in Table 3. All the point estimates
across these specifications indicate that school starting age jumps by a large and statistically
significant amount. However, models that use the full sample of data and condition only
on linear terms for the forcing variable suggest that this effect is substantially larger. We
view this as an artifact of the non-linearities evidenced in Figure 3. When we allow the
forcing variable to have a non-linear relationship with school starting age, we find that SSA
jumps by 0.15 to 0.17 years at the birthdate cutoff. Interestingly, local linear regressions
(i.e., columns 4 and 5 in Table 3) suggest roughly similar first stage effects (i.e., 0.18 to
0.20).

18

4.4

Validity of the RD Design

The prior evidence demonstrates that there is a large, statistically significant jump in school
starting age for children born January 1st and later. However, there are a number of reasons
to be concerned that this relationship may not constitute a valid quasi-experiment. For
example, a fundamental concern in any RD design is that the value of the forcing variable
relative to the threshold may be systematically manipulated by those with a differential
propensity for the relevant outcomes. In this setting, we might wonder whether expectant
mothers either advance or delay the timing of their birth around the January 1st threshold
and that the personal and family traits influencing this choice also influence child outcomes.
We present two types of evidence that are consistent with the maintained hypothesis that
there is no empirically meaningful manipulation of birth dates among our respondents.
First, we evaluate the distribution of births over the cutoff. Figure 4 shows the distribution of date of birth in our sample based on the test introduced by McCrary (2008). This
figure indicates that the number of births are smoothly distributed around the threshold.
The null hypothesis of no jump at this threshold cannot be rejected. Interestingly, there
appears to be a small drop in births around the new year (i.e., both December 31st and
January 1st), which may reflect some effort to avoid giving birth during a holiday. To consider possible issues related to undiagnosed "heaping" of the forcing variable, we also show
in Figure 5 a histogram of birth dates local to the threshold. These data also suggest that
the frequency of observations is continuous through the threshold that defines our intent to
treat.
Second, we use auxiliary regressions (i.e., the same specification as our RD design but
with baseline covariates as the dependent variables) to examine the balance of observed
traits of children and their families around the threshold. If the variation in school starting
ages around this threshold is "as good as randomized," we would expect the pre-determined
and observed traits of survey respondents to be similar on both sides of the threshold (i.e.,
no "jump" indicated by the RD estimates). In the appendix, Table A.2 shows these results
for each of the covariates. None of the the covariates show signs of jumps at the cutoffs
in either the 30 day local specification or in the full sample parametric specification. An
alternative strategy for testing covariate balance is to first regress the outcome variable on
all covariates and compute the predicted values. These predicted value represents an index
of all the covariates that are weighted by their OLS-estimated outcome relevance. In Table 4
19

.02
.015
Density
.01
.005
0
-30

-20

-10

0
Distance in days

10

20

30

0

0

40

Observations
80
120

200 400 600 800 1000
Observations

160

200

Figure 4: Observations by date of birth, based on McCrary (2008). The jump is estimated to
be -0.013 (0.086) using a one day bin width and the default bandwidth.

-30

-20

-10
0
10
Days from January 1
Survey sample

20

30

Population sample (right axis)

Figure 5: Observations by date of birth, survey data and population data. The survey data is
the data used in our analysis, and the population includes all children born in Denmark in the
period 1998-2003.

20

we show the outcome of regressing this weighted average on the cutoff and time trends for
for each of the six dependent variables. As with the single-covariate regressions, there is no
sign of a jump in any of these specifications.15 The balance of outcome-relevant covariates
around the January 1st threshold not only suggests a lack of manipulation of birth dates but
it is also general evidence for the validity of the RD design. We should also note that we also
compared the balance of several developmental variables defined for the DNBC respondents
before they attended kindergarten (e.g., making word sounds at 18 months). We found that
these traits were balanced around the threshold (Table A.3).
Table 4: Auxiliary RD estimates, balancing of the covariates.

Age 7
Ŷ (Total Difficulties)
Ŷ (Emotional Symptoms)
Ŷ (Conduct Problems)
Ŷ (Hyperactivity)
Ŷ (Peer Problems)
Ŷ (Pro-social Behavior)
Sample
Specification

Age 11
(3)
(4)

(1)

(2)

-0.008
(0.007)
-0.006
(0.005)
-0.005
(0.005)
-0.006
(0.007)
-0.005
(0.004)
0.001
(0.005)

-0.013
(0.012)
-0.012
(0.009)
-0.012
(0.008)
-0.008
(0.011)
-0.005
(0.008)
-0.008
(0.009)

-0.009
(0.006)
-0.007
(0.004)
-0.007
(0.004)
-0.011
(0.007)
-0.000
(0.003)
0.002
(0.005)

-0.007
(0.011)
-0.006
(0.008)
-0.006
(0.008)
-0.005
(0.012)
-0.004
(0.006)
-0.013
(0.010)

Full
Quadratic

Local
Linear

Full
Quadratic

Local
Linear

Robust standard errors in parenthesis. ∗∗∗ p < 0.01 ∗∗ p < 0.05, ∗ p < 0.1. Each cell shows the estimate from
a single regression. We first regress the outcome variables (in parenthesis) of the following set of covariates:
indicators for birth year, age at interview, parents’ years of schooling, parents’ gross income, mother’s age at
childbirth, birth weight, gender, 5 minute APGAR score, and origin. We regress the predicted variable on an
indicator for being born on January 1 or later, as well as the splines indicated by the bottom row.

Another fundamental concern with any RD design involves whether the functional form
is correctly specified. In particular, a failure to specify the functional form correctly could
lead to biased inferences about the true effects of our intent to treat. A visual inspection of
our results provides one important and unrestrictive way to assess this concern. However,
to examine the empirical relevance of functional-form issues more directly, we also report
15

Note that both Table A.2 and Table 4 show uncorrected standard errors and significance levels. Any
corrections for multiple testing will make the conclusions of no correlation even stronger.

21

results from specifications that add quadratic terms for the forcing variable. We also consider
the corresponding information criteria across specifications. And we report estimates based
on samples within increasingly tight bandwidths around the threshold (i.e., local linear
regressions). Whether our results are robust to these specification choices speaks to the
relevance of functional-form issues.
At least two other internal-validity concerns are unique to our application and merit
scrutiny. First, as noted early, our treatment contrast necessarily conflates higher school
starting ages with fewer years of schooling at the time of observation. That is, our intentto-treat (i.e., a birth date of January 1st or later) implies both a higher school starting age
and fewer years of formal schooling at the time parents rate their children on the SDQ.
However, there are several reasons to deprecate the role of years of schooling in our analysis.
For example, our pattern of results (i.e., effects on only one SDQ construct and not on the
other measures of psychological adaptation) are not easily reconcilable with effects due to
years of schooling but are consistent with the theorized effects of higher school starting
ages. Furthermore, we find that our results are quite similar in size and significance among
children at age 7 as at age 11 when the differences in years of schooling are relatively smaller.
This pattern would only be consistent with effects due to years of schooling if a year has
an additive effect without fade-out. Also, given that years of schooling are likely to have a
positive effect on our mental-health measures (at least in later childhood), the collinearity
in these measures (higher school starting age and fewer years of schooling) would not imply
a bias that is problematic for our main findings.16 .
A second internal-validity threat unique to our setting involves reference biases in the
SDQ ratings. It may be that children whose schooling is delayed are more likely to be rated
positively simply because they appear to have better psychological adaptations than their
younger classroom peers. Indeed, there is provocative evidence among U.S. children (Elder,
2010) that teachers are significantly more likely to rate children who are young for their
grade as having ADHD. However, Elder (2010) finds that parental assessments (i.e., like
those in the DNBC) are not subject to these biases; in all likelihood, because they have
different reference points than teachers. Moreover, if the parent reports in the DNBC were
subject to such biases, we would also expect to find effects on SDQ constructs other than
16

A study by Leuven, Lindahl, Oosterbeek, and Webbink (2010) utilizes the unique rolling-admissions policies in the Netherlands and their interaction with school holidays, and finds that earlier enrollment opportunities improve the test performance of disadvantaged students but have no or possibly negative effects of more
advantaged students

22

inattention/hyperactivity but do not. We also hypothesized that, if our results were sensitive
to rater biases, they would be attenuated among children who have older siblings (i.e., a
different reference point for parents). However, we find that they are not.
In sum, we find broad support for the internal validity of our research design. However,
our analysis, like most RD applications, is qualified by several caveats related to external
validity. First, because our estimates are defined by variation around the January 1st threshold, they are necessarily local estimates. Whether our results generalize to those born at
other times is uncertain. There is evidence shows that season of birth is not random with
respect to parental characteristics (Buckles and Hungerman, 2013) so the localness of our
RD estimates may have some empirical salience. Second, our estimates are qualified by the
non-random non-response to the last DNBC survey waves. In general, these respondents
tended to be more affluent. A third concern is related to the "fuzzy" nature of our RD design. If our treatment effects of interest are not homogenous, the LATE theorem implies that
our treatment estimates are defined for the sub-population of "compliers" with their intent
to treat (Imbens and Angrist, 1994). We speak to these concerns in two ways. One is to estimate our treatment effects separately for sub-samples of the data defined by pre-treatment
characteristics (e.g., boys versus girls). Second, using a straightfoward technique recently
introduced by Bertanha and Imbens (2014) we examine whether our complier population
is distinctive.

5
5.1

Results
Graphical Evidence

We begin with an unrestrictive, visual representation of our reduced-form results. First, Figure 6 shows, for each distinct SDQ measure observed at age 7, the conditional means by day
of birth (i.e., in 3-day bins) on each side of the January 1st threshold. The first panel of this
figure shows a distinct drop in the total difficulties score (i.e., of roughly 0.15 SD) for children whose birthday is January 1st and later. The next four panels (i.e., b through e) suggest
that this drop occurred for each of the four measures that constitute the difficulties score.
However, the decrease in difficulties is uniquely large for the inattention/hyperactivity measure (i.e., the measure indicating a lack of self regulation). Panel (f) suggests that there is
a noticeable increase in the pro-social measure for children born January 1st or later.
23

These age-7 results provide clear evidence that quasi-random assignment to a delayed
school start appears to improve mental health, particularly self-regulation, reported at age
7. However, one concern with these short-run findings is that they may be an artifact of the
age at which parents report these data. In particular, the children for whom the intent to
treat (ITT) is one (i.e., those born January 1st or later) are more likely to be in kindergarten
(i.e., a half-day program) relative to the ITT=0 children who are more likely to be in 1st
grade, a full-day program. So, it is possible that these effects, while valid, reflect the current
differences in the student’s exposure to formal schooling rather than deeper developmental
effects. The fact that the effects are concentrated in self-regulation rather than other constructs (as well as the evidence of positive effect on sociabilty) argues somewhat against this
interpretation.
However, a more compelling way to address this concern is to consider outcomes at a
later age when the children, regardless of their ITT, have long spells of formal schooling.
In Figure 7, we show such evidence by illustrating the mean values of the SDQ measures
across 3-day bins defined by date of birth for children observed in the most recent age-11
wave of the DNBC. As with the age-7 data, these graphs suggest that those born on or after
the cutoff (i.e., those with an ITT to delay their school start) have substantially lower levels
of difficulties and a higher level of sociability. Again, we see (i.e., panel (b) in Figure 7 that
this effect is uniquely large with respect to the inattention/hyperactivity construct.

5.2

Main Estimates

Our graphical results provide highly suggestive evidence that a higher school starting age
leads to an improvement in children’s mental health, particularly with respect to self regulation. In this section, we present our key RD estimates. This regression framework allows
to identify the point estimates of interest and, critically, test their statistical significance.
However, this framework also allows us to explore the robustness of our visual evidence.
In Table 5, we present the reduced-form RD estimates for age-7 SDQ measures across
five different specifications. The first two specifications condition on a linear spline of the
forcing variable and one includes controls for our baseline covariates. These results suggest
that the ITT generates statistically significant reductions in each difficulty and a statistically
significant increase in the pro-social construct. However, our graphical evidence suggests
that the relationship between date of birth and the SDQ measures is not always linear. In
24

0
Date of birth (Jan1=0)

100

200

-200

0
Date of birth (Jan1=0)

100

200

-100

0
Date of birth (Jan1=0)

100

200

-100

0
Date of birth (Jan1=0)

100

200

100

200

(c) Conduct

Emotional Symptoms 7
-.3 -.25 -.2 -.15 -.1 -.05 0 .05 .1 .15 .2 .25 .3
-200

-200

(b) Inattention/Hyperactivity

Peer Problems 7
-.3 -.25 -.2 -.15 -.1 -.05 0 .05 .1 .15 .2 .25 .3

(a) Total Difficulties

-100

Pro-social Behavior 7
-.3 -.25 -.2 -.15 -.1 -.05 0 .05 .1 .15 .2 .25 .3

-100

Conduct Problems 7
-.3 -.25 -.2 -.15 -.1 -.05 0 .05 .1 .15 .2 .25 .3

Hyperactivity 7
-.3 -.25 -.2 -.15 -.1 -.05 0 .05 .1 .15 .2 .25 .3

Total Difficulties 7
-.3 -.25 -.2 -.15 -.1 -.05 0 .05 .1 .15 .2 .25 .3
-200

-200

(d) Peer problems

-100

0
Date of birth (Jan1=0)

100

200

-200

(e) Emotional

-100

0
Date of birth (Jan1=0)

(f) Pro-social

-100

0
Date of birth (Jan1=0)

100

200

-200

0
Date of birth (Jan1=0)

100

200

-100

0
Date of birth (Jan1=0)

100

(d) Peer problems

200

-100

0
Date of birth (Jan1=0)

100

200

100

200

(c) Conduct

Emotional Symptoms 11
-.3 -.25 -.2 -.15 -.1 -.05 0 .05 .1 .15 .2 .25 .3
-200

-200

(b) Inattention/Hyperactivity

Peer Problems 11
-.3 -.25 -.2 -.15 -.1 -.05 0 .05 .1 .15 .2 .25 .3

(a) Total Difficulties

-100

Pro-social Behavior 11
-.3 -.25 -.2 -.15 -.1 -.05 0 .05 .1 .15 .2 .25 .3

-200

Conduct Problems 11
-.3 -.25 -.2 -.15 -.1 -.05 0 .05 .1 .15 .2 .25 .3

Hyperactivity 11
-.3 -.25 -.2 -.15 -.1 -.05 0 .05 .1 .15 .2 .25 .3

Total Difficulties 11
-.3 -.25 -.2 -.15 -.1 -.05 0 .05 .1 .15 .2 .25 .3

Figure 6: Reduced form relationship, age 7. Bin width: 3 days. Quadratic fits.

-200

-100

0
Date of birth (Jan1=0)

(e) Emotional

100

200

-200

-100

0
Date of birth (Jan1=0)

(f) Pro-social

Figure 7: Reduced form relationship, age 11. Bin width: 3 days. Quadratic fits.
our third specification, we condition on both linear and quadratic versions of the forcing
variable, while still allowing these variables to vary on both sides of the cutoff. In this

25

Table 5: Reduced-form RD Estimates, The Effect of da yi ≥ 0 on SDQ at age 7
(1)

(2)

(3)

(4)

(5)

-0.16∗∗∗
(0.02)
-0.07∗∗∗
(0.02)
-0.07∗∗∗
(0.02)
-0.19∗∗∗
(0.02)
-0.08∗∗∗
(0.02)
0.05∗∗∗
(0.02)

-0.15∗∗∗
(0.02)
-0.06∗∗∗
(0.02)
-0.06∗∗∗
(0.02)
-0.19∗∗∗
(0.02)
-0.07∗∗∗
(0.02)
0.05∗∗∗
(0.02)

-0.08∗∗∗
(0.03)
-0.05∗
(0.03)
-0.04
(0.03)
-0.09∗∗∗
(0.03)
-0.01
(0.03)
0.04
(0.03)

-0.14∗∗∗
(0.05)
-0.08∗
(0.05)
-0.06
(0.05)
-0.15∗∗∗
(0.05)
-0.04
(0.05)
0.09∗
(0.05)

-0.12∗∗∗
(0.05)
-0.07
(0.05)
-0.05
(0.05)
-0.14∗∗∗
(0.05)
-0.04
(0.05)
0.09∗∗
(0.05)

Observations

54,251

54,251

54,251

7,642

7,642

Sample
Specification
Controls

Full
Linear
No

Full
Linear
No

Full
Quadratic
Yes

Local
Linear
No

Local
Linear
Yes

Total Difficulties
Emotional Symptoms
Conduct Problems
Inattention/Hyperactivity
Peer Problems
Pro-social Behavior

Robust standard errors in parenthesis. ∗∗∗ p < 0.01 ∗∗ p < 0.05, ∗ p < 0.1. Each cell shows the estimate from a
single regression. Controls included are: indicators for birth year, age at interview, parents’ years of schooling,
parents’ gross income, mother’s age at childbirth, birth weight, gender, 5 minute APGAR score, and origin.
Missing values in covariates are replaced with zeros and indicators for missing variables are included.

specification, our RD estimates are generally smaller. And we find that the only statistically
significant reduction implied by the ITT is in the inattention/hyperactivity construct (effect
size = -0.09). The reduction in emotional problems (effect size = -0.05) is only weakly
significant. When using the full sample, we prefer to condition on both linear and quadratic
terms for the forcing variable because of the graphical evidence but also because Akaike’s
Information Criteria (AIC) generally privilege this specification. In the final two columns of
Table 5, we report non-parametric estimates based on an unweighted local linear regression
(LLR) using observations in a one-month bandwidth around the cutoff (i.e., December and
January births). These LLR results similarly indicate that the effect of the January 1st cutoff
is effectively concentrated in the inattention/hyperactivity measure.17
In Table 6, we present similarly constructed reduced-form RD estimates for age-11 SDQ
measures. As with the age-7 results, the full-sample results that condition on linear terms
for the forcing variable suggest that the ITT led to large, sustained reductions in difficulties.
17

We note that we have not formally applied multiple-comparison adjustments to our inferences. However,
our main results are estimated with sufficient precision that they would remain statistically significant after
correcting for examining 12 core outcomes (i.e., 6 SDQ measures across two age groups).

26

However, more flexible functional forms (i.e., quadratic terms for the forcing variable and
the LLR approach) again indicate that the effects unique to birth-date cutoff are concentrated in the inattention/hyperactivity score. Overall, these point estimates indicate that a
delayed school starting age causes a significant improvement in self-regulation that is sustained for at least several years and also qualitatively large. It should be noted that these
ITT estimates identify the change in self-regulation implied by the change in school starting
age from our first-stage equations (i.e., roughly 0.2 years).
Our implied estimate of the effect of a full year increase in school starting age is 5
times as large as these reduced-form effects. For example, using the LLR results conditional
on controls, we find that increasing the school starting age by one year reduces inattention/hyperactivity at age 7 by 0.7 SD (i.e., -0.14/0.20). The corresponding 2SLS estimate
for age 11 is -0.68 SD (i.e., -0.13/0.19). Arguably, these effect sizes are quite large, particularly for at-scale field settings.
Another potentially useful way to benchmark effects this large is to benchmark them
against the mental-health gaps observed in the data. For example, children from families in
the lowest decile of income have inattention/hyperactivity scores that are 0.61 SD higher
at age 7 and 0.5 SD higher at age 11 relative to children in the top decile. And boys have
higher inattention/hyperactivity scores than girls (i.e., generally about 0.7 SD). Our finding
indicates that a one-year increase in school starting age produces an effect that is as large
or larger than these mental-health gaps by income and gender.
One heuristic indication of the robustness of our findings is the correspondence between
our visual evidence, our full-sample specifications that include quadratic terms and our nonparametric estimates based on local linear regressions. To explore this robustness further,
we constructed IV/2SLS estimates based on our RD design for multiple bandwidths that use
only the data within increasingly tight bandwidths around the cutoff (i.e., the full sample
to bandwidths as tight as 20 days). We present these results visually in Figure 8 and Figure
9, respectively for the age-7 and age-11 samples. In this figures, the three horizontal lines
indicate the full-sample point estimates based on specifications that add higher-order polynomials of the forcing variable (i.e., linear, quadratic, and cubic). The dark dots and error
bars provide the point estimates and 95-percent confidence intervals from LLR specifications based on increasingly tight bandwidths. Unsurprisingly, all our models lose statistical
precision when the sample sizes are reduced. However, our main inattention/hyperactivity

27

Table 6: Reduced-form RD Estimates, The Effect of da yi ≥ 0 on SDQ at age 11
(1)

(2)

(3)

(4)

(5)

-0.14∗∗∗
(0.02)
-0.04∗∗
(0.02)
-0.07∗∗∗
(0.02)
-0.19∗∗∗
(0.02)
-0.07∗∗∗
(0.02)
0.03
(0.02)

-0.14∗∗∗
(0.02)
-0.04∗
(0.02)
-0.06∗∗∗
(0.02)
-0.18∗∗∗
(0.02)
-0.08∗∗∗
(0.02)
0.02
(0.02)

-0.09∗∗∗
(0.03)
-0.03
(0.03)
-0.03
(0.03)
-0.11∗∗∗
(0.03)
-0.06∗
(0.03)
0.03
(0.03)

-0.10∗
(0.05)
-0.02
(0.06)
-0.00
(0.06)
-0.14∗∗∗
(0.06)
-0.09∗
(0.06)
0.02
(0.06)

-0.09∗
(0.05)
-0.01
(0.06)
0.01
(0.06)
-0.13∗∗
(0.05)
-0.09
(0.05)
0.03
(0.06)

Observations

35,902

35,902

35,902

5,050

5,050

Sample
Specification
Controls

Full
Linear
No

Full
Linear
No

Full
Quadratic
Yes

Local
Linear
No

Local
Linear
Yes

Total Difficulties
Emotional Symptoms
Conduct Problems
Inattention/Hyperactivity
Peer Problems
Pro-social Behavior

Robust standard errors in parenthesis. ∗∗∗ p < 0.01 ∗∗ p < 0.05, ∗ p < 0.1. Each cell shows the estimate from a
single regression. Controls included are: indicators for birth year, age at interview, parents’ years of schooling,
parents’ gross income, mother’s age at childbirth, birth weight, gender, 5 minute APGAR score, and origin.
Missing values in covariates are replaced with zeros and indicators for missing variables are included.

result is quite robust. The point estimates remain large in absolute value and actually, tend
to get larger using only observations close to the threshold. And, across nearly all of these
specifications, there is sufficient precision to reject a null hypothesis of no effect.

28

Table 7: 2SLS estimates, the effect of School Starting Age on SDQ at age 7

Main
Boys
Girls
Highly educated
Low educated
High income
Low income
Low birthweight
High birthweight
No older sibs
Older sibs

(1)

(2)

(4)

(5)

Conduct

(3)
Inattention/
Hyperactivity

Emotional

Peer Problems

Pro-social

-0.27
(0.17)
-0.12
(0.57)
-0.32∗∗
(0.15)
-0.46∗
(0.26)
-0.13
(0.22)
-0.51∗∗
(0.23)
-0.04
(0.25)
-0.31
(0.24)
-0.20
(0.22)
-0.06
(0.22)
-0.52∗
(0.27)

-0.24
(0.16)
-0.42
(0.61)
-0.19
(0.14)
-0.40
(0.25)
-0.12
(0.22)
-0.45∗
(0.23)
-0.06
(0.24)
-0.05
(0.24)
-0.40∗
(0.22)
-0.07
(0.20)
-0.51∗
(0.29)

-0.53∗∗∗
(0.17)
-0.83
(0.66)
-0.45∗∗∗
(0.14)
-0.84∗∗∗
(0.28)
-0.30
(0.22)
-0.70∗∗∗
(0.24)
-0.38
(0.24)
-0.51∗∗
(0.24)
-0.53∗∗
(0.23)
-0.35∗
(0.21)
-0.81∗∗∗
(0.30)

-0.09
(0.17)
0.35
(0.62)
-0.21
(0.13)
-0.39
(0.25)
0.14
(0.23)
-0.34
(0.22)
0.15
(0.25)
-0.07
(0.24)
-0.09
(0.22)
0.01
(0.21)
-0.28
(0.28)

0.26
(0.16)
0.39
(0.62)
0.23∗
(0.13)
0.14
(0.25)
0.36∗
(0.21)
0.22
(0.23)
0.31
(0.23)
0.26
(0.23)
0.27
(0.22)
0.03
(0.20)
0.60∗∗
(0.29)

All results are based on the full sample using quadratic splines. Robust standard errors in parenthesis. ∗∗∗ p <
0.01 ∗∗ p < 0.05, ∗ p < 0.1. Each cell shows the estimate from a single regression. Controls included are:
indicators for birth year, age at interview, parents’ years of schooling, parents’ gross income, mother’s age at
childbirth, birth weight, gender, 5 minute APGAR score, and origin. Missing values in covariates are replaced
with zeros and indicators for missing variables are included. All sample splits are done at the median. Nonsingletons are always defined as having an older sibling.

29

Table 8: 2SLS estimates, the effect of School Starting Age on SDQ at age 11

Main
Boys
Girls
Highly educated
Low educated
High income
Low income
Low birthweight
High birthweight
No older sibs
Older sibs

(1)

(2)

(4)

(5)

Conduct

(3)
Inattention/
Hyperactivity

Emotional

Peer Problems

Pro-social

-0.18
(0.22)
1.21
(1.39)
-0.39∗∗
(0.19)
-0.15
(0.38)
-0.17
(0.26)
-0.44
(0.32)
0.09
(0.30)
0.20
(0.32)
-0.54∗
(0.30)
0.17
(0.28)
-0.63∗
(0.37)

-0.22
(0.22)
-0.53
(1.26)
-0.18
(0.17)
-0.36
(0.38)
-0.11
(0.26)
-0.52
(0.32)
0.07
(0.31)
0.14
(0.31)
-0.56∗
(0.31)
0.04
(0.27)
-0.57
(0.37)

-0.72∗∗∗
(0.23)
-1.57
(1.67)
-0.59∗∗∗
(0.17)
-1.19∗∗
(0.49)
-0.41
(0.26)
-1.15∗∗∗
(0.39)
-0.35
(0.30)
-0.49
(0.32)
-0.93∗∗∗
(0.33)
-0.27
(0.27)
-1.35∗∗∗
(0.47)

-0.40∗
(0.22)
-0.99
(1.42)
-0.30∗
(0.17)
-0.44
(0.39)
-0.36
(0.26)
-0.63∗
(0.34)
-0.16
(0.30)
0.04
(0.31)
-0.81∗∗
(0.33)
-0.14
(0.28)
-0.72∗
(0.39)

0.19
(0.22)
-0.10
(1.25)
0.23
(0.16)
0.31
(0.41)
0.11
(0.25)
0.23
(0.33)
0.12
(0.29)
0.22
(0.31)
0.16
(0.30)
-0.28
(0.28)
0.75∗
(0.39)

All results are based on the full sample using quadratic splines. Robust standard errors in parenthesis. ∗∗∗ p <
0.01 ∗∗ p < 0.05, ∗ p < 0.1. Each cell shows the estimate from a single regression. Controls included are:
indicators for birth year, age at interview, parents’ years of schooling, parents’ gross income, mother’s age at
childbirth, birth weight, gender, 5 minute APGAR score, and origin. Missing values in covariates are replaced
with zeros and indicators for missing variables are included. All sample splits are done at the median. Nonsingletons are always defined as having an older sibling.

30

0

.5

Point estimate
-1
-.5

Point estimate
-.5
0

50

80

110
Bandwidth

2SLS estimates:
Not significant at 5% lev.
Significant at 5% lev.

140

-1.5

-1
-1.5

20

170

20

50

1. order polynomial
2. order polynomial
3. order polynomial

80

110
Bandwidth

140

2SLS estimates:
Not significant at 5% lev.
Significant at 5% lev.

1. order polynomial
2. order polynomial
3. order polynomial

(b) Inattention/Hyperactivity

-1

-1.5

-1

-.5

Point estimate
-.5
0

Point estimate
0
.5

1

.5

(a) Total difficulties

170

20

50

80

110
Bandwidth

2SLS estimates:
Not significant at 5% lev.
Significant at 5% lev.

140

170

20

50

1. order polynomial
2. order polynomial
3. order polynomial

80

110
Bandwidth

140

2SLS estimates:
Not significant at 5% lev.
Significant at 5% lev.

1. order polynomial
2. order polynomial
3. order polynomial

(d) Emotional symptoms

20

50

80

110
Bandwidth

2SLS estimates:
Not significant at 5% lev.
Significant at 5% lev.

140

-.5

-1

0

-.5

Point estimate
.5
1

Point estimate
0
.5

1.5

1

(c) Conduct

170

170

20

1. order polynomial
2. order polynomial
3. order polynomial

50

80

110
Bandwidth

2SLS estimates:
Not significant at 5% lev.
Significant at 5% lev.

(e) Peer problems

140

170

1. order polynomial
2. order polynomial
3. order polynomial

(f) Pro-social

Figure 8: Bandwidth sensitivity, age 7. Each diamond marker is the 2SLS point estimate from
a local regression with the bandwidth size denoted on the x-axis. The bandwidth size increases
in steps of 10 days. A bandwidth of 10 implies a sample of children born 10 days before and
after January 1st. The horizontal lines are the 2SLS point estimate from a regression using the
full sample with separate trends on each side of the January 1st cutoff. The lines are solid if the
estimate is significant on a five percent level, and dashed if it is not significant on a five percent
level.

31

Point estimate
-1
-.5

0

.5
0

-1.5

Point estimate
-.5
-1

-2

-1.5
20

50

80

110
Bandwidth

2SLS estimates:
Not significant at 5% lev.
Significant at 5% lev.

140

170

20

50

1. order polynomial
2. order polynomial
3. order polynomial

80

110
Bandwidth

140

2SLS estimates:
Not significant at 5% lev.
Significant at 5% lev.

1. order polynomial
2. order polynomial
3. order polynomial

Point estimate
0
.5
-.5
-1

-1

-.5

Point estimate
0
.5

1

(b) Inattention/Hyperactivity

1

(a) Total difficulties

170

20

50

80

110
Bandwidth

2SLS estimates:
Not significant at 5% lev.
Significant at 5% lev.

140

170

20

50

1. order polynomial
2. order polynomial
3. order polynomial

80

110
Bandwidth

140

2SLS estimates:
Not significant at 5% lev.
Significant at 5% lev.

1. order polynomial
2. order polynomial
3. order polynomial

(d) Emotional symptoms

20

50

80

110
Bandwidth

2SLS estimates:
Not significant at 5% lev.
Significant at 5% lev.

140

-.5

-1.5

0

-1

Point estimate
.5

1

Point estimate
-.5
0

1.5

.5

(c) Conduct

170

170

20

1. order polynomial
2. order polynomial
3. order polynomial

50

80

110
Bandwidth

2SLS estimates:
Not significant at 5% lev.
Significant at 5% lev.

(e) Peer problems

140

170

1. order polynomial
2. order polynomial
3. order polynomial

(f) Pro-social

Figure 9: Bandwidth sensitivity, age 11. Each diamond marker is the 2SLS point estimate from
a local regression with the bandwidth size denoted on the x-axis. The bandwidth size increases
in steps of 10 days. A bandwidth of 10 implies a sample of children born 10 days before and
after January 1st. The horizontal lines are the 2SLS point estimate from a regression using the
full sample with separate trends on each side of the January 1st cutoff. The lines are solid if the
estimate is significant on a five percent level, and dashed if it is not significant on a five percent
level.

32

5.3

Treatment Heterogeneity

Our main RD results provide robust evidence that a higher school starting age leads to a large
and persistent increase in one particular dimension of children’s mental health (i.e., selfregulation). However, there are several ways in which the generalizability of this evidence
may be limited. For example, both local nature of an RD estimand and the non-random participation of DNBC respondents to the last two survey waves raise external-validity concerns.
Additionally, because we have a "fuzzy" RD design, the LATE theorem (Imbens and Angrist,
1994) implies that, in the absence of constant treatment effects, our point estimates are
defined for the subpopulation of "compliers" (i.e., those who choose a treatment condition
consistent with their ITT). To examine the empirical relevance of this concern, we follow
the suggestion recently introduced by Bertanha and Imbens (2014). They recommend examining the continuity of outcomes, separately for children who took up the "treatment"
and those who do not.
To apply this guidance in our setting, we defined the treatment as a binary indicator
for older school starting age, SSO: first entering kindergarten age 6.5 years or more. In
panel (a) of Figure 10, we show for the age-7 sample that this treatment "jumps" significantly at the threshold. Panel (b) illustrates the drop in the inattention/hyperactivity measure at this threshold. Panel (c) illustrates how the self-regulation measure changes at the
threshold using only observations for which SSO = 0. Using these data, the threshold
effectively separates "compliers" and "never takers" on the left from "never takers" on the
right. The discrete jump in panel (c) implies that the complier population has higher levels of inattention/hyperactivity than the never-takers (i.e., in the absence of treatment).
Panel (d) presents a similarly constructed graph but using data only from those who took
up the treatment (i.e., SSO = 1). This graph separates "always-takers" on the left from a
population of always-takers and compliers on the right. The significant drop in the inattention/hyperactivity measure to the right of the threshold indicates that, even when all are
taking the treatment, compliers have lower levels of inattention/hyperactivity than alwaystakers.
In Figure 11, we see effectively similar results when using the age-11 data. What do
these results imply? We believe that they are consistent with the assertion that the complier
sub-population is a distinct one that may have treatment effects that differ from those for
other parts of the population. For example, it is unsurprising that those who never choose to
33

E(SDQ Hyperactvity|X)

.5

.6

SSO=1(SSA>6.5)
.7
.8

SDQ Hyperactvity, age 7
-.5 -.4 -.3 -.2 -.1 0 .1 .2 .3

.4

.9

.5

P(SSO=1|X)

-30

-25

-20

-15

-10
-5
0
5
10
Date of Birth (Jan1=0)

15

20

25

30

-30

(a) P(SSO = 1|X )

-25

-20

-15

-10
-5
0
5
10
Date of Birth (Jan1=0)

15

20

25

30

25

30

(b) E(I nat t ent ion/H y per ac t ivi t y|X )

SDQ Hyperactvity, age 7
-.5 -.4 -.3 -.2 -.1 0 .1 .2 .3

SDQ Hyperactvity, age 7
-.5 -.4 -.3 -.2 -.1 0 .1 .2 .3

.4

.4

.5

E(SDQ Hyperactvity|SSO=1,X)

.5

E(SDQ Hyperactvity|SSO=0,X)

-30

-25

-20

-15

-10
-5
0
5
10
Date of Birth (Jan1=0)

15

20

25

30

(c) E(I nat t ent ion/H y per ac t i vi t y|SSO = 0, X )

-30

-25

-20

-15

-10
-5
0
5
10
Date of Birth (Jan1=0)

15

20

(d) E(I nat t ent ion/H y per ac t ivi t y|SSO = 1, X )

Figure 10: Inattention/Hyperactivity at age 7, by treatment status.
take up a delayed school start have low levels of inattention/hyperactivity (i.e., high degree
of self-regulation) relative to the population that would comply when encouraged (panel
c). The never-takers may rightfully see little benefit in delaying a school start. Similarly,
panel (d) indicates that always-takers have uniquely high levels of inattention-hyperactivity
and/or may have smaller treatment effects than compliers. This is consistent with the hypothesis that those who always seek a higher school starting age have unique developmental
challenges that may be comparatively immune to the effects of a late start (i.e., relative to
compliers).
To explore these issues in a more conventional and direct manner, we also examined
how our key findings varied for subpopulations of the DNBC samples defined by baseline
traits. Specifically, we estimated the effect of school starting age on each SDQ measure
using our RD design, first, for boys and girls separately and then for respondents who were
above the sample median values for education, income, and birt hweight. We report these
2SLS results in Tables 7 and 8 for the age-7 and age-11 samples, respectively.
34

E(SDQ Hyperactvity|X)

.4

SSO=1(SSA>6.5)
.6
.8

SDQ Hyperactvity, age 11
-.5 -.4 -.3 -.2 -.1 0 .1 .2 .3

.4

1

.5

P(SSO=1|X)

-30

-25

-20

-15

-10
-5
0
5
10
Date of Birth (Jan1=0)

15

20

25

30

-30

(a) P(SSO = 1|X )

-25

-20

-15

-10
-5
0
5
10
Date of Birth (Jan1=0)

15

20

25

30

25

30

(b) E(I nat t ent ion/H y per ac t ivi t y, X )
E(SDQ Hyperactvity|SSO=1,X)

SDQ Hyperactvity, age 11
-.5 -.4 -.3 -.2 -.1 0 .1 .2 .3

.4

.5

SDQ Hyperactvity, age 11
-.5 -.4 -.3 -.2 -.1 0 .1 .2 .3 .4 .5

E(SDQ Hyperactvity|SSO=0,X)

-30

-25

-20

-15

-10
-5
0
5
10
Date of Birth (Jan1=0)

15

20

25

30

(c) E(I nat t ent ion/H y per ac t i vi t y|SSO = 0, X )

-30

-25

-20

-15

-10
-5
0
5
10
Date of Birth (Jan1=0)

15

20

(d) E(I nat t ent ion/H y per ac t ivi t y|SSO = 1, X )

Figure 11: Inattention/Hyperactivity at age 11, by treatment status.
Interestingly, these estimates indicate that a school starting age had statistically insignificant effects for boys across all measures and both ages. However, these null findings reflect
a considerable loss in precision for boys. In fact, we find that the first-stage effect for boys is
smaller (0.07 compared to 0.27 for girls). So, our identifying variation is uniquely relevant
for girls. And estimates based only on girls indicates that a high school starting age improves both self regulation and emotional problems. Our remaining results indicate that the
mental-health benefits of a higher school starting age are almost exclusively concentrated
among socioeconomically advantaged children (i.e., higher parental education, income and
birthweight). These results are consistent with the hypothesis that an earlier start to formal
schooling confers comparative benefits to disadvantaged children.
Another relevant type of treatment heterogeneity concerns how the effects of a delayed
school start may influence more severe levels of mental illness. Our prior estimates effectively identify the changes in mean SDQ measures, which are in diagnostically normal
ranges. However, as noted earlier, each SDQ score can be classified as one of three lev35

Table 9: 2SLS estimates, the Effects of da yi ≥ 0 on Abnormal/Borderline SDQ
- - - Age 7 - - (1)
Abnormal
Total Diff.
Emotional Sympt.
Conduct Problems
Inattention/ Hyperactivity
Peer Problems
Prosocial Scale
Observations

-0.09∗∗∗
(0.03)
-0.10∗
(0.05)
-0.00
(0.04)
-0.10∗∗
(0.04)
-0.01
(0.04)
-0.03
(0.03)
54,251

[0.02]
[0.07]
[0.05]
[0.05]
[0.04]
[0.02]

(2)
Borderline/Abnormal
-0.04
(0.05)
-0.13∗
(0.07)
-0.05
(0.06)
-0.15∗∗∗
(0.05)
0.01
(0.05)
-0.05
(0.04)

[0.06]
[0.14]
[0.14]
[0.08]
[0.08]
[0.06]

54,251

- - - Age 11 - - (3)
(4)
Abnormal
Borderline
-0.03
(0.04)
-0.05
(0.07)
0.04
(0.04)
-0.12∗∗
(0.05)
-0.06
(0.05)
-0.01
(0.03)
35,902

[0.03]
[0.09]
[0.03]
[0.05]
[0.06]
[0.02]

-0.05
(0.05)
0.06
(0.08)
0.05
(0.06)
-0.13∗∗
(0.06)
-0.03
(0.07)
-0.00
(0.05)

[0.07]
[0.16]
[0.09]
[0.08]
[0.12]
[0.05]

35,902

Means of the dependent variables in square-brackets. Robust standard errors in parenthesis. ∗∗∗ p < 0.01
p < 0.05, ∗ p < 0.1. Each cell shows the estimate from a single regression. Controls included are: indicators
for birth year, age at interview, parents’ years of schooling, parents’ gross income, mother’s age at childbirth,
birth weight, gender, 5 minute APGAR score, and origin. Missing values in covariates are replaced with zeros
and indicators for missing variables are included.

∗∗

els: normal, borderline, and abnormal. To explore this form of heterogeneity, we estimated
2SLS models using our RD design and binary indicators for an abnormal rating (or for a
borderline/abnormal rating) as the dependent variables. We report these RD estimates for
the age-7 and age-11 samples in Table 9. We also report the mean value of these dependent variables. In general, diagnostically abnormal ratings on these scales are not common.
For example, across both age 7 and age 11, only 5 to 8 percent of respondents had inattention/hyperactivity ratings that qualified as abnormal or borderline. Consistent with our
prior results, these RD estimates indicate that a birthdate at the cutoff or later significantly
reduces the probability of an abnormal inattention/hyperactivity rating. These estimated effects are also quite large and suggest that a year delay in starting school virtually eliminates
the probability of an abnormal rating for the typical child.

6

Discussion and conclusions

The decision to delay the age at which children in developed nations begin formal schooling
is increasingly common. These delays may confer developmental advantages through both
relative and absolute-age mechanisms. However, an active research literature has generally

36

found that these delays do not clearly result in longer-run educational or economic advantages. In this study, we examined the effect of school starting age on distinctive and more
proximate outcomes: measures of mental health in childhood. One key feature of our study
is the availability of data on several psychopathological constructs from a widely used and
extensively validated mental-health screening tool fielded among children in the Danish National Birth Cohort (DNBC) study. We are also able to identify the causal effect of higher
school starting ages by leveraging the Danish rule that children should begin kindergarten
in the calendar year in which they turn six. We match the children in the DNBC to the
Danish administrative registries that include the exact day of birth and confirm that school
starting age increases significantly for children born after the cutoff.
The results based on this "fuzzy" regression-discontinuity design indicate that delays in
school starting age imply substantial improvements in mental health (e.g., reducing the
overall "difficulties" score by at least 0.5 SD). The evidence for these effects is robust and,
critically, persists in the latest wave of the DNBC when the children were aged 11. However, we also find that these mental-health gains are narrowly confined to one particular
construct: the inattention/hyperactivity score (i.e., a measure indicating a lack of self regulation). Interestingly, this finding is consistent with one prominent theory of why delayed
school starts are beneficial. Specifically, a literature in developmental psychology emphasizes the importance of pretend play in the development of children’s emotional and intellectual self-regulation. Children who delay their school staring age may have an extended (and
appropriately timed) exposure to such playful environments. Our findings are consistent
with this absolute-age mechanism and suggest that there may be broader developmental
gains to policies that delay the initiation of formal schooling (and that support playful earlychildhood environments). However, we also note that there are several external-validity
caveats to our study (e.g., the localness of our RD estimands, evidence for heterogeneous
treatment effects). These concerns about generalizability underscore the need for further
research that can guide effectively targeted and designed programs and policies.

37

References
ACHENBACH, T. M., A. BECKER, M. DÖPFNER, E. HEIERVANG, V. ROESSNER, H.-C. STEINHAUSEN , AND

A. ROTHENBERGER (2008): “Multicultural assessment of child and adoles-

cent psychopathology with ASEBA and SDQ instruments: research findings, applications,
and future directions,” Journal of Child Psychology and Psychiatry, 49(3), 251–275.
ALIPRANTIS, D. (2014): “When should children start school?,” Journal of Human Capital,
8(4), 481–536.
AMERICAN PSYCHIATRIC ASSOCIATION (1994): “Diagnostic and statistical manual of mental
disorders (DCM),” Discussion paper, American Psychiatric Association, Washington, DC.
ANGRIST, J. D.,

AND

J.-S. PISCHKE (2008): Mostly harmless econometrics: An empiricist’s

companion. Princeton university press.
BASSOK, D.,

AND

S. F. REARDON (2013): ““Academic Redshirting” in Kindergarten Preva-

lence, Patterns, and Implications,” Educational Evaluation and Policy Analysis, 35(3), 283–
297.
BEDARD, K.,

AND

E. DHUEY (2006): “The persistence of early childhood maturity: Inter-

national evidence of long-run age effects,” The Quarterly Journal of Economics, 121(4),
1437–1472.
BERTANHA, M.,

AND

G. W. IMBENS (2014): “External Validity in Fuzzy Regression Disconti-

nuity Designs,” Discussion paper, National Bureau of Economic Research.
BLACK, S. E., P. J. DEVEREUX, AND K. G. SALVANES (2011): “Too young to leave the nest? The
effects of school starting age,” The Review of Economics and Statistics, 93(2), 455–467.
BLAKE, P. R., M. PIOVESAN, N. MONTINARI, F. WARNEKEN,

AND

F. GINO (2014): “Prosocial

norms in the classroom: The role of self-regulation in following norms of giving,” Journal
of Economic Behavior & Organization.
BROWNING, M.,

AND

E. HEINESEN (2007): “Class Size, Teacher Hours and Educational At-

tainment*,” The Scandinavian Journal of Economics, 109(2), 415–438.
BUCKLES, K. S.,

AND

D. M. HUNGERMAN (2013): “Season of Birth and Later Outcomes: Old

Questions, New Answers,” The Review of Economics and Statistics, 95(3), 711–724.
38

CASCIO, E.,

AND

D. W. SCHANZENBACH (forthcoming): “First in the class? Age and the edu-

cation production function,” Education Finance and Policy.
CRAWFORD, C., L. DEARDEN,

AND

C. MEGHIR (2007): “When you are born matters: the

impact of date of birth on child cognitive outcomes in England,” Open Access publications
from University College London http://discovery.ucl.ac.u, University College London.
CUNHA, F., J. J. HECKMAN, L. LOCHNER,

AND

D. V. MASTEROV (2006): “Interpreting the

evidence on life cycle skill formation,” Handbook of the Economics of Education, 1, 697–
812.
DATTA GUPTA, N.,

AND

M. SIMONSEN (2010): “Non-cognitive child outcomes and universal

high quality child care,” Journal of Public Economics, 94(1), 30–43.
DEMING, D.,

AND

S. DYNARSKI (2008): “The Lengthening of Childhood,” The Journal of

Economic Perspectives, 22(3), 71–92.
DUCKWORTH, A. L.,

AND

S. M. CARLSON (2013): “Self-regulation and school success,” Self-

regulation and autonomy: Social and developmental dimensions of human conduct, 40, 208.
ELDER, T. E. (2010): “The importance of relative standards in ADHD diagnoses: Evidence
based on exact birth dates,” Journal of Health Economics, 29(5), 641–656.
ELDER, T. E.,

AND

D. H. LUBOTSKY (2009): “Kindergarten entrance age and children’s

achievement impacts of state policies, family background, and peers,” Journal of Human
Resources, 44(3), 641–683.
FREDRIKSSON, P.,

AND

B. ÖCKERT (2013): “Life-cycle Effects of Age at School Start,” The

Economic Journal.
GOODMAN, R. (1997): “The Strengths and Difficulties Questionnaire: a research note,”
Journal of child psychology and psychiatry, 38(5), 581–586.
GOODMAN, R.,

AND

S. SCOTT (1999): “Comparing the Strengths and Difficulties Question-

naire and the Child Behavior Checklist: is small beautiful?,” Journal of abnormal child
psychology, 27(1), 17–24.
HECKMAN, J. J.,

AND

T. KAUTZ (2012): “Hard evidence on soft skills,” Labour economics,

19(4), 451–464.
39

IMBENS, G. W.,

AND

J. D. ANGRIST (1994): “No Title,” Econometrica, 62(2), 467–475.

JACOBSEN, T. N., E. A. NOHR,

AND

M. FRYDENBERG (2010): “Selection by socioeconomic

factors into the Danish National Birth Cohort,” European journal of epidemiology, 25(5),
349–355.
LANDERSØ, R., H. S. NIELSEN,

AND

M. SIMONSEN (2013): “School Starting Age and Crime,”

Economics Working Papers 2013-03, School of Economics and Management, University
of Aarhus.
LEE, D. S.,

AND

T. LEMIEUX (2010): “Regression Discontinuity Designs in Economics,” The

Journal of Economic Literature, 48(2), 281–355.
LEUVEN, E., M. LINDAHL, H. OOSTERBEEK,

AND

D. WEBBINK (2010): “Expanding schooling

opportunities for 4-year-olds,” Economics of Education Review, 29(3), 319–328.
MCCRARY, J. (2008): “Manipulation of the running variable in the regression discontinuity
design: A density test,” Journal of Econometrics, 142(2), 698–714.
MCEWAN, P. J.,

AND

J. S. SHAPIRO (2008): “The benefits of delayed primary school enroll-

ment discontinuity estimates using exact birth dates,” Journal of human Resources, 43(1),
1–29.
MÜHLENWEG, A., D. BLOMEYER, H. STICHNOTH,

AND

M. LAUCHT (2012): “Effects of age at

school entry (ASE) on the development of non-cognitive skills: Evidence from psychometric data,” Economics of Education Review, 31(3), 68–76.
OLSEN, J., M. MELBYE, S. F. OLSEN, T. I. SØRENSEN, P. AABY, A.-M. N. ANDERSEN, D. TAXBØL,
K. D. HANSEN, M. JUHL, T. B. SCHOW, ET AL. (2001): “The Danish National Birth Cohort-its
background, structure and aim,” Scandinavian journal of public health, 29(4), 300–307.
PUHANI, P. A., AND A. M. WEBER (2005): “Does the Early Bird Catch the Worm? Instrumental
Variable Estimates of Educational Effects of Age of School Entry in Germany,” Publications
of Darmstadt Technical University, Institute of Economics (VWL) 25840, Darmstadt Technical University, Department of Business Administration, Economics and Law, Institute of
Economics (VWL).

40

STONE, L. L., R. OTTEN, R. C. ENGELS, A. A. VERMULST,

AND

J. M. JANSSENS (2010): “Psy-

chometric properties of the parent and teacher versions of the strengths and difficulties
questionnaire for 4-to 12-year-olds: a review,” Clinical child and family psychology review,
13(3), 254–274.
THE B OSTON GLOBE (2014): “Holding kids back for kindergarten doesn’t help,” Evan
Horowitz.
THE DANISH MINISTRY OF EDUCATION (2009): “Fælles Mål 2009 Børnehaveklassen,” Discussion Paper 25, Undervisningsministeriets håndbogsserie.
THE NEW YORK TIMES (2010): “The Littlest Redshirts Sit Out Kindergarten,” Pamela Paul.
THE NEW YORKER (2013): “Youngest Kid, Smartest Kid?,” The New Yorker, Maria Konnikova.
VYGOTSKY, L. S. (1978): “The role of play in development,” Mind in society, pp. 92–104.
WHITEBREAD, D. (2011): Developmental psychology and early childhood education. London,Sage.

41

80
0

0

10

5

20

Fraction delayed
10
15
20

Fraction delayed
30 40 50 60

25

70

30

Appendices

2004

2005

2006
School year
Boys

2007

2008

-6

-4

-2

Girls

0
Month of Birth
Boys

(a) By year of enrollment

2

4

Girls

(b) By month of birth

Figure A.1: Share of school entrants that are delayed. Imputed by when they participated in
the first National Test.

Table A.1: Variable descriptives, Survey sample compared to population data.
Population data
Mean
SD
Years of schooling, highest
among parents
Parents gross income
Mother’s age when child was
born
Birthweight (gr.)
Female
5min APGAR score

N

Mean

Survey
SD

N

P-value

14.37

2.74

481,255

15.66

2.00

36,444

0.00

664.92
25.84

491.21
11.29

481,253
557,688

745.72
30.74

479.00
4.49

36,444
36,521

0.00
0.00

3493.11
0.49
8.48

613.82
0.50
3.47

478,586
478,586
557,369

3572.34
0.50
9.79

584.82
0.50
1.09

36,141
36,141
36,507

0.00
0.00
0.00

Notes: Birth weight is measured in grams. Educational length is measured in years. Parents are defined as non-western if they are
immigrants to Denmark from a non-western country according to the classification by Statistics Denmark. The mother’s single status is
one if the child is living with the mother, and the mother is not married or cohabiting. The gross income is measured in 1,000 DKK and
adjusted to the 2010 level using the consumer price index. The parents’ employment is for November in the lagged year.

42

Table A.2: Auxiliary RD estimates, balancing of the covariates.

Non-western origin
Years of schooling, highest among parents
Parents gross income
Mother’s age when child was born
Birthweight (gr.)
Female
5min APGAR below 7

(1)

(2)

-0.00
(0.01)
0.18∗
(0.09)
8.10
(20.53)
0.20
(0.21)
4.88
(29.04)
-0.01
(0.02)
0.00
(0.00)

-0.00
(0.00)
0.09
(0.06)
14.71
(14.71)
0.08
(0.12)
15.38
(16.76)
0.01
(0.01)
0.00
(0.00)

Bandwidth
30 days
Full
Linear trend × cutoff
Ø
Ø
Quadratic trend × cutoff
Ø
∗∗∗
∗∗
∗
Robust standard errors in parenthesis.
p < 0.01, p < 0.05, p < 0.1.
Regressions of the covariates on the indicator for being born on January
1st or later as well as time trends. Each cell represents a regression and
shows the point estimate on the indicator for being born January 1st or
later.

43

Table A.3: Placebo regressions with pre-treatment outcomes

Can keep occupied for 15min aged
18m
Turns pictures right aged 18m
Makes word sounds aged 18m
Can walk up stairs aged 18m
Can bring things aged 18m
Observations

(1)

(2)

(3)

(4)

-0.02

-0.03

0.03

0.01

(0.09)
0.21
(0.14)
0.04
(0.04)
0.00
(0.03)
0.00
(0.04)

(0.09)
0.19
(0.13)
0.04
(0.04)
0.00
(0.03)
-0.00
(0.03)

(0.08)
0.10
(0.10)
0.02
(0.03)
-0.01
(0.03)
0.00
(0.03)

(0.07)
0.06
(0.09)
0.01
(0.03)
0.01
(0.02)
-0.01
(0.02)

5,816

5,816

40,749

40,749

Bandwidth
30 days 30 days
Full
Full
Covariates
Ø
Ø
Linear trend × cutoff
Ø
Ø
Ø
Ø
Quadratic trend × cutoff
Ø
Ø
∗∗∗
∗∗
∗
Robust standard errors in parenthesis.
p < 0.01, p < 0.05, p < 0.1.
Covariates included are birth weight, 5 minute APGAR score, parental
education, parents’ age, parental income, parental employment, age at
test (monthly indicators), and birth year fixed effects.

44

