                                NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




ARE LOW INTEREST RATES DEFLATIONARY? A PARADOX OF PERFECT-FORESIGHT
                              ANALYSIS

                                      Mariana García-Schmidt
                                        Michael Woodford

                                        Working Paper 21614
                                http://www.nber.org/papers/w21614


                      NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                               1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                 Cambridge, MA 02138
                                     October 2015




We would like to thank Gauti Eggertsson, Jamie McAndrews, Rosemarie Nagel, Jon Steinsson and
Lars Svensson for helpful comments, and the Institute for New Economic Thinking for research support.
The views expressed herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the
National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.

© 2015 by Mariana García-Schmidt and Michael Woodford. All rights reserved. Short sections of
text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit,
including © notice, is given to the source.
Are Low Interest Rates Deflationary? A Paradox of Perfect-Foresight Analysis
Mariana García-Schmidt and Michael Woodford
NBER Working Paper No. 21614
October 2015
JEL No. E31,E43,E52

                                              ABSTRACT

We illustrate a pitfall that can result from the common practice of assessing alternative monetary policies
purely by considering the perfect foresight equilibria (PFE) consistent with the proposed rule. In a
standard New Keynesian model, such analysis may seem to support the “Neo-Fisherian” proposition
according to which low nominal interest rates can cause inflation to be lower. We propose instead
an explicit cognitive process by which agents may form their expectations of future endogenous variables.
Under some circumstances, a PFE can arise as a limiting case of our more general concept of reflective
equilibrium, when the process of reflection is pursued sufficiently far. But we show that an announced
intention to fix the nominal interest rate for a long enough period of time creates a situation in which
reflective equilibrium need not resemble any PFE. In our view, this makes PFE predictions not plausible
outcomes in the case of such policies. Our alternative approach implies that a commitment to keep
interest rates low should raise inflation and output, though by less than some PFE analyses apply.


Mariana García-Schmidt
Central Bank of Chile
Agustinas 1180
Santiago, Chile
m.garcia.schmidt@gmail.com

Michael Woodford
Department of Economics
Columbia University
420 W. 118th Street
New York, NY 10027
and NBER
mw2230@columbia.edu
1       Perfect-Foresight Analyses of the Effects of
        Forward Guidance: A Paradox
One of the more notable features of recent monetary experience has been the fact that
first Japan, and now more recently the U.S. as well, have gone through prolonged
periods of extremely low nominal interest rates (overnight interest rates reduced prac-
tically to zero and kept there for years) without this leading to the sort of inflationary
spiral that one might have expected to follow from such a reckless experiment. In-
stead, inflation has remained low, below both countries’ desired levels of inflation
(and even below zero, much of the time, in Japan), while real activity has remained
disappointing as well. A common reaction to these surprising developments has been
to conclude that financial crises of the kind that both countries experienced can lower
the equilibrium real rate of interest for a very prolonged period of time, so that real
interest rates that seem very low by historical standards may nonetheless continue to
be contractionary.
    But some have proposed an alternative interpretation of these experiences, ac-
cording to which low nominal interest rates themselves may cause inflation to be
lower. In this view, the monetary policy reactions to these crises may have actually
prolonged the disinflationary slumps by creating disinflationary expectations. Under
such a view, actually promising to keep interest rates low for a longer period than
would otherwise have been expected — as both the Fed and a number of other central
banks have done in the recent period1 — would be the worst possible policy for a
central bank worried that inflation will continue to run below its target, and some
(beginning with Bullard, 2010, and Schmitt-Grohé and Uribe, 2010) have proposed
that such a central bank should actually raise interest rates in order to head off the
possibility of a deflationary trap. As the period over which the U.S. has kept its
federal funds rate target near zero has continued, views of this kind, that some have
taken to calling “neo-Fisherian,” have gained increasing currency, at least on the
internet.2
    Moreover, it might seem that even a standard textbook model of the effects of
alternative monetary policy commitments would support the “neo-Fisherian” posi-
tion. The most straightforward theoretical argument proceeds in two steps.3 One
    1
      See, for example, Woodford (2012) for a discussion of these experiences.
    2
      See, for example, Cochrane (2015b) for discussion and additional references.
    3
      The argument is explained more formally in section 2.2 below.



                                                1
first considers what should happen if a central bank were to commit to maintain the
short-term nominal interest rate at an arbitrarily chosen level forever. According to
a traditional view, famously articulated by Friedman (1968), this is not a possible
experiment, because any such attempt would lead to explosive inflation dynamics
that would require the central bank to abandon the policy in finite time. But in fact,
many modern equilibrium models of inflation determination, including standard New
Keynesian models, imply that there exist rational-expectations equilibria associated
with such a policy in which inflation and other variables remain forever bounded —
so that there is no reason to deny the logical possibility of the proposed thought ex-
periment.4 In a deterministic setting, there is typically a one-dimensional continuum
of perfect foresight equilibria consistent with this policy commitment, all of which
converge asymptotically to a steady state in which the constant inflation rate is the
one determined by the nominal interest-rate target and the Fisher equation. Thus
one might conclude that such an experiment should lead to an inflation rate that
converges to the one determined by the Fisher equation (and hence that is higher by
one percentage point for each percentage point increase in the nominal interest-rate
target), at least eventually.
    The second step in the argument notes that it doesn’t make sense to suppose
that the outcome resulting from a given forward path for policy should be extremely
sensitive to small changes in anticipated policy that relate only to the very distant
future. More specifically, one might assert that an expected shift in the monetary
policy rule should have an effect on outcomes now that shrinks to zero as the date of
the anticipated policy shift is pushed far enough into the future.5 But this means that
a commitment to keep the nominal interest rate at some level up until some finite
date T should not have consequences that are very different than those that would
follow from keeping the interest rate at that level forever. If keeping the interest rate
low forever must eventually lower the inflation rate, then there must be some finite
length of time such that keeping the interest rate low for that length of time also
must eventually lower the inflation rate almost as much. It is only a question of how
long a period of low interest rates should be required to observe this effect.
    This is a paradoxical result: it seems that the very assumptions that underly com-
   4
    This is emphasized in expositions of the neo-Fisherian view such as that of Cochrane (2015b).
   5
    This is the basis for the proposal in Cochrane (2015a) that a plausible analysis should select the
“backward stable” perfect foresight solution consistent with a given forward path policy.



                                                2
mon arguments for the efficacy of forward guidance — the use of a New Keynesian
model of the monetary transmission mechanism, and the assumption of perfect fore-
sight (or rational expectations) to determine the effects of a given policy commitment
— imply that a commitment to keep interest rates low for a long time should be even
more disinflationary than a plan of returning sooner to a more normal policy. Yet
this is not at all what standard model-based analyses of the implications of forward
guidance have concluded, and it is certainly not what policymakers have assumed
when recently announcing or contemplating commitments of that kind.
    It might seem that an argument of the kind just sketched about the consequences
of policies expected to last for unboundedly long periods of time has no consequences
for anything we will ever actually observe, and therefore no bearing upon either prac-
tical policy analysis or the interpretation of historical experience. But the standard
approach to analyzing the consequences of an expectation that the short-term interest
rate will remain at the zero lower bound (ZLB) for several more quarters — which
looks at the perfect foresight equilibrium (or the rational-expectations equilibrium,
in the case of a stochastic model) consistent with the forward path of policy that
converges asymptotically to the steady state in which the central bank’s long-run
inflation target is achieved — has the consequence, in a standard (very forward-
looking) New Keynesian model, that as the length of time that the interest rate is
expected to remain at zero is made longer, the predicted positive effects on inflation
and output at the time that the policy attention is announced grow explosively, as
shown by Del Negro et al. (2013), Chung (2015), and McKay et al. (2015). This
prediction violates the principle that anticipated policy paths that differ only in the
specification of policy far in the future should have similar near-term effects; but if
one thinks that the conclusion must be wrong about the effects of commitments to
long spells of zero-interest-rate policy, one may suspect that it is wrong about the
effects of shorter-range policy commitments as well.
    And similarly, if one thinks that selecting instead the “backward stable” perfect
foresight equilibrium as the relevant model prediction (as proposed by Cochrane,
2015a) makes sense in the case of commitments to a long spell of zero-interest-rate
policy, one may find this a reason to regard it as the more sensible prediction in the
case of shorter-range policy commitments as well. But the conventional equilibrium
selection and the “backward stable” selection lead to very different predictions about



                                         3
the effects of even periods of modest length at the zero lower bound.6
    Thus the conclusion that one reaches about the paradoxes resulting from attempts
to analyze very long spells at the zero lower bound matters for the analysis that one
should give of types of policy experiments that have recently been attempted or
contemplated. Indeed, if one accepts the analysis proposed by Cochrane (2015a),
the neo-Fisherian logic applies also to spells at the zero lower bound of only a few
years. In the numerical solutions that he displays, a temporary reduction of the
natural rate of interest to a level that makes the zero lower bound inconsistent with
the central bank’s inflation target — so that the ZLB requires an interest rate higher
than the one consistent with the target inflation rate, for a time — is inflationary,
rather than deflationary as in analyses like that of Eggertsson and Woodford (2003).
And maintaining a higher interest rate during the period of the shock would be even
more inflationary, according to the “backward stable” equilibrium selection.
    In this paper we consider whether a standard New Keynesian model of the effects
of monetary policy requires one to accept paradoxical conclusions of this kind.7 We
shall argue that it does not. Our quarrel, however, is not with the postulate that
anticipated changes in policy sufficiently far in the future should have negligible effects
on current economic outcomes. Rather, we deny the practical relevance of the perfect
foresight solutions (or more generally, rational-expectations solutions) of the model
under the thought experiment of a permanent interest-rate peg.
    Moreover, our criticism of the perfect-foresight analysis of this case is not based on
a wholesale denial of the plausibility of forward-looking expectations. It is well-known
that Friedman’s view of the consequences of an interest-rate peg can be defended if
one supposes that people’s expectations are purely backward-looking, as Friedman’s
   6
     See the demonstration of this in Cochrane (2015), sec. 3.1
   7
     Of course, we do not pretend to consider all of the logically possible models, and all of the
logically possible assumptions about policy, that might be consistent with neo-Fisherian claims. For
example, we do not discuss Cochrane’s (2014) derivation of neo-Fisherian conclusions under the
assumption of a non-Ricardian fiscal policy; here we are solely concerned with situations in which
fiscal policy is expected to be Ricardian, in a sense made precise in Woodford (2013). We would
dispute the argument in Cochrane (2014) that a non-Ricardian fiscal policy should be assumed
because the path of the price level is otherwise indeterminate in New Keynesian models. We offer
here a way of obtaining a determinate prediction despite Ricardian expectations regarding fiscal
policy, and show that it leads to quite different conclusions from those that would result from the
kinds of expectations about fiscal policy analyzed in Cochrane (2014), in addition to differing from
the predictions obtained in Cochrane (2015a) by selecting the “backward stable” equilibrium.


                                               4
informal discussion presumed.8 However, this particular defense of conventional views
about the effects of interest-rate policy would also imply that “forward guidance”
as to a central bank’s intentions regarding future policy should have no effects on
equilibrium outcomes, as expectations regarding the future are assumed to follow
solely from the data that have already been observed. Such a view would imply that
if the zero lower bound prevents a central bank from lowering the current short-term
rate enough to achieve its stabilization objectives through that channel alone, there
is nothing further to be done; keeping the interest rate low even beyond the end of
the period in which the bank’s current targets cannot be achieved can achieve higher
output and inflation in that later period, but because this will not be anticipated
until it occurs, this will do nothing to improve outcomes during the constrained
period (while meaning less successful stabilization later). So while it would not imply
that a commitment to keep the nominal interest rate low for a long time would
actually lower inflation, it would nonetheless imply that such a policy would impede
macroeconomic stabilization rather than improving it.
    We offer a different reason for rejecting the neo-Fisherian conclusion. We believe
that people are at least somewhat forward-looking; this is why central bank commit-
ments about the way in which monetary policy will be conducted in the future (such
as explicit inflation targets) matter. Nonetheless, it may not be reasonable to expect
that the outcome associated with a given policy commitment should be a perfect
foresight equilibrium, even when the commitment is fully credible and people have
the knowledge about how the economy works that would be required for calculation
of such an equilibrium.
    We argue that predicting what should happen as a result of a particular policy
commitment requires that one model the cognitive process by which one imagines peo-
ple to arrive at particular expectations taking that information into account. In this
paper, we offer a simple example of such an explicit model of reasoning. Under our
approach, a perfect foresight equilibrium (or more generally, a rational-expectations
equilibrium9 ) can be understood as a limiting case of a more general concept of re-
   8
      One can show formally, in a model derived from intertemporal optimization of the kind used
below, that an interest-rate peg will imply explosive dynamics if expectations are based on extrapo-
lation from past data, as under Friedman’s hypothesis of “adaptive expectations” or the hypothesis
of “least-squares learning” that has been popular more recently. See Woodford (2003, sec. 2.3) for
discussion and references.
    9
      We consider only deterministic environments in which, after some (possibly unexpected) change


                                               5
flective equilibrium, which limit may be reached under some circumstances if the
process of reflection about what forward paths for the economy to expect is carried
far enough. Our concept of reflective equilibrium is similar to the “calculation equilib-
rium” proposed by Evans and Ramey (1992, 1995, 1998): we consider what economic
outcomes should be if people optimize on the basis of expectations that they derive
from a process of reflection about what they should expect, given both their under-
standing of how the economy works and (as part of that structural knowledge) their
understanding of the central bank’s policy intentions.
    Furthermore, like Evans and Ramey, we model this process of reflection as an
iterative process that adjusts the provisional forecasts that are entertained at a given
stage of the process in response to the predictable discrepancy between those forecasts
and what one should expect to happen if people were to behave optimally on the basis
of those forecasts. Thus the process is one under which beliefs should continue to be
adjusted, if the process is carried farther, unless perfect-foresight equilibrium beliefs
have been reached. And like Evans and Ramey, we are interested in the theoretical
question of where such a process of belief revision would end up asymptotically,
if carried forward indefinitely, but we regard it as more realistic to suppose that
in practice, the process of reflection will be suspended after some finite degree of
reflection, and people will act upon the beliefs obtained in this way.
    The most important difference between our approach and that of Evans and
Ramey is that the primary goal of their analysis is to determine how far the belief
revision process should be carried forward, by specifying costs of additional calcu-
lation and a criterion for judging the benefits that should be weighed against those
costs; we do not propose any explicit model of such costs or the decision to terminate
the process of belief revision. Our concerns are instead to determine whether the
process will necessarily reach a perfect foresight equilibrium even if carried forward
indefinitely; to ask which perfect foresight equilibrium is reached in the case that
in economic fundamentals and/or the announced path of monetary policy, neither fundamentals nor
policy should depend on any further random events, and so we consider only the reasonableness
of assuming a perfect foresight equilibrium. But the kind of reflective equilibrium that we define
below could also be considered in stochastic environments, in which case we could instead consider
under what conditions the process of reflection will eventually converge to a rational-expectations
equilibrium; and some of the convergence results obtained below have direct extensions to stochastic
environments. To economize on notation and technicality, however, we here expound the idea only
in the simpler deterministic setting.


                                               6
the process converges; and to understand what determines the speed of convergence
when it occurs.
    In our view, the predictions obtained by considering the perfect foresight equilib-
rium (PFE) consistent with a given forward path for policy are of practical relevance
only in that the belief revision process converges to those PFE beliefs, sufficiently
rapidly and from a large enough range of possible beliefs that may be initially en-
tertained. If one has fast convergence to certain PFE beliefs from many possible
starting points, then the PFE predictions should be a good approximation to what
one should expect to occur in a reflective equilibrium, under any of a considerable
range of assumptions about where the process starts and how far it is carried forward.
We show below that standard conclusions about equilibrium determination under a
Taylor rule (when the zero lower bound does not constrain policy) can be justified in
this way; our analysis not only provides a reason for interest in the perfect-foresight
(or rational-expectations) predictions about such a policy commitment, but explains
why one particular PFE solution should be regarded as the relevant prediction of
the model, addressing Cochrane’s (2011) critique of the standard New Keynesian
literature.
    If, instead, a particular perfect foresight equilibrium cannot be reached under the
belief revision process, except by starting from extremely special initial beliefs, then
we do not think it is plausible to expect actual outcomes to resemble those PFE out-
comes.10 And if the belief revision process does not converge, or if it converges only
very slowly, then we do not believe there is ground to make any very specific predic-
tion about the beliefs that people should be expected to hold in practice and hence
about the economic outcomes that should be observed; and the range of outcomes
that should be considered to represent reasonable possibilities need have little to do
with the set of perfect foresight equilibria. We show below that in a standard New
Keynesian model, the thought experiment of an interest-rate peg that is maintained
forever produces a situation of this kind: while perfect foresight equilibria do indeed
exist, the belief revision process that we consider does not converge to any of them,
and the set of reflective equilibria resulting from different finite degrees of reflection
do not resemble perfect foresight equilibria. Thus in our view, the forward guidance
paradox sketched above results from reliance upon the concept of perfect foresight
  10
    This is our view of the “backward stable” PFE solutions analyzed by Cochrane (2015a) in the
case of a temporary interest-rate peg.


                                             7
equilibrium in a context in which it is especially inappropriate.
    Some may protest that an equilibrium concept that allows no definite conclusion
about what should occur (in the case of non-convergence or slow convergence) is of
no use in informing policy design. Yet as our results below illustrate, even in such
a case, it may well be possible to derive qualitative conclusions about the effects on
a reflective equilibrium that should be expected from changing policy in a particular
direction; and these may differ, even as to sign, from those that would be suggested
by considering the set of perfect foresight equilibria.
    In particular, we show that in our model, a commitment to maintain a low nominal
interest rate for a longer period of time — or to maintain a lower rate, for any fixed
length of time — will typically result (under any given finite degree of reflection) in
increased aggregate demand, increasing both output and inflation in the near term,
though the exact degree of stimulus that should result depends (considerably) on the
assumed degree of reflection. This is true regardless of the length of time for which
the interest-rate peg is expected to be maintained, and even in the limit of a perpetual
interest-rate peg. Thus consideration of the reflective equilibrium resulting from a
finite degree of reflection yields conventional conclusions about the sign of the effects
of commitments to lower interest rates in the future, and does so without implying
any non-negligible effects of changing the specification of policy only very far in the
future.
    Hence the reflective equilibrium analysis avoids both of the paradoxical conclu-
sions that a PFE analysis requires one to choose between: affirming either that main-
taining low nominal interest rates must eventually be deflationary, or that the out-
come implied by a given policy commitment can depend critically on the specification
of policy extremely far in the future. It implies that PFE (or rational-expectations
equilibrium) analyses of the effects of committing to keep the nominal interest rate
low for a longer (but still fairly short) period of time, under the conventional approach
to equilibrium selection, are likely to be correct as to the signs of the predicted effects,
but that the numerical magnitudes of the effects obtained from such analyses may
be quite inaccurate. In particular, our numerical illustrations below suggest that the
predicted effects on output and inflation from the PFE analysis are likely to be upper
bounds on the effects that should occur in a reflective equilibrium with only a finite
degree of reflection — and indeed, wild exaggerations in cases where the interest rate
is expected to remain at the zero lower bound for many years.


                                           8
    We proceed as follows. Section 2 introduces our New Keynesian model of infla-
tion and output determination under alternative monetary policies and alternative
assumptions about private-sector expectations, and the belief revision process that
underlies our proposed concept of reflective equilibrium. Section 3 then considers
reflective equilibrium when the forward path of monetary policy is specified by a
Taylor rule, and both the path of policy and the economy’s exogenous fundamentals
are such that the ZLB never binds in equilibrium. We allow the Taylor rule to involve
a possibly time-varying intercept (or inflation target), so that we can analyze a type
of forward guidance (but not one that involves commitment to a constant interest
rate). By contrast, section 4 considers reflective equilibrium in the less well-behaved
case of an expectation that the short-term interest rate will remain fixed until some
horizon T , and then revert to a Taylor rule thereafter; and also the limiting case
of a commitment to keep the interest rate fixed forever. Section 5 offers concluding
reflections.


2      Reflective Equilibrium in a New Keynesian Model
We expound our concept of reflective equilibrium in the context of a log-linearized
New Keynesian (NK) model. The model is one that has frequently been used, un-
der the assumption of perfect foresight or rational expectations, in analyses of the
potential effects of forward guidance when policy is temporarily constrained by the
zero lower bound (e.g., Eggertsson and Woodford, 2003; Werning, 2012; McKay et
al., 2015; Cochrane, 2015a).11 As in the analyses of Evans and Ramey (1992, 1995,
1998), we must begin by specifying the temporary equilibrium relations that map
arbitrary subjective expectations about future economic conditions into market out-
comes; these relations play a crucial role in the process of reflection that we wish to
model, in addition to being required in order to predict what should happen if peo-
ple’s beliefs do not converge to PFE beliefs. Because these relations are not generally
discussed in a form that would be valid under arbitrary subjective expectations in
expositions of the NK model that consider only its rational-expectations equilibria,
it is necessary to briefly sketch the foundations of the model. The presentation here
  11
    Werning (2012) and Cochrane (2015a) analyze a continuous-time version of the model, but the
structure of the model that they consider is otherwise the same as the discrete-time model considered
here.


                                                9
largely follows Woodford (2013), where the derivations are discussed in more detail.


2.1     Temporary Equilibrium Relations
In our model, both households and firms solve infinite-horizon decision problems,
and hence their optimal decision rules depend on their expectations about economic
conditions in a series of future periods extending indefinitely. It is important that we
explicitly represent the way in which actions depend on expectations about different
future dates, because of our interest in analyzing the effects of announcements about
future policy that may refer to points in time at different distances from the present.
   The economy is made up of identical, infinite-lived households. Each household i
seeks to maximize a discounted flow of utility
                                     ∞
                                     X      PT −1
                              Êti          e   s=t   ρs
                                                           [u(CTi ) − v(HTi )]            (2.1)
                                     T =t

when planning their path of consumption, looking forward from date t. Here Cti is a
Dixit-Stiglitz aggregate of the household’s purchases of differentiated consumer goods,
Hti is hours worked, the sub-utility functions satisfy u0 > 0, u00 < 0, v 0 > 0, v 00 ≥ 0,
and ρt is a possibly time-varying discount rate. We allow for the possibility of a non-
uniform discount rate in order to introduce a reason why the ZLB may temporarily
constrain monetary policy; the fact that intra-temporal preferences are uniform over
time will allow the efficient level of output to be constant over time.12 The operator
Êti indicates that this objective is evaluated using the future paths of the variables
implied by the household’s subjective expectations, which need neither be model-
consistent nor common across all households.
     For simplicity, there is assumed to be a single traded asset each period: one-period
riskless nominal debt (a market for which must exist in order for the central bank
to control a short-term nominal interest rate). Each household also owns an equal
share of each of the firms (discussed below), but these shares are assumed not to
be tradeable. In the present exposition, we abstract from fiscal policy, by assuming
that there are no government purchases, government debt, or taxes and transfers.13
We can then define the set of expenditure sequences {CT } for dates T ≥ t that the
  12
     In Woodford (2013), a more general version of the model is presented, in which a variety of
other types of exogenous disturbances are allowed for.
  13
     Woodford (2013) shows how the temporary equilibrium framework can be extended to include


                                                      10
household expects will be feasible as a function of the expected paths of real income,
the one-period nominal interest rate, and the rate of inflation.
    We can then solve for the household’s optimal expenditure plan as a function of
those expectations, and log-linearize the optimal decision rule around the constant
plan that is optimal in the event that ρT = ρ̄ > 0 for all T ≥ t, the inflation rate
is expected to equal the central bank’s target rate π ∗ in all periods, and real income
and the nominal interest rate are also expected to be constant in all periods at values
that represent a PFE for a monetary policy that achieves the inflation target at all
times.14 We obtain
                             ∞
                             X
                   cit   =          β T −t Êti {(1 − β)yT − βσ (iT − π T +1 − ρT )}               (2.2)
                             T =t

where {yT , iT , π T } are the expected paths of real income (or aggregate output, in
units of the Dixit-Stiglitz aggregate), the nominal interest rate, and inflation, and
all variables appearing in the equation are measured as log deviations from their
steady-state values (hence the use of cit rather than the Cti that appears in (2.1)).
Here β ≡ e−ρ̄ < 1 is the steady-state discount factor and σ > 0 is the intertemporal
elasticity of substitution of consumer expenditure. Note that (2.2) generalizes the
familiar “permanent-income hypothesis” formula (obtained by keeping only the yT
terms on the right-hand side) to allow for a non-constant desired path of spending
owing either to variation in the anticipated real rate of return or transitory variation
in the rate of time preference.
    We assume that households can correctly forecast the variation over time (if any)
in their discount rate in their intertemporal planning, so that Êti ρT = ρT for all
T ≥ t.15 The subjective expectations (that instead may not be model-consistent)
fiscal variables. The resulting temporary equilibrium relations are essentially of the kind derived
here, as long as households have “Ricardian expectations” (defined precisely there) regarding their
future net tax liabilities: that is, they expect that no matter how prices and interest rates evolve, net
taxes collected by the government will have a present value exactly equal to the value of outstanding
government debt. The assumption of Ricardian expectations is important for one’s conclusions about
the macroeconomic effects of interest-rate policy, as shown by Cochrane (2014).
   14
      We assume that π ∗ > −ρ̄, so that the required nominal interest rate in this steady state is
positive.
   15
      This means that expectations regarding future preference shocks are treated differently in (2.3)
below than in the expression given in Woodford (2013). The definition of the composite expectational
variable vti is correspondingly different.


                                                   11
regarding future conditions that matter for a household’s expenditure decision can
then be collected in a single expectational term, allowing us to rewrite (2.2) as

                        cit = (1 − β)yt − βσit + βgt + β Êti vt+1
                                                               i
                                                                   ,                         (2.3)

where                                            ∞
                                                 X
                                        gt ≡ σ          β T −t ρT
                                                 T =t

measures the cumulative impact on the urgency of current expenditure of a changed
path for the discount rate, and
                              ∞
                              X
                      vti ≡          β T −t Êti {(1 − β)yT − σ(βiT − π T )}
                              T =t

is a household-specific subjective variable.
    Then defining aggregate demand yt (which will also be aggregate output and each
household’s non-financial income) as the integral of expenditure cit over households i,
the individual decision rules (2.3) aggregate to an aggregate demand (AD) relation

                                       yt = gt − σit + e1t ,                                 (2.4)

where                                           Z
                                        e1t ≡        Êti vt+1
                                                           i
                                                               di

is a measure of average subjective expectations.
    The continuum of differentiated goods are produced by Dixit-Stiglitz monopolistic
competitors, who each adjust their prices only intermittently to changing market
conditions; as in the Calvo-Yun model of staggered pricing, only a fraction 1 − α of
prices are reconsidered each period, where 0 < α < 1 measures the degree of price
stickiness. Our version of this model differs from many textbook presentations (but
follows the original presentation of Yun, 1996) in assuming that prices that are not
reconsidered in any given period are automatically increased at the target rate π ∗ .16
If a firm j reconsiders its price in period t (rather than simply increasing it at the
  16
    This allows us to assume a positive steady-state inflation rate — which is important for the
quantitative realism of the numerical examples below, since the steady-state inflation rate matters
for the tightness of the ZLB constraint — while at the same time retaining the convenience of
a steady state in which the prices of all goods are identical, despite the assumption of staggered
pricing.


                                                12
rate π ∗ ), it chooses a price that it expects to maximize the present discounted value
of profits in all future states prior to the next reconsideration of its price, given its
subjective expectations regarding the evolution of aggregate demand {yT } for the
composite good and of the log Dixit-Stiglitz price index {pT } for all T ≥ t. A log-
linear approximation to its optimal decision rule (again around the steady state with
constant inflation rate π ∗ ) takes the form
                                      ∞
                                      X
                 p∗j
                  t    = (1 − αβ)            (αβ)T −t Êtj [pT + ξyT − π ∗ (T − t)]          (2.5)
                                      T =t
                                                      − (pt−1 + π ∗ )                        (2.6)

where p∗j                              0
          t is the amount by which j s log price exceeds the average of the prices that
are not reconsidered, pt−1 + π ∗ , ξ > 0 measures the elasticity of a firm’s optimal
relative price with respect to aggregate demand,17 and the operator Ê j [·] indicates
that what matter are the subjective expectations of firm j regarding future market
conditions.
    Again, the terms on the right-hand side of (2.6) involving subjective expectations
of conditions at various future horizons can be collected in a single composite term,
αβ Êtj p∗j
         t+1 . Aggregating across the prices chosen in period t by the continuum of firms,
we obtain an implied aggregate supply (AS) relation

                                  π t = κyt + (1 − α)β e2t                                   (2.7)

where π t ≡ pt − pt−1 − π ∗ is inflation in excess of the target rate,
                                       (1 − α)(1 − αβ)ξ
                                κ ≡                     > 0,
                                               α
and                                             Z
                                      e2t ≡           Êtj p∗j
                                                            t+1 dj

measures average expectations of the composite variable.
   We can close the system by assuming a reaction function for the central bank of
the Taylor (1993) form
                               it = ı̄t + φπ π t + φy yt                     (2.8)
  17
    The parameter ξ is thus a measure of the degree of “real rigidities.” See Woodford (2003, chap.
3) for a detailed discussion of its dependence on underlying parameters relating to preferences,
technology and market structure.


                                                 13
where the response coefficients satisfy φπ , φy ≥ 0. We allow for a possibly time-varying
intercept in order to consider the effects of announcing a transitory departure from
the central bank’s normal reaction function. (More generally, we consider below the
possibility of situations in which the response coefficients are assumed to be different
at different times, though they are assumed time-invariant in (2.8).) Equations (2.4),
(2.7) and (2.8) then comprise a three-equation system, that determines the temporary
equilibrium (TE) values of yt , π t , and it in a given period, as functions of the exogenous
disturbances (gt , ı̄t ) and subjective expectations (e1t , e2t ). Under our sign assumptions,
it is easily shown that the TE values are uniquely determined, linear functions of the
vector of disturbances and the vector of subjective expectations (see the Appendix
for details).
     As preparation for our discussion of the process of expectation revision, it is useful
to note the relationship between subjective expectations and the actual values of the
variables that people seek to forecast. The two sufficient statistics for subjective
expectations eit are each the average forecast of a certain average of the future values
of a certain composite variable aiT at different horizons T > t, where aiT is a variable
that is determined purely by disturbances and subjective expectations in period T .
For i = 1, 2, we can write
                                                    ∞
                                                    X
                                 eit = (1 − δ i )         δ ji Ēt ai,t+j+1 ,                     (2.9)
                                                    j=0


where
                                       δ 1 = β,        δ 2 = αβ
(so that 0 < δ i < 1 for both variables),
                                                     σ
                                 a1t ≡ yt −             (βit − π t ),
                                                    1−β
                                              1
                                 a2t ≡            π t + ξyt ,
                                           1 − αβ

and the operator Ēt [·] indicates the average of the population’s forecasts at date t.18
  18
    While we still allow for the possibility of heterogeneous forecasts, from here on we assume that
the distribution of forecasts across the continuum of households is the same as the distribution across
the continuum of firms, and so refer simply to the distribution of forecasts. Ēt [·] refers to the mean
of this distribution of forecasts at some date t.



                                                  14
    We can then use the TE relations to solve for the equilibrium values of the variables
ait that people seek to forecast as linear functions of the current vector of disturbances
and current average expectations. This solution can be written in the form

                                    at = M e t + m ω t ,                                (2.10)

where at is the vector consisting of (a1t , a2t ), et is the vector consisting of (e1t , e2t ),
ω t is the vector consisting of (gt , ı̄t ), and the matrices of coefficients are given in
the Appendix. The system (2.10) shows how expectations determine the endogenous
variables that are themselves being forecasted in those expectations, as indicated by
(2.9).


2.2     Perfect Foresight Equilibrium
The assumption of perfect foresight equilibrium adds to the above model the further
assumption that the expected paths for output, inflation and the interest rate (and
hence the expected paths for the variables {at }) are precisely the paths for those
variables implied by the TE relations under those expectations. Thus a PFE cor-
responds to sequences {at , et } that both satisfy (2.10) each period and satisfy (2.9)
when the equilibrium paths {at } are substituted for the average expectations in those
equations.
    It can be shown (see Woodford, 2013) that under the PFE assumption, the TE
relations (2.4) and (2.7) imply that the paths of output, inflation and the interest
rate must satisfy difference equations of the form

                               yt = yt+1 − σ(it − π t+1 − ρt )                          (2.11)

                                      π t = κyt + βπ t+1                                (2.12)
which are simply perfect-foresight versions of the usual “New Keynesian IS curve”
and “New Keynesian Phillips curve” respectively. Using the policy specification (2.8)
to eliminate it , one obtains a pair of difference equations that can be written in the
form
                                xt = B xt+1 + b (ρt − ı̄t )                      (2.13)
where xt is the vector consisting of (yt , π t ), and the matrix B and vector b are defined
in the Appendix.

                                            15
    Under our sign assumptions for the model coefficients, the matrix B is invertible,
and the system (2.13) can be uniquely solved for xt+1 as a function of xt and the period
t disturbances. One then obtains a two-parameter family of possible PFE solutions
consistent with any given forward paths for the disturbances, corresponding to the set
of possible choices for the elements of x0 . The asymptotic behavior of these solutions
as t is made large depends as usual on the eigenvalues of the matrix B.
    As shown in the Appendix, the matrix B has both eigenvalues inside the unit
circle if and only if
                                        1−β
                                  φπ +         φy > 1                             (2.14)
                                           κ
so that the “Taylor Principle” is satisfied. In this case, there is a unique bounded
PFE solution for the sequences {xt } corresponding to any bounded sequences {ρt , ı̄t },
obtained by “solving forward” the system (2.13) to obtain
                                          ∞
                                          X
                                   xt =          B j b (ρt+j − ı̄t+j ).                        (2.15)
                                           j=0


When this is uniquely defined, we shall call this the “forward stable” PFE (FS-PFE).
It is common to regard this as the relevant prediction of the model in such a case;19
below we shall provide a justification for this in terms of our concept of reflective
equilibrium.
    This solution implies that in the case of a sufficiently transitory change in policy,
a reduction of ı̄t (for a given path of the real disturbance) must be both expansionary
and inflationary (must raise both yt and π t ), while the nominal interest rate is tem-
porarily reduced (though by less than the reduction in ı̄t ). In the case of a sufficiently
persistent shift in ı̄t , output, inflation and the nominal interest rate are all predicted
to increase, because of the endogenous effect of the output and inflation increases on
the central bank’s interest-rate target;20 but even in this case, a downward shift in
the reaction function (reducing the interest-rate target implied by any given current
levels of inflation and output) is inflationary rather than deflationary.
  19
    See however Cochrane (2011) for objections to this interpretation.
  20
    In a more realistic model than the simple NK model used in this paper, there will be delays in
the effect of the policy change on output and inflation. It is then possible to have an initial decline
in the nominal interest rate in the case of an expansionary monetary policy shock, even in the case
of a relatively persistent shift in the central-bank reaction function, as shown in Woodford (2003,
secs. 5.1-5.2).


                                                  16
    If the inequality in (2.14) is reversed, the matrix B instead has two real eigenvalues
satisfying
                                      0 < µ1 < 1 < µ2 ,
so that the larger is outside the unit circle. In particular, this is true if the central
bank fixes the forward path for the nominal interest rate (the case φπ = φy = 0),
regardless of whether this path is constant. In this case, there is no longer a unique
bounded solution; instead, assuming again that the sequences {ρt , ı̄t } are bounded,
there is a bounded PFE solution
                      ∞
                      X                                            t
                                                                   X
  xt =   v1 (e01 b)         µj1   (ρt+j − ı̄t+j ) −   v2 (e02 b)         µ−j                        −t
                                                                          2 (ρt−j − ı̄t−j ) + χ v2 µ2    (2.16)
                      j=0                                          j=1


in the case of any real number χ. (In this expression, vi is the right eigenvector
corresponding to eigenvalue µi , e0i is the left eigenvector corresponding to that same
eigenvalue, and we normalize the eigenvectors so that e0i vi = 1 for each i.) Since such
solutions necessarily exist, the PFE analysis gives us no reason to suppose that there
is anything problematic about a commitment to fix a path for the nominal interest
rate, including a commitment to fix it at a constant rate forever.
     Now suppose that not only are the exogenous disturbance sequences bounded,
but that after some finite date T , they are expected to be constant: ρt = ρLR and
ı̄t = ı̄LR for all t ≥ T, where the long-run values need not equal zero. We show in the
Appendix that in any of the continuum of bounded PFE solutions, the elements of
xt converge asymptotically to long-run values
                                                                     1−β
                            π LR = ı̄LR − ρLR ,           yLR =          (ı̄LR − ρLR ).                  (2.17)
                                                                      κ
One observes that the long-run inflation rate increases one-for-one with increases in
the long-run interest-rate target. Hence if we suppose that the economy must follow
one or another of the PFE associated with the central bank’s policy commitment,
we would conclude that a lower path for the nominal interest rate must at least
eventually result in a lower rate of inflation; and similarly, a higher nominal interest
rate must eventually make inflation higher.
    One might obtain even stronger conclusions under further assumptions about how
to select a particular solution from among the set of PFE. Consider the simple case
of a policy commitment under which the interest rate will be fixed at one level ı̄SR

                                                         17
for all 0 ≤ t < T, and another (possibly different) level ı̄LR for all t ≥ T, and let us
suppose for simplicity that ρt = 0 for all t.21 In this case, the complete set of PFE
solutions (2.16) are of the form

                              1 − µT1 −t           µT1 −t
                                                               
                         0
           xt = −v1 (e1 b)               ı̄SR +            ı̄LR
                               1 − µ1            1 − µ1
                                                        µ−1
                                                                    
                                              0
                                       + v2 (e2 b)        2
                                                             −1 ı̄SR   + χ v2 µ−t
                                                                               2  (2.18)
                                                      1 − µ2

for all 0 ≤ t ≤ T, and
                                           
                                    1
         xt =      −v1 (e01 b)          ı̄∞
                                1 − µ1
                                      T −t−1
                                                      µ−1
                                                       2 − µ2
                                                             T −t−1     
                                0     µ2
                         + v2 (e2 b)           ı̄SR +               ı̄LR + χ v2 µ−t
                                                                                 2  (2.19)
                                      1 − µ−12          1 − µ −1
                                                              2

for all t ≥ T.
    Now suppose that we believe that there should be a unique prediction regarding
the equilibrium outcomes under such a policy; then equilibrium output and inflation
in period t should be given by a single-valued outcome function x(t, T ; ı̄SR , ı̄LR ). And
suppose further that we demand that the equilibrium outcomes from any period k > 0
onward should also be given by the same outcome function, if period k is re-numbered
as period 0, and all periods t > k are re-numbered as t − k, given that the structural
equations that define PFE from period k onward are of exactly the same form as
those that define PFE from period 0 onward, with this re-numbering of the periods.22
This means that the outcome function can depend only on t − T, rather than on the
absolute magnitudes of either t or T . But the only one of the PFE given by (2.18)–
(2.19) with this property is the solution with χ = 0. Under this criterion, there is a
  21
      Given the linearity of the model’s structural equations, it is reasonable to suppose that the
prediction in the case of any disturbance sequences {ρt , ı̄t } can be expressed as the sum of a predicted
effect of the real disturbance {ρt } (under the assumption that ı̄t = 0 for all t) and a predicted effect
of the monetary policy disturbance {ı̄t } (under the assumption that ρt = 0 for all t). The discussion
in the text concerns the latter half of this problem; but similar considerations can be offered to
select a particular prediction regarding the effects of alternative sequences {ρt }.
   22
      This assumption about the form of the correct prediction is in the spirit of McCallum’s (1983,
1999) “minimal-state-variable criterion.” It requires that the predicted outcome in any period not
depend on the number of the period, but only on its distance from the period T in which the interest
rate changes, since the equilibrium conditions do not involve the former state variable.


                                                 18
unique PFE prediction, obtained by substituting χ = 0 into equations (2.18)–(2.19).
This is also the unique PFE solution selected by the “backward stability” criterion
proposed by Cochrane (2015a).
   Under this equilibrium selection, the perfect foresight analysis yields a “neo-
Fisherian” conclusion about the effects of interest-rate policy in the short run, and
not just in the long run. When we set χ to zero, the solution (2.18)–(2.19) implies
that the inflation rate will equal

                        π t = λ(t − T ) ı̄SR + (1 − λ(t − T )) ı̄LR ,

where the sequence of weights {λ(t − T )} depend only on the distance in time from
the date of the policy shift. Increasing both ı̄SR and ı̄LR by the same number of
percentage points is predicted to increase the inflation rate in all periods by exactly
that same number of percentage points. Increasing only one of the interest rates is
also predicted to increase the inflation rate both initially and later, and an increase
in ı̄SR should immediately increase inflation by nearly as much as the increase in the
interest rate, even though the increase is not expected to be permanent, if T is far
enough in the future.
     The conclusions that one obtains about the sign of the effects of a shift in the
anticipated path of {ı̄t } on inflation seem then to depend crucially on the magnitude
of the reaction coefficients (φπ , φy ), if one believes the results of the perfect foresight
analysis. We shall argue however, that the conclusions of PFE analysis are misleading
in the case just discussed, in which the “Taylor principle” is violated. This requires
that we consider whether the PFE paths just discussed are ones that can be justified
as resulting from beliefs that people would arrive at under a process of reflection,
that involves a comparison between their beliefs and the outcomes that should be
expected to result from such beliefs.


2.3    Reflective Equilibrium
Why should people have the particular expectations about the future that are as-
sumed in a perfect foresight equilibrium? One answer could be that, if they expected
a future path for the economy of any other type, action on the basis of their ex-
pectations would produce outcomes that disconfirm those expectations. One might
suppose, then, that experience should sooner or later disabuse people of any expec-
tations that are not consistent with a PFE. And if one supposes that people have

                                           19
sufficient structural knowledge (including understanding of the central bank’s inten-
tions regarding future policy), one might even think that they should be able to
recognize the inconsistency between their expectations and what they should expect
to happen if others were also to think that way — allowing them to refine their be-
liefs on the basis of their understanding of how the economy works, even prior to any
experience with the current economic disturbance or policy regime. Here we explore
the conditions under which a PFE might arise (or under which outcomes would at
least approximate a PFE) as a result of reflection of the latter sort.
    Presumably the structural knowledge required for such reasoning would have to
reflect previous observation of the economy; but it might reflect only experience
with the effects of shocks and/or policy changes of different magnitudes and different
degrees of persistence than the ones currently faced. If it were possible to acquire such
knowledge of how the economy responds to shocks and to monetary policy from past
experience, and then also to have reason to expect time paths for the current shock
and current policy regime that are different from any prior experience, a process of
reflection of the kind proposed here would make more sense than simply forecasting
by extrapolating the past evolution of the variables that are forecasted. This kind
of reasoning is particularly relevant when considering how one should expect people
to respond to an announcement about future policy intentions that are historically
unprecedented, as with recent experiments in “forward guidance.”
    We model a process of reflection by a decisionmaker (DM) who understands how
the economy works — that is, who knows the correct quantitative specification of the
TE relations (2.4) and (2.7) — and who also understands the policy intentions of the
central bank, in the sense of knowing the policy rule (2.8) that will determine policy
in all future periods. However, while the DM understands (and fully believes) the
announcement of what the central bank will do, she does not know, without further
reflection, what this implies about the future evolution of national income, inflation,
or the resulting level of interest rates (unless the policy rule specifies a fixed interest
rate).
    The assumed structural knowledge can however be used to refine her expecta-
tions about the evolution of those variables. Suppose that the DM starts with some
conjecture about the future evolution of the economy, which we can summarize by
paths for the variables {et } for each of the dates t ≥ 0, where t = 0 means the date
at which the economy’s future evolution is being contemplated. She can then ask:


                                          20
suppose that others were sophisticated enough to have exactly these expectations (on
average), both now and at all of the future dates under consideration. What path for
the economy should she expect, given her structural knowledge, under this conjec-
ture about others’ average expectations? (Note that specification of the conjecture
in terms of the implied sequences {et } for t ≥ 0 gives exactly the information that is
needed to answer this question, using the TE relations and the assumed path for the
central-bank reaction function.)
    Under such a conjecture {et }, the TE relations imply unique paths for the variables
{at }, where in each period the implied at is given by (2.10). From these predictions
the DM can infer implied paths {e∗t } for all t ≥ 0, where for each date t, e∗t are
the forecasts that would be correct at that date if the economy evolves in the way
implied by the TE relations, in the case of the average expectations {et }. This
deduction yields an affine operator23

                                              e∗ = Ψe

mapping sequences {et } of conjectured expectations into sequences {e∗t } of correct
forecasts of the same variables.24 Note that the operator Ψ is purely forward-looking;
in fact, we can write
                                   ∞
                                   X             ∞
                                                 X
                              ∗
                             et =     ψ j et+j +   ϕj ω t+j                     (2.20)
                                        j=1             j=1

for all t ≥ 0, where the sequences of matrices {ψ j } and {ϕj } are given by
                                                                                           !
                                                                                   δ1 0
        ψ j ≡ (I − Λ)Λj−1 M,            ϕj ≡ (I − Λ)Λj−1 m,             Λ ≡
                                                                                   0 δ2

for all j ≥ 1.
    We suppose (following the logic sketched above) that an awareness that the im-
plied correct sequences e∗ differ from the conjectured sequences e should constitute a
  23
      Note that the definition of the operator Ψ depends on the sequences of fundamental perturba-
tions {ω t }. To simplify notation, we suppress these additional arguments. We shall be interested
in the application of this operator to different possible conjectured beliefs {et }, holding fixed the
fundamentals.
   24
      Note that the definition of the operator Ψ depends on the sequences of fundamental perturba-
tions {ω t }. To simplify notation, we suppress these additional arguments. We shall be interested
in the application of this operator to different possible conjectured beliefs {et }, holding fixed the
fundamentals.


                                               21
reason to doubt the reasonableness of expecting people to hold the conjectured beliefs.
But what should one expect instead? We propose that the conjectured beliefs should
be adjusted in the direction of the discrepancy between the model prediction on the
basis of the conjectured beliefs and the conjectured beliefs themselves. Specifically,
we consider a process of belief revision described by a differential equation

                                   ėt (n) = e∗t (n) − et (n),                              (2.21)

where the continuous variable n ≥ 0 indexes how far the process of reflection has been
carried forward, et (n) is the conjecture regarding average beliefs in period t at stage n
of the process, e∗t (n) is the implied correct forecast in period t if average expectations
are given by the stage n conjectures, and ėt (n) is the derivative of et (n) with respect
to n.
    One possible interpretation of the law of motion (2.21) for the belief-revision
process would be as follows.25 At each stage n of the process, one conjectures a
particular sequence of average forecasts {et (n)}. But one supposes that people ought
to further revise their beliefs, and considers the consequences of their revising their
beliefs each time an event occurs that arrives as an independent Poisson process
for each member of the population, with some fixed rate. If one supposes that each
time someone revises their own expectations, they switch from whatever expectations
they had held until that point, to the expectations that would be correct given the
distribution of beliefs held by others at that state of the process of belief revision,
then the rate of change of average beliefs will be given by (2.21); for the average of the
previous period-t expectations of those revising their beliefs in any small time window
will be et (n), while the expectations that they adopt after reconsidering reconsidering
their beliefs will be e∗t (n).
    We suppose that the process of reflection starts from some initial “naive” conjec-
ture about average expectations et (0), and that the differential equations (2.21) are
then integrated forward from those initial conditions. This initial conjecture might
be based on the forecasts that would have been correct, but for the occurrence of
the unusual shock and/or the change in policy that are the occasion for the process
  25
    Note that this is not the only possible interpretation of the equation, as it specifies only a
dynamic process for average beliefs, and not the heterogeneity in beliefs that may exist at each
stage of the process. An alternative interpretation, in which n indexes the Poisson distribution of
discrete “levels of thinking” in the population, is discussed below in section 2.4.


                                              22
of reflection about what to expect in light of new circumstances. (One might sup-
pose that but for these changes, the situation would have been a sufficiently routine
one for people to have learned how to accurately forecast the economy’s evolution.)
The process of belief revision might be integrated forward to an arbitrary extent,
but like Evans and Ramey (1992, 1995, 1998), we suppose that it would typically
be terminated at some finite stage n, even if the sequences {e∗t (n)} still differ from
{et (n)}.
     By a reflective equilibrium26 we mean a situation in which output, inflation and
the nominal interest rate at some date (here numbered date 0) are determined by
the TE relations, using the average subjective expectations e0 (n) at the stage n
at which the belief revision process is terminated.27 We may also refer to the entire
sequence of outcomes in periods t ≥ 0 implied by the TE relations if average subjective
expectations in each period are given by et (n) as representing a reflective equilibrium
of degree n. One should however only expect this entire sequence of outcomes to be
realized on the assumption that the same process of reflection would determine beliefs
and hence actions in each of the subsequent periods; this would make sense only if
one supposes that the assumptions used as inputs to the process of reflection do not
change in later periods in the light of additional observations, or that the process of
reflection is only undertaken once. More generally, one might suppose that at each
date the outcomes result from a process of reflection of the above type undertaken at
that date, starting from an initial conjecture that may have been modified relative
to the one used in previous periods; but here we consider only the beliefs resulting
from a one-time process of reflection, and how similar or not these should be to PFE
  26
     It may be objected that we should not speak of “equilibrium” if there remains a discrepancy
between {e∗t (n)} and {et (n)}; but we use the term in the same way that Hicks and Grandmont refer
to a “temporary equilibrium” (even though the assumed expectations need not be model-consistent).
A reflective equilibrium is a temporary equilibrium in which the subjective expectations from which
decision rules are derived are not arbitrarily specified, but instead result from the process of reflection
just described.
  27
     We could generalize the concept to consider possible TE outcomes resulting from distributions
of subjective expectations in which different members of the population have carried forward the
belief revision process to different degrees, so that there would more generally be a distribution of
values of n, rather than a single value as assumed in the discussion here. Note however that, as
discussed in section 2.4, the reflective equilibrium of degree n defined here can already be viewed
as one in which there is a distribution of different levels of reflection across the population, with n
indicating the mean level of reflection rather than a level common to all individuals.


                                                  23
beliefs.
    A reflective equilibrium of the kind defined here might alternatively be supposed to
arise from prior experience with similar shock/policy scenarios. One might suppose
that the first time such a scenario occurred, people had (on average) the “naive”
expectations specified by the sequence e(0), and that as a result the outcome was the
one implied by the TE relations (2.10) given these beliefs. The next time that people
realize that a similar shock and policy response are occurring, one might suppose
that (in light of the previous experience) average expectations e(1)28 would instead
be some convex combination of the previous expectations e(0) and what turned out
to be correct that time, the sequence e∗ = Ψ(e(0)). Hence the change in expectations
between the first occurrence of the scenario and the second, e(1) − e(0), will be
proportional to the discrepancy Ψ(e(0)) − e(0) Similarly, if on the third occasion
that the same scenario is expected to occur, average expectations e(2) are a convex
combination of average expectations e(1) on the second occasion and what turned
out to be correct that time, then the change e(2) − e(1) will be proportional to
Ψ(e(1)) − e(1).
    One obtains in this way an adjustment process for expectations that is essentially
a discrete version of the continuous process specified in (2.21). We could on this
ground be interested in whether the process (2.21), or a discretization of it, will
converge eventually to a perfect foresight equilibrium, even if we do not believe that
many people possess the structural knowledge reflected in the Ψ mapping. (In the
adaptive learning dynamics just described, it is the working of the economy that
computes Ψ(e) if average expectations are e; no one in the economy need have been
able to anticipate this through mental calculation.) However, our primary interest
in this paper is in the question of what should happen when an unusual, perhaps
wholly unprecedented, policy commitment is announced; and in such a case, our
concept of a reflective equilibrium is relevant only on the assumption that at least
part of the population can (at least approximately) calculate Ψ(e) on the basis of
their understanding of the economy. But even so, it is important to remember that
(2.21) simply indicates the rate of adjustment of average expectations; a reflective
equilibrium of degree n > 0 is still consistent with part of the population maintaining
the “naive” expectations that they held without any consideration of what the TE
  28
    Here we use e(n) to mean average expectations when there have been n previous occurrences of
the scenario.


                                             24
relations should imply.
    It should be evident that the proposed concept of reflective equilibrium will not
generally lead to a unique prediction as to how the economy should evolve as a re-
sult of a specific policy commitment; the reflective equilibrium outcome will depend
both on the initial expectations e(0) from which the process of reflection is assumed
to start, and on the stage n at which the process of reflection is assumed to termi-
nate. Nonetheless, if the dynamics (2.21) converge globally (or at least for a large
enough set of possible initial conditions) to a particular PFE, and furthermore con-
verge rapidly enough, then a quite specific prediction will be possible under fairly
robust assumptions. This is the case in which it would be justifiable to use the PFE
(the specific PFE that represents this limit of the process of belief revision) as a pre-
diction for what should happen under the policy commitment in question; for in this
case, a reflective equilibrium will be quite similar to this PFE under a wide range
of assumptions (both a wide range of assumptions about the initial beliefs e(0) and
a wide range of assumptions about the degree n at which the process of reflection
terminates).
    We show below that there exist circumstances under which PFE analysis can
indeed be given a justification of this kind; in particular, we show in section 3 that
when policy is expected to conform to a Taylor rule, the belief revision dynamics
converge to a PFE, and more specifically to the FS-PFE defined in (2.15). This
provides not only a justification for the concept of a PFE, but a definite answer to
the question of which of the two-dimensional continuum of PFE solutions to (2.13)
should be viewed as the model’s prediction. However, in cases where the belief revision
dynamics do not converge, or converge only very slowly, we argue that there is little
reason to expect the outcome of a policy to be similar to the prediction of a PFE
analysis.
    To be sure, in such cases, the concept of reflective equilibrium will not provide
a precise quantitative prediction, but only indicate a range of possibilities. But
this does not mean that the predictions of a PFE analysis should be considered
“as likely as anything else” to be correct. For even when the analysis of reflective
equilibrium suggests only a range of possibilities, they may all be quite different from
the conclusions that would be obtained from considering the PFE consistent with the
policy in question. We show below that this is true in the case of a commitment to
a fixed interest rate for a long period of time.


                                         25
2.4     Related Proposals
The idea that a perfect foresight equilibrium can be obtained as the limit of an itera-
tive process with a logic of the kind proposed above is the basis for an algorithm pro-
posed by Fair and Taylor (1983) for numerical solution for the rational-expectations
equilibrium (REE) of dynamic economic models. Essentially, their method begins
with an initial conjectured sequence e(0) of expectations, and computes an updated
sequence of expectations e(1) = Ψ(e(0)) by solving the model under the conjectured
expectations. This process can be repeated, resulting in a further updated sequence
e(2) = Ψ(e(1)), and so on; the process is continued until one finds that one has a
sequence of conjectured expectations that is close enough to being a fixed point of
the mapping.29 This is essentially a discrete version of the belief-revision dynamics
(2.21). An important difference, of course, is that for Fair and Taylor these dynamics
are simply a way for an econometrician to deduce the predictions of a model that he
wishes to estimate; a failure of the dynamics to converge,30 or to converge quickly
enough, may pose a problem for the econometrician’s ability to draw conclusions, but
is not viewed as affecting the validity of the assumption that the data are generated
in accordance with the REE of an appropriately parameterized model.
    An algorithm of this kind is instead proposed as a representation of how equi-
librium is actually determined in the economy, as a consequence of the calculations
upon which people base their decisions, in the “calculation equilibrium” of Evans
and Ramey (1992, 1995, 1998), already mentioned in section 1. Like us, Evans and
  29
      The Fair-Taylor algorithm is actually more complex than this. Because they are interested in
performing actual computations (with only a finite number of operations), they approximate the
forward path of the economy by a sequence that extends only to some finite horizon T . But this
raises the problem that it is only possible to solve a forward-looking model for endogenous variables
out to date T using conjectured expectations that extend farther into the future than date T , and one
cannot get such expectations by numerical solution of the model (under some previous conjecture
about expectations) if one only solves the model out to date T . Their “extended path” method
proposes a way to get around this problem; this complication is not needed in our exposition here,
as we define our updating operation on infinite sequences, even if actual mental operations would
have at best to approximate this.
   30
      Fair and Taylor recognize that their algorithm need not converge. They offer a conjecture that
it “will converge in the class of [RE] models for which the uniqueness conditions hold” (p. 1179)
— that is, when the model has a unique forward-stable solution. In fact, that is just what we find
in the case of the NK model considered here; but this determinacy condition fails in the case of an
exogenous fixed path for the interest rate, as discussed in section 2.2 above.


                                               26
Ramey are interested not simply in whether this process would eventually converge
to a PFE, but in how quickly it converges, as they posit that the process should be
terminated after only a few steps owing to “calculation costs” (that they explicitly
model, unlike us). In addition to seeking to endogenize the finite degree of reflection,
their approach differs from ours in considering discrete iterations of the Φ mapping,
rather than a continuous belief revision process (2.21).
    A related idea has also been proposed as an explanation of observed behavior in
laboratory experiments with games of full information, under the name of “level-k
thinking” (Stahl and Wilson, 1994, 1995; Nagel, 1995; Crawford et al., 2013). This
model begins by positing a “naive” form of behavior, requiring no strategic reasoning
on the basis of information supplied about others’ payoffs, which is taken to be the
behavior of “level-0” players. “Level-1” players instead use their understanding of
the game to calculate their best action on the assumption that the other players in
the game think like “level-0” players; “level-2” players calculate their best action on
the assumption that the other players think like “level-1” players, and so on.
    Under a suitable assumption about the play of “level-0” players, the observed
play of many experimental subjects in multi-player games — when the subjects are
confronting a new situation (they have no experience playing the game) but have had
the rules explained to them (so that they possess the structural knowledge to calculate
the best response to a conjecture about others’ expectations) — is found to correspond
to one or another of these levels of reasoning (most commonly, levels 0, 1, 2 or 3).31
The empirical support for this type of reasoning suggests that one should only expect
an outcome similar to the Nash equilibrium prediction in cases where iteration of
the best-response mapping (the analog of our Ψ mapping above) converges relatively
quickly to the Nash equilibrium. (In fact, the concept has primarily been of interest
  31
    Keynes (1936) famously asserted (with regard to the role of higher-order expectations in invest-
ment decisions) that few investors reason beyond “the third degree, where we devote our intelligences
to anticipating what average opinion expects the average opinion to be,” though “there are some,
I believe, who practice the fourth, fifth and higher degrees” [p. 156]. Arad and Rubinstein (2012)
report that even in the case of a fairly sophisticated population of experimental subjects, and a
game which makes iterated best-response reasoning relatively natural, few if any subjects exhibit a
level higher than 3. (In their preferred model of their experimental data, level-3 thinkers make up
43 percent of the sample, while the mean level of thinking is 2.2.) See Camerer et al. (2004) and
Crawford et al. (2013) for reviews of other empirical evidence as to the levels of thinking observed
in experimental games.



                                               27
because of cases in which level-k thinking allows outcomes that remain quite different
from Nash equilibrium play, for low values of k.)
    Given the empirical support for level-k thinking in the experimental game theory
literature, as well as the way that belief revision is modeled by Evans and Ramey, it
may be wondered why we do not consider a discrete a sequence of belief revisions,

                                         et (k) = Ψk (e(0))                      (2.22)

for integral levels of reasoning k ≥ 0, instead of the continuous process (2.21). While
this would lead to conclusions somewhat like those that we obtain, we prefer the
continuous model of belief revision for several reasons. One is that we are concerned
with average beliefs about average beliefs about . . . , in an economy made up of very
many individuals reflecting individually about what to do. Even if we suppose that
each individual is a level-k thinker for some integral value of k, there is no reason to
assume that everyone in the economy should carry the process forward for exactly the
same number of stages. And a reflective equilibrium of degree n, as we have defined
it, is observationally equivalent to an economy made up of level-k thinkers, under a
particular population distribution of the levels of thinking.
     The linear system (2.21) can be integrated forward from the given initial condition
e(0) to obtain
                               e(n) = exp[n(Ψ − I)] e(0)                          (2.23)
where I is the identity operator (mapping an infinite sequence e into itself) and the
exponential of a linear operator A is defined as32
                                                 ∞
                                                X   Ak
                                       exp[A] ≡        .                         (2.24)
                                                k=0
                                                    k!

It follows that we can write
                                               ∞
                                               X
                                     e(n) =          sk (n) e(k)
                                               k=0

where
                                                         nk
                                          sk (n) ≡ e−n
                                                         k!
 32
      See, for example, Hirsch and Smale (1974), pp. 82-87.



                                               28
for each integer k ≥ 0, and e(k) refers to the “level-k” expectations defined in (2.22).
Moreover, for any n, the {sk (n)} are a sequence of positive weights that sum to 1,
corresponding to a Poisson distribution with parameter n.
    Hence a reflective equilibrium of degree n involves the same average expectations,
and hence the same temporary equilibrium outcomes for output, inflation and interest
rates, as a model in which fraction sk (n) of the population is made up of level-k
thinkers, for each k ≥ 0. In this interpretation, the degree of reflection n indexes
a one-parameter family of possible distributions of “levels of thinking” in the sense
proposed in the “level-k” literature, and the continuous variable n indicates the mean
“level of thinking” in the population.33 However, our model does not require that
we assume that all (or any) members of the population have beliefs corresponding
exactly to one of those in the sequence (2.22); for example, we might suppose that
most (or all) people conjecture that the rest of the economy is made up of a non-
degenerate distribution of different levels of thinking, as proposed by Camerer et al.
(2004).34
    Consideration of the continuous process (2.21) rather than a discrete sequence
of progressively higher levels of thinking defined by (2.22) also avoids a technical
problem with the latter progression as a way of modeling convergence to PFE. It
is possible for the mapping Ψ to be such that the sequence of progressively revised
beliefs {e(k)} defined by (2.22) will fail to converge as k is made large, owing to
the existence of a negative eigenvalue of absolute value greater than one, resulting
in explosive oscillations.35 Expectations of high inflation at one level of thinking
result in expectations of low inflation at the next level, which result in expectations
of still higher inflation at the following level, which result in expectations of still lower
  33
      The use of a Poisson distribution to characterize the distribution of “levels of thinking” by a
single parameter has been proposed in the experimental game theory literature by Camerer et al.
(2004), though they also define the discrete “levels of thinking” in a different way than is standard
in the “level-k” literature.
   34
      Note that the interpretation of (2.21) suggested above, in the text immediately following the
equation, is one in which at each stage n of the belief-revision process, not only is there a non-
degenerate distribution of degrees of reflection across the population, but most members of the
population have expectations that reflect an assumption that the beliefs of others involve a non-
degenerate distribution of degrees of reflection. We do not present a formal analysis of this “cognitive
hierarchy,” as we are here concerned solely with the aggregate dynamics predicted by our model.
   35
      We discuss in the Appendix how this problem can arise, for certain numerical parameter values,
in the context of the model treated in this paper.


                                                29
inflation at the level after that . . . .
    In our view, the possibility of oscillations of this kind should not constitute a
reason to find it unlikely that people would arrive at PFE beliefs even if able to carry
out a very long chain of reasoning about others’ likely beliefs. For the instability
indicated by the explosive sequence requires a very rigid and implausible kind of
reasoning: one must first entertain the belief that everyone else is exactly a level-9
thinker, and then pass from this to the conclusion that really everyone else should
be exactly a level-10 thinker, and so on, even though the extreme conjecture at
each stage of the reasoning has implications quite different from the one before.
Assuming instead a continuous revision of average beliefs (which may be interpreted as
a continuous shift in the population fractions that stop at different levels of thinking)
avoids this possibility — though as we shall see, it still allows for belief revision
dynamics that may fail to converge (for reasons that are less fragile).
    Our continuous process of belief revision (2.21) is also closely related to the con-
cept of expectational stability (or “E-stability”) analyzed by Evans and Honkapohja
(2001). Evans and Honkapohja classify rational-expectations equilibria as E-stable or
not through an analysis of the properties of a mapping that associates with each of
a class of a possible “perceived laws of motion” (on the part of the decisionmakers in
some economic model) the “actual law of motion” for endogenous variables that will
result from the expectations implied by that perceived law of motion. The key to their
analysis is thus a mapping from a parametric specification of subjective beliefs to the
corresponding specification of beliefs that would be correct if people generally act on
the basis of the subjective beliefs, like our Ψ mapping. They then posit a differential
equation for the adjustment of subjective beliefs (specifically, of the parameters of
the “perceived law of motion”) similar to (2.21), and say that an REE (a fixed point
of the Ψ mapping) is “E-stable” if and only if the posited dynamics converge to it
starting from arbitrary initial beliefs. The analysis of E-stability is proposed as a
criterion to distinguish REE that could arise as the outcome of a learning process
from ones that one should not expect to arise.
    Our approach differs somewhat from theirs in that we prefer to map subjective
expectations into the expectations that would be correct if people acted upon the
subjective expectations, rather than mapping a subjective description of the process
generating the data into the description that would be correct if people’s forecasts
were based on the subjective description; but while we think that our approach


                                         30
has advantages,36 it makes little difference for the conclusions obtained. The more
important difference is that we parameterize beliefs in terms of sequences that describe
people’s beliefs about different horizons, instead of assuming that the dynamics can
be described by a Markov process with only a finite number of parameters. This
in turn means that our process is more easily interpreted as a process of prospective
calculation by decisionmakers before they observe what actually happens, rather than
a process of learning from experience. Except for this, our analysis of the convergence
of reflective equilibrium to a PFE poses essentially the same question as Evans and
Honkapohja consider when they determine whether such an equilibrium is E-stable.
     Our convergence analysis is even more closely related to Guesnerie’s (1992, 2008)
consideration of the “eductive stability” of REE. Instead of assuming that only the
REE of a given model (including the specification of policy) is a relevant prediction
of the model, Guesnerie proposes that one should consider the entire set of outcomes
that are rationalizable, in the sense that the outcome could result from optimizing
behavior under some specification of expectations regarding the economy’s evolution,
which expectations are for outcomes that could result from optimizing behavior under
still other specifications of expectations, which other expectations are for outcomes
that could result from optimizing behavior, and so on.37 The question whether a given
outcome can be rationalized by progressively higher-order specifications of beliefs
belonging to some admissible set M is essentially a question whether the outcome
can be generated by beliefs that remain within the image of M under progressively
higher-order iterations of the mapping Ψ; hence the question of “eductive stability”
is essentially a question about whether the sequence defined by (2.22) converges to
a given PFE for all initial beliefs e(0) drawn from an admissible set. This in turn
is closely related to (though not identical to) the question of convergence of the
continuous process (2.21).
     Like ours, Guesnerie’s analysis considers whether an REE should be the outcome
of a process of reflection based on knowledge of the model of the economy (including
a rule that specifies policy). The most important difference from our analysis is his
  36
     We need only describe subjective beliefs in terms of the evolution of two variables per period,
the two summary measures of expectations that matter, rather than having to describe the evolution
of the three variables per period that matter for people’s decision problems.
  37
     This line of analysis was originated by Phelps (1983). See Woodford (2013) for further discussion
of the proposal, and its application to an NK model of the kind assumed in this paper.



                                               31
consideration of belief specifications that result from repeated application of the Ψ
mapping, rather than from integration of the continuous process (2.21). As discussed
above, this discrete form of the belief revision process converges for a smaller range
of parameter values, making “eductive stability” more elusive. But we believe that
Guesnerie’s criterion admits too large a set of rationalizable outcomes: it does not
seem likely that people capable of a high level of reflection should expect a higher
rate of inflation than the PFE rate, if this is rationalizable only by a conjecture that
most other people are expecting a lower rate of inflation than PFE rate, which would
in turn be consistent with their rationality on the supposition that most of them
expect most other people to expect a higher rate than the PFE rate, and so on, with
the bias changing sign in a precisely choreographed way at each higher stage.38 Our
own proposed criterion implies in such a case that if the average level of reflection is
high enough, the economy’s evolution should not be too different from the FS-PFE
prediction.


3      Convergence                 of      Reflective             Equilibrium                 to
       Perfect Foresight: The Case of a Taylor Rule
Here we show that under some circumstances, the PFE analysis (with a correct
equilibrium selection) can be justified as an approximation to a reflective equilibrium,
and that (for some parameter values) the degree of reflection required to approach
the PFE outcome need not even be too large. The case that we consider is that in
which monetary policy is expected to be specified by a Taylor-type rule of the form
(2.8), where the response coefficients φπ , φy are assumed to be constant over time,
though we allow a time-varying path for the intercept {ı̄t }. The allowance for time-
variation in the intercept allows us to analyze policy experiments in which there may
be a commitment to conduct a “looser” policy for a specified period of time, before
returning to the central bank’s normal reaction function; but here the temporary
loosening of policy is understood as a temporary reduction of the intercept (or a
temporary increase in the implicit inflation target), while the endogenous responses
  38
    Guesnerie’s (2008) conclusion that the PFE is not eductively stable in the case of monetary
policy specified by a Taylor rule, except for a narrow range of possible parameter values, depends
on oscillating constructions of this kind.



                                              32
to variations in inflation in output remain the same. We further assume that these
endogenous responses satisfy (2.14), so that there is a unique bounded PFE solution
in the case of any bounded sequences {gt , ı̄t }, given by (2.15).39
     We assume in this section that under the reflective equilibrium dynamics, the zero
lower bound never binds, so that it is in fact feasible for the central bank’s interest-rate
target to satisfy (2.8) at all times. This is not an “equilibrium selection” assumption,
since for each value of n, reflective equilibrium is uniquely defined. It is, however, an
assumption that both the disturbances to fundamentals {ω t } and subjective beliefs
{et (n)} involve small enough departures from the long-run steady state (the values
of the state variables around which we have log-linearized our model) for the interest
rate implied by the TE relations (including the policy specification (2.8)) to always
be non-negative.
     This will be unproblematic in the case of small enough disturbances, and small
enough differences between initial expectations and those consistent with the long-run
steady state, if the belief-revision dynamics (2.21) remain forever bounded. (Since
the system is linear, the bound on the distance between beliefs and steady-state
beliefs will be proportional to the magnitude of the perturbations of fundamentals
and of initial beliefs, so that one can ensure any desired bound — in particular, one
that implies that the ZLB is never violated — by choosing a small enough bound on
those perturbations.) We show below that for the kind of policy considered in this
section, the belief-revision dynamics are indeed bounded for all n. Hence the analysis
in this section applies as long as the shock to the economy, the policy response to
it, and any associated shift in the initially conjectured expectations are all small
enough departures from the long-run steady state. We defer until the next section
consideration of the case in which a large shock causes the ZLB to constrain policy
for some period of time.


3.1     Exponentially Convergent Belief Sequences
Our results on the convergence of reflective equilibrium as the degree of reflection
increases depend on starting from an initial (“naive”) conjecture that is sufficiently
well-behaved as forecasts far into the future are considered. We shall say that a
  39
    Note that any bounded sequence {gt } uniquely determines a bounded sequence {ρt }, given by
ρt = σ −1 [gt − βgt+1 ].



                                            33
sequence {xt } defined for all t ≥ 0 “converges exponentially” if there exists a finite
date T̄ (possibly far in the future) such that for all t ≥ T̄ , the sequence is of the form
                                                    K
                                                    X
                                    x t = x∞ +            ak λt−T̄
                                                              k ,                              (3.1)
                                                    k=1

where x∞ and the {ak } are a finite collection of real coefficients, and the {λk } are
real numbers satisfying |λk | < 1. This places no restrictions on the behavior of the
sequence over any finite time horizon, only that it converges to its long-run value in
a sufficiently regular way. We shall similarly say that a vector sequence such as {et }
converges exponentially if this is true of each of the individual sequences (elements
of the vector).
     We shall consider only the case in which the initial belief sequence {et (0)} con-
verges exponentially. This amounts to an assumption that these “naive” beliefs are
of a sufficiently simple form, as respects what is anticipated about the very dis-
tant future. Note that the TE relations (2.9)–(2.10) imply that if the sequence of
fundamentals {ω t } converges exponentially, and a conjecture {et } regarding average
subjective expectations converges exponentially as well, then the correct expectations
{e∗t } implied by this conjecture also converge exponentially. Thus if people start from
an initial conjecture about others’ average expectations that converges exponentially,
they should be led by reflection to beliefs that also have this property. Thus the
operator Ψ maps exponentially convergent belief sequences into exponentially con-
verging belief sequences, and any finite number of iterations will similarly lead to
exponentially convergent beliefs.40 Hence our assumption of an initial conjecture
that converges exponentially does not preclude an initial conjecture that may reflect
some degree of sophistication; it might, for example, be based on the paths that en-
dogenous variables were observed to take on some previous occasion when there was
a shift in fundamentals described by series that converged exponentially.
  40
     The conclusion requires that the sequence of fundamentals also converges exponentially, but this
is a relatively innocuous assumption. It will be satisfied, for example, if the shock (and associated
policy change) that create the situation that we wish to analyze have implications after some finite
horizon (possibly far in the future) that converge to long-run values with dynamics that can be
described by a stable autoregressive process with real roots.




                                               34
3.2    Reflection Dynamics
We now consider the adjustment of the sequence {et (n)} describing subjective beliefs
as the process of reflection specified by (2.21) proceeds (that is, as n increases),
assuming that fundamentals {ω t } converge exponentially and that the initial “naive”
conjecture {et (0)} converges exponentially as well. Then there exists a finite date T
after which all four sequences (both elements of {ω t } and both elements of {et (0)})
have the form (3.1). There is furthermore a finite set of growth factors {λk } such
that all four sequences can be written in the form (3.1) using the same values {λk }
for each of the series.
     Thus all four sequences must belong to the linear space L, consisting of all se-
quences that take the form (3.1) for all t ≥ T̄ , where the value of T̄ , the value of K,
and the values {λk } are part of the definition of L. Note that L is a finite-dimensional
linear space (specifically, one of dimension T̄ + K + 1), the elements of which can be
parameterized by specifying {xt } for 0 ≤ t ≤ T̄ − 1, {ak } for 1 ≤ k ≤ K, and x∞ . We
shall similarly let L2 ≡ L × L denote the linear space of vector sequences {et } such
that both elements are sequences in L.
     The TE relations (2.9)–(2.10) imply that if both fundamentals {ω t } and a conjec-
ture {et } about average beliefs belong to L2 , then the implied correct expectations
{e∗t } belong to L2 as well. The dynamics (2.21) then remain forever within the finite-
dimensional linear space L2 if one starts from an initial conjecture {et (0)} in L2 .
Our study of the dynamics implied by (2.21) then reduces to the study of a linear
differential equation system on a finite-dimensional vector space, that we can write
in the form
                                 ė(n) = V e(n) + W ω.                               (3.2)
Here e(n) and ω are vectors of length 2(T̄ + K + 1), that parameterize elements of
L2 (i.e., that specify the weights on 2(T̄ + K + 1) basis vectors for that space), and
V and W are square matrices of that same dimension.
   We show in the Appendix that if the central bank’s reaction function satisfies the
Taylor Principle (2.14), each of the 2(T̄ + K + 1) eigenvalues of the matrix V has a
negative real part. This implies that V must be non-singular, and the system (3.2)
has a unique fixed point, given by

                                  eP F ≡ −V −1 W ω.                                 (3.3)


                                          35
Any such fixed point must correspond to a PFE solution of the model, as defined in
section 2.2 above, though the converse is not true: only PFE solutions that belong to
the finite-dimensional space L2 will be fixed points of the reduced-dimension system
(2.21). The unique PFE of this kind corresponds to the FS-PFE defined by (2.15).
    The general solution of the linear system of differential equations (3.2) can then
be written in the form

                             e(n) = eP F + exp(nV ) [e(0) − eP F ]                   (3.4)

for all n ≥ 0.41 Furthermore, the fact that each of the eigenvalues of V has a negative
real part implies that
                                  lim exp(nV ) = 0,
                                        n→∞

a matrix that is zero in all its elements. This yields the following important conclu-
sion.

Proposition 1 Consider the case of a shock sequence {gt } that converges exponen-
tially, and let the forward path of policy be specified by a sequence of reaction functions
(2.8), where the coefficients (φπ , φx ) are constant over time and satisfy (2.14), and
the sequence of perturbations {ı̄t } converges exponentially. Then in the case of any
initial conjecture {et (0)} regarding average expectations that converges exponentially,
the belief revision dynamics (2.21) converge as n grows without bound to the belief
sequence {ePt F } associated with the FS-PFE.
    The implied reflective equilibrium paths for output, inflation and the nominal in-
terest rate similarly converge to the FS-PFE paths for these variables. This means
that for any  > 0, there exists a finite n() such that for any degree of reflection
n > n(), the reflective equilibrium value will be within a distance  of the FS-PFE
prediction for each of the three variables and at all horizons t ≥ 0.

Further details of the proof are given in the Appendix.
   This result has several implications. First, it shows how a PFE can arise through
a process of reflection of the kind proposed in section 2.3 above. But further, it
indicates that only one of the two-dimensional continuum of solutions to the difference
equations (2.13) represents a PFE that can be reached in this way, at least if we accept
the reasonableness of starting from an initial conjecture that is well-behaved in the
  41
       See, for example, Hirsch and Smale (1974), pp. 89-97.


                                                36
sense assumed in the proposition.42 Thus it provides a justification for selecting the
FS-PFE as the relevant perfect-foresight prediction of the model, if by such an exercise
we understand the “perfect foresight” prediction to actually mean the limiting case
of a reflective equilibrium, in which the degree of reflection is unboundedly large.
    Proposition 1 also shows that the proposal to use reflective equilibrium, as defined
above, as one’s prediction of what should happen under a given policy need not mean
that one cannot obtain predictions of any precision. In the case considered here, the
reflective equilibrium predictions are quite similar, for all sufficiently large values of n,
rather than depending on the precise value of n that is assumed. They are also similar
(in the case of a large enough degree of reflection) regardless of the initial conjecture
that is assumed, as long as the initial conjecture is not extremely distant from the
beliefs associated with the long-run steady state, and the initial conjecture regarding
beliefs about the distant future is well-behaved in the specified sense. Finally, in this
case where the concept of a reflective equilibrium with a relatively high degree of
reflection leads to a sharply-defined prediction, we see that the FS-PFE provides a
useful approximation to that prediction; the accuracy of this approximation should
be greater the greater the degree of reflection that one assumes.
    These conclusions refer to the predictions obtained from the theory of reflective
equilibrium in the case that n is “large enough”; an obvious question is how large
n must be for reflective equilibrium to resemble the FS-PFE. The answer to this
will depend on parameter values; but at least in some cases, the required degree of
reflection may not be implausibly large. We illustrate this by considering a numerical
example.
    Figure 1 considers an experiment in which the intercept ı̄t is lowered for 8 quarters
(periods t = 0 through 7 of the quarterly model), but is expected to return to its
normal level from quarter 8 onward. The policy to which the central bank returns in
the long run is specified in accordance with Taylor (1993): the implicit inflation target
π ∗ is 2 percent per annum, and the reaction coefficients are φπ = 1.5, φy = 0.5/4.43
The model’s other structural parameters are those used by Denes et al. (2013),
  42
     This includes, for example, the “naive” hypothesis that people’s expectations should be unaf-
fected by either the shock that has occurred or the resulting change in policy. This is the specific
initial hypothesis assumed in the numerical illustrations below.
  43
     The division of φy by 4, relative to the value quoted by Taylor (1993), reflects the fact that
periods in our model are quarters, so that it and π t in (2.8) are quarterly rates rather than the
annual rates used in Taylor’s formula.


                                               37
to show that the ZLB can produce a contraction similar in magnitude to the U.S.
“Great Recession,” in the case of a shock to the path of {gt } of suitable magnitude
and persistence: α = 0.784, β = 0.997, σ −1 = 1.22, and ξ = 0.125.44 Among other
things, these imply a long-run steady-state value for the nominal interest rate of 3.23
percent per annum.45
    We assume that ı̄t is reduced by 0.008 (in quarterly units) for the first 8 quarters;
this is the maximum size of policy shift (given the above parameters) for which the
ZLB does not bind in the reflective equilibria associated with any degree of reflection
n ≥ 0.46 In computing the reflective equilibria shown in Figure 1, we assume an initial
“naive” conjecture under which expectations continue to be those that are correct in
the steady state with 2 percent inflation. Finally, for simplicity we consider only a
pure temporary loosening of monetary policy, not motivated by any real disturbance
(so that gt = 0 for all t). Because our model is linear, we can separately compute the
perturbations of the steady-state paths of all variables implied by a pure monetary
policy shift (assuming no real disturbance and no change in the initial conjecture),
the perturbations implied by a real disturbance (assuming no change in monetary
policy and no change in the initial conjecture), and the perturbations implied by a
change in the initial conjecture (assuming no real disturbance or change in monetary
policy), and sum these to obtain the predicted effects of a scenario under which a
real disturbance provokes both a change in monetary policy and a shift in the initial
conjecture.47 In the figure, we isolate the pure effect of an announced loosening of
  44
      We do not pretend to offer a quantitatively realistic analysis of alternative policies that should
have been available during the Great Recession; our goal in this paper is purely to explicate the
conditions under which perfect foresight analysis of monetary policy commitments makes a greater
or lesser amount of sense. The parameter values proposed by Denes et al. are of interest as a
case in which an expectation of remaining at the ZLB for several quarters has very substantial
effects — and in which, more generally, monetary policy anticipations have large effects — under a
rational-expectations analysis. It is in this sort of case that it matters most exactly how one models
expectation determination.
   45
      This means that the intercept of the central-bank reaction function assumed in the long run
is smaller here than in Taylor (1993); we assume the value that (in our model) is consistent with
achievement of the 2 percent inflation target in the long-run steady state.
   46
      As shown in Figure 1, the shock results in a zero nominal interest rate in each of the first 8
quarters, when n = 0. In quarter 7, the nominal interest rate is also zero for all n ≥ 0 (and also
in the FS-PFE), since the belief-revision dynamics do not change expectations regarding any of the
periods from t = 8 onward.
   47
      Of course, in order for the ZLB not to bind in the reflective equilibria, one must bound the


                                                38
             1.1   Evolution Expectations: Graph 1 together

                                      Figure 1: Change in ω: T = 8, n = 0 − 4



                         4


                         3


                         2




                     y
                         1


                         0
                             0    2          4        6              8   10       12        14
                                                          quarters

                       2.8


                       2.6


                       2.4
                   π




                       2.2


                         2
                             0    2          4        6              8   10       12        14
                                                          quarters

                       3.5
                         3
                       2.5
                         2
                   i




                       1.5
                         1
                       0.5
                         0
                             0    2          4        6              8   10       12        14
                                                          quarters



Figure 1: Notes:
           Reflective
                 The dashedequilibrium         outcomes
                            blue line is the REE.             for
                                                  The updates in    n = 0 are
                                                                 expectations through
                                                                                shown from4yellow
                                                                                             (progressively
                                                                                                  line (n = 0, darker
          no update) and until the blue (n = 4).
lines) compared with the FS-PFE solution (dash-dotted line), when the Taylor-rule
intercept is reduced for 8 quarters.

monetary policy, to last for a known length of time.
   The three panels of the figure show the TE paths of output, inflation and the
nominal interest rate,48 in reflective equilibria corresponding to successively higher
cumulative impact of each of these three perturbations. For example, it will not be possible to loosen
policy (reduce the intercept of the policy reaction function) by as much as is assumed in Figure 1 if
a shock has occurred that also lowers gt . Indeed, a sufficiently sharp temporary reduction in gt may
require the intercept of the monetary policy reaction function to be raised in order for the ZLB not
to make implementation of the reaction function3 (2.8) infeasible.
  48
     Here yt is measured in percentage points of deviation from the steady-state level of output:
for example, “2” means 2 percent higher than the steady-state level. The variables π t and it are
reported as annualized rates, and the units are again percentage points; thus “2” means two percent
per annum. Note that in this and all later figures, yt is reported as a log deviation from steady-state


                                                          39
degrees of reflection. The lightest of the solid lines (most yellow, if viewed in color)
corresponds to n = 0; these are the outcomes that are expected to occur under
the “naive” conjecture about average expectations (namely, that these do not take
account of the policy shift at all), but taking account of the announced change in
the central bank’s behavior in the TE analysis under those expectations. (Thus the
n = 0 paths do not represent the naive beliefs, but rather the paths that it would
be correct to expect, if people on average hold the naive beliefs.) The relatively
aggressive reduction in the interest rate has some stimulative effect on output even
in the absence of any change in expectations, but this effect is the same in each of
the first 8 quarters; the effect of the loosening of policy is the same, regardless of the
number of additional quarters for which the loose policy will continue.
    As n increases, the effects on output and inflation become greater in quarters zero
through 6; and the extent to which this is so is greater, the larger the number of
quarters for which the looser policy is expected to continue. There are no changes
in the expected paths from quarter 8 onward, as n increases; this is because we have
assumed reversion to the long-run steady-state policy in quarter 8, and the initial
“naive” conjecture already corresponds to a PFE from quarter 8 onward, so that
beliefs do not change as n increases.49 There are similarly no changes in the expected
outcomes in quarter 7, because quarter 7 expectations about later quarters do not
change, in the absence of any outcomes different from those expected in any of those
later quarters. However, the fact that outcomes are different in quarter 7 and earlier
than those anticipated under the “naive” expectations causes beliefs to be revised
in quarters 6 and earlier. As expectations shift toward expecting higher output and
inflation in one or more later periods, the TE levels of output and inflation in the
earlier quarters increase (and the nominal interest rate increases as well, through an
endogenous policy reaction). This effect is greater the larger the number of future
quarters about which expectations of output and inflation are revised upward.
    The progressively darker solid lines in the figure plot the reflective equilibrium
outcomes for degrees of reflection n = 0, 0.4, 0.8, and so on up to n = 4.0. The FS-
PFE paths are also shown by dark dash-dotted lines. One sees from the figure that
output, as in the model equations, but π t and it in the figures are shown in absolute terms, not as
deviations from the steady-state values of these variables.
  49
     Because the model is purely forward-looking, revisions of expectations about earlier periods
have no effects on equilibrium determination from period 8 onward.



                                               40
the reflective equilibrium paths converge to the FS-PFE solution as n increases, in
accordance with Proposition 1. Moreover, the convergence is relatively fast, for this
kind of policy experiment. Already when n = 2, the predicted reflective equilibrium
responses for both output and inflation differ from the PFE responses by less than
10 percent (in fact, by less than 7.5 percent) in any quarter. This means that if
the average member of the population is expected to be capable of iterating the Ψ
mapping at least twice,50 one should predict outcomes approximately the size of the
PFE outcomes. When n = 4, the reflective equilibrium output responses differ from
the PFE outcomes by only 1 percent or less, and except in quarter zero (when the
discrepancy is closer to 2 percent), the same is true of the inflation responses.
    Higher degrees of reflection would only make the FS-PFE prediction even more
accurate. This provides a good example of the kind of situation in which, in our
view, a perfect foresight equilibrium analysis of the effects of a monetary policy
commitment can make sense. Note that is specifically the FS-PFE, rather than any
other solution to the difference equations (2.13), that provides a good approximation
to a reflective equilibrium (as long as n is not extremely low). This provides an answer
to the question raised by Cochrane (2011) about the justification of appealing to the
FS-PFE in monetary policy analysis.


3.3     Effects of a Policy Change Far in the Future
The paradox posed in section 1 involves arguments about the effects of an expectation
that policy will be changed permanently, rather than for only a few quarters as
in Figure 1, and questions about how much it can matter what is assumed about
policy extremely far in the future. Here we consider these issues in the case of the
class of policies discussed above, where (temporary or permanent) policy changes are
understood simply to involve changes in the intercept of the monetary policy reaction
  50
     Here it is worth recalling that Arad and Rubinstein (2012) find that their subjects have a mean
“level of thinking” of 2.2. Camerer et al. (2004), however, conclude that “an average of 1.5 steps
[of iterated best response] fits data from many games” [p. 861]. It should be noted that these
experimental results relate to subjects’ play in one-shot games, where the strategic considerations
have been explained to the players, but they have no experience on the basis of which to calculate
their best action. One might expect that the realistic mean (effective) degree of reflection n will be
higher in cases where people have some degree of prior experience with the policy regime in question,
as discussed further in section 3.4.



                                               41
function.
     For the sake of specificity, we consider the following special class of policy ex-
periments. Suppose that ı̄t is expected to take one value (ı̄SR ) for all t < T, and
another value (ı̄LR ) for all t ≥ T. (The policy experiment considered in Figure 1 is
one example of a policy in this class, with ı̄SR < 0, ı̄LR = 0, and T = 8. In this more
general discussion, we again assume that both ı̄SR and ı̄LR are high enough that the
ZLB never binds.) How does the effect of such a policy commitment vary depending
on the choice of the horizon T ? In particular, should the effect be similar for all large
enough values of T ?
     As in the case considered in Figure 1, we consider the effects of a pure policy
change, assuming gt = 0 for all t and an initial “naive” conjecture in which average
expectations are consistent with the steady state in which the inflation target π ∗ is
achieved at all times.51 Because our model is purely forward-looking, and ı̄t , gt , and
et (0) are each the same for all t ≥ T, it is easy to see that the belief-revision dynamics
(2.21) result in et (n) having the same value for all t ≥ T. Let this value be denoted
eLR (n). We see that it must evolve according to

                                 ėLR = [M − I] eLR + m2 ı̄LR                                    (3.5)

starting from the initial condition eLR (0) = 0, where m2 is the second column of the
matrix m in (2.10).
    Let us suppose that the quantity on the left-hand side of (2.14) is not exactly
equal to 1;52 in this case we can show (see the Appendix) that M − I is non-singular.
The solution to (3.5) is then easily seen to be53

                             eLR (n) = [I − exp[n(M − I)]] ēPLRF                                (3.6)

for all n ≥ 0, where
                                    ēPLRF ≡ [I − M ]−1 m2 ı̄LR                                  (3.7)
  51
      As in the case discussed above, we can determine the effect of varying the length T of the policy
commitment in the case of a given real disturbance (represented by a sequence {gt }) by summing
the effect of the pure policy change (computed here as a function of T ) and the effect of the real
disturbance in the absence of any policy change (which will be independent of T ).
   52
      Note that this condition is satisfied by generic reaction functions of the form (2.8) whether the
Taylor Principle is satisfied or not. Hence we do not discuss the knife-edge case in which M − I is
singular, though our methods can easily be applied to that case as well.
   53
      See, for example, Hirsch and Smale (1974), p. 90.


                                                42
is the unique rest point of the dynamics (3.5).
    Note that ēPLRF is also the stationary vector of average expectations associated with
the unique PFE steady state, in the case that the policy ı̄t = ı̄LR is expected to be
maintained forever. If the reaction coefficients (φπ , φy ) satisfy the Taylor Principle
(2.14), then (as shown in the Appendix) both eigenvalues of M − I have negative real
part, and
                                   lim exp[n(M − I)] = 0.                             (3.8)
                               n→∞

It then follows from (3.6) that

                                      lim eLR (n) = ēPLRF ,
                                     n→∞

so that the reflective equilibrium in any period t ≥ T converges to the PFE steady
state associated with the long-run policy (which is also the FS-PFE solution for this
policy). This is of course as we should expect from Proposition 1.
    We turn now to the characterization of reflective equilibrium in periods t < T. The
forward-looking structure of the model similarly implies that the solution for et (n)
depends only on how many periods prior to period T the period t is, and not on the
dates of either t or T . If we adopt the alternative numbering scheme τ ≡ T − t (i.e.,
we number periods according to the number remaining until the shift to the long-run
policy), then the solution for eτ (n) for any τ ≥ 1 will be independent of T . Moreover,
in terms of this notation, the belief-revision dynamics (2.21) can be written in the
form
                             τ −1
                             X                                         ∞
                                                                       X
       ėτ (n) = −eτ (n) +          [ψ j eτ −j (n) + ϕj2 ı̄SR ] +            [ψ j eLR (n) + ϕj2 ı̄LR ]
                             j=1                                       j=τ


for each τ ≥ 1, where ϕj2 is the second column of the matrix ϕj . These dynamics can
equivalently be written in the form
                                                       τ −1
                                                       X
             ėτ (n) = −eτ (n) + (I − Λ)                      Λj−1 [M eτ −j (n) + m2 ı̄SR ]
                                                       j=1
                                           τ −1
                                    + Λ           [M eLR (n) + m2 ı̄LR ],                                (3.9)

and integrated forward from the initial conditions eτ (0) = 0 for all τ ≥ 1, using
solution (3.6) for eLR (n).


                                                  43
    We observe that for τ = 1, the linear differential equation (3.9) can be solved
uniquely for the function e1 (n), given that eLR (n) is already known. Then the equa-
tion for τ = 2 can be solved uniquely for the function e2 (n), given that e1 (n) and
eLR (n) are already known; and proceeding recursively in this way, one can solve
uniquely for the {eτ (n)} for all values of τ up to any given bound T (corresponding
to the initial period t = 0). In this way, we obtain a unique solution for et (n) for all
t ≥ 0.
    Note further that considering how et (n) changes (for any fixed t) as T is increased
is equivalent to considering how the solution to the system of differential equations
(3.9) changes for progressively larger values of τ . In particular, the behavior of et (n)
as T is made unboundedly large can be determined by calculating the behavior of the
solution to the system (3.9) as τ → ∞. This yields the following simple result.

Proposition 2 Consider the case in which gt = 0 for all t, and let the forward path
of policy be specified by a sequence of reaction functions (2.8), where the coefficients
(φπ , φx ) are constant over time and such that the left-hand side of (2.14) is non-zero,
and suppose that ı̄t = ı̄SR for all t < T while ı̄t = ı̄LR for all t ≥ T. Then if the initial
conjecture is given by et (0) = 0 for all t, the reflective equilibrium beliefs {et (n)} for
any degree of reflection n converge to a well-defined limiting value

                                  eSR (n) ≡ lim et (n)
                                                T →∞

that is independent of t, and this limit is given by

                          eSR (n) = [I − exp[n(M − I)]] ēPSRF ,                      (3.10)

where
                                ēPSRF ≡ [I − M ]−1 m2 ı̄SR .                         (3.11)
The reflective equilibrium outcomes for output, inflation and the nominal interest rate
then converge as well as T is made large, to the values obtained by substituting the
beliefs eSR (n) into the TE relations (2.10) and the reaction function (2.8).

    The proof is given in the Appendix. This result implies that our concept of re-
flective equilibrium, for any given degree of reflection n, has the intuitively appealing
property that a commitment to follow a given policy (a given intercept for the reaction


                                           44
function, or a given implicit inflation target) for a time horizon T has similar conse-
quences for all large enough values of T ; moreover, for any large enough value of T ,
the policy that is expected to be followed after date T has little effect on equilibrium
outcomes. Comparison of expressions (3.10)–(3.11) with (3.6)–(3.7) also shows that
the predicted outcomes in the case of any long enough horizon T for maintenance of
the “temporary” policy are close to the predicted outcomes (under a reflective equi-
librium with the same degree of reflection n) in the case that the policy is expected to
be permanent. In the case of policies in the class considered here, there is no relevant
difference between a commitment to a given reaction function for a long but finite
time and a commitment to follow the rule forever.
    Next, we consider how the reflective equilibrium prediction in the case of a long
horizon T changes as the degree of reflection n increases. If the coefficients (φπ , φy )
satisfy the Taylor Principle (2.14), then (3.8) implies that as n is made large,

                                   lim eSR (n) = ēPSRF .
                                 n→∞

Moreover, the beliefs ēPSRF defined in (3.11) are simply the steady-state PFE beliefs
(or FS-PFE beliefs) in the case of a permanent commitment to the reaction function
(2.8) with ı̄t = ı̄SR . Thus we obtain the following result.

Proposition 3 Suppose that in addition to the hypotheses of Proposition 2, the co-
efficients (φπ , φy ) satisfy the Taylor Principle (2.14). Then the limits

                        lim lim et (n) = lim eSR (n) = ēPSRF
                        n→∞ T →∞             n→∞

and
                          lim lim et (n) = lim ePt F = ēPSRF
                         T →∞ n→∞              T →∞

are well-defined and equal to one another. Moreover, both are independent of t, and
equal to the FS-PFE expectations in the case of a permanent commitment to the
reaction function (2.8) with ı̄t = ı̄SR .

   Proposition 3 identifies a case in which the thought experiment of considering the
PFE consistent with a permanent commitment to a given policy rule does not lead
to paradoxical conclusions. Not only does the question have a unique, well-behaved
answer (if one selects the FS-PFE solution, as is conventional in the NK literature),
but this answer provides a good approximation to the reflective equilibrium outcome

                                          45
            1.2    Evolution Expectations: Graph 2

                                      Figure 2: Change in ω: T = 200, n = 0 − 20



                         6

                         5

                         4

                         3




                    y
                         2

                         1

                         0
                             0   20      40    60    80     100      120   140   160   180   200
                                                          quarters

                        10


                         8


                         6
                   π




                         4


                         2
                             0   20      40    60    80     100      120   140   160   180   200
                                                          quarters

                        12

                        10

                         8

                         6
                    i




                         4

                         2

                         0
                             0   20      40    60    80     100      120   140   160   180   200
                                                          quarters



Figure 2: Notes: The dashedequilibrium
           Reflective       blue line is the REE. The updates for
                                               outcomes       in expectations are shown from
                                                                   n = 0 through           20yellow line (n = 0,
                                                                                               (progressively    darker
          no update) and until the blue (n = 20).
lines) compared with the FS-PFE solution (dash-dotted line), when the Taylor-rule
intercept is reduced for 200 quarters.

in the case of any large enough degree of reflection n and any long enough horizon T
for maintenance of the policy.
    Figure 2 provides a numerical illustration of these results. The policy experiment
is the same as in Figure 1, as are the assumed numerical parameter values, except
that in Figure 2 the commitment to the intercept ı̄ < 0 is expected to last for 50
years. (This is not forever, but it should already be evident from the figure that
further increases in the length of the commitment will make little difference in the
predicted outcomes over the first decade or two of the commitment to looser policy;
                                          4
consideration of a finite value of T makes it still possible to show how the reflective
equilibrium outcomes change for smaller values of τ , so that the results for all values of


                                                          46
T of 50 years or less can be shown in a single figure.) Again the reflective equilibrium
paths are shown for progressively higher values of n.54 The figure shows not only
the convergence of the reflective equilibrium outcomes for all three variables as T is
made large, for each of the possible values of n, but also the convergence of reflective
equilibrium to the FS-PFE predictions, for each of the possible values of τ (and hence
for each possible value of T ). Not only is eτ (n) close to ePτ F for all large enough n in
the case of any single value of τ , but there exists a value of n for which eτ (n) is close
to ePτ F for all τ (and hence for all possible commitment lengths T ).
    While a calculation of the FS-PFE implied by a permanent commitment to a
Taylor rule clearly represents a meaningful limiting case, one can not necessarily con-
clude that it should provide a good quantitative prediction about the effects of a
policy change that is expected to be long-lasting. Figure 2 shows that (for the pa-
rameter values assumed) the FS-PFE provides a good approximation to the reflective
equilibrium outcome if the degree of reflection is on the order of n = 20 (or even
higher values that are not shown); but this would involve a degree of reflection that
seems fairly unrealistic, if it is taken to represent a purely prospective calculation on
the part of people who have learned about an announced policy change, but not yet
had occasion to observe what actually happens under the new regime. If the degree
of reflection equals only n = 2,55 for example, then if the commitment is to change
policy for only two years (as in Figure 1), the reflective equilibrium outcomes are not
too different from the FS-PFE predictions; but when the new policy is expected to
last for decades (as in Figure 2), the predicted outcomes are quite different, even if
the responses to the policy change under reflective equilibrium have the same sign as
the FS-PFE predictions. (The output increase predicted by the reflective equilibrium
is many times larger than the FS-PFE prediction, while the inflation increase is only
a fraction of the FS-PFE prediction.)
    This illustrates a general point: in judging the practical relevance of the PFE
prediction, it matters not only whether reflective equilibrium should converge to the
PFE as n is made large enough, but also how quickly such convergence should occur.
The speed of convergence is not too great an issue in the case of a commitment to a
  54
     Again, the movement from lighter to darker lines corresponds to increasing n. The lines shown
in the figure correspond to the values n = 0, 2, 4, and so on up to n = 20.
  55
     In the figure, this is the line for which the output response is largest, while the inflation and
interest-rate responses are the second-lowest.



                                               47
new policy to be maintained for only a few quarters, when the new policy is a Taylor
rule, and when the temporary policy is to be followed by a reversion to a policy
regime that the public already understands well on the basis of past experience (the
experiment considered in Figure 1). It is a bigger issue, however, in the case of a
commitment to a new permanent (or at any rate long-lasting) regime that differs
non-trivially from past policy (for example, adoption of a new inflation target that
is announced as a permanent change), even when both the old and the new policies
conform to the Taylor principle. And, as we show in the next section, it is a still
larger issue in the case of a temporary regime under which the Taylor principle is not
expected to be satisfied, as in the case of a commitment to a fixed interest rate for a
significant period of time.


3.4    The Fisher Equation and Long-Lasting Shifts in Policy
We can now address a question posed in the title of our paper: what should happen
if people come to expect (whether as a result of a central-bank announcement, or on
the basis of experience) that a “loose” monetary policy will be maintained for several
more years? Should such a shift in understanding of the outlook for future policy be
inflationary, or can it be deflationary? If policy is expected to follow a Taylor rule,
and “looser policy” means a lower intercept in that rule (and thus a lower nominal
interest rate for any given outcomes for inflation and output, but not necessarily a
lower nominal interest given the endogenous effects on inflation and output), then we
can answer the question using the results above.
    Our results show that in our model, an expectation that the reaction-function
intercept will be kept lower than usual for the next several years should lead to
higher inflation and output, regardless of the degree of reflection, and regardless of
the length of time for which the looser policy is expected to be maintained. (In this
respect, the FS-PFE solution gives the correct answer, at least as regards the sign
of the effects.) If the loosening of policy is expected to be sufficiently transitory
(though it may last for some years), as in Figure 1, then the policy change will be
associated with a temporarily lower nominal interest rate, regardless of the degree of
reflection. But if the shift in the policy rule is expected to last for a sufficiently long
(though possibly finite) period of time, the higher inflation rate and output will be
associated with a higher nominal interest rate, despite the reduction in the intercept


                                          48
of the central bank’s reaction function, except in the case of a degree of reflection
that is very low. (Figure 2 shows that when n = 2 or greater, even a commitment
to maintain looser policy for five years results in a higher nominal interest rate than
the steady-state level that would represent the reflective equilibrium in the absence
of a policy change.56 Longer commitments would result in even greater increases in
the nominal interest rate.)
    In the case of a permanent increase in the inflation target, the FS-PFE prediction
is that the nominal interest rate should increase one-for-one with the increase in
inflation (which increases by exactly the increase in the target); the relationship
between the permanent change in the inflation rate and the permanent change in the
level of nominal interest rates satisfies the Fisher equation. In the case of a reflective
equilibrium with only a finite degree of reflection n, the Fisher equation need not be
satisfied (it depends on expectations being correct, at least on average), though it
will hold approximately, if n is large. But even for modest values of n, a permanent
increase in the inflation target, which permanently raises inflation, is likely to be
associated with an increase, rather than a decrease, in nominal interest rates.
    These results do not involve any discontinuity in the predicted effects of a policy
change as one passes from the case of a long-lasting (but still temporary) change to
the case of a permanent change in policy; Figure 2 shows how the predicted effects
on output, inflation and the nominal interest rate all vary continuously as τ increases
(and hence as T increases, for a fixed value of t). Nor do they involve any failure of
the conventional expectation that reducing the intercept of the interest-rate reaction
function represents a more expansionary (and more inflationary) policy, regardless of
the length of time that the policy shift is expected to last. They do, however, indicate
that the change in the nominal interest rate is not necessarily a good measure of the
degree to which policy is loosened, as a shift down in the reaction function may
be associated with an increase in the nominal interest rate. Indeed, this is almost
certainly what should be observed, in the case of a sufficiently long-lasting change in
policy.
    Rather than supposing that the degree of reflection n is fixed, as in our formal
analysis above, it is plausible to suppose that in the case of a long-lasting shift in
policy, average expectations at the time of the initial announcement of the novel
  56
    The effect of a commitment that lasts for T = 20 quarters can be read off from the figure by
observing the predictions for quarter 180, which corresponds to τ = 20.


                                             49
policy will correspond to a relatively low value of n, but that over time the value
of n should increase. The reason is not simply that people would have more time
to think through the implications of the new policy regime, but (more importantly)
that observation of economic outcomes under the new regime should lead people to
adjust their expectations in the same direction as is implied by an increase in n.57
     Consider, for simplicity, the case of a permanent shift in the intercept ı̄LR , and
suppose that the initial conjecture e(0) is that expectations do not change at all
(et (0) = 0 for all t). The reflective equilibrium for some low value of n involves
et (n) = eLR (n) for all t, where eLR (n) is defined in (3.6). This will imply constant
levels of output, inflation and the nominal interest rate corresponding to that value
of n (the values that can be read off from the extreme left points of the responses
shown in Figure 2). But, given these constant levels of output, inflation and interest
rates, the correct expectations e∗t (n) will also be the same for all t, but different from
average expectations eLR (n). And observing actual output, inflation and interest rates
for even a few periods should indicate the direction in which outcomes under the new
regime are different from those that have been expected on average.
     If we suppose that as a result, people’s expectations (at least on average) should
shift in the direction of the discrepancy — specifically, that et continues to be the
same for all future dates t, but that the constant value changes in proportion to the
constant difference

                          e∗ (n) − eLR (n) = [M − I] eLR + m2 ı̄LR

— then the new time-invariant value for et should correspond to eLR (n) for a some-
what higher value of n, given that the evolution of eLR (n) in response to increases in
n is given by (3.5). But in subsequent periods, observation of the outcomes resulting
from expectations eLR (n) with this higher value of n should lead expectations to be
  57
     In the experimental game theory literature, it is often observed that when subjects get to play
a given game repeatedly, observed play deviates much less from the Nash equilibrium prediction
after a few repetitions (see, e.g., Nagel, 1995). In the games in question, this is what the theory of
reflective equilibrium would predict, with a fixed initial conjecture, if the average level of reflection
n were to increase on each repetition. However, it could also occur without any increase in the
average level of reflection, if one supposes that the initial conjecture changes on each repetition,
being determined by average behavior on the previous instance; this is essentially the interpretation
of her data proposed by Nagel. Stahl (1996) interprets the same data in terms of an alternative
learning model, in which there is an increase over time in players’ “level of thinking.”


                                                 50
revised in a way that corresponds to a still higher value of n, and so on indefinitely
if the new regime continues without further changes.
    In this way, one might expect to observe over time, not the reflective equilibrium
(as defined above) corresponding to a single value of n, but rather a progression from
lower to steadily higher values of n. If the initial level of reflection when the policy
shift is announced is quite low, then even a permanent reduction in the reaction-
function intercept might initially be associated with a decrease, rather than an in-
crease, in the nominal interest rate (as shown, for example, in Figure 2 for the case
n = 0). However, observation of the outcomes produced by the new policy (which
differ from average expectations) should cause n to increase; and at first, this should
result in increases in output, inflation and the nominal interest rate required by the
new reaction function (as shown in Figure 2 by the difference between the responses
for n = 2 compared to those for n = 0).
    As n increases still further (as it should with sufficient experience of the new
policy), the output effect of the policy change should decrease, while inflation and
the nominal interest rate continue to increase (as shown in Figure 2 by the movement
from n = 2 to the cases n = 4, n = 6, and so on). Hence such a permanent shift
in policy could be associated with an initial decrease in the nominal interest rate,
though the nominal interest rate should eventually (and permanently) be increased.
The policy shift should increase both output and inflation, but if the effective degree
of reflection increases with experience, one would observe a much stronger output
effect in the beginning, while the eventual effect would be a permanent increase in
inflation and the nominal interest rate while most of the output effect would prove
temporary.58
    Thus a permanent (or long-lasting) “loosening” of policy, in the sense of a reduc-
tion of the reaction-function intercept, need not mean permanently lower nominal
interest rates. (Indeed, if the change in policy is immediately understood to be per-
manent, and a sufficiently large part of the population engages in a sufficient degree
of reflection, the period for which the nominal interest rate is reduced might not be
very long.) But this doesn’t mean that a central bank couldn’t decide to maintain
  58
    If one further supposes that the automatic rate of price increase π ∗ between occasions on which
prices are re-optimized would eventually increase in the case of a permanently higher inflation rate,
then the output effect would eventually disappear altogether. This is not seen in Figure 2 even as
T → ∞ and n → ∞, because of the assumption of indexation at the fixed rate π ∗ .



                                               51
a lower nominal interest-rate target for many years, and that it could not credibly
announce an intention to do so. However, such a policy (or such an understanding of
policy) is not equivalent to any particular degree of adjustment of the intercept of a
Taylor-type rule, and our results above need not apply. We turn next to an analysis
of reflective equilibrium in this alternative case.


4    Consequences of a Temporarily Fixed Nominal
     Interest Rate
We now consider the case in which it comes to be understood (either as a result of
a shock, or a policy announcement) that the nominal interest rate will be fixed at
some level ı̄SR up to some date T , while it will again be determined by the “normal”
central bank reaction function from date T onward. (The latter policy is assumed
to be a rule of the form (2.8), in which the response coefficients satisfy the Taylor
Principle (2.14), and the intercept is consistent with the inflation target π ∗ .) There
are various reasons for interest in this case. First, a real disturbance may create a
situation in which the interest rate prescribed by the Taylor rule violates the ZLB
for some time; in such a case, it may be reasonable to suppose that the central bank
will set the nominal interest rate at the lowest possible rate, regardless of the exact
outcomes for output and inflation, as long as the situation persists, but return to
implementation of its normal reaction function once this is feasible. And second, a
central bank may commit itself to maintain the nominal interest rate at its lower
bound for a specific period of time, even if this is lower than the rate that the Taylor
rule would prescribe. The “date-based forward guidance” provided by several central
banks in the aftermath of the global financial crisis arguably involved commitments
of this kind; and while no explicit promises were made about how policy would be
conducted beyond the horizons in question, one might suppose that people would
expect the central bank to revert to its usual approach to policy once there ceased
to be any explicit commitment to behave otherwise. We are interested in the extent
to which such a temporary change in policy should have effects similar or different
from the effects of a temporary shift in the intercept of the monetary policy reaction
function, analyzed above.
    We are interested in two kinds of questions about the effects of such policies. One


                                         52
is what the effect should be of changing ı̄SR , taking the horizon T as given (perhaps
by the expected persistence of an exogenous real disturbance). While there might
seem to be no room to vary the short-run level of the interest rate, if we imagine a
case in which it is already at the ZLB, it would even in that case always be possible to
commit to a higher (though still fixed) interest-rate target, and some have suggested
that (at least when the situation of being constrained by the ZLB persists for a long
enough time) it might actually be expansionary to do so. A second question is the
effect of changing T, the length of time that the interest rate is held fixed, taking as
given the time path of the real disturbance. To what extent can a commitment to
keep the interest rate low for a longer time substitute for an ability to cut rates more
sharply right away (which may be infeasible due to the ZLB)?


4.1       Convergence to Perfect-Foresight Equilibrium
We first consider whether reflective equilibrium converges to a PFE again in this
case, as n grows, and if so to which of the possible PFE paths. The question of
equilibrium selection is of particular interest in this policy experiment, since here,
unlike the case considered in section 3, the “backward stability” selection criterion
proposed by Cochrane (2015a) would imply a different solution than the conventional
“forward stability” (or local determinacy) criterion.59
    Because of the forward-looking character of our model, the determination of re-
flective equilibrium from period T onward depends only on the specification of policy
from period T onward. Since we again assume a reaction function that satisfies the
Taylor Principle over this period, the results of section 3 continue to apply; specifi-
cally, Proposition 1 implies that in the case of any initial conjecture that converges
exponentially, reflective equilibrium outcomes will converge to the unique FS-PFE
outcomes as n increases. If we suppose that gt = 0 for all t ≥ T , this means that the
reflective equilibrium outcomes for all t ≥ T will converge to the steady state con-
sistent with the inflation target π ∗ . Note that this simple result already tells us that
reflective equilibrium cannot generally converge to the “backward stable” solution
proposed by Cochrane (2015a), as this does not generally imply that the long-run
steady state is reached from date T onward. Instead, if reflective equilibrium con-
verges to any PFE, it can only converge to the FS-PFE, which does imply steady-state
 59
      See the discussion of this point by Cochrane (2015a), sec. 4.1.


                                                 53
outcomes from date T onward in the case just discussed.
   The analysis of convergence prior to date T requires an extension of our previous
result, because now we assume that the response coefficients (φπ , φy ) differ before
and after date T . Nonetheless, as shown in the Appendix, the methods used to prove
Proposition 1 can be extended to establish convergence in this case as well.

Proposition 4 Consider the case of a shock sequence {gt } that converges exponen-
tially, and let the forward path of policy be specified by a fixed interest rate ı̄SR for all
0 ≤ t < T, but by a reaction function of the form (2.8) for all t ≥ T, where the coeffi-
cients (φπ , φx ) of the latter function satisfy (2.14), and the intercept is consistent with
the inflation target π ∗ . Then in the case of any initial conjecture {et (0)} regarding
average expectations that converges exponentially, the belief revision dynamics (2.21)
converge as n grows without bound to the belief sequence {ePt F } associated with the
FS-PFE.
    The implied reflective equilibrium paths for output, inflation and the nominal in-
terest rate similarly converge to the FS-PFE paths for these variables. This means
that for any  > 0, there exists a finite n() such that for any degree of reflection
n > n(), the reflective equilibrium value will be within a distance  of the FS-PFE
prediction for each of the three variables and at all horizons t ≥ 0.

    Figure 3 provides a numerical illustration of this result. The model parameters are
as in the previous numerical examples, and for simplicity we again show the effects
of a pure shift in monetary policy, assuming gt = 0 for all t and an initial conjecture
under which et (0) = 0 for all t. As in Figure 1, it is again assumed that monetary
policy is expected to depart from the “normal” Taylor rule for 8 quarters, and then
to revert to the “normal” reaction function thereafter. The only difference is that in
Figure 3 it is assumed that the nominal interest rate is fixed at zero for the first 8
quarters.
    For the case n = 0 (the lightest of the lines in the figure), the responses are
identical to those in Figure 1: the two shifts in monetary policy have been chosen to
lower the nominal interest rate to the same extent (i.e., to zero), in the absence of
any change in average expectations. For higher values of n, the effects of the policy
change are qualitatively similar to those in Figure 1, but not exactly the same: the
output and inflation increases are somewhat larger when the interest rate is expected


                                           54
            1.3   Fixed interest rate example: 8 Q

                        Figure 3: Change to fixed interest rate: T = 8, n = 0 − 4



                        6

                        5

                        4

                        3




                    y
                        2

                        1

                        0
                            0    2         4         6              8   10        12       14
                                                         quarters

                      2.8


                      2.6


                      2.4
                  π




                      2.2


                        2
                            0    2         4         6              8   10        12       14
                                                         quarters

                        4


                        3


                        2
                    i




                        1


                        0
                            0    2         4         6              8   10        12       14
                                                         quarters



Figure 3:Notes:
           Reflective
                The dashed equilibrium
                           blue line is the REE.outcomes
                                                 The updates infor  n = 0are through
                                                                expectations             4 compared
                                                                             shown from yellow line (n = 0, with the
         no update) and until the blue (n = 4).
FS-PFE solution, when the nominal interest rate is fixed for 8 quarters.

to remain fixed, because now there is no expectation of endogenous interest-rate
increases in subsequent periods in response to the increases in output and inflation.
    Because these stronger effects depend on reflection about what should happen in
the future, given what is understood about future monetary policy, they are larger
the greater the degree of reflection, and strongest under the assumption of perfect
foresight. (They are also larger the longer the time for which the interest rate is
expected to remain fixed, as this increases the degree to which reflection about the
effects of future policy matters.) This means that in the case of a temporarily fixed
interest rate, the difference between the PFE predictions and those obtained from a
                                              5
given finite degree of reflection is greater than that obtained in the case of a temporary
shift in the Taylor-rule intercept.


                                                         55
    In Figure 3, as in Figure 1, an average degree of reflection of n = 4 results in
TE outcomes that are similar to the PFE predictions. But the reflective equilibrium
outcomes when n = 2 are not as close to the PFE outcomes as they are in Figure
1, especially in the first quarters (when the anomalous policy is still expected to last
for more than a year). In quarter zero, the output response when n = 2 is 14 percent
smaller than the PFE prediction, and the inflation response is 10 percent smaller;
and even when n = 4, the output and inflation responses are both about 3 percent
smaller than the PFE predictions (whereas output differs by less than 1 percent in
Figure 1, and inflation by less than 2 percent). Moreover, these discrepancies rapidly
become much larger if the interest rate is expected to be fixed for an even longer
period of time.


4.2     Very Long Periods with a Fixed Nominal Interest Rate
Much recent criticism of the implications of standard New Keynesian models regard-
ing the effects of “forward guidance” have focused on the implications of such models
(when solved under the assumption of perfect foresight or rational expectations) if
one assumes that the nominal interest rate would be fixed for several years.60 It
should be noted that no central banks have actually experimented with date-based
forward guidance that referred to dates more than about two years in the future;
and while the period in which the U.S. federal funds rate target has remained at its
lower bound has (as of the time of writing) lasted for more than six years, there was
little reason for anyone to expect it to remain at this level for so long when the lower
bound was reached at the end of 2008. Nonetheless, as discussed in section 1, thought
experiments involving long-lasting periods at the ZLB remain useful for clarifying the
theoretical coherence of proposed solution concepts.
     If one assumes a date T many years in the future, the FS-PFE predicted effects
on both output and inflation rapidly become extremely large. However, the effects
predicted by reflective equilibrium with some modest (though positive) degree of
reflection n do not grow in the same way, so that the PFE prediction rapidly becomes
a worse and worse approximation to what one should expect in a reflective equilibrium
with a modest level of n, if the horizon T is very long. Figure 4 illustrates this, in
  60
    See, for example, Del Negro et al. (2013), Chung (2015), McKay et al. (2015), and Cochrane
(2015a).



                                            56
                         Figure 4: Change to fixed interest rate: T = 60, n = 0 − 4


                       400


                       300


                       200




                   y
                       100


                         0
                             0       10           20           30           40           50           60
                                                             quarters

                       100

                        80

                        60
                  π




                        40

                        20

                         0
                             0       10           20           30           40           50           60
                                                             quarters

            Notes: The dashed blue line is the REE. The updates in expectations are shown from yellow line (n = 0,
Figure 4: noReflective     equilibrium
             update) and until the blue (n = 4). outcomes for n = 0 through 4 compared with the

FS-PFE solution, when the nominal interest rate is fixed for 15 years.

the case of the same model calibration as used in previous figures, by considering a
(certainly unrealistic) situation in which the nominal interest rate is expected to be
fixed for 15 years.61
    According to the log-linearized model, an expectation of remaining at the ZLB
for such a long time would, under the FS-PFE analysis, imply extremely large effects
in the initial quarter: log output higher than its steady-state level by 4.36 (output
78 times its steady-state level), and an inflation rate of 442 percent.62 Of course,
such extreme predictions make it foolish to believe the assumptions made in this
calculation (even given the assumption about policy): log-linearization of the model
cannot be expected to yield even a roughly accurate result in the case of such a
  61
      The third panel of the figure is omitted, since the expected path of the nominal interest rate
is independent of the degree of reflection, as in Figure 3. Note also that now only the degrees of
reflection n = 0, 1, 2, 3, 4 are shown in the figure, in order to allow the successive lines to be clearly
distinguished from one another.
   62
      Note that here, as in previous figures, π t is reported as a conventional annualized rate, so that
“π t = 100” means that the price level will be twice as high (100 percent greater) after a year, while
“yt = 100” means that the log of output exceeds its steady-state value by 1.00, so that output is
2.72 times its steady-state level.


                                                            576
massive departure from steady-state conditions, nor do even the assumptions of the
exact NK model — such as the assumption that the fraction 1 − α of firms that
do not reconsider their prices during the quarter simply supply whatever demand
they receive at those prices — make sense under such extreme circumstances. We
mention them only to point out that even granting the validity of our log-linearized
model for purposes of such an exercise, the FS-PFE predictions are not at all a close
approximation to the reflective equilibrium predictions.
    Even if we assume n = 4 (a rather high average degree of reflection), the predicted
increase in log output in quarter zero is instead only 1.11 (output 3 times its steady-
state level), while the inflation rate is predicted to increase only to 31.5 percent per
annum. If we assume a more modest degree of reflection, n = 2, the predicted increase
in log output is only 0.53 (output 1.7 times its steady-state level), and inflation is
predicted to increase only to 10.6 percent. This is still quite a large increase in output
(large enough to make one doubt the realism of using the model for such an analysis),
but these results are not close to the shocking predictions of the FS-PFE analysis.
    The FS-PFE predictions of the log-linearized model become even more extreme
if a longer period at the ZLB is contemplated: both the predicted effects on output
and inflation grow without bound (and quite rapidly) as T is increased. For the kind
of situation described in Proposition 4, but with gt = 0 for all t, the FS-PFE paths
for inflation and output are found by solving (2.13) for all t < T, working backward
from the terminal condition xT = 0 (which represents the unique FS-PFE given the
specification for policy from date T onward). One obtains
                                                τ −1
                                                X
                                      xτ = −           B j b ı̄SR                          (4.1)
                                                j=0

for all τ ≥ 1, where τ ≡ T − t is again the number of periods remaining until policy
is expected to revert to the Taylor rule, and the matrix B and vector b are the ones
corresponding to policy response coefficients φπ = φy = 0. We show in the Appendix
that in this case the matrix B has an eigenvalue µ2 > 1, and that the left eigenvector
e02 associated with this eigenvalue satisfies e02 b 6= 0. It follows that the solution (4.1)
contains a component that grows as µτ2 as τ is made larger (which is to say, as T is
made larger, for any value of t). Thus both elements of xt grow exponentially as T is
increased.63
  63
       Note further that the elements of xt are the logarithm of output and the continuously com-


                                               58
    Cochrane (2015a) objects to the FS-PFE as a solution concept on this ground,
noting that it is implausible to suppose that changes in the specification of policy
only very far in the future (say, a commitment to maintain the low interest rate for
1001 quarters instead of for only 1000 quarters) should have any significant effect
on current economic outcomes. But this unpalatable feature of the FS-PFE is not a
property of our concept of reflective equilibrium, assuming a fixed degree of reflection
n as the length of the policy commitment is increased. Methods similar to those used
to establish Proposition 2 also allow us to show the following.

Proposition 5 Consider the case in which gt = 0 for all t, and let the forward path
of policy be specified as in Proposition 4.Then if the initial conjecture is given by
et (0) = 0 for all t, the reflective equilibrium beliefs {et (n)} for any degree of reflection
n converge to a well-defined limiting value

                                       eSR (n) ≡ lim et (n)
                                                     T →∞

that is independent of n, and this limit is again given by (3.10), where ēPSRF is again
defined in (3.11). The reflective equilibrium outcomes for output, inflation and the
nominal interest rate then converge as well as T is made large, to the values obtained
by substituting the beliefs eSR (n) into the TE relations (2.10) and the reaction function
(2.8).

The proof is given in the Appendix. The result is similar to the one stated in Propo-
sition 2.64 There is one important difference, however: in the present case, the sta-
tionary expectations ēPSRF no longer correspond to a unique FS-PFE associated with
permanent maintenance of the interest rate it = ı̄SR . (There is no unique FS-PFE
under such a policy; instead, as discussed in section 2.2, there is a continuum of PFE
that all converge asymptotically to the steady state in which expectations are given
by ēPSRF .)
pounded rate of inflation; these quantities must both be exponentiated to obtain the level of output
and the factor by which prices increase relative to the previous year’s prices. Thus even if the ele-
ments of xt only grew linearly with T , output and the conventional measure of inflation would both
grow exponentially. Instead, here the latter quantities grow as the exponential of an exponential.
  64
     Note that Proposition 2, as stated earlier, did not require that the reaction function coefficients
satisfy (2.14); it would apply, in particular, to the case φπ = φy = 0, corresponding to fixed interest
rates before and after date T . The only difference here is that Proposition 5 establishes a similar
result even when the response coefficients prior to date T differ from those from date T onward.


                                                59
    Thus if we consider the reflective equilibrium associated with any given finite
degree of reflection n, we find that equilibrium outcomes are essentially the same for
any long enough horizon T . Moreover, for any long enough T , reflective equilibrium
outcomes are nearly constant over time, and close to the constant outcomes that
occur under a reflective equilibrium of the same degree in the case of a permanent
commitment to the fixed interest rate it = ı̄SR . (This last observation follows from
a comparison of (3.10)–(3.11) with (3.6)–(3.7), where the latter equations define the
reflective equilibrium of degree n in the case of a permanent commitment to a given
reaction function.) Thus there is no material difference, as far as reflective equilibrium
is concerned, between commitment to a fixed interest rate for a long but finite time
and a commitment to fix the interest rate permanently.
    This attractive feature of reflective equilibrium does not, however, mean that it
leads to predictions similar to those of Cochrane’s (2015a) “backward stable” PFE
solution. In those cases where the degree of reflection n is large enough for the
reflective equilibrium to correspond nearly to a PFE (as, for example, in the case
that n = 4 or larger, for the parameter values and policy experiment considered in
Figure 3), the PFE that it approximates is the FS-PFE (uniquely defined in the case
of a finite-length interest-rate peg), and not the backward-stable PFE. These solutions
are in fact quite different — not only in the case of large values of T , but even when
T is very short.65 It is thus important to note that one need not accept Cochrane’s
solution concept as a sensible one, in order to avoid the unpalatable prediction of
explosive behavior as T is made large.
  65
    They imply quite different equilibrium responses even when T is arbitrarily short: in a
continuous-time version of the model, they would imply different responses even in the limit as
the continuous length of time T is made infinitesimally small (which is possible because under the
“backward stable” solution, outcomes after date T depend on the policy pursued before that date).
This is one of the especially unattractive features of the “backward stable solution” as a solution
concept: it implies that pegging the interest rate at different levels should lead to different equilib-
rium outcomes over a period of years, even when the pegs in question are to last for only one second!
The concept of a reflective equilibrium for some given degree of reflection n avoids this undesirable
prediction, while also yielding predictions that converge as T is made unboundedly large.




                                                60
4.3     The Paradox Explained
We can now explain the error in the reasoning sketched in the introduction. It is true
that under the assumption of a permanent interest-rate peg, the only forward-stable
PFE are ones that converge asymptotically to an inflation rate determined by the
Fisher equation and the interest-rate target (and thus, lower by one percentage point
for every one percent reduction in the interest rate). But for most possible initial
conjectures (as starting points for the process of belief revision proposed above),
none of these perfect foresight equilibria correspond, even approximately, to reflective
equilibria — even to reflective equilibria for some very high degree of reflection n.
Nor is this because in such cases high-n reflective equilibria correspond to some other
kind of PFE; instead, one generally finds that the belief-revision dynamics fail to
converge to any PFE as n increases, in the case of a permanent interest-rate peg.
    This failure of convergence can be illustrated using results already presented
above. In the case of a policy under which it = ı̄LR forever, if we further assume
that gt = 0 for all t and start from an initial conjecture under which et = 0 for
all t, then the belief-revision dynamics are given by (3.5) for all t, where M in this
equation is now the matrix corresponding to response coefficients φπ = φy = 0, and
we now have et (n) = eLR (n) for all t.66 The solution for general n is again given by
(3.6), where ēPLRF is again defined by (3.7). However, whereas in the Taylor-rule case
considered in section 3, this solution implied that eLR (n) → ēPLRF as n → ∞, this is
no longer true in the case of an interest-rate peg. When φπ = φy = 0, we show in
the Appendix that the matrix M − I has a positive real eigenvalue. This in turn
means that the elements of the matrix exp[n(M − I)] grow explosively as n is made
large, and eLR (n) diverges from ēPLRF , rather than converging to it. Nor does eLR (n)
approach any PFE: the distance between eLR (n) and e∗LR (n) also grows explosively
as n increases.
    It similarly follows (using Proposition 5) that the nearly-stationary outcomes ob-
tained in the case of any long enough finite-length interest-rate peg under a fixed
degree of reflection n do not converge to any limit as n is made large. Thus neither
of the double limits
                               lim lim et (n) = lim eSR (n)
                               n→∞ T →∞              n→∞

  66
   The case considered now is of the same kind as was considered in deriving (3.5), except that we
now set T = 0, and assume φπ = φy = 0.


                                              61
or
                                   lim lim et (n) = lim ePt F
                                  T →∞ n→∞               T →∞

is well-defined in the case of a temporary interest-rate peg.67 It is true (for any finite
length of peg) that a high enough degree of reflection leads to an outcome indis-
tinguishable from a forward-stable PFE; and it is also true (for any finite degree of
reflection) that a long enough finite-length peg leads to reflective equilibrium out-
comes that are indistinguishable from those under a permanent peg. But it does not
follow from these observations that a long enough peg together with a high enough
degree of reflection must lead to anything similar to a forward-stable PFE associated
with a permanent interest-rate peg. It is the failure to recognize this that leads to
paradoxical conclusions in the argument sketched in the introduction.


4.4     Consequences of Maintaining a Low Interest Rate for
        Longer
Consideration of the possible PFE in the case of a permanently fixed interest rate
thus need not provides a correct conclusion as to the likely effects of a commitment
to maintain the nominal interest rate at a low level for a longer time than that for
which the zero lower bound prevents a central bank from implementing its normal
reaction function. In fact, one can easily show that for any given degree of reflection,
commitment to keep the nominal interest rate at a low level for a longer period of
time is necessarily both expansionary and inflationary, at least in the case where (at
the future horizon at which one is lengthening the commitment to fixed-interest-rate
policy) neither exogenous disturbances nor the assumed initial conjecture are sources
of deflationary pressures.

Proposition 6 For a given shock sequence {gt } and a given initial conjecture {et (0)},
consider monetary policies of the kind described in Proposition 4, with ı̄SR < 0 (that
is, an initial fixed interest rate at a level lower than the steady-state nominal interest
rate associated with the long-run inflation target π ∗ ). Suppose also that gt = 0 and
  67
    Note that ēP  F
                 SR , the common limit given in Proposition 3, is still well-defined in this case. But
eSR (n) no longer converges to it as n is made large, nor does eP   t
                                                                      F
                                                                        converge to it as T is made
large. Failure of the “Taylor Principle” invalidates both of those convergence results, relied upon in
Proposition 3.


                                               62
             Figure 5: Change to fixed interest rate: Increasing T , PFE, n = 4 and
             n = 0.5



                                                               (a)
                        10

                         8

                         6




                    y
                         4

                         2

                         0
                             0     2          4          6              8     10        12         14
                                                             quarters
                                                               (b)
                        10

                         8

                         6
                    y




                         4

                         2

                         0
                             0     2          4          6              8     10        12         14
                                                             quarters
                                                               (c)
                        10

                         8

                         6
                    y




                         4

                         2

                         0
                             0     2          4          6              8     10        12         14
                                                             quarters



Figure 5:Each
          Output        responses
              line represents a differentif
                                          endthe
                                              dateinterest
                                                   of the policy,rate
                                                                  from Tis= fixed     atuntil
                                                                             8 (yellow)   zeroT = for  T quarters,
                                                                                                  14 (blue). The first where T
         graph shows the PFE, the second n = 4 and the third n = 0.5.
takes values between 8 and 14. Panel (a): PFE; panel (b): n = 4; panel (c): n = 0.5.

et (0) = 0 for all t ≥ T.68 Then for any fixed ı̄SR and fixed level of reflection n > 0,
increasing the length of the commitment from T to T 0 > T increases both inflation
and output in the reflective equilibrium, in all periods 0 ≤ t < T 0 , while it has no
effect on either variable from date T 0 onward.

The proof is given in the Appendix.
    Figure 5 illustrates the effect indicated in Proposition 6, for the case of a pure
shift in monetary policy (that is, one in which gt = 0 and et (0) = 0 for all t).
  68
    In fact, it should be evident from the proof given in the Appendix that it suffices that gt ≥ 0
and et (0) ≥ 0 for all t ≥ T. What matters for the proof is that there not be factors tending to reduce
                                                  7
output or inflation, apart from the effects of monetary policy, that are anticipated to affect periods
beyond date T .


                                                             63
Model parameters are as in the earlier numerical examples, and as in Figures 3 and
4, ı̄SR is set at the lowest rate allowed by the zero lower bound. In each panel,
the equilibrium paths for output are compared in the case of alternative values of
T , ranging from 8 quarters up to 14 quarters. The successive panels indicate the
outcomes under different degrees of reflection: in panel (a), the FS-PFE outcomes
are shown (corresponding to the limit as n → ∞, given Proposition 4); in panel
(b), the reflective equilibrium outcomes for the case n = 4; and in panel (c), the
corresponding outcomes if instead n = 0.5.
    One sees that with each successive increase in the length of time for which the
low interest rate is to be maintained, output is increased, in each of the periods in
which the interest rate is fixed; this is true regardless of the assumed value of n.69
(Inflation is similarly increased, though we do not show the corresponding responses
for inflation.) In the case of a high enough degree of reflection (such as the case n = 4,
shown in the figure), the reflective equilibrium outcomes are similar to the FS-PFE
outcomes. But even when the degree of reflection is much lower, the outcomes qual-
itatively resemble those predicted by the FS-PFE analysis, even if the quantitative
magnitude of the effects is quite different.
    The quantitative effects can, however, be quite different from those implied by
the FS-PFE analysis; they are particularly different in the case of long periods with a
fixed interest rate. Indeed, while the FS-PFE analysis implies that the effects of any
contractionary shock, no matter how severe, can necessarily be completely counter-
acted by a sufficiently long-lasting commitment to a low interest rate (albeit one that
remains non-negative) — and in fact, that a sufficiently long-lasting commitment can
produce an inflationary boom of arbitrary size — it is possible, under the reflective
equilibrium analysis, to find (if the degree of reflection is small enough) that even a
promise to keep the interest rate permanently at zero would be insufficient to prevent
output and inflation from both falling below their target values. Proposition 5 implies
that there will be only a finite amount of stimulus provided even by a permanent
interest-rate peg, and this need not be enough to prevent output and inflation from
falling in response to a disturbance.
  69
    Except, of course, in the limiting case n = 0. When n = 0, as illustrated in Figure 3, the effects
on output and inflation are independent of the number of remaining periods for which the interest
rate is expected to be fixed, as expectations regarding future policy have no influence.




                                               64
                Figure 7: Effect of increasing period under fixed interest rate at ZLB,
                n = 0.1



                            20

                            10

                             0




                       y
                           −10

                           −20

                           −30
                                 0   2      4       6       8         10    12      14      16      18      20
                                                                 quarters



                           2.5


                             2
                       π




                           1.5


                             1
                                 0   2      4       6       8         10    12      14      16      18      20
                                                                 quarters

                Notes: The dashed blue line is the permanent change to a fixed interest rate. The increases in the time
Figure 6: Output         and
           under the fixed       inflation
                           interest rate is shown responses         in= a8, noreflective
                                                  from yellow line (T                       equilibrium
                                                                               update) and until                  with n = 0.1,
                                                                                                 the blue (T = 2000).

when ρt is reduced for 8 quarters, and the interest rate is kept at zero for a period of
length T . Darker lines indicate progressively longer periods T (to infinity).

    Figure 6 illustrates this possibility. The model parameters are the same as in the
previous numerical illustrations, but we now consider a real disturbance that lowers
the discount rate ρt by 5 percentage points per quarter, and that lasts for 8 quarters.
(The discount rate returns to its low normal value again in quarter 8.) This is a
“Great Depression” magnitude of disturbance: as shown in the figure, in the absence
of any commitment to depart from the normal reaction function after quarter 8 (the
time at which it becomes possible again to implement a standard Taylor rule), this
disturbance causes output to contract by more than 30 percent. The figure shows
the responses of output and inflation to this shock, under a variety of assumptions
about the length of time T for which it is announced that the nominal interest rate
will be held at its lower bound, after which the central bank will revert to its normal
(Taylor-rule) reaction function. In each case, the outcomes shown are for a reflective
equilibrium in which the degree of reflection is only n = 0.1.70
  70
       This is quite a low level of reflection, but is chosen to illustrate our point.



                                                                  5
                                                                65
    The lightest lines correspond to the case T = 8 quarters: that is, the interest
rate will remain at the lower bound only for as long as the Taylor rule would require
an even lower rate than that (which cannot be implemented). Progressively darker
lines indicate the effects of progressively longer commitments; the lines shown are
for periods of 50 years, 100 years, 150 years and so on. The final dash-dotted line
indicates the effect of a commitment to keep the interest rate permanently at the
zero lower bound. In accordance with Proposition 6, each lengthening of the com-
mitment increases both output and inflation; but, in accordance with Proposition 5,
the outcomes associated with all long enough commitments converge to the outcomes
predicted in the case of a permanent commitment. In this example (involving a very
low, though positive, degree of reflection), even the permanent commitment is insuffi-
cient to prevent both output and inflation from falling below their target values in the
quarter of the shock (quarter zero), though the long-lasting low-interest-rate regimes
result in very substantial output booms, and persistently above-target inflation, later
on (that last for decades).
    Thus while our reflective equilibrium analysis confirms the result of PFE anal-
yses using the conventional (FS-PFE) equilibrium selection, according to which a
commitment to keep the interest rate at its lower bound for a longer time should
be expansionary, it also indicates that — given that it is realistic to assume that
people would truncate the belief-revision process at some finite level of reflection,
and quite possibly at a relatively low one — rational-expectations analyses almost
certainly overstate the magnitude of stimulus that one can expect to obtain from
such commitments, even when understood and believed by all individuals. This can
be added to the varied list of reasons that other authors have proposed for doubting
that forward guidance should be as extraordinarily powerful as rational-expectations
analyses using highly forward-looking NK models sometimes suggest.71 While our
analysis still implies that commitments of this kind should provide a potentially pow-
erful tool, of particular usefulness when a central bank is constrained by the zero
lower bound, it increases the possible scope for using other tools, such as fiscal policy,
under such circumstances as well.
 71
      Again see Del Negro et al. (2013), Chung (2015), and McKay et al. (2015).




                                               66
5      Conclusion
Is there, then, reason to fear that a commitment to keep nominal interest rates low
for a longer period of time will be deflationary, rather than inflationary? There is one
way in which such an outcome could easily occur, and that is if the announcement
of the policy change were taken to reveal negative information (previously known
only to the central bank) about the outlook for economic fundamentals, rather than
representing a pure change in policy intentions of the kind analyzed above.72 This
may well have been a problem with the way in which “date-based forward guidance”
was used by the U.S. Federal Reserve during the period 2011-12, as discussed by
Woodford (2012); but it is not an inherent problem with announcing a change in
future policy intentions, only with a particular way of explaining what has changed.
    The idea that a commitment to keep nominal interest rates low for a longer time
should be deflationary, even when understood to represent a pure change in monetary
policy — simply because the only rational-expectations equilibria in which nominal
interest rates remain forever low involve deflation — is instead mistaken, in our view.
If people believe the central bank’s statements about its future policy intentions, and
believe that it will indeed succeed in maintaining a low nominal interest rate, it does
not follow that they must expect a deflationary equilibrium; this does not follow,
even if we suppose that they reason about the economy’s likely future path using a
correct model of how inflation and aggregate output are determined.
    If their reasoning occurs through a process of reflection of the kind modeled in this
paper, then an increase in the expected length of time for which the nominal interest
rate is expected to remain at some effective lower bound should result in expectations
of higher income and higher inflation, regardless of the degree of reflection (as long
as n > 0); and according to our model of temporary equilibrium resulting from
optimizing spending and pricing decisions, such a change in expectations should result
in higher output and inflation. This outcome may or may not approximate the
outcome associated with a perfect foresight equilibrium, depending on the degree of
reflection; in the case of a commitment to keep the nominal interest rate low for a long
enough period, it almost certainly will not resemble any PFE, even approximately.
    This is why it is important to explicitly model the process of belief revision as a
  72
   For further discussion of the way in which the revelation of central-bank information by an-
nounced policy decisions can result in perverse effects, see Garcı́a-Schmidt (2015).



                                            67
result of further reflection, rather than simply assuming that the PFE must yield a
correct prediction. Some macroeconomists may find the proposed alternative solution
concept (reflective equilibrium for some finite degree of reflection n) unappealing, on
the ground that it yields a less definite prediction than the assumption of perfect
foresight (or rational expectations) equilibrium. But while it is true that our con-
clusions about the effects of a given policy commitment depend both on the exact
choice of an initial conjecture and on exactly how far one supposes that people should
continue the belief-revision process, this does not mean that we are unable to draw
any conclusions of relevance to policy deliberations. Our conclusions as to the signs
of the effects just mentioned are independent of those details of the specification of
the reflective equilibrium. Hence it is possible to obtain conclusions of a useful degree
of specificity even when one has little ground for insisting on a single precise model
of expectation formation.
    It should also be noted that while our concept of reflective equilibrium can yield
quite various predictions (for differing assumptions about the initial conjecture and
the degree of reflection) under some circumstances, because the belief-revision dy-
namics diverge (or converge quite slowly), under other circumstances much tighter
predictions are obtained, because of relatively rapid convergence of the belief-revision
dynamics. It can then be a goal of policy design to choose a policy with the property
that the belief-revision dynamics should converge reliably, leading to less uncertainty
about the outcome that should be expected under the policy.
    In the case of a central bank that finds itself seeking additional demand stimulus
when it has already cut its short-term nominal interest rate instrument to its effective
lower bound, a commitment to maintain the instrument at the lower bound for a
long time that can be announced in advance, regardless of how economic conditions
develop, is not an ideal policy response, according to this criterion. Such a policy
should be expected to be stimulative, according to the analysis in this paper; but the
exact degree of stimulus is difficult to predict. It may not be possible to choose a
length of time for which to commit to the ultra-low interest rate that does not run
simultaneously the risk of being too short to be effective, if the degree of reflection n
is too low, and the opposite risk of being wildly inflationary, if the degree of reflection
n is too high.
    But one could achieve a less uncertain outcome, according to the reflective equi-
librium analysis, by committing to maintain a low nominal interest rate until some


                                          68
macroeconomic target is reached, such as the price-level target proposed by Eggerts-
son and Woodford (2003), or the nominal-GDP target path proposed by Woodford
(2012).73 In the case that people carry the belief-revision process forward to a high
degree, they should expect interest rates to be raised relatively soon, under such a
commitment; but if instead they truncate the process at a relatively low degree of
reflection, they should expected interest rates to remain low for much longer. In
either case, belief that the central bank is serious about the policy should change
expectations in a way that results in a substantial, but not extravagant, increase in
current aggregate demand.
    Thus even though the approach proposed here leads to a set of possible predictions
in the case of a given policy specification rather than a point prediction, this does
not mean that the approach yields no conclusions that are useful for policy design.
Instead, insisting on the use of perfect foresight equilibrium analysis simply because
it yields a more precise prediction may lead to large errors. One is reminded of the
dictum of the British logician Carveth Read:74 “It is better to be vaguely right than
exactly wrong.”




  73
      This alternative to date-based forward guidance would also have the advantage of being less
likely to be misunderstood as revealing negative central-bank information about fundamentals, as
discussed by Woodford (2012).
   74
      Read (1920), p. 351. The aphorism is often mis-attributed to John Maynard Keynes.


                                             69
References

 [1] Arad, Ayala, and Ariel Rubinstein, “The 11-20 Money Request Game: A Level-k
     Reasoning Study,” American Economic Review 102: 3561-3573 (2012).

 [2] Bullard, James, “Seven Faces of ‘The Peril’,” Federal Reserve Bank of St. Louis
     Review 92(5): 339-352 (2010).

 [3] Camerer, Colin F., Teck-Hua Ho, and Juin-Kuan Chong, “A Cognitive Hierarchy
     Model of Games,” Quarterly Journal of Economics 119: 861-898 (2004).

 [4] Chung, Hess, “The Effects of Forward Guidance in Three Macro Mod-
     els,” FEDS Notes, Federal Reserve Board, February 26, 2015. [URL:
     http://www.federalreserve.gov/econresdata/notes/feds-notes/2015/effects-
     of-forward-guidance-in-three-macro-models-20150226.html]

 [5] Cochrane, John H., “Determinacy and Identification with Taylor Rules,” Journal
     of Political Economy 119: 565-615 (2011).

 [6] Cochrane, John H., “Monetary Policy with Interest on Reserves,” unpublished,
     October 2014.

 [7] Cochrane, John H., “The New-Keynesian Liquidity Trap,” unpublished, revised
     January 2015a.

 [8] Cochrane, John, “Doctrines Overturned,” The Grumpy Economist, Febru-
     ary 28, 2015b. [URL: http://johnhcochrane.blogspot.com/2015/02/doctrines-
     overturned.html]

 [9] Crawford, Vincent P., Miguel A. Costa-Gomes, and Nagore Iriberri, “Structural
     Models of Nonequilibrium Strategic Thinking: Theory, Evidence and Applica-
     tions,” Journal of Economic Literature 51: 5-62 (2013).

[10] Del Negro, Marco, Marc Giannoni, and Christina Patterson, “The Forward Guid-
     ance Puzzle,” Federal Reserve Bank of New York Staff Report no. 574, revised
     May 2013.




                                       70
[11] Denes, Matthew, Gauti B. Eggertsson, and Sophia Gilbukh, “Deficits, Public
     Debt Dynamics, and Tax and Spending Multipliers,” Economic Journal 123:
     F133-F163 (2013).

[12] Eggertsson, Gauti B., and Michael Woodford, “The Zero Bound on Interest
     Rates and Optimal Monetary Policy,” Brookings Papers on Economic Activity
     2003(1): 139-211.

[13] Evans, George W., and Seppo Honkapohja, Learning and Expectations in
     Macroeconomics, Princeton: Princeton University Press, 2001.

[14] Evans, George W., and Garey Ramey, “Expectation Calculation and Macroeco-
     nomic Dynamics,” American Econ. Review 82: 207-224 (1992).

[15] Evans, George W., and Garey Ramey, “Expectation Calculation, Hyperinflation
     and Currency Collapse,” in H. Dixon and N. Rankin, eds., The New Macroe-
     conomics: Imperfect Markets and Policy Effectiveness, Cambridge: Cambridge
     University Press, 1995.

[16] Evans, George W., and Garey Ramey, “Calculation, Adaptation and Rational
     Expectations,” Macroeconomic Dynamics 2: 156-182 (1998).

[17] Fair, Ray, and John B. Taylor, “Solution and Maximum Likelihood Estimation
     of Dynamic Nonlinear Rational Expectations Models,” Econometrica 51: 1169-
     1185 (1983).

[18] Friedman, Milton, “The Role of Monetary Policy,” American Economic Review
     58: 1-17 (1968).

[19] Garcı́a-Schmidt, Mariana, “Monetary Policy Surprises and Expectations,” un-
     published, Columbia University, August 2015.

[20] Guesnerie, Roger, “An Exploration of the Eductive Justifications of the Rational
     Expectations Hypothesis,” American Economic Review 82: 1254-1278 (1992).

[21] Guesnerie, Roger, “Macroeconomic and Monetary Policies from the Eductive
     Viewpoint,” in K. Schmidt-Hebbel and C. Walsh, eds., Monetary Policy Under
     Uncertainty and Learning, Santiago: Central Bank of Chile, 2008.


                                       71
[22] Hirsch, Morris W., and Stephen Smale, Differential Equations, Dynamical Sys-
     tems, and Linear Algebra, New York: Academic Press, 1974.

[23] Jury, Eliahu I., Theory and Application of the z-Transform Method, New York:
     Wiley, 1964.

[24] Keynes, John Maynard, The General Theory of Employment, Interest and
     Money, London: Macmillan, 1936.

[25] McCallum, Bennett T., “On Non-Uniqueness in Rational Expectations Models:
     An Attempt at Perspective,” Journal of Monetary Economics 11: 139-168 (1983).

[26] McCallum, Bennett T., “Role of the Minimal State Variable Criterion in Rational
     Expectations Models,” International Tax and Public Finance 6: 621-639 (1999).

[27] McKay, Alisdair, Emi Nakamura, and Jon Steinsson, “The Power of Forward
     Guidance Revisited,” unpublished, July 2015.

[28] Nagel, Rosemarie, “Unraveling in Guessing Games: An Experimental Study,”
     American Economic Review 85: 1313-1326 (1995).

[29] Phelps, Edmund S., “The Trouble with ‘Rational Expectations’ and the Prob-
     lem of Inflation Stabilization,” in R. Frydman and E.S. Phelps, eds., Individual
     Forecasting and Aggregate Outcomes, Cambridge: Cambridge University Press,
     1983.

[30] Read, Carveth, Logic: Deductive and Inductive, London: Simkin, Marshall,
     1920.

[31] Schmitt-Grohé, Stephanie, and Martı́n Uribe, “Liquidity Traps: An Interest-
     Rate-Based Exit Strategy,” NBER Working Paper no. 16514, November 2010.

[32] Stahl, Dale O., “Boundedly Rational Rule Learning in a Guessing Game,” Games
     and Economic Behavior 16: 303-330 (1996).

[33] Stahl, Dale O., and Paul W. Wilson, “Experimental Evidence on Players’ Models
     of Other Players,” Journal of Economic Behavior and Organization 25: 309-327
     (1994).



                                       72
[34] Stahl, Dale O., and Paul W. Wilson, “On Players’ Models of Other Players:
     Theory and Experimental Evidence,” Games and Economic Behavior 10: 218-
     254 (1995).

[35] Taylor, John B., “Discretion versus Policy Rules in Practice,” Carnegie-
     Rochester Conference Series on Public Policy 39: 195-214 (1993).

[36] Werning, Ivan, “Managing a Liquidity Trap: Monetary and Fiscal Policy,” un-
     published, April 2012.

[37] Woodford, Michael, Interest and Prices: Foundations of a Theory of Monetary
     Policy, Princeton: Princeton University Press, 2003.

[38] Woodford, Michael, “Methods of Policy Accommodation at the Interest-Rate
     Lower Bound,” in The Changing Policy Landscape, Kansas City: Federal Re-
     serve Bank of Kansas City, 2012.

[39] Woodford, Michael, “Macroeconomic Analysis Without the Rational Expecta-
     tions Hypothesis,” Annual Review of Economics 5: 303-346 (2013).

[40] Yun, Tack, “Nominal Price Rigidity, Money Supply Endogeneity, and Business
     Cycles,” Journal of Monetary Economics 37: 345-370 (1996).




                                     73
                                         APPENDIX

A     Matrices of Coefficients and their Properties
A.1     Temporary Equilibrium Solution
The system of three equations given in the text can be solved to obtain

                                            xt = Cet + cω t                                               (A.1)

where we define the vectors
                                                                     
                         y                         e1,t                  g
                   xt = t ,                   et =        ,         ωt = t ,
                         πt                        e2,t                  ı̄t
and the matrices
                                                                                      
                   1        1   −σφπ (1 − α)β                              1       1 −σ
              C=                                   ,               c=                      ,
                   ∆        κ (1 + σφy )(1 − α)β                           ∆       κ −κσ

and use the shorthand notation ∆ ≡ 1 + σφy + σκφπ ≥ 1. (This last inequality, that
allows us to divide by ∆, holds under the sign restrictions maintained in the text.)
Given this solution for xt , the solution for the nominal interest rate is obtained by
substituting the solutions for inflation and output into the reaction function (2.8).
    This solution also allows us to solve for the summary variables at that decision-
makers need to forecast, resulting in

                                           at = M et + mω t

where we define
                            σβ(1−α)(1+σφy −φπ )
        "                                         #                    "                                       #
            1+σκ−β∆
      1       1−β                   1−β                            1
                                                                             1+σκ−β∆
                                                                               1−β
                                                                                                − σ(1+σκ)
                                                                                                     1−β
M=                             β(1+σφy −α∆)           ,       m=                κ                     σκ           .
      ∆        κ                                                   ∆
                                                                           (1−α)(1−αβ)
                                                                                               − (1−α)(1−αβ)
          (1−α)(1−αβ)              1−αβ


A.2     Perfect Foresight Equilibrium Dynamics
It follows from the discussion in the text (citing Woodford, 2003, chap. 4) that the
PFE dynamics can be written in the form

                                       xt = B xt+1 + b (ρt − ı̄t )                                        (A.2)

where we define
                                                                                      
                            1       1   σ(1 − βφπ )                            1       σ
                   B=       ∆
                                                        ,           b=         ∆
                                                                                           .
                                    κ σκ + β(1 + σφy )                                 σκ

                                                  74
    Alternatively, we can characterize PFE dynamics by the requirement that et must
equal e∗t for all t. From (2.20) it follows that a sequence of vectors of expectations
{et } constitute PFE expectations if and only if
                                      ∞
                                      X                  ∞
                                                         X
                  et   =    e∗t   =         ψ j et+j +         ϕj ω t+j
                                      j=1                j=1
                       =    ψ 1 et+1 + ϕ1 ω t+1 + Λ et+1
                       =    (I − Λ)M et+1 + (I − Λ)m ω t+1 + Λ et+1
                       =    [(I − Λ)M + Λ] et+1 + (I − Λ)m ω t+1                   (A.3)
for all t ≥ 0.
    The dynamics implied by (A.3) are in fact equivalent to those implied by (A.2).
Using (A.1) together with (A.3) implies that the PFE dynamics of output and infla-
tion must satisfy
      xt    =   C [(I − Λ)M + Λ] et+1 + C(I − Λ)m ω t+1 + c ω t
            =   C [(I − Λ)M + Λ] C −1 [xt+1 − cω t+1 ] + C(I − Λ)m ω t+1 + c ω t .
But this relation is in fact equivalent to (A.2), given that our definitions above imply
that
                              C [(I − Λ)M + Λ] C −1 = B,                            (A.4)
                           C (I − Λ)m = Bc + b · [−βσ −1 0],
                                      c = b · [σ −1 − 1].

A.3        Properties of the Matrix M
A number of results turn on the eigenvalues of the matrix
                               " σφ +σκφ −σκ (1−α)σβ(1+σφ −φ ) #
                             1 − y 1−βπ                1−β
                                                             y π

               M −I =                  κ           β(1+σφy )−∆   .
                            ∆     (1−α)(1−αβ)         1−αβ


We first note that the determinant of the matrix is given by
                                                        (1 − β)
                                                                     
                                     σκ
            Det(M − I) =                          φπ +          φy − 1 .
                              ∆(1 − β)(1 − αβ)             κ

Under our sign assumptions, the factor pre-multiplying the factor in parentheses
is necessarily positive. Hence the determinant is non-zero (and the matrix is non-
singular) if
                                   (1 − β)
                             φπ +          φy − 1 6= 0.                      (A.5)
                                      κ

                                                75
(In this case the steady-state vector of expectations (3.7) is well-defined, as asserted
in the text.)
    For any 2 × 2 real matrix A, both eigenvalues have negative real part if and only
if Det[A] > 0 and Tr[A] < 0.75 From the result above, the first of these conditions
is satisfied if the left-hand side of (A.5) is positive, which is to say, if the Taylor
Principle (2.14) is satisfied. The trace of M − I is given by

                            1 σ(φy + κφπ − κ) σκφπ + (1 − β)(1 + σφy )
                                                                             
        Tr(M − I) = −                            +                              .
                            ∆         1−β                    1 − αβ

The second term inside the parentheses is necessarily positive under our sign as-
sumptions, and the first term is positive as well if the Taylor Principle is satisfied,
since
                                                      φy (1 − β)
                       
                              φy
                                                                  
     φy + κφπ − κ = κ φπ +        − 1 > κ φπ +                   − 1 > 0.        (A.6)
                               κ                           κ

Hence the Taylor Principle is a sufficient condition for Tr[M − I] < 0. It follows
that (given our other sign assumptions) the Taylor Principle is both necessary and
sufficient for both eigenvalues of M − I to have negative real part.
    If instead the left-hand side of (A.5) is negative, Det[M − I] < 0, and as a
consequence the matrix must have two real eigenvalues of opposite sign.76 Thus one
eigenvalue is positive in this case, as asserted in the text. Note that this is the case
that obtains if φπ = φy = 0.

A.4        A Further Implication of the Taylor Principle
We are also interested in the eigenvalues of the related matrix A(λ)M − I, where for
an arbitrary real number −1 ≤ λ ≤ 1, we define
                                                            !
                                        λ(1−δ 1 )
                                         1−λδ 1
                                                     0
                           A(λ) ≡                 λ(1−δ 2 )   .
                                           0       1−λδ 2


(Note that in the limiting case λ = 1, this reduces to the matrix M −I, just discussed.)
In the case that the Taylor principle (2.14) is satisfied, we can show that for any
−1 ≤ λ ≤ 1, both eigenvalues of A(λ)M − I have negative real part. This follows
again from a consideration of the determinant and trace of the matrix (generalizing
the above discussion).
 75
      See, for example, Hirsch and Smale (1974), p. 96.
 76
      Again see Hirsch and Smale (1974), p. 96.



                                               76
   Since
                                           σ(1−α)β(φπ −1−σφy )λ
                           " ∆−λ(1+σκ)                          #
                          1 − 1−βλ       −        1−βλ
              A(λ)M − I =        κλ           ∆−βλ(1+σφy )        ,
                          ∆ (1−α)(1−αβλ)    − 1−αβλ

we have
                              ∆ − λ(β(1 + σφy ) + 1 + σκ) + βλ2
             Det(A(λ)M − I) =                                   .
                                    ∆(1 − βλ)(1 − αβλ)

Note that under our sign assumptions, the denominator is necessarily positive. The
numerator defines a function g(λ), a convex function (a parabola) with the properties

                          g 0 (1) = (β − 1) − βσφy − κσ < 0

and
                                        (1 − β)
                                                     
                         g(1) = κσ φπ +         φy − 1 ,
                                           κ
so that g(1) > 0 if and only if the Taylor Principle is satisfied. Hence the function
g(λ) > 0 for all λ ≤ 1, with the consequence that Det[A(λ)M − I] > 0 for all |λ| ≤ 1,
if and only if the Taylor Principle is satisfied.
    The trace of the matrix is given by

                                   1 ∆ − λ(1 + σκ) ∆ − βλ(1 + σφy )
                                                                        
          Tr(A(λ)M − I) = −                          +                     .
                                  ∆         1 − βλ           1 − αβλ

The denominators of both terms inside the parentheses are positive for all |λ| ≤ 1,
and we necessarily have ∆ > 0 under our sign assumptions as well. The numerator
of the first term inside the parentheses is also positive, since

  ∆ − λ(1 + σκ) = σ [κφπ + φy − κ] + (1 − λ)(1 + σκ) ≥ σ [κφπ + φy − κ] > 0

if the Taylor Principle is satisfied, again using (A.6). And the numerator of the second
term inside the parentheses is positive as well, since

                ∆ − βλ(1 + σφy ) = (1 − βλ)(1 + σφy ) + κσφπ > 0

under our sign assumptions. Thus the Taylor Principle is also a sufficient condition
for Tr[A(λ)M − I] < 0 for all |λ| ≤ 1.
    It then follows that the Taylor Principle is necessary and sufficient for both eigen-
values of the matrix A(λ)M − I to have negative real part, in the case of any |λ| < 1.
We use this result in the proof of Proposition 1.

                                         77
A.5     Properties of the Matrix B
Necessary and sufficient conditions for both eigenvalues of a 2 × 2 matrix B to have
modulus less than 1 are that (i) DetB < 1; (ii) DetB + TrB > −1; and (iii)
DetB − TrB > −1. In the case of the matrix B defined above, we observe that

                                      ∆ DetB = β,                                     (A.7)

                           ∆ TrB = 1 + κσ + β(1 + σφy ).
   From these facts we observe that our general sign assumptions imply that

                                     ∆ DetB < ∆,

                              ∆ (DetB + TrB + 1) > 0.
Thus (since ∆ is positive) conditions (i) and (ii) from the previous paragraph neces-
sarily hold. We also find that
                                                       1−β
                                                                  
              ∆ (DetB − TrB + 1) = κσ φπ +                    φy − 1 ,
                                                         κ
from which it follows that condition (iii) is also satisfied if and only if the quantity
in the square brackets is positive. Thus we conclude that both eigenvalues of B have
modulus less than 1 if and only if the Taylor Principle (2.14) is satisfied.
    In the case that the Taylor Principle is violated (as in the case of a fixed interest
rate, in which case φπ = φy = 0), since DetB = µ1 µ2 and TrB = µ1 + µ2 , where
(µ1 , µ2 ) are the two eigenvalues of B, the fact that condition (iii) fails to hold implies
that
                                  (µ1 − 1)(µ2 − 1) < 0.                                (A.8)
This condition is inconsistent with the eigenvalues being a pair of complex conjugates,
so in this case there must be two real eigenvalues. Condition (A.8) further implies that
one must be greater than 1, while the other is less than 1. Condition (A.7) implies that
DetB > 0, which requires that the two real eigenvalues both be non-zero and of the
same sign; hence both must be positive. Thus when the Taylor Principle is violated
(i.e., the quantity in (A.5) is negative), there are two real eigenvalues satisfying

                                  0 < µ1 < 1 < µ2 ,

as asserted in section 2.2.
    We further note that in this case, e02 , the (real) left eigenvector associated with
eigenvalue µ2 , must be such that e02 b 6= 0 (a result that is relied upon in section 4.2).
The vector v20 6= 0 must satisfy

                                    e02 [B − µ2 I] = 0

                                           78
to be a left eigenvector. The first column of this relation implies that (1 − µ2 )e2,1 +
κe2,2 = 0, where we use the notation e2,j for the jth element of eigenvector e02 . Since
κ > 0 and µ2 > 1, this requires that e2,1 and e2,2 must both be non-zero and have the
same sign. But since both elements of b have the same sign, this implies that e02 b 6= 0.
   Finally, we note that whenever (A.5) holds, regardless of the sign, the eigenvalues
must satisfy
                                (µ1 − 1)(µ2 − 1) 6= 0,
so that B has no eigenvalue equal exactly to 1. This means that the matrix B − I
must be non-singular, which is the condition needed for existence of unique steady-
state levels of output and inflation consistent with a PFE. In the case of constant
fundamentals ω t = ω̄ for all t, the unique steady-state solution to (A.2) is then given
by xt = x̄ for all t, where

                         x̄ ≡ (I − B)−1 b [(1 − β)σ −1 ḡ − ı̄].                    (A.9)

    Note that condition (A.5) is also the condition under which M − I is non-singular,
as shown above. Moreover, since I − Λ is non-singular, M − I is non-singular if and
only if (I − Λ)(M − I) = [(I − Λ)M + Λ] − I is non-singular. This is the condition
under which equation (A.3) has a unique steady-state solution, in which et = ē for
all t, with
                                 ē ≡ (I − M )−1 m ω̄.
This solution for steady-state PFE expectations is consistent with (A.9) because of
the identities linking the M and B matrices noted above.

A.6     Convergence of the PFE Dynamics
As noted in the text in section 2.2, in the case that φπ = φy = 0, there exists a
continuum of PFE solutions that remain bounded for all t, described by equations
(2.16) for alternative values of the coefficient χ. Here we show that if after some finite
date T , both ı̄t and ρt take constant values, then each of this continuum of solutions
has the property that

                          lim π t = π LR ,      lim yt = yLR ,
                          t→∞                  y→∞


where the limiting values are independent of χ and are given by (2.17). Moreover, the
limiting values to which the PFE dynamics converge correspond to the PFE steady
state (A.9).




                                          79
   If ı̄t = ı̄LR and ρt = ρLR for all t ≥ T, then for any t ≥ T, (2.16) takes the form
                                             ( t−T                          t
                                                                                                  )
                   ρ   −  ı̄ LR
                                              X                           X
xt = v1 (e01 b) LR              − v2 (e02 b)       µ−j
                                                    2 · (ρLR − ı̄LR ) +         µ−j
                                                                                 2 (ρt−j − ı̄t−j )
                     1 − µ1                    j=1                      j=t+1−T

                                               + χ v2 µ−t
                                                        2
              v1 (e01 b)   v2 (e02 b)
                                                  
     =                   −            (1 − µT2 −t ) · (ρLR − ı̄LR ) + C v2 µ−t        −t
                                                                            2 + χ v2 µ2
              1 − µ1       µ2 − 1
where
                                            T −1
                                            X
                                      C ≡          µs2 (ρs − ı̄s )
                                             s=0
has a value independent of t. Given that 0 < µ−1         2 < 1, we see immediately from this
that xt converges to
                               v1 (e01 b)       v2 (e02 b)
                                                          
                      xLR ≡                +                 · (ρLR − ı̄LR )
                               1 − µ1            µ2 − 1
as t → ∞. This limiting vector is independent of the value of χ.
    Finally, we note that
                                         v1 (e01 b)       v2 (e02 b)
                                                                    
        (I − B) xLR = (I − B)                       −                  · (ρLR − ı̄LR )
                                          1 − µ1           µ2 − 1
                            (1 − µ1 )v1 (e01 b)          (1 − µ2 )v2 (e02 b)
                                                                            
                       =                            −                          · (ρLR − ı̄LR )
                                  1 − µ1                       µ2 − 1
                       = [v1 (e01 b) + v2 (e02 b)] · (ρLR − ı̄LR )
                       = b · (ρLR − ı̄LR ),
so that xLR is just the vector of steady-state values defined in (A.9). Our definitions
of B and b above further imply that when φπ = φy = 0,
                                               1−β 
                                      −1        − κ
                              (I − B) b =                ,
                                                  −1
so that (A.9) implies the values given in (2.17).


B        Proofs of Propositions
B.1      Proof of Proposition 1
As discussed in the text, under the hypotheses of the proposition, there must exist a
date T̄ such that the fundamental disturbances {ω t } can be written in the form
                                                   K
                                                   X
                                   ωt = ω∞ +              aω,k λt−
                                                                k
                                                                   T̄

                                                    k=1


                                              80
for all t ≥ T̄ , and the initial conjecture can also be written in the form
                                                      K
                                                      X
                                 et (0) = e∞ (0) +          ae,k (0)λt−
                                                                     k
                                                                       T̄

                                                      k=1

for all t ≥ T̄ , where |λk | < 1 for all k = 1, . . . , K. (There is no loss of generality
in using the same date T̄ and the same finite set of convergence rates {λk } in both
expressions.) With a driving process and initial condition of this special form, the
solution to the system of differential equations (2.21) will be of the form
                                                      K
                                                      X
                                 et (n) = e∞ (n) +          ae,k (n)λt−
                                                                     k
                                                                       T̄

                                                      k=1

for all t ≥ T̄ , for each n ≥ 0. We then need simply determine the evolution as n
increases of the finite set of values et (n) for 0 ≤ t ≤ T − 1, together with the finite set
of coefficients e∞ (n) and ae,k (n). This is a set of 2(T̄ + K + 1) functions of n, which
we write as the vector-valued function e(n) in the text.
    In the case of any belief sequences and disturbances of the form assumed in the
above paragraph, it follows from (2.20) that the implied correct beliefs will be of the
form
                                                  XK
                             e∗t (n) = e∗∞ (n) +     a∗e,k (n)λt−
                                                               k
                                                                 T̄

                                                      k=1

for all t ≥ T̄ , where
                                   e∗∞ (n) = M e∞ (n) + m ω ∞ ,
and
                              a∗e,k (n) = A(λk ) [M ae,k (n) + m aω,k ]
for each k = 1, . . . , K. We further observe that for any t < T̄ ,
                −t−1
              T̄X
e∗t (n)   =            [ψ j et+j (n) + ϕj ω t+j ] + ΛT̄ −t−1 [M e∞ (n) + mω ∞ ]
               j=1
                                                     K
                                                     X
                                               +           λ−1
                                                            k Λ
                                                                T̄ −t−1
                                                                        A(λk ) [M ae,k (n) + maω,k ].
                                                     k=1

Thus the sequence {e∗t (n)} can also be summarized by a set of 2(T̄ + K + 1) functions
of n, and each of these is a linear function of the elements of the vectors e(n) and ω.
    It then follows that the dynamics (2.21) can be written in the more compact form

                                      ė(n) = V e(n) + W ω,                                   (B.10)

                                                81
where the elements of the matrices V and W are given by the coefficients of the
equations in the previous paragraph. Suppose that we order the elements of e(n) as
follows: the first two elements are the elements of e0 , the next two elements are the
elements of e1 , and so on, through the elements of eT̄ −1 ; the next two elements are
the elements of ae,1 , the two elements after that are the elements of ae,2 , and so on,
through the elements of ae,K ; and the final two elements are the elements of e∞ . Then
we observe that the matrix V is of the form
                                                   
                                           V11 V12
                                  V =                 ,                           (B.11)
                                            0 V22

where the first 2T̄ rows are partitioned from the last 2(K + 1) rows, and the columns
are similarly partitioned.
    Moreover, the block V11 of the matrix is of the block upper-triangular form
                                                                 
                                −I v12 · · · v1,T̄ −1 v1,T̄
                               0 −I · · · v             v2,T̄ 
                                               2,T̄ −1           
                      V11 =  ...      .. . .     ..        ..
                                                                  ,            (B.12)
                                                                 
                                        .     .    .         .
                                                                 
                               0      0 ···     −I     vT̄ −1,T̄ 
                                 0     0 ···      0       −I

where now each block of the matrix        is 2 × 2. Furthermore, when V22 is similarly
partitioned into 2 × 2 blocks, it takes   the block-diagonal form
                                                                    
                          A(λ1 )M − I      ···        0           0
                               ..          ...        ..         .. 
               V22 = 
                                .                      .          . .
                                                                     
                                                                               (B.13)
                               0          · · · A(λK )M − I      0  
                                0          ···        0        M −I

    These results allow us to determine the eigenvalues of V . The block-triangular
form (B.11) implies that the eigenvalues of V consist of the 2T̄ eigenvalues of V11
and the 2(K + 1) eigenalues of V22 (the two diagonal blocks). Similarly, the block-
triangular form (B.12) implies that the eigenvalues of V11 consist of the eigenvalues
of the diagonal blocks (each of which is −I), which means that the eigenvalue -
1 is repeated 2T̄ times. Finally, the block-diagonal form (B.13) implies that the
eigenvalues of V22 consist of the eigenvalues of the diagonal blocks: the two eigenvalues
of A(λk )M − I, for each k = 1, . . . , K, and the two eigenvalues of M − I.
    Using the results in section A.3, it follows from the hypothesis that the reaction
function coefficients satisfy (2.14) and the hypothesis that |λk | < 1 for each k that
all of the eigenvalues of M − I and of each of the matrices A(λk )M − I have negative
real part. Since all of the other eigenvalues of V are equal to -1, all 2(T̄ + K + 1)
eigenvalues of V have negative real part. This implies that V is non-singular, so that

                                           82
there is a unique rest point for the dynamics (B.10), defined by (3.3) in the text. It
also implies that the dynamics (B.10) converge asymptotically to that rest point as n
goes to infinity, for any initial condition e(0) (Hirsch and Smale, 1974, pp. 90-95).77
    The rest point to which e(n) converges is easily seen to correspond to the unique
PFE that belongs to the same linear space L2 . Beliefs in L2 constitute a PFE if
and only if e∗ = e. From our characterization above of e∗ , this is equivalent to the
requirement that V e + W = 0, which holds if and only if e = eP F , the unique rest
point of the system (B.10).
    Finally, the paths of output and inflation in any reflective equilibrium are given
by (A.1), given the solution for {et (n)}. Using (2.8), one obtains a similar linear
equation for the nominal interest rate each period. It then follows that for any t, the
reflective equilibrium values for yt , π t , and it converge to the FS-PFE values as n is
made large. Furthermore, the complete sequences of values for these three variables
for any value of n depend on only the finite number of elements of the vector e(n), in
such a way that for any  > 0, there exists an ˜ > 0 such that it is guaranteed that
each of the variables yt , π t , and it are within distance  of their FS-PFE values for
all t as long as |e(n) − eP F | < ˜. The convergence of e(n) to eP F then implies the
existence of a finite n() for which the latter condition is satisfied, regardless of how
small ˜ needs to be. This proves the proposition.

B.2      Comparison with a Discrete Model of Belief Revision
Here we note that the convergence result in Proposition 1 would not hold with the
same generality were we instead to assume a discrete model of belief revision in which,
instead of the continuous model of belief revision (2.21), we iterate the mapping

                                       et (N + 1) = e∗t (N )                                  (B.14)

for N = 0, 1, 2, . . . , where for each N , {e∗t (N )} is the sequence of correct beliefs
implied by average expectations specified by the sequence {et (N )}. As with the con-
tinuous model, we might take as given some “naive” initial conjecture, and then
consider how it evolves as a result of further iterations of the mapping. And as with
the continuous model, if the process converges to a fixed point, such a fixed point
must correspond to PFE beliefs.
  77
     Of course, it is important to recognize that this result only establishes convergence for initial
conjectures that belong to the linear space L2 . The result also only establishes convergence under
the assumption that the linear dynamics (B.10) apply at all times; this depends on assuming that
the reaction function (2.8) can be implemented at all times, which requires that the zero lower
bound never bind. Thus we only establish convergence for all those initial conjectures such that the
dynamics implied by (2.21) never cause the zero lower bound to bind. There is however a large set
of initial conditions for which this is true, given that the unconstrained dynamics are asymptotically
convergent.


                                               83
                            Figure 4: Change Discrete Updating, 200 Quarters,N=0-4



                      5000


                            0


                    −5000




                y
                    −10000


                    −15000
                                0       20   40   60   80     100      120   140   160   180     200
                                                            quarters

                         60

                         40

                         20
                    π




                            0

                        −20

                        −40
                                0       20   40   60   80     100      120   140   160   180     200
                                                            quarters
                                    9
                                x 10
                            6
Figure 7: Reflective equilibrium outcomes for N = 0 through 4 (progressively darker
                    5                                          N=0
lines) when the Taylor-rule intercept is reduced for 200 quarters,
                                                               N=1 as in Figure 2; but
                    4
a discrete process of3 iterative belief revision is assumed.   N=2
                        i




                                                                                               N=3
                                                                                               N=4
                            2

    However, the conditions
                     1         for convergence of the discrete process, while related to
the conditions under 0
                       0
                         which
                          20   40
                                 the 60continuous
                                           80   100
                                                       process
                                                        120 140
                                                                converges,
                                                                 160  180
                                                                            are more stringent.
                                                                           200
Convergence need not obtain under the conditions
                                              quarters       hypothesized in Proposition 1, as
the following numerical example illustrates. In Figure 7, the same policy experiment
is considered as in Figure 2, namely, the intercept of the Taylor rule is expected to be
lowered for 200 quarters, after which it is expected to return to the level consistent
with the inflation target π ∗ . All model parameters are also the same as in Figure 2,
and the initial conjecture is assumed to be et (0) = 0 for all t, also as in the Figure 2.
However, in Figure 7 the iterative model of belief revision (B.14) is assumed, whereas
the continuous model (2.21) is assumed in Figure 2.
    The figure plots the implied TE dynamics of output and inflation for iterations
N = 0, 1, 2, 3, and 4. The belief-revision dynamics are seen to be explosive. The first
revision of the initial conjecture (which takes account of the fact that it is predictable
that if people maintain the initial beliefs, consistent with the unperturbed steady
state, the temporary policy will lead to higher inflation and output) raises both
output and inflation further. But anticipation of these effects (and the associated
increase in the interest rate that they must provoke) should actually lead output and
inflation to be lower in stage N = 2. Anticipation of the N = 2 outcomes (which
imply an even deeper cut in the interest rate) then leads output and inflation to


                                                            84
                                                             3
be high again in stage N = 3, and to an even greater extent than in stage N = 1.
Anticipating of this then leads output and inflation to be low again in stage N = 4, to
an even greater extent than in stage N = 2. The oscillations continue, growing larger
and larger, as N is increased; but as the figure shows, the predicted expectations are
already very extreme after only four iterations of the belief updating mapping.
    It is not accidental that the unstable dynamics of belief revision in this case are
oscillatory. In terms of the compact notation introduced in the proof of Proposition 1
(under the assumption of exponentially convergent fundamentals and average beliefs),
the discrete model of belief revision (B.14) replaces the continuous dynamics (B.16)
by the discrete process

                         e(N + 1) = (I + V ) e(N ) + W ω.                                (B.15)

This process is unstable if not all eigenvalues of I + V are of modulus less than 1.
Since the eigenvalues of I + V are equal to 1 + µi , where µi is an eigenvalue of V ,
and we have shown above that all eigenvalues of V have negative real part, I + V
cannot have a real eigenvalue greater than 1. It can, however, have a real eigenvalue
with modulus greater than 1, if V has a real eigenvalue that is less than -2. This is
the case shown in Figure 7, in which a large negative eigenvalue results in explosive
oscillations.
    We feel, however, that the kind of unstable process of belief revision illustrated
by Figure 7 is unrealistic, as it is requires that at each stage in the reasoning, one
must conjecture that everyone else should reason in one precise way, even though that
assumed reasoning changes dramatically from each stage in the process of reflection
to the next. The continuous process of belief revision proposed in the text avoids
making such an implausible assumption.

B.3     Proof of Proposition 2
It has already been shown in the text that under the assumptions of the proposition,
we have et (n) = eLR (n) for all t ≥ T, where eLR (n) is given by (3.6). It has also been
shown that for any τ ≥ 1, the solution for eτ (n), where τ ≡ T − t is the number
of periods remaining until the regime change, is independent of T . The functions
{eτ (n)} further satisfy the system of differential equations
                                                  τ −1
                                                  X
            ėτ (n) = −eτ (n) + (I − Λ)                  Λj−1 [M eτ −j (n) + m2 ı̄SR ]
                                                  j=1
                                      τ −1
                                + Λ          [M eLR (n) + m2 ı̄LR ]                      (B.16)

derived in the text, together with the initial conditions eτ (0) = 0 for all τ ≥ 1.
(Equation (B.16) repeats equation (3.9) from the text.)

                                             85
   We wish to calculate the behavior of the solution to this system as τ → ∞ for an
arbitrary value of n. It is convenient to use the method of z-transforms (Jury, 1964).
For any n, let the z-transform of the sequence {eτ (n)} for τ ≥ 1 be defined as the
function                                   ∞
                                          X
                               Xn (z) ≡        eτ (n) z 1−τ .                   (B.17)
                                             τ =1

Here Xn (z) is a vector-valued function; each element is a function of the complex
number z, defined for complex numbers |z| > 1/ρ, where ρ is the minimum of the
radii of the convergence of the two series.
    Differentiating (B.17) with respect to n, and substituting (B.16) for ėτ (n) in the
resulting equation, we obtain an evolution equation for the z-transform:
                 ∞                          ∞
                                                     "    ∞                        ∞
                                                                                           #
                X                         X              X                        X
Ẋn (z) = −         eτ (n)z 1−τ + (I − Λ)     Λj z −j M      eτ (n)z −τ + m2 ı̄SR     z −τ
                τ =1                          j=0             τ =1                 τ =1
                                    ∞
                                    X
                                +         Λj z −j [M eLR (n) + m2 ı̄LR ]
                                    j=0

             −Xn (z) + (I − Λ)(I − Λz −1 )−1 z −1 M Xn (z) + (z − 1)−1 m2 ı̄SR
                                                                              
         =
                        + (I − Λz −1 )−1 [M eLR (n) + m2 ı̄LR ] ,                (B.18)

which holds for any n > 0 and any z in the region of convergence. We note that the
right-hand side of (B.18) is well-defined for all |z| > 1.
    The z-transform of the initial condition is simply X0 (z) = 0 for all z. Thus we
wish to find functions {Xn (z)} for all n ≥ 0, each defined on the region |z| > 1, that
satisfy (B.18) for all n and all |z| > 1, together with the initial condition X0 (z) = 0
for all z. If we can find such a solution, then for any n we can find the implied
sequence {et (n)} by inverse z-transformation of the function Xn (z).
    We note that the dynamics of Xn (z) implied by (B.18) is independent for each
value of z. (This is the advantage of z-transformation of the original system of
equations (B.16).) Thus for each value of z such that |z| > 1, we have an independent
first-order ordinary differential equation to solve for Xn (z), with the single initial
condition X0 (z) = 0. This equation has a closed-form solution for each z, given by

      Xn (z) = (1 − z −1 )−1 [I − exp(n(M − I))] (I − M )−1 · m2 ı̄LR
               + (z − 1)−1 [I − exp(−nΦ(z))] Φ(z)−1 (I − Λ)(I − Λz −1 )−1
                                          ·m2 (ı̄SR − ı̄LR )              (B.19)

for all n ≥ 0, where

                       Φ(z) ≡ I − (I − Λ)(I − Λz −1 )−1 z −1 M.

                                            86
Note also that the expression on the right-hand side of (B.19) is an analytic function
of z everywhere in the complex plane outside the unit circle, and can be expressed
as a sum of powers of z −1 that converges everywhere in that region. Such a series
expansion of Xn (z) for any n allows us to recover the series of coefficients {eτ (n)}
associated with the reflective equilibrium with degree of reflection n.
    For any value of n ≥ 0, we are interested in computing

                               eSR (n) ≡ lim et (n) = lim eτ (n).
                                              T →∞         τ →∞

The final value theorem for z-transforms78 implies that

                                   lim eτ (n) = lim (z − 1)Xn (z)
                                  τ →∞               z→1

if the limit on the right-hand side exists. In the case of the solution (B.19), we observe
that the limit is well-defined, and equal to

                 lim (z − 1)Xn (z) = [I − exp(n(M − I))] (I − M )−1 m2 ı̄SR .
                 z→1

Hence for any t and any n, et (n) converges to a well-defined (finite) limit as T is
made large, and the limit is the one given in the statement of the proposition.

B.4         Proof of Proposition 3
The result that
                                         lim et (n) = eSR (n)
                                         T →∞

for all t and n follows from Proposition 2. If in addition, the Taylor Principle (2.14) is
satisfied, then as shown in section A.3 above, both eigenvalues of M −I have negative
real part. From this (3.8) follows; substituting of this into (3.10) yields

                                         lim eSR (n) = ēPSRF ,
                                         n→∞

where ēPSRF is defined in (3.11). This establishes the first double limit in the statement
of the proposition.
    The result that
                                     lim et (n) = ePt F
                                          n→∞

for all t follows from Proposition 1. Establishing the second double limit thus requires
us to consider how ePt F changes as T is made large.
    As discussed in section A.2 above, the FS-PFE dynamics {ePt F } satisfy equation
(A.3) for all t. Under the kind of regime assumed in this proposition (with ω t equal
  78
       See, for example, Jury (1964), p. 6.


                                                 87
to a constant vector ω̄ for all t ≥ T ), the FS-PFE (obtained by “solving forward”
the difference equation) involves a constant vector of expectations, ePt F = ēPLRF for all
t ≥ T − 1, where
                                ēPLRF ≡ [I − M ]−1 m2 ı̄LR
is the same as the vector defined in (3.7).
    For periods t < T − 1, one must instead solve the difference equation backward
from the terminal condition ePT −1
                                F
                                   = ēPLRF . We thus obtain a difference equation of the
form
                    eτ = [(I − Λ)M + Λ] eτ −1 + (I − Λ) m2 ı̄SR                   (B.20)
for all τ ≥ 2, with initial condition e1 = ēPLRF . The asymptotic behavior of these
dynamics as τ is made large depends on the eigenvalues of the matrix

                              (I − Λ)M + Λ = C −1 BC,                                (B.21)

which must be the same as the eigenvalues of B. (Note that (B.21) follows from
(A.4).)
    Under the hypothesis that the response coefficients satisfy the Taylor Principle
(2.14), both eigenvalues of B are inside the unit circle. It then follows that the
dynamics (B.20) converge as τ → ∞ to the steady-state vector of expectations ēPSRF
defined in (3.11). We thus conclude that

                                     lim ePt F = ēPSRF
                                    T →∞

for any t. This establishes the second double limit.

B.5     Proof of Proposition 4
The proof of this proposition follows exactly the same lines as the proof of Proposition
1. While the definition of the matrices of coefficients V and W must be modified, it
continues to be possible to write the belief revision dynamics in the compact form
(B.10), for an appropriate definition of these matrices. (This depends on the fact
that we have chosen T̄ ≥ T, so that the coefficients of the monetary policy reaction
function do not change over time during periods t ≥ T̄ . Variation over time in the
reaction function coefficients does not prevent us from writing the dynamics in the
compact form, as long as it occurs only prior to date T̄ ; and our method of analysis
requires only that T̄ be finite.)
   Moreover, it continues to be the case that V will have the block-triangular form
indicated in equations (B.11)–(B.13). In equation (B.13), the matrix M is defined
using the coefficients (φπ , φy ) that apply after date T , and thus that satisfy the Taylor
Principle (2.14), according to the hypotheses of the proposition. The eigenvalues of V
again consist of -1 (repeated 2T̄ times); the eigenvalues of A(λk )M, for k = 1, . . . , K,

                                           88
and the eigenvalues of M . Because M is defined using coefficients that satisfy the
Taylor Principle, we again find that all of the eigenvalues of M and of A(λk )M
have negative real part. Hence all of the eigenvalues of V have negative real part.
This again implies that the dynamics (B.10) are asymptotically stable, and the fixed
point to which they converge again corresponds to the FS-PFE expectations. This
establishes the proposition.
    Note that this result depends on the hypothesis that from date T onward, mon-
etary policy is determined by a reaction function with coefficients that satisfy the
Taylor Principle. If we assumed instead (as in the case emphasized in Cochrane,
2015a) that after date T , policy again consists of a fixed interest rate, but one that
is consistent with the long-run inflation target (i.e., ı̄LR = 0), the belief-revision dy-
namics would not converge. (See the discussion in section 4.3 of the text of the case
in which an interest-rate peg differs temporarily from the long-run interest-rate peg.)
    If the interest rate is also fixed after date T (albeit at some level ı̄LR 6= ı̄SR ), the
belief-revision dynamics can again be written in the compact form (B.10), and the
matrix V will again have the form (B.11)–(B.13). But in this case, the matrix M in
(B.13) would be defined using the response coefficients φπ = φy = 0, so that the
Taylor Principle is violated. It then follows from our results above that M will have
a positive real eigenvalue. (By continuity, one can show that A(λk )M will also have
a positive real eigenvalue for all values of λk near enough to 1.) Hence V will have
at least one (and possibly several) eigenvalues with positive real part, and the belief-
revision dynamics (B.10) will be explosive in the case of almost all initial conjectures
(even restricting our attention to conjectures within the specified finite-dimensional
family).

B.6     Proof of Proposition 5
The proof of this proposition follows similar lines as the proof of Proposition 2. In
general, the characterization of reflective equilibrium is more complex when the mon-
etary policy response coefficients are not time-invariant, as in the situation considered
here. However, in the case hypothesized in the proposition, gt = 0 and from period
T onward, monetary policy is consistent with constant inflation at the rate π ∗ . Un-
der these circumstances, and initial conjecture under which et = 0 for all t ≥ T
implies correct beliefs e∗t = 0 for all t ≥ T as well. Hence under the belief-revision
dynamics, the conjectured beliefs are never revised, and et (n) = 0 for all degrees of
reflection n ≥ 0, and any t ≥ T. This result would be the same if we were to assume
a fixed interest rate for all t ≥ T (that is, if we were to assume response coefficients
φπ = φy = 0 after date T , just like we do for dates prior to T ), but a fixed interest
rate ı̄t = 0 for all t ≥ T (that is, the fixed interest rate consistent with the steady
state with inflation rate π ∗ ).
    Thus the reflective equilibrium is the same (in this very special case) as if we

                                           89
assumed a fixed interest rate in all periods (and thus the same response coefficients
in all periods), but ı̄t = ı̄SR for t < T while ı̄t = 0 for t ≥ T.79 And the latter is a case
to which Proposition 2 applies. (Note that Proposition 2 requires no assumptions
about the response coefficients except that they are constant over time, and that
they satisfy (A.5). Hence the case in which φπ = φy = 0 in all periods is consistent
with the hypotheses of that proposition.)
     Proposition 2 can then be used to show that the reflective equilibrium beliefs
{et (n)} for any degree of reflection n converge to a well-defined limiting value eSR (n),
which is given by (3.10)–(3.11). This establishes the proposition.

B.7      Proof of Proposition 6
Let {e1t } be the sequence of expectations in a reflective equilibrium when the date of
the regime change is T , and {e2t } be the expectations in the equilibrium corresponding
to the same degree of reflection n when the date of the regime change is T 0 > T.
Similarly, let {a1t } and {a2t } be the evolution of the vectors of summary variables that
decisionmakers need to forecast in the two equilibria, and {e∗1                 ∗2
                                                                     t } and {et } the implied
sequences of correct forecasts in the two equilibria. We similarly use the notation
M (i) , m(i) , C (i) , c(i) to refer to the matrices M, m, C, and c respectively, defined using
the monetary policy response coefficients associated with regime i (for i = 1, 2).80
    Let us first consider the predictions regarding reflective equilibrium in periods
t ≥ T 0 . Under both of the assumptions about policy, policy is expected to be the
same at all dates t ≥ T 0 . Since it is assumed that we start from the same initial
conjecture {et (0)} in both cases, and the model is purely forward-looking, it follows
that the belief-revision dynamics will also be the same for all t ≥ T 0 in both cases.
Hence we obtain the same sequences {et (n)} in both cases, for all t ≥ T 0 ; and since the
outcomes for output and inflation are then given by (A.1), these are the same for all
t ≥ T 0 as well. Moreover, it is easily shown that under our assumptions, the common
solution is one in which et (n) = 0 for all t ≥ T 0 , and correspondingly xt (n) = 0 for
all t ≥ T 0 .
    Moreover, since outcomes for output and inflation are the same for all t ≥ T 0 in
the two cases, it follows that the sequences of correct forecasts {e∗t } are the same in
both cases for all t ≥ T 0 − 1. (Note that the correct forecasts in period T 0 − 1 depend
only on the equilibrium outcomes in period T 0 and later.) Hence the belief-revision
  79
      Note that these two different specifications of monetary policy would not lead to the same
reflective equilibrium expectations, under most assumptions about the real shocks or about the
initial conjecture; see the discussion at the end of the proof of Proposition 4. Here we get the same
result only because we assume gt = 0 (exactly) for all t ≥ T and an initial conjecture under which
et (0) = 0 (exactly) for all t ≥ T.
   80
      By “regime 1” we mean the Taylor rule (the regime in place in periods T ≤ t < T 0 under policy
1); by “regime 2” we mean the interest-rate peg at ı̄SR .


                                               90
dynamics for period T 0 − 1 will also be the same in both cases, and we obtain the
same vector eT 0 −1 (n) for all n; and again the common beliefs are eT 0 −1 (n) = 0.
   Let us next consider reflective equilibrium in periods T ≤ t ≤ T 0 − 1. Suppose
that for some such t and some n, e2t ≥ e1t ≥ 0 (in both components). Then
                                                                           (2)
              a2t − a1t = M (2) (e2 − e1t ) + [M (2) − M (1) ] e1t | + m2 ı̄SR .

Moreover, we observe from the above definitions of M and m that M (2) is positive
                                                                     (2)
in all elements; M (2) − M (1) is positive in all elements; and m2 is negative in both
elements. Under the hypotheses that e2t ≥ e1t ≥ 0 and ı̄SR < 0, it follows that
a2t − a1t >> 0, where we use the symbol >> to indicate that the first vector is
greater in both elements.
      Now suppose that for some n, e2t ≥ e1t ≥ 0 for all T ≤ t ≤ T 0 − 1. It follows from
our conclusions above that these inequalities then must hold for all t ≥ T. It also
follows from the argument in the paragraph above that we must have a2t >> a1t for all
T ≤ t ≤ T 0 − 1, along with a2t = a1t for all t ≥ T 0 . This implies that e∗2           ∗1
                                                                           t (n) >> et (n)
for all T ≤ t < T 0 − 1, while e∗2          ∗1               0
                                  t (n) = et (n) for t = T − 1.
      The fact that e∗2        ∗1              0
                      t (n) = et (n) for t = T −1 means that the belief-revision dynamics
                0
for period T − 1 will again be the same in both cases, and we obtain the same vector
eT 0 −1 (n) for all n; and again the common beliefs are eT 0 −1 (n) = 0. For periods T ≤
t < T 0 − 1, we continue to have e∗1 t (n) = 0 for all n, for the same reason as in the case
                    0
of periods t ≥ T . But now the fact that we start from the common initial conjecture
e2t (0) = e1t (0) = 0 implies that e∗2           ∗1                      2           1
                                     t (0) >> et (0) = 0 and hence ėt (0) >> ėt (0) = 0.
                                                                  2         1
This implies that for small enough n > 0, we will have et (n) >> et (n) = 0 for all
T ≤ t < T 0 − 1.
      Moreover, for any n, as long as we continue to have e2t (n) ≥ e1t (n) = 0 for all
t ≥ T, we will continue to have e∗2              ∗1                           0
                                     t (n) >> et (n) = 0 for all T ≤ t < T − 1. Since the
belief-revision dynamics (2.21) imply that for any n > 0, et (n) is an average of et (0)
and the vectors e∗t (ñ) for values 0 ≤ ñ < n, as long as we have had e∗2    t (ñ) >> 0 for
                                               2
all 0 ≤ ñ < n, we will necessarily have et (n) >> 0. Thus we conclude by induction
that e2t (n) >> e1t (n) = 0 for all n > 0, and any T ≤ t < T 0 − 1.
      The associated reflective equilibrium outcomes are given by (A.1) in each case.
This implies that
                                                                         (2)
               x2t − x1t = C (2) (e2 − e1t ) + [C (2) − C (1) ] e1t | + c2 ı̄SR .

Note furthermore that all elements of C (2) are non-negative, with at least one positive
element in each row; that all elements of C (2) −C (1) are positive; and that all elements
     (2)
of c2 are negative. Then the fact that e2t (n) ≥ e1t (n) = 0 for all T ≤ t ≤ T 0 − 1 and
ı̄SR < 0 implies that x2t >> x1t for all T ≤ t ≤ T 0 − 1.
    Finally, let us consider reflective equilibrium in periods 0 ≤ t < T. In these
periods, the monetary policy is expected to be the same in both cases (the fixed

                                             91
interest rate). Suppose that for some such t and some n, e2t ≥ e1t . Then

                            a2t − a1t = M (2) (e2 − e1t ) ≥ 0,

because all elements of M (2) are positive. Since we have already concluded above
that a2t >> a1t for all T ≤ t ≤ T 0 − 1, and that a2t = a1t for all t ≥ T 0 , this implies
that e∗2      ∗1
      t >> et for all 0 ≤ t < T.
    We can then use an inductive argument, as above, to show that e2t (n) >> e1t (n)
for any n > 0, and any 0 ≤ t < T. It follows from this that

                           x2t − x1t = C (2) (e2 − e1t ) >> 0

for any n > 0, and any 0 ≤ t < T, given that all elements of C (2) are non-negative,
with at least one positive element in each row. This establishes the proposition.




                                          92
