NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

NATURAL GAS PRICES AND COAL DISPLACEMENT:
EVIDENCE FROM ELECTRICITY MARKETS
Christopher R. Knittel
Konstantinos Metaxoglou
Andre Trindade
Working Paper 21627
http://www.nber.org/papers/w21627

NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
October 2015

We thank Matt Barmack, Severin Borenstein, Jim Bushnell, Steve Cicala, Joe Cullen, Wayne Gray,
Erin Mansur, Richard Schmalensee, Aaron Smith, Frank Wolak, Catherine Wolfram, the participants
of the Spring 2014 Harvard seminar in Environmental Economics and Policy, and the 2014 NBER
Environmental and Energy Economics Summer Institute for very helpful comments and suggestions.
The views expressed herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the
National Bureau of Economic Research.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peerreviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.
© 2015 by Christopher R. Knittel, Konstantinos Metaxoglou, and Andre Trindade. All rights reserved.
Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided
that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.

Natural Gas Prices and Coal Displacement: Evidence from Electricity Markets
Christopher R. Knittel, Konstantinos Metaxoglou, and Andre Trindade
NBER Working Paper No. 21627
October 2015
JEL No. L5,L71,L94,Q4,Q5
ABSTRACT
We examine the environmental impact of the post-2005 natural gas glut in the United States due to
the shale gas boom. Our focus is on quantifying short-term coal-to-gas switching decisions by different
types of electric power plants in response to changes in the relative price of the two fuels. In particular,
we study the following entities: investor-owned utilities (IOUs) and independent power producers
(IPPs) in restructured markets coordinated by Independent System Operators, as well as IOUs in traditional
vertically-integrated markets. Using alternative data aggregations and model specifications, we find
that IOUs operating in traditional markets are more sensitive to changes in fuel prices than both IOUs
and IPPs in restructured markets. We attribute our findings to differences in available gas-fired generating
capacity with the most cost-efficient technology: electricity generators reduced their rate of investment
in the restructured markets post restructuring. The heterogeneity in the response of fuel consumption
to prices has implications for carbon dioxide (CO2) emissions for the entities considered. Using simple
back-of-the-envelope calculations, the almost 70% drop in the price of natural gas between June 2008
and the end of 2012 translates to as much as 33% reduction in CO2 emissions for IOUs in traditional
markets, but only up to 19% for IOUs in restructured markets.

Christopher R. Knittel
MIT Sloan School of Management
100 Main Street, E62-513
Cambridge, MA 02142
and NBER
knittel@mit.edu
Konstantinos Metaxoglou
Carleton University
konstantinos.metaxoglou@carleton.ca

Andre Trindade
Fundacao Getulio Vargas / EPGE
Praia de Botafogo, 190
Rio de Janeiro, RJ 22250-900 Brazil
andre.trindade@fgv.br

1

Introduction

Fossil fuel-fired power plants burn coal, natural gas, or oil to generate electricity. In 2003,
51 percent of U.S. electricity was generated using coal, while 17 percent was generated using
natural gas. By 2012, 37 percent of U.S. electricity was generated using coal, while 30
percent was generated using natural gas. One factor responsible for this change has been the
change in the relative price of the two fuels. Recent advances in the ability to use hydraulic
fracturing methods (fracking) have substantially increased natural gas production, altering
the relative prices of natural gas and coal.1 On a per unit-of-energy basis, the average price
of natural gas was nearly seven times the average price of coal at the beginning of 2006. By
the end of 2012, this ratio had decreased to less than two.
Within the U.S. power sector, electricity generators vary in terms of their ownership
structure and the type of market in which they operate. Following the large restructuring
wave in the late 1990s and the early 2000s, wholesale electricity markets emerged in a
large part of the country highlighted by the formation of independent system operators
(ISOs) coordinating the function of some type of a power pool.2 In most cases, emphasis
was put on the unbundling of generation from transmission and distribution, which gave
rise to independent power producers (IPPs). IPPs focused exclusively on generation. The
utilities continued to be responsible for transmission and distribution often engaging in
generation. The parts of the country that did not opt for restructuring maintained the
traditional structure of vertically integrated utilities. As a result, today, generation around
the country is either utility or non-utility owned. Utilities, which may be publicly or investor
owned, transmit and distribute electricity. Other than IPPs, large industrial and commercial
entities serving almost exclusively their own needs, such as manufacturing plants, hospitals,
and universities, own generation assets too.
This is the first paper showing that a generator’s response to changes in the price of coal
and natural gas depends on its ownership and the type of market in which it operates.3
We analyze the responses of investor-owned utilities (IOUs) and IPPs, which account for
the largest fraction of the electric power sector in the country. Our analysis focuses on the
period 2003–2012 and our interest lies exclusively on entities with both coal- and gas-fired
1

Hausman and Kellogg (2015) offer an in-depth analysis of the welfare and distributional impacts of shale
gas. See also the CBO (2014) study on the effects shale gas on energy markets, economic output, and the
federal budget.
2
See Borenstein and Bushnell (2015), on the status of the U.S. electricity industry after 20 years of
restructuring.
3
Recent related work, albeit with a different focus, on the effects of lower gas prices in electricity markets
includes Brehm (2015), Cullen and Mansur (2014), Fell and Kaffine (2014), and Linn et al. (2014).

1

generating capacity. The core of the empirical exercises analyzes the response of the share
of gas in fuel consumption to the prices of coal and natural gas.
We find that IOUs in traditional markets respond more to fuel prices than both IOUs and
IPPs in ISO markets. The results hold for both coal and natural gas prices and are robust
to a set of alternative specifications that address potential econometric problems. We offer
a plausible explanation for our findings: the restructuring process appears to have reduced
the incentives of ISO market participants to invest in natural gas capacity, which limits
their ability to respond to changes in the relative price of the two fuels. Using a differencein-differences exercise, we show that the natural gas capacity with the most cost-efficient
technology increased more quickly in traditional markets compared to restructured markets
post restructuring. We are not able to assess whether the relative increase in capacity in
traditional markets was optimal as two competing effects may be at play. On one hand,
restructuring may have led to lower investment due to market power. On the other hand,
traditional markets may have invested more in capacity because of the Averch-Johnson effect.
The differences in the response of fuel consumption to prices has implications for carbon
dioxide (CO2 ) emissions for the entities considered. To illustrate this, we perform simple
back-of-the-envelope calculations based on a model relating emissions to fuel prices. Based
on our findings, the almost 70% drop in the price of natural gas between June 2008 and
the end of 2012 translates to as much as a 33% reduction in CO2 emissions for utilities
in traditional markets, but only up to 19% for utilities in ISO markets. Eliminating the
difference in responses to fuel prices between entities in traditional and ISO markets, also
leads to significant gains in terms of lower CO2 emissions of up to 15 percentage points.
The remainder of the paper is organized as follows. We provide a background on natural
gas and coal production, generation technologies, and wholesale electricity markets in Section
2. Section 3 contains a discussion of our data, our baseline results, and robustness checks
regarding the heterogeneity in the response of fuel consumption to prices. Section 4 discusses
our explanation of the findings and gives documental evidence supporting it. Section 5
presents our counterfactual emission calculations. We finally conclude. The tables and
figures are attached at the end of the paper. An online Appendix is also provided.

2

2

Background

2.1

Natural gas and coal production

The U.S. production of natural gas has increased considerably in the past 10 years. This
increase is largely attributed to horizontal drilling—a technical innovation from the 1930s—
and multistage hydraulic fracturing (fracking), which began in the 1950s. The technique
has allowed natural gas deposits captured in shale formations to be accessed.4 Data from
the U.S. Energy Information Administration (EIA) for 2003–2012 show that monthly gross
withdrawals of natural gas exhibit a clear upward trend, which is more pronounced after 2006.
The withdrawals start at about 2 trillion cubic feet (tcf) in Jan-2003 and peak at around
2.6 tcf in late 2012. In 2007, gross withdrawals from shale gas accounted for approximately
7.5% of total gross withdrawals. By 2012, this fraction reached 35%.5
Panel (a) of Figure 3 shows the monthly natural gas price for the electric power sector
using EIA data.6 After the frenzy of the commodity markets in the summer of 2008, the
series exhibits a largely declining pattern until mid-2012 when it starts bouncing back. Of
course, for a good part of this period (fall 2008–fall 2009), the continued strong domestic
production overlapped with sluggish demand due to the recession. Therefore, it is hard to
tell how much of this decline was due to the positive (negative) shift in supply (demand).
The last quarter of 2011 was the first time since the economic downturn that gas prices
remained consistently below $4/MMBtu (Macmillan et al. (2013)). The recovery of prices
in the late 2012 has been attributed to an increased demand due to higher utilization of gasfired electric generating units (EGUs), the potential for additional LNG exports, inventory
drawdowns as the country was marching towards a cold winter, and the diversion of rigs
used in natural gas production towards the search of oil, among other factors.
According to EIA data for the 2003–2012 period, total U.S. coal production exhibits a
slight upward trend between 2003 and 2009 and then starts declining with the Appalachia
and Western regions driving much of the decline. The downward trend post 2009 is largely
consistent with the slow recovery of the economy, the changing landscape of electric power
4

The overall effect of fracking on the U.S. economy is pronounced. Hausman and Kellogg (2015) find that
between 2007 and 2013 the shale gas revolution led to an increase in welfare for natural gas consumers and
producers of $48 billion per year. Newell and Raimi (2015) describe the major oil- and gas related revenues
and costs for county and municipal governments have experienced in several states around the country.
Cascio and Narayan (2015) study the effect of fracking on high-school dropouts. Muehlenbachs et al. (2014)
using data from Pennsylvania and New York find negative impacts from shale gas development on nearby
groundwater-dependent homes.
5
http://www.eia.gov/dnav/ng/ng_prod_sum_dcu_NUS_a.htm.
6
The electric power sector consists of utilities and IPPs only.

3

generation towards higher utilization of gas-fired EGUs, and increasing stockpiles of coal at
the power plants. The only good news for coal producers in the country during this period
was the increase in exports, which have been historically served with Appalachian coal.
Panel (b) of Figure 3 shows the price of coal for the electric power sector from EIA for
2003–2012, which almost doubled during this period, from about $1.3/MMBtu to around
$2.5/MMBtu. According to EIA, the price increases in 2008 were largely driven by the
international markets where U.S. coal was in demand. An additional factor that affected
coal prices was the escalating delivery cost due to the growing fuel surcharges added by
transportation companies in response to the unprecedented rise in oil prices experienced
during the first half of the year.7
Another difference between natural gas and coal, other than the patterns in production
and prices discussed above, is the amount of pollution that they generate. Burning natural
gas results in much fewer emissions of nearly all types of air pollutants and CO2 per unit of
heat produced than coal. For example, 117 (over 200) lbs. of CO2 are produced per million
British Thermal Units (MMBtu) of natural gas (coal). These clean burning properties have
contributed to an increase in natural gas use for electricity generation and as a transportation
fuel.8 When coal is burned, it releases impurities including sulfur, which when combined with
oxygen forms sulfur dioxide SO2 , that contributes to acid rain and respiratory illnesses. Other
emissions resulting from coal combustion are: nitrogen oxides NOx , particulates, mercury,
and other heavy metals.9

2.2

Natural gas and coal-fired electricity generation

Both natural gas and coal are used in the generation of electricity with a combined share
(gigawatt per day) of close to 70% in 2012. Between 2003 and 2012, there is a downward
trend in the share of coal in electricity generation from 51% to 37%. The share of natural
gas in electricity generation, on the other hand, has nearly doubled during the same period;
from 17% to 30%.10
The prices that power plants pay for the delivery of coal differ considerably due to the
7

Our commentary here follows EIA (2008) and EIA (2009).
http://www.eia.gov/energyexplained/index.cfm?page=natural gas environment.
9
Additionally, when coal is burned at power plants, residues such as fly and bottom ash are created. In the
past, fly ash was released into the air through the smoke stack, but by law much of it now must be captured by
pollution control devices, like scrubbers. Fly ash is generally stored at coal power plants or placed in landfills.
Pollution leaching from ash storage and landfills into groundwater has emerged as a new environmental
concern. See http://www.eia.gov/energyexplained/index.cfm?page=coal_environment.
10
See Table 3.1.A in EIA Electric Power Annual 2013.
8

4

heterogeneity of the product and variations in the distance from the coal producing areas;
transportation costs have historically been a major consideration in the choice of coal as
a fuel. Coal-fired plants receive more than two thirds of their coal by rail and, while, on
average, transportation costs account for approximately 20% of total delivered costs, they
can be as high as 60% on shipments of coal originating in the Powder River Basin.11
By contrast, natural gas is a homogenous product. Since it is delivered by a national
network of pipelines that maintain pressure throughout the grid, transportation costs are
essentially zero. However, gas is harder to store in bulk near power plants, which makes them
dependent on natural-gas pipelines that sometimes have delivery issues. In New England, for
example, pipeline capacity has not kept up with the growth in natural-gas demand, which
has led to increased volatility and numerous price spikes in the area recently.12
Most of the coal-fired plants in the U.S. are owned by traditional utilities with the Southeast and the Midwest portions of the country being the strongholds of coal-fired generation.
They supply base load electricity and typically operate throughout the day due to low variable costs and performance penalties in transient operation. Pulverized-coal plants (PC)
account for the great majority of existing coal-fired generating capacity in the U.S. Coal is
ground to fine powder and injected through burners into the furnace with combustion air.
The fine coal particles heat up rapidly, undergo pyrolysis and ignite. Pipes filled with water
run through the burners and the heat turns the water to steam, which is used to rotate a
turbine and generate electricity.
Gas-fired power plants employ three major technologies: steam boilers, combustion turbines also known as simple-cycle or gas turbines, and combined-cycle generators. The steam
boiler technology is an older design that burns gas in a large boiler furnace to provide heat
for turning water into steam. The steam is then run through a turbine that is attached
to a generator, which spins and produces electricity. When a combustion turbine (CT) is
put into operation, air is pulled in from outside and is compressed. This compressed air is
ignited by burning natural gas and expands pushing the turbine much like steam does in
a steam plant. The turbines then turn the electric generators. CTs are small, quick-start
11
See http://www.eia.gov/coal/transportationrates/. Industry sources cite transportation costs as
a major reason why many utilities in the New England states have chosen to generate electricity with natural
gas, or import coal from overseas as a lower cost alternative.
12
See http://www.eia.gov/naturalgas/issuesandtrends/deliverysystem/2013/. According to EIA,
“Since 2012, limited supply from the Canaport and Everett (LNG) terminals coupled with congestion on the
Tennessee and Algonquin pipelines has led to winter natural gas price spikes in New England. The problem
continued in the winter of 2013–14, as indicated by New England’s forward basis for January 2014 reaching
$17.41. Pipeline expansions could ease price spikes, but their cost-effectiveness, including their ultimate cost
to consumers, remains a challenge.”

5

EGUs similar to aircraft jet engines. The natural gas combined cycle (NGCC) technology
utilizes a gas turbine generator and a steam turbine that recovers waste heat from the gas
turbine. The NGCC technology is the most efficient of the three and it is fair to say that it
has revolutionized the industry.
Overall, gas-fired generation is more flexible than coal when it comes to changes in output
and is the primary option to meet the variable portion of the electricity load and typically
supplies peak power. However, the increased natural gas supply and relatively low natural
gas prices, have resulted in more gas-fired EGUs being utilized to serve base load.

2.3

Wholesale electricity markets

Historically, the U.S. electric industry developed as a loosely connected structure of individual monopoly utility companies, each building and operating power plants and transmission
and distribution lines to serve its franchise area. The utilities were overseen by regulators
aiming to protect consumers from unfair pricing and other undesirable behavior.
In the 1990s, the federal government took a series of steps to restructure the wholesale
electricity industry with an emphasis on the unbundling of generation from transmission and
distribution. Efforts were also put on the promotion of competitive retail markets. For the
first time in the history of the industry, retail customers in some states were given the choice
to pick their power suppliers.
Twenty years later, electricity is sold either in traditional regulated markets in areas of
the country that did not opt for restructuring, or in wholesale markets coordinated, initially,
by Independent System Operators (ISOs), and, subsequently, by Regional Transmission
Organizations (RTOs) in parts of the country that did (Figure 2). ISOs/RTOs use a series
of forward and spot markets to make operational decisions, such as generator dispatch.
Traditional systems rely on management to make those decisions, usually based on the cost
of using the various generation options. Power trading occurs via bilateral transaction and
transactions in ISO markets.13
Generation facilities around the country can also be classified as utility- or non-utility
13

Electricity markets run by ISOs/RTOs deliver electricity through competitive market mechanisms. Although ISOs/RTOs have operational control of the transmission system, they do not own transmission or
generation assets, perform the actual maintenance on generation or transmission equipment; or directly
serve end use customers. More specifically, ISOs/RTOs use a series of markets to provide electric service
to customers, which usually include the following: a forward (day-ahead or hour-ahead) energy market,
a spot (real-time) energy market, capacity markets, which are designed to ensure resource adequacy, and
ancillary-services (reserves) market. Bilateral transactions take place also in ISO/RTO markets. See FERC
(2012) for additional details.

6

owned. The main difference is that non-utilities do not transmit and do not distribute
electricity. Utilities can be sub-classified into either investor-owned companies (IOUs) or
public agencies. Our interest lies in the former. Non-utility-owned electric power plants
belong to one of the following groups: independent power producers (IPPs), commercial,
and industrial. Entities in the last two sectors produce electricity primarily for their own
use and are outside the scope of the empirical analysis that follows.
The growth of non-utility ownership took off following the restructuring of the electricity industry and the divestiture of generation assets by utilities, especially, investor-owned
utilities (IOUs) in the late 1990s. Those assets were transferred to another company or to
an unregulated subsidiary with its own holding company structure. As a result, around the
time of restructuring, the number of IOUs was decreasing, and non-utilities were expanding
by buying utility divested generating assets, increasing their share of generation and new
capacity. In the empirical analysis that follows, we will focus on the following three types
of entities: IOUs in ISO/RTO markets, IOUs in traditional markets, and IPPs in ISO/RTO
markets (Figure 1).

3

Empirical analysis

Our goal is to understand how entities with generation facilities adjust their use of inputs to
changes in input prices, and how these responses vary by operator and market type. For this
reason, we focus on two comparisons. The first comparison is between IOUs in traditional
markets and IOUs in ISO markets. The second comparison is between IOUs in traditional
markets and IPPs in ISO markets. By focusing on IOUs and IPPs, we capture the largest
fraction of the U.S. electric power sector as defined by the EIA, since we only exclude publicly
owned utilities.

3.1

Data

The vast majority of the data used in our analyses are publicly available from the EIA and
the Environmental Protection Agency (EPA). We aggregate monthly data for net generation
(MWh) from the EIA-906, EIA-920, and EIA-923 forms, at the plant level. Monthly data for
total fuel consumption (electricity plus thermal output) in physical units and associated heat
content (Btu) by fuel are available from the same forms. We also aggregate fuel consumption

7

at the plant level.14
Monthly plant-level fuel receipts in physical units and delivery costs ($/MMBtu) are publicly available from the FERC-423 and EIA-923 forms. The same forms contain information
regarding the quality of fuel receipts (e.g., heat content). Although data on fuel receipts and
associated heat content for IPPs are publicly available from the EIA-423 and EIA-923 forms,
the associated delivery costs are not. For this reason, we obtained access to EIA confidential
data.15
We imputed plant-level fuel delivery costs that were not available for a particular month
using fuel delivery costs from the closest plant that reported delivery costs during that
month. Using the Haversine formula and power-plant coordinates, we identified the closest
plant reporting delivery costs for imputation—we document the extent of imputation and
comment on its implications below. One advantage of this method is that it accounts for
unobserved factors that affect input costs and are spatially correlated. For the remainder of
our discussion, we use the terms price and delivery cost interchangeably.
Annual data for nameplate operating capacity (MW) are available at the generator level
from EIA-860. The form reports up to six energy sources for each generator. We use the
primary energy source to construct a measure of operating nameplate capacity fired by coal
and natural gas. For example, for a generator with operating nameplate capacity of 50MW
for which the primary energy source is coal and the secondary source is natural gas, the coalfired nameplate operating capacity is 50MW, while the natural gas-fired nameplate operating
capacity is zero.
Using information from EIA-860, the EPA E-GRID 2012 database, and the proprietary
SNL Financial Power Plant Database, we were able to check which plants in our sample
fall within the footprint of the various ISOs. As an additional—albeit imperfect—check, we
compared monthly total net generation and loads for 2007–2012 across six ISOs (CAISO,
14

The Appendix in EIA (2013) provides a very informative and concise summary of the EIA and FERC
forms used in our analysis.
15
The FERC-423 form was filed by plants with a total steam turbine electric generating capacity and/or
combined-cycle generating capacity of 50 or more megawatts. Only fuel delivered for use in steam-turbine
and combined-cycle EGUs was reported. Fuel received for use in gas-turbine or internal-combustion EGUs
that was not associated with a combined-cycle operation was not reported. In the case of EIA-923, Fuel
receipts and costs are collected for plants with a nameplate capacity of 50MW or more and burn fossil fuels.
The Form EIA 423 collected the cost and quality of fossil fuels to non-utility plants—IPPs and commercial
and industrial combined heat and power producers with a nameplate capacity of 50MW or more. Using the
databases described, we calculated annual generation, fuel consumption for electricity only in physical units,
and fuel receipts in physical units, for coal and natural gas for the period 2001–2012. We then compared
these annual figures with the corresponding ones in Tables Tables 3.1.a, 5.1.a, 5.4.a, and 7.2 in EIA (2013).
The maximum percentage difference is around 5% and is associated with natural gas fuel receipts for years
between 2008 and 2012.

8

ERCOT, ISO-NE, MISO, NYISO, PJM). The absolute value of their percentage difference
never exceeded 5%.16
Annual information for environmental controls at the generator level are available from
the EPA Air Markets Program Data (AMPD) database for facility attributes. The AMPD
data contain also information on annual and ozone season (May–September) programs at the
generator level. The annual programs include the Acid Rain program (ARP), the Transport
Rule NOx Annual program (TRNOX), the Transport Rule SO2 Annual Group 1 program
(TRSO2G1), the Transport Rule SO2 Annual Group 2 program (TRSO2G2), the CAIR SO2
(CAIRSO2), the CAIR NOx Annual program (CAIRNOX), and the Regional Greenhouse
Gas Initiative (RGGI). The ozone season programs include the Transport Rule Ozone Season
NOx program (TRNOXOS), the CAIR Ozone Season NOx program (CAIROS), the StateImplementation-Plan NOx program (SIPNOX), and the NOx Budget Program (NBP).
Finally, we obtained daily settlement SO2 and seasonal NOx (SNOx ) permit prices from
Evolution Markets, an allowance broker we identified through EPA’s website.17 It is worth
mentioning that although the prices of the SO2 permits were constantly in the range $100–
$200/ton during the first 10 years of the ARP, the situation changed when it became clear
that more stringent caps would be put into place following CAIR in 2005. CAIR essentially required some states to reduce the amount of permits by two thirds, which increased
substantially the price of the remaining allowances (Schmalensee and Stavins (2012)).

3.2

Preliminary comparisons

The summary statistics discussed below and the econometric analysis that follows are based
on monthly data that we aggregate at the plant (Table 1) or at the firm (Table 2) level.18
The statistics pertain to a set of variables used in our formal econometric analysis regarding
fuel consumption and emissions.
The statistics in all tables, as well as the results of the econometric analysis that follow,
are based on samples that span the period 2003–2012 after filtering the data in a way that
16

The date range is dictated by the fact that our current load data from SNL Energy don’t extend before
2007. To our surprise, assigning plants to ISOs prior to 2010 (this is the first year for which the information
is available in EIA-860) is rather difficult. For, example, although PJM provides a list of plants in its area,
MISO informed us that treats such a list as confidential. FERC-714 would allow us to match exactly plants to
ISOs but it has two problems: (i) it lacks EIA plant codes, (ii) its electronic filing started in 2005. Electricity
imports to and exports from the ISO areas complicate the calculation even further.
17
See http://www.epa.gov/airmarkets/trading/buying.html. Additional information about Evolution Markets is available at http://www.evomarkets.com/environment/emissions/_markets.
18
We use the term firm to refer to the operator ID field in our data.

9

allows us to focus on the within-entity consumption substitution patterns between coal and
natural gas due to changes in their prices. We focus on dual-fuel entities; namely, plants
and firms with both coal and gas firing at some point between 2003 and 2012. We provide
additional details about the data in Appendix A.1.19
The first variable for which we report summary statistic and make comparisons across entities of interest is the share of fuel consumption in MMBtu from natural gas. The logarithm
of this share will be the dependent variable in the first set of empirical models introduced
below. Additionally, we include the fuel price (delivery cost) in dollars per MMBtu for coal
and natural gas, as well as generation (MWh) and nameplate (MW) capacity.20 We also
include a set of variables that appear as covariates in our econometric models. There are
two main groups of variables here, both exhibiting variation only by year within a plant in
the original data. The first group tracks the number of EGUs equipped with a particular
pollution-abatement technology. The second group tracks the number of EGUs within a
plant under the umbrella of an EPA program.21
i. Plant-level comparisons
There are roughly 4,100 observations associated with 44 plants in the case of traditional
IOUs. We use about 6,850 observations and 68 plants in the case of ISO IOUs (Table 1). In
both cases, we track a plant for roughly 8 years, on average. Traditional IOUs account for
40% of coal consumption and 56% of gas consumption when we focus on traditional and ISO
IOUs.22 Traditional and ISO IOUs exhibit significant differences in coal prices paid, as well
as in the number of units under the the Transport Rule NOx Annual program (TRNOX),
the Transport Rule SO2 Annual Group 1 program (TRSO2G1), and the Transport Rule SO2
Annual Group 2 program (TRSO2G2). There are no other variables that exhibit significant
differences at conventional levels.
We see around 4,700 observations for 58 plants in the case of IPPs. Therefore, we track an
IPP’s plant for roughly 7 years, on average. When we restrict the sample to traditional IOUs
19

Overall, dual-fuel firms account for about 78% of coal consumption and coal-fired generation and for
roughly 19% of the gas consumption and gas-fired generation. Dual-fuel plants account for about 37% of coal
consumption and coal-fired generation and for roughly 5% of the gas consumption and gas-fired generation.
20
We use the sum of net generation and capacity from coal and natural gas only. Net generation includes
generation used for the facility’s own needs for both electricity and thermal output.
21
When we aggregate the data at the firm level, the variables that pertain to the abatement technology
and the EPA programs are based on the total number of EGUs operated by each firm.
22
Five states (AL, MS, FL, GA, and SC) account for almost 83% of gas-fired generation by traditional
IOUs. Five states (AL, CO, KY, FL, MS) account also for roughly 72% of coal-fired generation by traditional
IOUs. MISO, PJM, and SPP account for almost the entirety of both coal- and gas-fired generation in the
case of ISO IOUs.

10

and IPPs, the former account for 46% of coal consumption and 80% of gas consumption.23
The number of EGUs with dry-lime scrubbers (FGDs), as well as the number of EGUs in the
Acid Rain Program and the Transport Rule Annual Groups 1 and 2 are the variables that
differ significantly between these two groups. We see borderline differences (5.7%) for the
gas share of fuel consumption, and the EGUs under the Transport Rule Annual and Seasonal
(TRNOXOS) programs. Finally, the IPPs do pay more—on average, 7%—than traditional
IOUs for coal delivered to their plants, albeit the difference is significant at the 10% level.
ii. Firm-level comparisons
As Table 2 indicates, the number of observations associated with the traditional (ISO)
IOUs is roughly 2,100 (3,700). There is also a substantial difference in the number of firms
in the two groups of interest; 24 for traditional and around 60 for ISO IOUs. Traditional
IOUs account for 44% of coal consumption and 67% of gas consumption among the IOUs
in our sample.24 The two groups of IOUs have similar characteristics. They only differ in
a significant way (5% level) in terms of the coal prices (dollars per MMBtu), the average
number of EGUs equipped with SCR technology, and the number of EGUs under the EPA
TRNOXOS program. The fuel price differential could be attributed to the quality of coal
(e.g., heat and sulfur content), to transportation costs, or to cost-reducing efforts in the
restructured markets (see Cicala (2015)). There are no other variables that exhibit differences
at conventional significance levels.
In the case of IPPs, we use about 2,800 observations for 68 firms. When we focus on
traditional IOUs and ISO IPPs, traditional IOUs account for 55% of coal consumption and
76% of gas consumption.25 We see significant differences in the gas share of fuel consumption,
generation, capacity, the average number of EGUs with SCR capabilities, and the number of
EGUs under the ARP program. The gas share for traditional IOUs is almost three times its
counterpart for the IPPs. Traditional IOUs generate almost twice as much as IPPs. They
also have almost twice as much coal- plus gas-fired capacity. The values of the remaining
variables for traditional IOUs are almost double the corresponding ones for IPPs. Most
of the remaining variables also fail to exhibit significant differences at conventional levels
23
Five states (AL, MS, FL, GA, and SC) account for about 83% of gas-fired generation by traditional IOUs.
Five states (AL, MS, FL, GA, SC) account also for roughly 72% of coal-fired generation by traditional IOUs.
ERCOT, MISO, and PJM account for almost the entirety of both coal- and gas-fired generation in the case
of ISO IOUs.
24
Five states (FL, AL, MS, AZ, GA) account for about 70% of gas-fired generation by traditional IOUs.
Five states (GA, AL, NC, WY, FL) also account for roughly 70% of coal-fired generation by traditional
IOUs. MISO, PJM, and SPP account for almost the entirety of both coal- and gas-fired generation in the
case of ISO IOUs.
25
ERCOT, MISO, and PJM account for almost all IPP coal- and gas-fired generation.

11

between the two groups of interest.
Overall, the comparisons in Tables 1 and 2 provide fairly strong evidence that both plants
and firms are similar on most observables. Of course, the major concern will be that they
differ in terms of unobservables. We address the issue of time-invariant unobservables in the
econometric models that follow.

3.3

Baseline results

We begin by examining the sensitivity of the natural-gas share of fuel consumption in MMBtu
to coal and natural-gas prices in $/MMBtu. Using i to denote the cross-section and t to
denote the time (month), we estimate models of the form:
ln (sng,it ) = a + βng ln(png,it ) + βcoal ln(pcoal,it ) + f (lnetgenit ; βf )
+X0it βx + ηi + ηm + εit ,
sng,it ≡

(1)

M M Btung,it
.
M M Btucoal,it + M M Btung,it

Depending on the level of aggregation, the cross-section subscript i denotes either a plant
or a firm. Other than the logarithms of the fuel prices, ln(pcoal,it ), and ln(pcoal,it ), our specifications include plant or firm fixed effects (ηi ) to control for time-invariant characteristics
and month fixed effects (ηm ) to account for seasonality in the share of natural gas. We also
include a third-degree polynomial in the logarithm of net generation from the two fuels,
f (lnetgenit ), to allow for flexibility in the output expansion path. The vector Xit includes
a number of covariates, which we have already discussed in the previous section, as well as
SO2 and NOx permit prices.26
The complete list of covariates in our models is available in Table 3. We estimate all our
models for dual-fuel firms and plants with data between 2003 and 2012. The logarithmic
transformation of the natural gas share of fuel consumption is a very natural choice given
that shares exhibit fairly skewed distributions. In addition, coupled with the logarithmic
transformation of fuel prices, coefficients can be directly interpreted as elasticities.
The main testable hypothesis in our empirical exercises is whether entities in ISO markets
respond differently from their counterparts in traditional markets including the controls
26

The permit prices exhibit only monthly variation. Focusing on fuel use independent of other inputs, is
equivalent to assuming that electricity production is Leontief in fuel and other inputs, which implies that a
plant cannot substitute labor or materials for fuel. Note also that fuel accounts for more than 1/2 of the
total costs and around 3/4 of the operating costs of generating electricity (Bushnell and Wolfram (2005)).

12

described above. To test this hypothesis, we pool data for entities in both traditional and
ISO markets and interact all covariates in (1) except for the fixed effects with an ISO dummy
that equals one if the entity under consideration falls within the footprint of one of the ISOs.
As a result, our specification includes a long list of variables that would be hard to report due
to space limitations. Hence, we only report the coefficient estimates and associated standard
errors for fuel prices and their interaction with the ISO dummy in Table 4, which are the
primary variables of interest.
Our modeling approach addresses the endogeneity of prices due to measurement error
and buyer power. The measurement error is a (direct) implication of the imputation of
fuel prices. Our original data do not contain cost information in numerous instances, such
as those for plants without fuel receipts during a particular month. In these instances, we
imputed monthly cost information from the closest (in terms of distance) plant. Buyer power
that exhibits variation over time is a concern if, for example, larger plants or firms, are able
to secure better prices. While classical measurement error generates an upward (towards
zero) bias of the plants’ response to prices, buyer power generates a downward (away from
zero) bias.
We instrument both coal and gas prices using the coal and gas prices of other operators’
nearest plant.27 Using data at the plant level, regressions of the fuel prices on the excluded
instruments produce R-squared values between 0.36 (natural gas, traditional IOUs) and 0.94
(natural gas, ISO IPPs). The same regressions using data at the firm level produce R-squared
values between 0.22 (natural gas, traditional IOUs) and 0.91 (natural gas, ISO IOUs).28
To account for endogeneity, we estimate linear IV (2SLS) models given the large dimension
of the parameter vector and the small number of observations with shares having boundary
values of one. As Table 3 indicates, there are 38 covariates (due to ISO dummy interactions) in our specifications setting aside plant or firm fixed effects, which add, at least, 58
more parameter estimates, depending on the level of aggregation and the groups of interest.
Additionally, table 4 indicates that no more than 5 percent of the observations have share
values of one depending on the model considered.29 The two rightmost columns of table 4
27
For the models estimated using data at the firm level, we aggregate these prices using fuel purchases
(physical units) as weights.
28
Without imputation of the fuel delivery costs, the excluded instruments deliver R-squared values within
the ranges reported here.
29
IV Tobit models produced highly similar estimates given the rather small number of observations for
which the natural has share equals one. The use of Tobit models for data defined in the interval [0,1] as
opposed to being censored in the range [0,1] has been questioned in the literature (see, e.g., Ramalho et al.
(2011)). The estimation of fractional response models that account for both heterogeneity and endogeneity
as in Papke and Wooldridge (2008) is challenging due to the high dimension of the parameter vector.

13

indicate that imputation of prices is not an issue for either fuel with firm-level data. The
imputation of fuel prices is quite substantial for plant-level data and affects 15%–20% of
the observations depending on the groups of interest. In terms of inference, we cluster the
standard errors by state, year, and month.30 Finally, as the last row of the table indicates,
we strongly reject the null hypothesis of exogeneity of fuel prices in all four models using the
regression-based test of Wooldridge (1989).
Based on our estimates using plant-level data, the price coefficients have the correct signs
and are all highly significant. The fuel-consumption share of natural gas increases when the
price of coal increases and decreases when the price of natural gas increases. The difference
in responses to coal and gas prices between traditional and ISO entities are also statistically
significant.31 With coefficient estimates of around -1.2 and standard errors in the neighborhood of 0.2, the gas share seems to be inelastic for traditional IOUs and is not statistically
different from zero for ISO IPPs and IOUs.32 In the case of coal, we see a highly significant
elasticity of 1.7 for traditional IOUs, and elasticities of 0.53 and -0.17 for ISO IOUs and IPPs,
respectively, which are statistically indistinguishable from zero. We discuss the remainder
of the coefficient estimates not reported in Table 4 in Appendix A.2.
Using firm level-data, we also see price coefficients with the correct signs. However, they
are statistically insignificant at conventional levels in two cases. The first is the interaction
of the coal price with the ISO dummy when we compare traditional and ISO IOUs. The
second is the interaction of the price for natural gas with the ISO dummy when we compare
traditional IOUs and ISO IPPs. Therefore, we fail to reject the null hypothesis that the
IPP response to natural gas prices is the same as that of traditional IOUs. An analogous
statement holds in the case of the IOU response to coal prices. The natural gas price elasticity
for traditional IOUs is about -1.1 in both cases with standard errors that are large enough
so that we fail to reject the null that is different from -1. Its analog for the ISO entities
is not different from zero. In the case of coal prices, we see highly significant elasticities of
about 2.1 for traditional IOUs and around 1.7 for ISO IOUs. The coal price elasticity for the
gas share of fuel consumption for ISO IPPs is statistically indistinguishable from zero. We
follow the same approach with the plant-level estimates and discuss the coefficient estimates
not reported in Table 4 in Appendix A.2.
30

Clustering the standard errors by state and year increases the standard errors for the 8 coefficients of
interest discussed below substantially. However, most of these coefficients remain statistically significant at
5%.
31
We use the shorthand traditional (ISO) entities to refer to entities in traditional (ISO) markets.
32
Our conclusion for the response of ISO entities to natural gas prices is based on the sum of the appropriate
coefficients and the associated standard error that requires a covariance term not reported in Table 4.

14

Overall, using either plant- or firm-level data, we see that the gas share of fuel consumption
for traditional IOUs is more responsive to gas prices than its counterpart for ISO IOUs and
IPPs. However, the elasticity does not depart in a statistically significant way from unity in
absolute value. The elasticities for ISO entities are statistically indistinguishable from zero.
The million-dollar question is what drives the heterogeneity in responses to fuel prices. We
postpone the answer accompanied with formal econometric analysis until the next section.33

3.4

Robustness checks

i. Time trend
In our baseline specifications we control for seasonality but exclude time trends because
time is an important source of variation in prices that allows us to estimate accurately the
response of fuel consumption to prices. That is particularly true for coal where the change in
the delivery cost has increased at a steady rate similar to a linear trend (Figure 3). However,
one may be concerned with the presence of omitted variables that change over time and are
correlated with the fuel costs and the dependent variable. Controlling explicitly for a time
trend mitigates those concerns.
In Table 5, we present results for our original specification augmented with a time trend.
All four coefficients of interest have the correct signs and are significant using plant-level
data. All four coefficients of interest have the correct signs using firm-level data, too. However, the coefficients on the interaction of the coal and gas prices with the ISO dummy are
not significant when we compare traditional IOUs with ISO IOUs. The coefficient on the
interaction of the gas price with the ISO dummy also fails to be statistically significant when
we compare traditional IOUs with ISO IPPs.
ii Nearby plants only
Another potential concern in our baseline results is that we compare groups of plants or
firms that are located in different parts of the country. In order to control for geographically
correlated unobservable factors, we estimate a new set of IV models in Table 6 using plantlevel data only. In these models, we limit the samples to plants that are within 50 and 100
miles from each other.
33

Our results that ISO IOUs don’t seem to respond to changes in fuel prices are largely consistent with
Fabrizio et al. (2007) who find that restructuring doesn’t have a measurable impact on heat rates, but does
have an effect on non-fuel costs. If reductions in fuel costs are quickly passed through to consumers, then
ISO IOUs won’t have an incentive to reduce heat rates or fuel costs, but would have an incentive to reduce
labor costs.

15

In the case of plants within 50 miles, all four coefficients of interest have the expected signs
when we compare IOUs. This is not the case in the comparison of traditional IOUs with ISO
IPPs. However, we have to keep in mind the small sample size. In this case, there are roughly
800 observations when we compare traditional with ISO IOUs and about 200 observations
when we compare traditional IOUs with ISO IPPs. Expanding the set of neighboring plants
to those within 100 miles gives a substantially larger number of observations. There are
2,300 observations when we compare IOUs and close to 1,500 observations when we compare
traditional IOUs with ISO IPPs. The coefficients of interest have the expected signs for
both sets of comparisons with the exception of the coefficient on the interaction of the coal
price with the ISO dummy. The gas and coal price coefficients are highly significant when
we compare traditional IOUs with ISO IPPs.

4

Explaining response heterogeneity

We now discuss one potential reason behind the notable differences in fuel-cost responses
across entities in ISO and traditional markets; in doing so, we note that there may be others.
We observe reductions in gas-fired capacity investment for the most cost-efficient technology
(combined cycle) by ISO market participants relative to investment in traditional markets
prior to the collapse in natural gas prices in the beginning of the shale gas era. This lower
investment, we argue, led to two effects that limited the shift toward natural gas generation.
First, fewer gas-fired EGUs are available in restructured markets to switch to if the price
of natural gas relative to the price of coal falls. Second, existing gas-fired EGUs will be on
average older and less efficient with higher heat rate, and, hence, less competitive compared
to coal-fired EGUs. We find evidence in support of these two arguments.
First, using a difference-in-differences (DID) analysis of generating capacity, we show that
entities in ISO markets have reduced their investment rates, post restructuring, compared to
entities operating in traditional market. Second, we compare the distribution of natural gas
heat rates across the different entities using firm-level data and we find that the distribution
of heat rates in ISO markets compared to that of traditional markets is such that the latter
group is, on average, more efficient (has lower heat rates). Finally, we discuss documental
evidence claiming that the absence of long-term contracts in ISO markets may be responsible
for this apparent lower investment and consequent inability to respond to fuel cost changes.
We do not claim that investment decisions in either market were more efficient than the
other. Doing so is beyond the scope of this paper and would require a structural model

16

of investment choices. However, we would like to raise the following points. On one hand,
market power in restructured markets may have reduced investment incentives.34 On the
other hand, investment incentives in traditional markets may be inefficiently large because
of the Averch-Johnson effect.
i. Difference-in-Differences Analysis
Using i to denote the state and t to denote the year, we estimate the following model:
Capacityng,it = a + β · Restit × P ostit + γConsumptionit + ηi + ηt + εit .

(2)

The dependent variable in (2) is gas-fired operating combined-cycle nameplate capacity for
1990–2012 from EIA-860 data; see Table 8.35 We focus on the combined-cycle technology
because it is the most competitive to coal due to its low heat rate. The most recent technologies achieve heat rates as low as 7,500 Btu/KWh, while the ones for coal-fired steam
EGUs is close to 10,500 Btu/KWh. Note also that the heat rate is the main driver of fuel
cost that accounts for the largest fraction of variable costs for electricity generators.36
We construct the dependent variable using the gas-fired capacities of all entities in a state
and not just IOUs or IPPs. In terms of notation, Restit is a restructuring dummy based
on Table 1 in Craig and Savage (2013). It equals one if state i adopted an initiative that
introduced competition in its wholesale electricity market, and zero, otherwise. In addition,
P ostit equals one for the restructured states post restructuring and Consumptionit is the
state-level end-use electricity consumption (kilowatt hours).37 Finally, ηi and ηt are state and
year fixed effects. In the remainder of our discussion, we refer to the states that restructured
(did not restructure) as the treated (control) states.
Figure 4 shows the main trends in gas-fired combined-cycle capacity for the treated and
the control states with time series plots of the mean nameplate capacity by year. Each point
on the series is an average of the nameplate capacity across multiple states in a given year.
The black vertical lines identify the time window during which the restructuring took place,
34

For evidence of market power in restructured markets see Wolfram (1999), Borenstein et al. (2002),
and Hortacsu and Puller (2008), among others. We also note that the existence of market may increase in
investment incentives for entrants.
35
We use operating nameplate capacity as defined by EIA.
36
See http://www.eia.gov/electricity/annual/html/epa_08_02.html. The other types of gas-fired
EGUs, steam and combustion turbines, achieve heat rates that are close to 10,500 Btu/KWh and 11,500
Btu/KWh, respectively.
37
We use the column “Access to wholesale markets” of Table 1 in Craig and Savage to construct Restit .
We use the year associated with the access to wholesale markets for each state to construct P ostit , which is
also readily available in Craig and Savage.

17

namely between 1997 and 2004. Table 7 provides some basic summary statistics regarding
capacity for both the control and treated states.
An immediate observation from Figure 4 is the tremendous growth in gas-fired capacity
associated with the combined-cycle technology, especially between the mid-1990s and the
mid-2000s. However, after 2004, which marks the end of the restructuring wave and the
beginning of the shale gas era, the growth is more notable for the control states—from about
5,500 MW to close to 8,000 MW on average. During the same period, the average gas-fired
capacity increased from about 5,500 MW to around 6,000 MW, on average, in the treated
states. The Southeast (Alabama, Florida, and Georgia) and the Southwest drive most of the
increase in the control states. Texas, California, and the Midwest (to a lesser extent) drive
most of the increase in the treated states.
Table 8 formalizes the comparison of mean gas-fired capacity with DID regression results
based on equation (2) controlling for end-use electricity consumption, state, and year fixed
effects. We report results for four alternative approaches to address the severe autocorrelation
within state for two specifications. In column (1), we report OLS estimates with clustered
standard errors by state. In column (2), we report the results for the Prais-Winsten estimator
assuming an AR(1) autocorrelation structure that is common across states. In columns (3)
and (4), we report results for a two-step feasible GLS (FGLS) estimator and an iterated
FGLS estimator (I-FGLS) with AR(1) autocorrelation structures that also allow for crosssectional heteroskedasticity. In all 4 cases, we use almost 700 observations for the contiguous
states.
The first thing to note in Table 8 is that the coefficient estimate of Rest × P ost in the case
of OLS is quite inefficient due to autocorrelation. Although OLS produces a larger point
estimate than the 3 GLS procedures considered, it also produces a much larger standard
error. The GLS estimates, however, are within the confidence interval of the OLS. The reader
should also keep in mind that our interest lies on the qualitative nature of the results—the
sign and not the magnitude of the coefficient—and the exercise should not be perceived as
an attempt to evaluate the effects of restructuring on investment, which in itself is a very
interesting topic.38
38

We estimate (2) excluding observations for which the dependent variable equals zero because we estimated the same model using a log specification. Including the observations with zero values leads to
coefficient estimates between -1,050 and -250 for Rest × P ost. In this case, all coefficient estimates for
Rest × P ost are significant at 5% level except for OLS. The logarithmic specification produced a positive
coefficient estimate for Rest × P ost that can be explained as follows. Using Y to denote the outcome variable, the logarithmic transformation amplifies the differences between the treated (T) and control (C) states
before (B) 1997, (YBT − YBC ), and condenses the differences between the treated and control states after (A)
2004 (YAT − YAC ). As a result, the difference in differences, (YAT − YAC ) − (YBT − YBC ), is positive despite

18

ii. Distribution of heat rates
We study firm-level heat rates to measure the entities’ efficiency, namely their ability to
turn fuel consumption into electricity generation. The motivation behind the rather informal
statistical analysis that follows is the fact that lower heat rates allow generators to respond
more to natural gas prices all else equal. For example, assume generators H and L are both
extra-marginal in the merit order in a world of high gas prices and are fully described by their
heat rates and idle capacity. Both generators have the same idle capacity but generator H
has a substantially higher heat rate than generator L. There is a better chance that generator
L will become infra-marginal if both generators are exposed to the same decrease in natural
gas prices.
Figure 5 contains kernel density plots of natural gas heat rates (MMBtu/MWh) for the
entities of interest using firm-level data. We have constructed these kernel density plots
using the samples in Table 4 and excluding observations with heat rates below 7 and above
20. Panel (a) of Figure 5 compares the heat rate distributions of traditional and ISO IOUs.
Panel (b) compares the heat rate distributions of traditional IOUs and ISO IPPs. Based on a
cursory glance at the figure, the heat-rate distribution for traditional IOUs has a pronounced
bimodal shape. Actually, it lies above its counterpart for the ISO IOUs for heat rates up
to about 10.5 at which point the positions of the two kernel densities switch. In the case of
panel (b), the “change-of-positions” point is somewhat lower at around 9.
Continuing in the spirit of a rather informal analysis, an OLS regression of heat rates on
a constant and an ISO dummy produced intercepts around 10, and highly significant slopes
of about 1.7 and 1.4, using the data in panels (a) and (b), respectively. Repeating the same
regressions in logs produced intercepts around 2.2 and highly significant slopes of about 0.17
and 0.15, respectively. Therefore, lower heat rates may offer another explanation for the fact
that traditional IOUs respond more to gas prices than the ISO entities considered.
iii. Documental evidence
Additional support for our findings based on the difference-in-difference regressions comes
from a report to the U.S. Congress by The Electric Energy Market Competition Task Force
(2007), which was created by the Energy Policy Act of 2005. Among other activities, the
the fact that each of the two components is negative. The identifying assumptions in the DID framework
are scale dependent; if they hold for the level of Y , they may not hold for monotone transformations of Y .
In other words, the way we measure and transform the outcome variable is relevant for the plausibility of
the identifying assumptions, even without postulating any parametric model for the relation of confounders
and treatment to the outcomes, which has motivated the change-in-change estimator of Athey and Imbens
(2006)—see page 155 in Meyer (1995) and page 437 in Athey and Imbens (2006).

19

Task Force solicited comments from industry stakeholders on how competition policy affected investment decisions of both buyers and sellers in wholesale markets. In its executive
summary, the Task Force concludes that investment in new generation exhibited significant variation across the country since the adoption of open access transmission and the
introduction of competition in wholesale electricity markets. Additionally, the investment
dampening effects of a perceived lack of long-term contracts for generation and transmission
is also highlighted. The availability of long-term contracts was deemed to be critical to the
ability of non-utility generators to secure capital for new investment.
This argument is largely in line with Joskow (2006), who makes the case that wholesale
markets do not provide adequate incentives for the proper mix of generating capacity. According to Joskow, and drawing from the U.S. experience, a large part of the problem can
be associated with the failure of wholesale spot markets to produce prices during periods of
capacity constraints that are high enough to attract investment in a least-cost mix of generating capacity. The investment disincentives associated with high volatility in wholesale
energy prices, limited hedging opportunities, and concerns about regulatory opportunism
are also emphasized. Peak load plants, which tend to be gas plants, in particular, are more
exposed to price risk due to their low capacity factors. Furthermore, there is the concern
about strategic use of investment. Large incumbents, may choose to postpone generation
investments to drive up prices from existing assets in the presence of barriers to entry that
prevent new investment in generating capacity.

5

Implications for emissions

Our results based on the fuel consumption share of natural gas indicated heterogeneity in
response to fuel prices for different types of generators with traditional IOUs being more
responsive than both IOUs and IPPs in ISO markets. An obvious next step is to assess the
implications of these differences on emissions of air pollutants, and, in, particular, on carbon
dioxide (CO2 ) emissions. To assess such implications, using i to denote the plant or firm
and t to denote the month, we estimate models of the form:
ln (CO2it ) = a + βng ln(Png,it ) + βcoal ln(Pcoal,it ) + X0it βx + ηi + ηm + εit

(3)

CO2it ≡ CO2ng,it + CO2coal,it ,
where CO2it is the sum of CO2 emissions from coal and natural gas for the ith plant or
firm depending on the level of aggregation. The specification in 3 is largely similar to the
20

specification in 1, excluding the polynomial in generation.
Using data from the EPA Continuous Emissions Monitoring System (CEMS), aggregated
at the plant- or firm-month level, we estimated the model in (3) using linear IV regressions
with the fuel prices treated as endogenous.39 The instruments are the same as the ones used
in the IV models for the gas share of fuel consumption. Once again, we capture heterogeneity
by interacting all terms with the exception of plant/firm fixed effects with an ISO dummy.
Our interest lies in the difference between traditional and ISO IOUs, as well as between
traditional IOUs and ISO IPPs.40
Starting with the plant-level estimates in Table 9, the fuel price coefficients have the
expected signs and are highly significant. An increase in the price of natural gas increases
emissions due to substitution towards coal, which has almost double the CO2 emissions of
natural gas. An increase in the price of coal has the opposite effect. Furthermore, emissions
respond more to the price of coal than to the price of gas for all three groups. With the
exception of coal prices in the case of the IOU comparisons at 10% level (column 1), the
coefficients on the interactions of the fuel prices with the ISO dummy fail to be significant.
Interestingly, in the case of coal, the emissions of ISO IOUs seem to be more responsive to
prices than those for traditional IOUs. The elasticity of emissions with respect to the price
of gas is 0.3 for traditional IOUs, 0.4 for ISO IOUs, and 0.3 for ISO IPPs. It is statistically
significant at 1% in all three cases. The elasticity of emissions with respect to the price
of coal is -0.6 for traditional IOUs, -0.9 for ISO IOUs, and -0.4 for ISO IPPs. It is also
statistically significant at 1%.41
The results using firm-level data (columns 3 and 4) also produce fuel price coefficients
with the expected signs. Once again, emissions respond more to coal prices than to gas
prices. Although the coefficients of the interactions of the fuel prices with the ISO dummy
fail to be significant, their size is very notable, and more so in the case of natural gas. They
are about 40% of the magnitude of the gas price coefficient for the traditional IOUs and
they play an important role in the back-of-the envelope (BOE) calculations discussed below.
Furthermore, traditional IOUs respond similarly to changes in the price of both fuels, while
ISO entities’ response to coal prices is twice as large as their response to gas prices. The
39

We use the primary fuel type of the generator reported in the CEMS data to calculate emissions due to
coal and gas firing. Note that the EPA CEMS data are at the generating-unit level. EPA collects data on
emissions for all EGUs burning fossil fuels and have capacity of at least 25 MW.
40
Using either the Wu-Hausman test or Wooldridge’s score test, we strongly reject the null of exogeneity
for the four variables for the models reported in Table 9.
41
Although not reported in Table 9, for the ISO entities, we calculate elasticities as the sum of the
appropriate coefficient estimates and we calculate the proper standard errors taking into account their
covariances. The same holds for the results using firm-level data discussed in the next paragraph.

21

elasticity of emissions with respect to the price of gas is 0.52 for traditional IOUs, 0.30 for
ISO IOUs, and 0.27 for ISO IPPs and is statistically significant at 1%. The elasticity of
emissions with respect to the price of coal is -0.49 for traditional IOUs and around -0.60 for
ISO IOUs and IPPs; it is also statistically significant at 1%.
Based on theses estimates, we perform a simple back-of-the-envelope (BOE) exercise in
which we translate the drop in gas prices since mid-2008 to a drop in CO2 emissions from
coal-plus-gas firing; see Figure 6. We first construct a monthly price index for natural gas
between June 2008 and December 2012 using consumption-weighted fuel prices for the plants
in our sample. In the spirit of a ceteris paribus exercise, we then translate the index of natural
gas prices into an index of CO2 emissions using the coefficient estimates for natural gas in
Table 9. For example, using the estimates in column (3) of Table 9, the 24% drop in the
price of natural gas between June 2008 and August 2008 translates roughly into a 12% (7%)
decrease in emissions for traditional (ISO) IOUs.42
Using plant-level data, the level of emissions for traditional IOUs in December 2012 was
at 79% of their June 2008 levels. The same number for ISO IOUs is 73% due to the positive
coefficient of the interaction of gas prices with the ISO dummy in column (1) of Table 9.
In the case of ISO IPPs, the emissions in December 2012 are at 81% of their levels in June
2008. With firm level data, traditional IOUs experience a decrease of 33% in their emissions
relative to their June-2008 levels, while the ISO IOUs and IPPs experience a drop of 19%
and 17%, respectively.
In Figure 7, we provide actual and BOE hypothetical emissions eliminating the heterogeneity in responses to the price of natural gas in Table 9. That is, we set the interaction
of the logarithm of the price of natural gas with the ISO dummy equal to zero. The dashed
lines indicate 95% confidence intervals that have been constructed using non-parametric
bootstrap drawing from the estimated residuals. The solid lines correspond to the means of
the bootstrap distributions.43
Using plant-level data, the actual emissions in 2012 were at 82% of their level in 2008
when we focus on traditional and ISO IOUs. The BOE emissions are at about 65%. The
figures are largely similar when we focus on traditional IOUs and ISO IPPs. Had the ISO
IPPs exhibited the same response to the price of natural gas as traditional IOUs, emissions
would have dropped to 62% as opposed to 83% of their 2008 levels. Using firm-level data,
the actual and BOE emission estimates are very similar to our estimates using plant-level
data. We see gains of about 15 percentage points when we focus on IOUs (66% vs. 81%) and
42
43

We calculate the decrease in emissions as follows: 0.5 × 24% = 12% and (0.5 − 0.2) × 24% ≈ 7%.
Our bootstrap makes no correction for heteroskedasticity or clustering.

22

around 16 percentage points in the case of traditional IOUs and ISO IPPs (62% vs. 78%).

6

Conclusions

We examine the environmental impact of the post-2005 natural gas glut caused by the shale
gas boom on the U.S. electric power sector. We focus on short-term coal-to-gas switching
decisions by different types of plants in response to changes in the relative price of the two
fuels. We analyze investor-owned utilities (IOUs) and independent power producers (IPPs) in
restructured electricity markets coordinate by Independent System Operators, and IOUs in
traditional vertically-integrated markets. We find that IOUs operating in traditional markets
are more sensitive to changes in fuel prices than both IOUs and IPPs in restructured markets.
Our findings are robust to alternative model specifications data aggregations. We attribute
the difference in responses to differences in available gas-fired capacity for the most costefficient technology based on formal econometric analysis and documental evidence. The
heterogeneity in the response of fuel consumption to fuel prices has implications for the
carbon dioxide (CO2 ) emissions of the entities considered. The almost 70% drop in the
price of natural gas between June 2008 and the end of 2012 translates to as much as 33%
reduction in CO2 emissions for IOUs in traditional markets, but only up to 19% for IOUs in
restructured markets.

23

References
Athey, S. and G. Imbens (2006). Identification and inference in nonlinear difference-indifference models. Econometrica 74 (2), 431–497.
Borenstein, B., J. Bushnell, and F. Wolak (2002). Measuring market inefficiencies in california’s restructured wholesale electricity market. American Economic Review 92 (5),
1376–1405.
Borenstein, S. and J. Bushnell (2015). The u.s. electricity industry after 20 years of restructuring. NBER WP 21113 .
Brehm, P. (2015). Natural gas prices, electric generation investment, and greenhouse gas
emissions. Working paper .
Bushnell, J. and C. Wolfram (2005). Ownership changes, incentives and plant efficiency:
The divestiture of u.s. electric generation plants. CSEM WP 140 .
Cascio, E. and A. Narayan (2015). Who needs a fracking education? the educational response
to low-skill biased technological change? NBER WP 21359 .
CBO (2014). The economics and budgetary effects of producing oil and natural gas from
shale. Congressional Budget Office, Congress of the United States.
Cicala, S. (2015). When does regulation distort costs? lessons from fuel procurement in us
electricity generation. American Economic Review 105 (1), 411–444.
Craig, J. and S. Savage (2013). Market restructuring, competition and the efficiency of
electricity generation: Plant-level evidence from the united states 1996 to 2006. Energy
Journal 34 (1), 1–31.
Cullen, J. and E. Mansur (2014). Inferring carbon abatement costs in electricity markets: A
revealed preference approach using the shale revolution. NBER WP 20795 .
EIA (2008). U.s coal supply and demand: 2008 review. Technical report, Energy Information
Administration.
EIA (2009). U.s coal supply and demand: 2009 review. Technical report, Energy Information
Administration.
EIA (2013). Electric power annual 2011. Technical report, Energy Information Administration.
24

Fabrizio, K., N. Rose, and C. Wolfram (2007). Do markets reduce costs? assessing the
impact of regulatory restructuring on us electric generation efficiency. American Economic
Review 97 (4), 1250–1277.
Fell, H. and D. Kaffine (2014). A one-two punch: Joint effects of natural gas abundance and
renewables on coal-fired power plants. Colorado School of Mines WP 2014-10 .
FERC (2012). Energy primer: A handbook of energy market basics. Technical report,
Federal Energy Regulatory Commission.
Hausman, C. and R. Kellogg (2015). Welfare and distributional implications of shale gas.
NBER WP 21115 .
Hortacsu, A. and S. Puller (2008). Understanding strategic bidding in multi-unit auctions:
A case study of the texas electricity spot market. RAND Journal of Economics 39 (1),
86–114.
Joskow, P. (1974). Inflation and environmental concern: Structural change in the process of
public utility price regulation. Journal of Law and Economics 17 (2), 291–327.
Joskow, P. (2006). Competitive electricity markets and investment in new generating capacity. MIT-CEEPR WP 06-009 .
Linn, J., L. Muehlenbachs, and Y. Wang (2014). How do natural gas prices affect electricity
consumers and the environment. Resources for the Future Discussion Paper 14-19 .
Macmillan, S., A. Antonyuk, and H. Schwind (2013). Gas to coal competition in the u.s.
power sector. Technical report, International Energy Agency (IEA).
Meyer, B. (1995). Jbes symposium on program and policy evaluation. Journal of Business
and Economic Statistics 13 (2), 151–161.
Muehlenbachs, L., E. Spiller, and C. Timmins (2014). The housing market impacts of shale
gas development. NBER WP 19796 .
Newell, R. and D. Raimi (2015). Shale public finance: Local government revenues and costs
associated with oil and gas development. NBER WP 21542 .
Papke, L. and J. Wooldridge (2008). Panel data methods for fractional response variables
with an application to test pass rates. Journal of Econometrics 145, 121–123.

25

Ramalho, E., J. Ramalho, and J. Murteira (2011). Alternative estimating and testing empirical strategies for fractional regression models. Journal of Economic Surveys 25 (1),
19–68.
Schmalensee, R. and R. Stavins (2012). The so2 allowance trading system: The ironic history
of a grand policy experiment. MIT CEEPR Working Paper .
The Electric Energy Market Competition Task Force (2007). Report to congress on competition in wholesale and retail markets for electric energy. Pursuant to Section 1815 of the
Energy Policy Act of 2005 .
Wolfram, C. (1999). Measuring duopoly power in the british electricity spot market. American Economic Review 89 (4), 803–826.
Wooldridge, J. (1989). Score diagnostics for linear models estimated by two stage least
squares. In G. S. Maddala, P. Phillips, and T. Srinivasan (Eds.), Advances in Econometrics and Quantitative Economics: Essays in Honor of Professor C. R. Rao, pp. 66–87.
Blackwell.

26

Tables and Figures

27

Table 1: Plant-level covariates

Variables

(1)

(2)

(3)

(1)-(2)

(1)-(3)

Trad IOUs

ISO IOUs

ISO IPPs

Trad IOUs-ISO IOUs

Trad IOUs-ISO IPPs

mean
0.115

sd
0.234

mean
0.105

sd
0.255

mean
0.056

sd
0.179

difference
-0.009

p-value

NG share of fuel consumption

0.802

difference
-0.059

Fuel delivery cost (NG)

$6.792

$3.428

$7.109

$3.087

$7.244

$3.119

$0.318

0.253

$0.452

0.101

Fuel delivery cost (coal)

$2.306

$1.236

$1.844

$0.796

$2.058

$0.955

-$0.461

0.006

-$0.248

0.167

Net generation (million MWh)

0.340

0.368

0.286

0.279

0.303

0.340

-0.055

0.423

-0.037

0.617

894

711

730

587

712

706

-164

0.233

-183

0.228

# of units with SCR

0.564

1.236

0.480

0.887

0.447

0.897

-0.084

0.711

-0.117

0.622

# of units with SNCR

0.204

0.754

0.196

0.642

0.255

0.633

-0.008

0.945

0.051

0.674

# of units with dry-lime FGD

0.255

0.607

0.093

0.364

0.040

0.266

-0.162

0.108

-0.215

0.028

# of units with wet-lime FGD

0.231

0.756

0.114

0.688

0.222

0.719

-0.117

0.442

-0.009

0.956

# of units with PM controls

0.529

0.954

0.451

0.904

0.537

1.048

-0.078

0.676

0.008

0.971

# of units in ARP

3.803

2.568

3.173

1.650

2.668

2.057

-0.630

0.173

-1.135

0.025

# of units in CAIRNOX

1.789

2.902

1.272

1.979

1.384

2.204

-0.518

0.099

-0.405

0.228

# of units in CAIROS

1.475

2.692

1.223

2.015

1.340

2.169

-0.251

0.417

-0.135

0.676

# of units in CAIRSO2

1.424

2.681

0.992

1.826

1.099

2.041

-0.432

0.088

-0.324

0.229

# of units in NBP

0.988

2.397

0.930

1.965

1.963

2.373

-0.058

0.860

0.975

0.006

0.033

0.250

0.096

Coal plus NG op. capacity

# of units in SIPNOX

p-value
0.057

# of units in TRNOX

0.365

1.518

0.276

1.025

0.229

0.985

-0.089

0.177

0.03
-0.136

# of units in TRNOXOS

0.365

1.518

0.101

0.671

0.229

0.985

-0.264

0.000

-0.136

0.057

# of units in TRSO2G1

0.073

0.673

0.218

0.959

0.189

0.886

0.145

0.002

0.116

0.019

# of units in TRSO2G2

0.185

1.162

0.049

0.357

0.040

0.449

-0.136

0.017

-0.145

0.057

0.015

obs.

4,086

6,842

4,705

10,928

8,791

# plants

44

68

58

112

102

Note: The table contains the mean and standard deviation of the variables listed in the leftmost column for the three groups of interest: traditional investor-owned utilities (IOUs), IOUs in
ISO/RTO markets, and independent power producers (IPPs) in ISO/RTO markets. The two rightmost columns contain the differences in means and associated p-values. The variables are discussed
in Section 3.1 of the main text. The p-values are calculated using std.errors clustered by plant.

28

Table 2: Firm-level covariates

Variables

(1)

(2)

(3)

(1)-(2)

(1)-(3)

Trad IOUs

ISO IOUs

ISO IPPs

Trad IOUs-ISO IOUs

Trad IOUs-ISO IPPs

mean
0.184

sd
0.193

mean
0.108

sd
0.165

mean
0.063

sd
0.153

difference
-0.076

p-value

NG share of fuel consumption

0.064

difference
-0.120

Fuel delivery cost (NG)

$6.666

$3.003

$6.765

$2.838

$7.215

$3.247

$0.098

0.760

$0.549

0.125

Fuel delivery cost (coal)

$2.347

$1.106

$1.802

$0.644

$2.135

$0.939

-$0.544

0.011

-$0.212

0.349

Net generation (million MWh)

1.770

1.684

1.141

0.876

0.936

0.967

-0.628

0.101

-0.833

0.032

Coal plus NG op. capacity

4,678

3,868

3,234

2,309

2,478

2,675

-1,444

0.113

-2,200

0.019

# of units with SCR

4.627

5.173

1.932

2.490

1.776

2.496

-2.695

0.020

-2.850

0.013

# of units with SNCR

0.837

2.585

0.557

1.717

1.106

1.850

-0.280

0.607

0.269

0.605

# of units with dry-lime FGD

0.846

1.717

0.348

1.211

0.113

0.511

-0.497

0.262

-0.733

0.064

# of units with wet-lime FGD

1.207

2.353

0.374

1.185

0.600

1.486

-0.833

0.078

-0.608

0.196

# of units with PM controls

1.963

3.377

1.138

1.997

1.066

1.536

-0.825

0.327

-0.897

0.265

# of units in ARP

19.000

13.580

13.240

8.804

9.294

8.147

-5.761

0.070

-9.705

0.002

# of units in CAIRNOX

11.120

19.040

6.902

10.690

6.378

12.440

-4.222

0.182

-4.746

0.156

# of units in CAIROS

9.412

16.920

6.544

10.790

5.053

10.970

-2.867

0.327

-4.359

0.147

# of units in CAIRSO2

8.891

17.530

5.386

9.878

4.954

11.230

-3.505

0.165

-3.937

0.138

# of units in NBP

3.275

9.567

3.629

9.319

6.379

12.240

0.354

0.828

3.104

0.077

0.059

0.385

0.209

# of units in SIPNOX

p-value
0.003

# of units in TRNOX

2.040

9.002

1.505

5.612

1.069

5.513

-0.535

0.376

0.06
-0.970

# of units in TRNOXOS

2.040

9.002

0.637

3.814

1.064

5.451

-1.403

0.019

-0.975

0.121

# of units in TRSO2G1

0.586

4.320

1.183

5.237

0.732

4.414

0.597

0.143

0.146

0.705

# of units in TRSO2G1

0.691

5.608

0.285

2.149

0.337

3.378

-0.406

0.330

-0.353

0.124

0.439

obs.

2,075

3,659

2,795

5,734

4,870

# firms

24

58

68

82

92

Note: The table contains the mean and standard deviation of the variables listed in the leftmost column for the three groups of interest: traditional investor-owned utilities (IOUs), IOUs in
ISO/RTO markets, and independent power producers (IPPs) in ISO/RTO markets. The two rightmost columns contain the differences in means and associated p-values. The variables are discussed
in Section 3.1 of the main text. The p-values are calculated using std.errors clustered by firm.

29

Table 3: Variables used in linear IV models for the natural gas share of fuel consumption

Variables
log coal delivery cost

# of units with PM controls

log NG delivery cost

# of units in ARP

log net generation

# of units in CAIRNOX

log net generation sq.

# of units in CAIROS

log net generation cb.

# of units in CAIRSO2

coal plus NG op. capacity

# of units in NBP

SO2 permit price

# of units in SIPNOX

SNOX permit price

# of units in TRNOX

# of units with SCR

# of units in TRNOXOS

# of units with SNCR

# of units in TRSO2G1

# of units with dry-lime FGD

# of units in TRSO2G2

# of units with wet-lime FGD

Note: The table contains the list of the explanatory variables in the linear IV models for the natural
gas share of fuel consumption as discussed in Section 3.3 of the main text. The list excludes the
appropriate fixed effects and the variable interactions with the ISO dummy that equals one if the
variable pertain to entities participating in ISO/RTO wholesale markets, and zero otherwise.

30

Table 4: Linear IV model for the natural gas share of fuel consumption, baseline

Plant

Variable

Firm

(1)

(2)

(3)

(4)

IOUs

IOUs/IPPs

IOUs

IOUs/IPPs

-1.2172***

-1.2172***

-1.1181***

-1.1181***

(0.2088)

(0.2088)

(0.3343)

(0.3343)

1.2368***

1.3259***

0.8063**

0.4602

(0.2518)

(0.2721)

(0.3963)

(0.4198)

1.7297***

1.7297***

2.0842***

2.0842***

(0.2621)

(0.2621)

(0.3358)

(0.3358)

-1.2009***

-1.8999***

-0.4286

-2.3670***

(0.3557)

(0.3714)

(0.6299)

(0.5588)

All obs.

10,928

8,791

5,734

4,870

Boundary obs.

564

244

17

21

Imputed coal obs.

1,752

1,312

0

0

Imputed NG obs.

1,823

1,722

0

0

Cross section

44

44

24

24

Cross section ISO

68

58

58

68

Exogeneity test

11.92***

8.205***

11.32***

10.67***

log NG
log NG × ISO
log coal
log coal × ISO

0.05

0.03

basepanel of the table, we report 2SLS estimates using both plant-level (Plant) and
Note: In the top
firm-level data (Firm) for the baseline model in Section 3.3 of the main text. We use log NG (coal)
to denote the logarithm of the natural gas (coal) price. We use log NG (coal) × ISO, to denote the
interaction of the logarithm of natural gas (coal) price with a dummy that equals one if the entities
indicated in columns (1)–(4) participate in ISO/RTO wholesale markets, and zero otherwise. The
standard errors in parentheses are clustered by state, year, and month. In the bottom panel of the
table, we report the number of observations for which the share of natural gas equals one (Boundary
obs.), the number of observations for which we impute coal and natural gas prices, as well as the
number of plants/firms in traditional (Cross section) and ISO/RTO markets (Cross section ISO).
The asterisks denote statistical significance at 1%(***), 5%(**), and 10%(*), respectively.

31

Table 5: Linear IV models for the natural gas share of fuel consumption, time trend

Plant

Variable

Firm

(1)

(2)

(3)

(4)

IOUs

IOUs/IPPs

IOUs

IOUs/IPPs

-1.2903***

-1.2903***

-2.8072**

-2.8073**

(0.2126)

(0.2126)

(1.1986)

(1.1986)

1.3134***

1.4650***

2.3791*

2.2616*

(0.2546)

(0.2788)

(1.2329)

(1.2255)

2.5852***

2.5852***

9.0109**

9.0113**

(0.7766)

(0.7766)

(3.6980)

(3.6981)

-2.2391**

-3.2984***

-4.8355

-10.4845***

(1.1147)

(0.8742)

(5.5976)

(3.8303)

All obs.

10,928

8,791

5,734

4,870

Boundary obs.

564

244

17

21

Imputed coal obs.

1,752

1,312

0

0

Imputed NG obs.

1,823

1,722

0

0

Cross section

44

44

24

24

Cross section ISO

68

58

58

68

Exogeneity test

6.987***

4.901***

7.141***

7.296***

log NG
log NG × ISO
log coal
log coal × ISO

trendpanel of the table, we report 2SLS estimates using both plant-level (Plant) and
Note: In the top
firm-level data (Firm) for the model with time trend in Section 3.4 of the main text. We use log
NG (coal) to denote the logarithm of the natural gas (coal) price. We use log NG (coal) × ISO,
to denote the interaction of the logarithm of natural gas (coal) price with a dummy that equals
one if the entities indicated in columns (1)–(4) participate in ISO/RTO wholesale markets, and
zero otherwise. The standard errors in parentheses are clustered by state, year, and month. In the
bottom panel of the table, we report the number of observations for which the share of natural gas
equals one (Boundary obs.), the number of observations for which we impute coal and natural gas
prices, as well as the number of plants/firms in traditional (Cross section) and ISO/RTO markets
(Cross section ISO). The asterisks denote statistical significance at 1%(***), 5%(**), and 10%(*),
respectively.

32

Table 6: Linear IV models for the natural gas share of fuel consumption, neighboring plants only

Plant-50 miles

Variable

Plant-100 miles

(1)

(2)

(3)

(4)

IOUs

IOUs/IPPs

IOUs

IOUs/IPPs

-2.8937**

0.1163

-1.7217

-2.6362***

(1.4758)

(5.3443)

(1.5244)

(0.7914)

3.7679**

-0.9117

2.2309

1.2874

(1.6337)

(5.7179)

(1.5541)

(1.9794)

3.5994

-1.8795

6.5424

8.1737***

(2.4159)

(7.2882)

(4.5103)

(2.5112)

-3.1969

1.6898

-5.8518

11.2336

(2.8249)

(5.6636)

(4.5294)

(25.1433)

All obs.

813

213

2,300

1,481

Censored obs.

0

0

27

6

Imput. coal obs.

17

47

200

187

Imput. NG obs.

56

48

348

259

Cross section

2

1

6

6

Cross section ISO

11

2

32

22

Exogeneity test

3.02***

4.501***

6.029***

4.059***

log NG
log NG × ISO
log coal
log coal × ISO

near panel of the table, we report 2SLS estimates using using plants within 50 and
Note: In the top
100 miles for the model with neighboring plants only in Section 3.4 of the main text. We use log
NG (coal) to denote the logarithm of the natural gas (coal) price. We use log NG (coal) × ISO,
to denote the interaction of the logarithm of natural gas (coal) price with a dummy that equals
one if the entities indicated in columns (1)–(4) participate in ISO/RTO wholesale markets, and
zero otherwise. The standard errors in parentheses are clustered by state, year, and month. In the
bottom panel of the table, we report the number of observations for which the share of natural gas
equals one (Boundary obs.), the number of observations for which we impute coal and natural gas
prices, as well as the number of plants/firms in traditional (Cross section) and ISO/RTO markets
(Cross section ISO). The asterisks denote statistical significance at 1%(***), 5%(**), and 10%(*),
respectively.

33

Table 7: State-level combined-cycle gas-fired capacity statistics

Statistic

(1)

(2)

(3)

(4)

Control

Treated

Treated

Treated

All

Pre-Rest.

Post-Rest.

mean

4,213

3,428

616

4,770

std.dev.

5,523

6,181

1,166

7,089

median

2,573

1,377

194

2,697

obs.

178

489

158

331

Coal\Analysis\Fuel_Switching2\Logs\DID_NG_cc_stats.log
Note: We use Control
(Treated) to denote the states that restructured (did not restructure) their
wholesale electricity markets. Columns (3) and (4) contain summary statistics for the treated states
pre- and post-restructuring. For additional details, including the definition of restructuring, see the
discussion in Difference-in-Differences Analysis in Section 4 of the main text.

Table 8: State-level difference-in-differences analysis for combined-cycle gas-fired capacity

(1)

(2)

(3)

(4)

OLS

PW

FGLS

I-FGLS

-1,576.9470*

-909.3138***

-335.0440**

-229.1362***

(865.4763)

(273.8900)

(162.8444)

(80.2367)

End-use cons.

YES

YES

YES

YES

State FE

YES

YES

YES

YES

Year FE

YES

YES

YES

YES

Obs.

667

667

667

667

# States

38

38

38

38

# States Treated

28

28

28

28

TREAT × POST

NG CC, levels

Note: We use TREAT × POST to denote the variable Rest × P ost in equation 2 of Section 4
in the main text. The lower part of each panel indicates whether we control for state-level enduse electricity consumption (End-use cons.), state, and year fixed effects. The column headers PW,
FGLS, and IFGLS denote the Prais-Winsten, feasible GLS, and iterated feasible GLS estimators we
employed. The asterisks denote statistical significance at 1%(***), 5%(**), and 10%(*), respectively.

34

Table 9: Linear IV models of CO2 emissions

Plant

log NG
log NG × ISO
log coal
log coal × ISO
Observations
R-squared

Firm

(3)

(4)

(1)

(2)

IOUs

IOUs/IPPs

IOUs

IOUs/IPPs

0.3020***

0.3020***

0.5259***

0.5259***

(0.0783)

(0.0783)

(0.1208)

(0.1208)

0.0953

-0.0296

-0.2295

-0.2584*

(0.1249)

(0.1132)

(0.1436)

(0.1540)

-0.5886***

-0.5886***

-0.4929***

-0.4929***

(0.1281)

(0.1281)

(0.1023)

(0.1023)

-0.3504*

0.1489

-0.1231

-0.1099

(0.1839)

(0.2017)

(0.1641)

(0.2148)

11,923

9,223

5,733

4,623

0.75

0.79

0.94

0.93

EPA

Note: We report 2SLS estimates using both plant-level (Plant) and firm-level data (Firm) for the
model in Section 5 of the main text. We use log NG (coal) to denote the logarithm of the natural gas
(coal) price. We use log NG (coal) × ISO, to denote the interaction of the logarithm of natural gas
(coal) price with a dummy that equals one if the entities indicated in columns (1)–(4) participate in
ISO/RTO wholesale markets, and zero otherwise. The standard errors in parentheses are clustered
by state, year, and month. The asterisks denote statistical significance at 1%(***), 5%(**), and
10%(*), respectively.

35

Figure 1: Entities of interest by type of wholesale electricity market
Wholesale electricity markets

ISOs/RTOs
IOUs

Traditional
IPPs

IOUs

Note: Throughout the paper, we focus on comparisons between investor-owned utilities (IOUs) and
independent power producers (IPPs) in wholesale markets coordinated by Independent System Operators/Regional Transmission Owners (ISOs/RTOs), and IOUs in traditional vertically-integrated
wholesale markets.
Figure 2: ISO and traditional regional wholesale electricity markets

(a) ISOs/RTO markets

(b) Traditional markets-Southeast

(c) Traditional markets-Northwest

(d) Traditional markets-Southwest

Source: FERC (2012) and New-York ISO

36

Figure 3: Fuel costs

14
12

$/MMBtu

10
8
6
4
2
0
2003 2004 2005 2006 2007 2008 2009 2010 2011 2012

(a) Electric power sector price for natural gas
3.0

2.5

$/MMBtu

2.0

1.5

1.0

0.5

0.0
2003 2004 2005 2006 2007 2008 2009 2010 2011 2012

(b) Electric power sector price for coal

Note: We plot monthly natural gas and coal prices ($/MMBtu) for the electric power sector using
data from the EIA Short Term Energy Outlook Custom Table Builder.44

44

http://www.eia.gov/forecasts/steo/query/index.cfm?

37

Figure 4: State-level combined-cycle gas-fired capacity
8,000

control
treated

nameplate capacity (MW)

7,000
6,000
5,000
4,000
3,000
2,000
1,000
0

1990 1992 1994 1996 1998 2000 2002 2004 2006 2008 2010 2012

Note: The blue (red) line tracks the average of annual state-level gas-fired nameplate capacity for
the control (treated) states. For additional details, see section 4 in the main text.
Figure 5: Kernel density plots of natural gas heat rates with firm-level data
0.40

0.40

Traditional
ISO

0.35

Traditional
ISO

0.35

0.30

0.30

0.25

0.25

0.20

0.20

0.15

0.15

0.10

0.10

0.05

0.05

0.00

0.00
6

8

10

12

14

16

18

20

6

NG heat rate (MMBtu/Mwh)

8

10

12

14

16

18

20

NG heat rate (MMBtu/Mwh)

(a) Traditional IOUs vs. ISO IOUs

(b) Traditional IOUs vs. ISO IPPs

Note: The kernel density plots are based on the samples in Table 4 that pertain to firm-level data
excluding with heat rates below 7 and above 20 MMBtu/MWh.

38

Figure 6: Back-of-the envelope (BOE) CO2 emission reduction
1.10
1.00
0.90

0.90

0.80

0.80

0.70
0.60

0.70
0.60

0.50

0.50

0.40

0.40

0.30

0.30
0.20

0.20
2008

2009

2010

2011

2012

2008

(a) Plant-level data, traditional and ISO IOUs
1.10

2009

2010

2011

2012

(b) Plant-level data, traditional and ISO IPPs
1.10

NG price
ISO emissions
Traditional emissions

1.00

NG price
ISO emissions
Traditional emissions

1.00

0.90

0.90

0.80

0.80
June 2008:1

June 2008:1

NG price
ISO emissions
Traditional emissions

1.00

June 2008:1

June 2008:1

1.10

NG price
ISO emissions
Traditional emissions

0.70
0.60

0.70
0.60

0.50

0.50

0.40

0.40

0.30

0.30

0.20

0.20
2008

2009

2010

2011

2012

2008

(c) Firm-level data, traditional and ISO IOUs

2009

2010

2011

2012

(d) Firm-level data, traditional and ISO IPPs

Note: The blue line is a monthly price index for natural gas between June 2008 and December
2012 using consumption-weighted fuel prices for the plants in our sample. We translate the index of
natural gas prices into an index of CO2 emissions for entities in ISO/RTO (red line) and traditional
(green line) markets using the coefficient estimates for natural gas in Table 9. For additional details,
see section 5 in the main text.

39

Figure 7: Back-of-the envelope (BOE) CO2 emission reduction, eliminating heterogeneity
1.00

1.00

0.90

0.90

0.80

0.80

0.70

0.70

0.60

0.60
Actual
BOE

0.50
2008

Actual
BOE

0.50

2009

2010

2011

2012

2008

2009

(a) Plant, IOUs
1.00

0.95

0.95

0.90

0.90

0.85

0.85

0.80

0.80

0.75

0.75

0.70

0.70

0.65

0.65

0.60

0.60
0.55

Actual
BOE

0.50
2008

2010

2012

2011

2012

Actual
BOE

0.50

2009

2011

(b) Plant, IPPs

1.00

0.55

2010

2011

2012

(c) Firm, IOUs

2008

2009

2010

(d) Firm, IPPs

Note: We provide actual (blue line) and BOE (red lines) hypothetical emissions eliminating the
heterogeneity in responses to the price of natural gas in Table 9. We do so by setting the interaction
of the logarithm of the price of natural gas with the ISO dummy equal to zero. The red short-dashed
lines indicate 95% confidence intervals that have been constructed using non-parametric bootstrap
drawing from the estimated residuals. The solid lines correspond to the means of the bootstrap
distributions. Our bootstrap makes no correction for heteroskedasticity or clustering.

40

A

Online Appendix-Not for Publication

41

A.1

Data details

Prior to conditioning on dual-fuel plants, the total number of observations is 256,606 with
the number of observations per year lying between 23,296 (2003) and 26,357 (2012). The
number of plants per year is between 2,153 (2003) and 2,323 (2012) and does not exhibit
notable variation across years. When limited to dual-fuel plants, the sample consists of
40,067 observations, with the number of observations per year varying between 3,634 (2003)
and 4,145 (2004 and 2007). The number of plants per year is between 312 (2003) and 348
(2007) without notable variation across years. Additional data requirements for the purpose
of the econometric analysis, such as a non-zero gas share of fuel consumption, reduces the
number of observations even further to what is reported in the bottom of Table 1.
Prior to conditioning on dual-fuel firms, the total number of observations is 174,297. The
number of observations per year is between 16,189 (2003) and 18,126 (2006). In addition,
the number of firms per year is between 1,458 (2003) and 1,570 (2005). When limited to
dual-fuel firms, the sample consists of 33,675 observations, with a number of observations
per year that lies between 2,971 (2003) and 3,501 (2006). The number of firms per year is
now as low as 255 (2003) and as high as 296 (2007). As in the case of the plant-level data,
additional data requirements reduces the number of observations even further to what is
reported in the bottom of Table 2.

A.2

Additional discussion of baseline results

In the Appendix, we provide a brief discussion of the variables that enter the specification
of the linear IV models that we don’t report in Table 4.
With plant-level data, the coefficients of the covariates other than prices for the traditional
IOUs are essentially identical in both models with plant-level data. Although the quadratic
and cubic terms of the generation polynomial are significant, the linear term is not. Operating
capacity and seasonal NOx prices seem to matter—both enter with a positive coefficient.
The number of EGUs equipped with NOx SCR (+) and wet-lime scrubbers (-) are also
significant.45 The coefficients for the number of EGUs under the CAIRSO2 (-), NBP (-),
and TRSO2G1 (+) are also significant. Summer month fixed effects are generally significant.
Increased demand for cooling boosts the demand for electricity which in its turn increases
the share of gas-fired generation given that intermediate and peaking generation is mostly
gas-fired.
45

We use (+/-) to indicate a positive/negative coefficient.

42

In the case of IOUs, we see significant interactions (with the ISO dummy) for the quadratic
and cubic terms of the generation polynomial, the permit prices, the number of EGUs
equipped with various abatement technologies (except for the wet-lime scrubbers), as well
as the number of EGUs under the ARP. For IPPs, the interactions for the quadratic and
cubic terms of the generation polynomial, the seasonal NOx permit prices, the number of
EGUs with wet-lime scrubbers, and the number of EGUs under the ARP, CAIROS, and the
CAIRSO2 programs.
With firm-level data, the coefficients of the remaining covariates for the traditional IOUs
are essentially identical in both models. All terms of the generation polynomial fail to be
significant. Operating capacity and permit prices seem to matter—all enter with a positive
coefficient. Additionally, the number of EGUs equipped with NOx SNCR (-) and dry-lime
scrubbers (-) are also significant. Furthermore, the coefficients for the number of EGUs
under the CAIRSO2 (-), the TRNOX (-), and the TRSO2G1 (+) programs are significant.
Finally, the summer month fixed effects appear to be significant.
In the case of IOUs, we see significant interactions (with the ISO dummy) for the SO2
permit prices (both negative), the number of EGUs with dry lime scrubbers (+) and PM (+)
abatement technologies, as well as the number of EGUs under the ARP (+), the CAIRSO2
(-), the NBP (-), and the TRSO2G2 programs. For IPPs, the interactions with the terms of
the capacity, the permit prices (both negative), the number of EGUs with dry-lime scrubbers
(+), and the number of EGUs under the ARP (-), and the TRSO2G1(+) programs, are all
significant.

A.3

Additional explanations for response heterogeneity

The difference in incentives to reduce costs between traditional and ISO IOUs may explain
the difference in their responses to fuel prices. Discussions with an individual representing a
utility with operations in ISO and traditional markets corroborated this explanation.46 He
explained that in ISO markets his company is able to keep only a part of cost savings for
power plants that generate in excess of their required demand—the remaining cost savings
are passed directly to the final customers. In contrast, in traditional markets, the utility is
the residual claimant to any costs savings taking place between rate hearings.47 Further46

We held this discussion in late winter of 2013. We maintain the anonymity of the individual per his
request.
47
Regulatory lags in rate hearings offers an incentive for the utilities to reduce costs since they reap the
profits between hearings (e.g., Joskow (1974)). Fabrizio et al. (2007) argue that frictions in in cost-of-service
regulation have limited impact on the incentive for cost-reducing efforts apart from periods of rapid nominal

43

more, based on conversations we have had, ISO IOUs hedge their fuel purchases more than
traditional IOUs. Actually, utility commissions encourage utilities to hedge their fuel costs.
As a result, they are insulated from short-term price fluctuations, and, hence, their output
is insensitive to short-term changes in fuel prices. Unfortunately, data availability precludes
us from providing empirical support for this explanation.
Finally, we checked whether the different responses to fuel prices for traditional and ISO
IOUs could be attributed to a different mix of own generation and wholesale power purchases
to serve their demand. IOUs may respond less to fuel prices if own generation accounts for
a smaller fraction of their source of electricity. Using data from EIA-861, we calculated the
fraction of IOUs’ total disposition from wholesale power purchases (MWh) .48 Using annual
data for 17 traditional and 30 ISO IOUs with dual-fuel plants for 2003–2012, wholesale
purchases accounted for 19% of traditional IOUs’ disposition, on average, oscillating between
16% and 22%. The same figures for ISO IOUs were, 26%, 29%, and 32%, respectively.
Hence, the fact that wholesale power purchases account for a larger fraction of the source of
electricity for ISO IOUs compared to traditional IOUs may also explain the fact that they
respond less to fuel prices.

cost inflation.
48
EIA-861 follows the terminology total sources and total disposition. Generation and purchases from
electricity suppliers are among sources. Sales to ultimate consumers and sales for resale are part of disposition.

44

