                                NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                   GEOGRAPHIC DISPERSION OF ECONOMIC SHOCKS:
                    EVIDENCE FROM THE FRACKING REVOLUTION

                                            James Feyrer
                                           Erin T. Mansur
                                           Bruce Sacerdote

                                        Working Paper 21624
                                http://www.nber.org/papers/w21624


                      NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                               1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                 Cambridge, MA 02138
                                     October 2015




We thank Mahnum Shazad for excellent research assistance, Drillinginfo for providing the natural
gas and oil production data, Liz Cascio for the shale play data, and the National Science Foundation
for generous funding. The views expressed herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect
the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.

© 2015 by James Feyrer, Erin T. Mansur, and Bruce Sacerdote. All rights reserved. Short sections
of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full
credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
Geographic Dispersion of Economic Shocks: Evidence from the Fracking Revolution
James Feyrer, Erin T. Mansur, and Bruce Sacerdote
NBER Working Paper No. 21624
October 2015
JEL No. E24,Q33,Q35,Q43

                                              ABSTRACT

The combining of horizontal drilling and hydrofracturing unleashed a boom in oil and natural gas production
in the US. This technological shift interacts with local geology to create an exogenous shock to county
income and employment. We measure the effects of these shocks within the county where production
occurs and track their geographic propagation. Every million dollars of oil and gas extracted produces
$66,000 in wage income, $61,000 in royalty payments, and 0.78 jobs within the county. Outside the
immediate county but within the region, the economic impacts are over three times larger. Within
100 miles of the new production, one million dollars generates $243,000 in wages, $117,000 in royalties,
and 2.49 jobs. Thus, over a third of the fracking revenue stays within the regional economy. Our results
suggest new oil and gas extraction led to an increase in aggregate US employment of 725,000 and
a 0.5 percent decrease in the unemployment rate during the Great Recession.


James Feyrer                                         Bruce Sacerdote
Department of Economics                              6106 Rockefeller Hall
Dartmouth College                                    Department of Economics
6106 Rockefeller Hall                                Dartmouth College
Hanover, NH 03755-3514                               Hanover, NH 03755-3514
and NBER                                             and NBER
james.feyrer@dartmouth.edu                           Bruce.I.Sacerdote@dartmouth.edu

Erin T. Mansur
Dartmouth College
100 Tuck Hall
Hanover, NH 03755
and NBER
erin.mansur@dartmouth.edu
1     Introduction

The technological innovation of combining horizontal drilling with hydrofracturing
has created an oil and natural gas boom within the United States. The combination
of technological change and preexisting geology has generated large income shocks in
many areas of the country. Employment in the mining industry grew by 60 percent
during a period when overall US unemployment reached 10 percent. We use the
fracking revolution to study how income and employment shocks propagate across
geography and industries.
    We measure county-level impacts of new oil and gas production caused by the
fracking boom. Our identification strategy uses a comprehensive data set of annual
production (appropriately instrumented) to measure the effects on income, employ-
ment and crime. Our data allow us to know the exact value of new production taken
out of the ground in any county in a given year. Using measures of income from the
Bureau of Labor Statistics (BLS) and the Internal Revenue Service (IRS), we can
examine how much of the value of new production stays within the county where
the production occurs.
    These income effects take several forms. First, wages of workers in the resource
extraction and transportation industries are directly impacted through participation
in the extraction process. Second, landowners are paid royalties on the value of
production taken from their land. Finally, we examine the impact on wages and
employment in industries not directly related to oil and gas production.
    The county may not be the ideal level of observation because workers and
landowners may be located in counties adjacent to where new production is oc-
curring. By examining the impact of new production at increasing distances we can
track the propagation of the shocks over space. This spatial analysis is important



                                         2
because we are interested in how fracking impacts the entire region, not just the
immediate county. This is particularly important since substantial new fracking
activity occurs in sparsely populated counties. We also examine data aggregated to
the state level.
   Several conclusions emerge from our analysis. First, the counties where extrac-
tion occurs enjoy significant economic benefits. Second, the effects grow larger as
we widen the geographic area being examined. The state-level impact on jobs and
income is approximately five times as large as the immediate county effect with most
of the impact happening within 100 miles of the drilling sites. Third, we find no
significant change in crime rates.
   Each million dollars of new oil and gas production is associated with a $66,000
increase in wage income and 0.78 new jobs within the county. Roughly 40 percent
of the income increase is in industries not directly related to oil and gas extraction
such as finance, leisure, hospitality, and local government. Of the $66,000 increase in
local wages, $39,000 are wage payments to oil and gas industry workers, including
trucking, and another $27,000 are wage spillovers to workers in other industries.
There are another $61,000 in royalty payments to lease holders within the county.
The direct effects imply that roughly 10 percent of the total value of gas and oil
extracted remains in the county in the form of wages and royalty payments with
another 2.7 percent in indirect activity.
   Within a 100-mile radius, each million dollars in new production is associated
with wage increases of $243,000 and 2.49 jobs, which are about three times as
large as the effects at the county level. We also find regional spillovers for royalty
payments: each million dollars generates almost $117,000 of royalty payments within
a 100-mile radius. Since royalty payments are 12 to 20 percent of the production
value, this suggests that the majority of royalty payments remain local. Overall,


                                            3
we conclude that 36 percent of the value of new production shows up in households
within commuting distance of the drilling locations.
    Our results also provide some insight into the aggregate impact of the frack-
ing boom. A significant portion of the increase in oil and gas production occurred
during the depths of the Great Recession. With the national economy operating at
significantly less than full employment, the increased demand for labor generated by
the fracking boom almost certainly increased overall employment. Our employment
estimates suggest that an increase of 725,000 jobs were associated with new oil and
gas extraction between 2005 and 2012. Assuming no displacement from other em-
ployment, this suggests that the fracking boom lowered aggregate US unemployment
by 0.5 percent during the Great Recession.



2     Literature Review

There is a related and growing literature on whether or not fossil fuels create a
resource curse in a region by raising wages in one sector and crowding out other
sectors. Jacobsen and Parker (2014) find that the oil bust in the 1980s harmed
manufacturing employment more than the boom in the 1970s helped employment
in this sector. This is analogous to the Black, McKinnish and Sanders (2005) finding
that the coal bust hurt income and employment more than the boom helped.
    In contrast, Allcott and Keniston (2014) find that energy extraction benefits,
rather than harms, local manufacturing employment by using exposure to national
shocks (as measured by proven reserves) as an instrument. Similarly, Weber (2013)
does not find evidence of a resource curse and instead finds that non-mining jobs
are positively correlated with mining jobs. Michaels (2011) uses data covering a
longer time horizon–from 1890 to 1990–and finds that oil abundant counties in the


                                         4
US South saw higher population growth and higher income per capita growth than
counties without oil.
       Several recent papers have focused on the fracking revolution, but use different
empirical strategies from our paper. Weber (2012) examines county-level direct
effects of gas production in three states from 1998 to 2008. Other papers have used
indirect measures of production. Fetzer (2014) examines the county-level direct
effect of any drilling activity after 2007 by instrumenting with the presence of shale.
Maniloff and Mastromonaco (2014) study the effect of the number of wells (and
a similar instrument) as a measure of production. 1 Our paper differs from the

literature in several ways: we use detailed measures of production from new wells
for all states; we study the effect during the Great Recession; and we examine
regional economic spillovers from shocks to this industry.
       Our work has implications beyond an understanding of the local effects of oil
and gas fracking. We are studying a large and arguably exogenous shock that can
teach us about the size and breadth of geographic spillovers from localized economic
activity. Our estimates contribute to the literature on the economic responses to
local shocks in the spirit of Blanchard and Katz (1992), Black et al. (2005) and
Shoag (2015). Black et al. (2005) find that each coal mining job added to a county
during the coal boom created an additional 0.17 jobs in other industries. In contrast,
we find larger spillovers from fracking at both the county and state level. 2
       It is worth noting that the increase in drilling activity is not universally viewed
as positive. The regions where this activity is taking place tend to be rural and
   1
     Other papers related to this topic include Bartik, Currie, Greenstone and Knittel (2014),
Considine, Watson and Considine (2011), Deller and Schreiber (2013), Marchand (2012), Wang
and Krupnick (2013), and Weber (2013).
   2
     For example, at the county level, each million dollars of oil extracted results in 0.49 jobs
within the natural resources and the transportation categories. But there are an additional 0.31
jobs created in other industries such as construction and leisure. This implies a spillover of 0.6
jobs for every person employed directly in extraction.



                                                5
drilling activities generate significant local impacts. Newell and Raimi (2015) find
significant heterogeneity in the impact on local government finance. Media reports
have noted increases in crime and congestion that have accompanied increased eco-
nomic activity.3 Many landowners and environmentalists have expressed concern

about water contamination, either from fracking fluids leaking into aquifers or sur-
face water contamination from leaks in ponds where fracking water (fluid) is stored.
A 2015 draft study by the EPA admits this possibility but finds it to be quite rare. 4
These concerns have led to many communities questioning whether the local ben-
efits exceed the costs. New York State has placed a moratorium on fracking while
several counties in Colorado have done the same.
      Several recent papers have examined the environmental concerns with shale gas
and oil, including water quantity, water quality, local air pollution, methane leak-
ages, and earthquakes. Howarth, Ingraffea and Engelder (2011) debate many of
these concerns and risks. In a recent paper examining people’s perceptions of the
risks from fracking, Muehlenbachs, Spiller and Timmins (forthcoming) find that
homes relying on wells for drinking water have fallen in value because of drilling
activity in Pennsylvania. The empirical evidence does find some support for these
concerns. For example, Olmstead, Muehlenbachs, Shih, Chu and Krupnick (2013)
find increases in chloride concentrations downstream of treatment plants processing
shale gas waste and increased concentrations of total suspended solids in watersheds
with new shale gas wells.
  3
     See, For example, see these three New York Times articles: Healy (2013), “As Oil Floods
Plains Towns, Crime Pours In”; Galbraith (2012), “In Oil Boom, Housing Shortages and Other
Issues”; and Urbina (2011b), “A Tainted Water Well and Concern There May Be More.”
   4
     EPA (2015), http://www2.epa.gov/hfstudy/executive-summary-hydraulic-fracturing-study-
draft-assessment-2015




                                             6
3         Local Geology and the Technology of Fracking

Domestic oil production has increased every year since 2008, reversing a decline that
began in 1986. The Energy Information Administration (EIA) projects that the US
will soon exceed the 1970s level of oil production of 11.5 million barrels per day
(EIA 2013a). As a result, the US oil and gas industries added about 300,000 jobs
from 2004 to 2012.5 Additionally, fuel prices have responded to this supply shock:

domestic natural gas prices fell by two thirds between 2005 and 2012 while global
oil prices fell by half in the fall of 2014. 6
        Shale gas and oil refer to fossil fuels trapped in shale formations, which are fine-
grained, sedimentary rocks. While these resources have been known for decades, it
was not until the early 2000s that they began to be developed in earnest (EIA 2013b).
Wang and Krupnick (2013) point to several culminating events that lead to the shale
revolution starting in the mid-2000s. Industry combined the use of several techno-
logical innovations in horizontal drilling, hydrofracturing, and three-dimensional
seismic imaging.7 High natural gas prices enabled some firms to risk experiment-
ing with the new technique. Finally, favorable conditions exist in many locations
throughout the United States: conditions include geology, property rights, market
    5
     Employment in the natural resources and mining sector grew from 1.68 million in 2004 to 1.98
million in 2012 (BLS Quarterly Census of Employment and Wages). Similar changes are reported
in the BLS Current Employment Statistics for mining category, 509,000 to 800,000 over this time
period.
   6
     Gas prices fell from $10 per million British Thermal Units (MMBTU) in October 2005 to $3.35
by the end of 2012 (see http://www.eia.gov/dnav/ng/hist/n9190us3m.htm). The oil price drop
occurs after our sample period and was due to a number of factors in addition to US crude supply.
Below, we examine whether there are asymmetric responses to prices rising or falling.
   7
     The process of developing shale gas and oil begins with geological surveying. New seismic
imaging technology allows geologist to better understand the structure and properties of the sub-
surface rocks (Bohi 1999). After permitting, a firm will develop a multi-well pad. From one
location, the company can drill eight horizontal wells and access the same reservoir volume as
sixteen vertical wells (DOE 2009). Casing and cement is installed to protect against leaks. Wells
are typically drilled thousands of feet below groundwater and then turn horizontal thousands of
feet more. Next, a firm will begin hydraulic fracturing by injecting high-pressure fracture fluid
mix of water, sand and chemicals into the well bore. This causes cracks and fractures to develop
and the hydrocarbon to be extracted.

                                                 7
structure, pipeline infrastructure, and water availability. Joskow (2013) discusses
the importance of deregulation in the recent developments in the gas industry.
    Over the past decade, the share of US petroleum production coming from shale
resources has increased dramatically. Figure 1 shows oil and gas production sep-
arately for vertically and horizontally drilling fuels. In 2000, the amount of fuel
produced from vertically drilled wells greatly exceeded that from horizontal wells.
By 2013, this pattern has reversed and aggregate production has increased dramat-
ically. This trend is not expected to end soon (EIA 2013a). EIA estimates that the
United States has 223 billion barrels of shale oil and 2,431 trillion cubic feet of shale
natural gas, over a third of the world’s recoverable shale resources (EIA 2013b). The
locations of this activity is geographically specific. For each county, Figure 2 shows
the cumulative value of new fossil fuel extraction per capita between 2004 and 2012.




4     Data Description

For our analysis we combine sectoral level data on income and employment from the
BLS, income data from the IRS, and data on oil and natural gas production from
the energy information service Drillinginfo.
    From the BLS, we use the Quarterly Census of Employment and Wages, which
has information on annual average employment and wages by county. These data
come from employers and therefore are our best measure of county-level economic
activity. These data are disaggregated into the following sectors: natural resources
and mining; trade, transportation and utilities; construction; leisure and hospitality;
financial activities; local government; education and health services; information;
manufacturing; professional and business services; and state and federal government.


                                            8
                                                        Figure 1: Production By Drill Type
                                                          Oil from Horizontal Wells




                                                                                                                                                 1200
                                100
                                                          Oil from Vertical Wells
                                                          Gas from Horizontal Wells




                                                                                                              Natural Gas (Millions MMBTU/Month)
                                                          Gas from Vertical Wells




                                                                                                                                        1000
                  Oil (Millions Barrels/Month)
                                         80




                                                                                                                                  800
                              60




                                                                                                                        600
                40




                                                                                                              400
                                                                                                              200
                                20




                                                 2000   2002    2004      2006        2008   2010   2012   2014


Notes: We report aggregate barrels of oil produced in a given month from wells with a drilling
 type of vertical or horizontal (including directional). These totals differ from other national
reports as we exclude wells with unknown drilling types. There are 5.6 MMBTU per barrel of
                           crude oil. Data source is drillinginfo.com.




                                                    Figure 2: New Production from Fracking




Notes: This figure plots each county’s cumulative value of new production per capita from 2004
                      to 2012. Data sources are drillinginfo.com and BLS.




                                                                                 9
These disaggregated data allow us to see if the income and employment effects are
restricted to sectors that are directly employed in oil and gas extraction (mining
and transportation) or whether these effects are seen in other sectors.
       The IRS Statistics of Income data have county-level information on annual wages,
dividends, interest and other income. These data are likely to be less useful than the
BLS data for county-level estimation because the data are assigned to the county
where the tax form is filed by the individual rather than the location of economic
activity. For workers that are commuting, or for those that have temporarily relo-
cated for a job, the location where they file taxes may be different from the location
where they actually perform the work and collect paychecks. These data are poten-
tially useful in another way. The IRS data are broken into three categories: wages;
interest and dividends; and other income. 8 We are particularly interested in the
other income category because this is where royalties to land holders should appear.
These royalties can be 12 to 20 percent of the value of production (Urbina 2011a).
       The crime data are from the Uniform Crime Reporting Statistics of the Depart-
ment of Justice.9 The UCR Program collects statistics on violent crime (murder
and non-negligent manslaughter, forcible rape, robbery, and aggravated assault)
and property crime (burglary, larceny-theft, and motor vehicle theft) from local
agencies.
       Drillinginfo collects oil and natural gas drilling information from various state
agencies for each well and month. We use fuel prices from the EIA to determine
values.10 We have BLS and Drillinginfo data from 2004 to 2014. However, the IRS
   8
     Results on the interest and dividends portion of the IRS income were always insignificant and
are not reported.
   9
     These data are available at http://www.ucrdatatool.gov/ and http://doi.org/10.3886/
ICPSR35019.v1
  10
     We use the West Texas Intermediate monthly spot oil price (http://www.eia.gov/dnav/pet/
pet_pri_spt_s1_m.htm) and the U.S. natural gas monthly wellhead price (http://www.eia.gov/
dnav/ng/hist/n9190us3m.htm).



                                               10
data are available with more of a lag, so we focus on 2004 to 2012 when we have all
data for all variables. All values are converted to 2014 dollars using the CPI.
   Drillinginfo has information on over one million wells that were active during
our sample. We define oil wells as those wells with a well type classification of Oil
or O&G, and gas wells as those classified as Gas. We focus only on wells that begin
producing oil or gas in a given year. New oil wells account for nine percent of the
oil produced in the US during our sample. New gas wells account for 13 percent of
natural gas. We aggregate these data by county and year.
   Our identification strategy relies on changes in production and changes in out-
comes and hence identification derives from the states and counties that are the
major producers of each fuel. The most active counties producing oil are in Cali-
fornia, Colorado, Kansas, Louisiana, New Mexico, North Dakota, Ohio, Oklahoma,
and Texas. The most active gas-producing counties are in Arkansas, Colorado,
Louisiana, New Mexico, Pennsylvania, Utah, Texas, West Virginia, and Wyoming.
From 2005 to 2012, the new production in our sample is valued at $81 billion in oil
and $136 billion in gas.
   Our county-level analysis includes all US counties with employment of more
than 446 people in 2004, at the beginning of our sample. The 63 excluded counties
represent 15 states and are the smallest two percent by employment. We exclude
these counties because there are a few with very small populations and significant
new production of oil and natural gas. Our analysis examines the value extracted
per capita: therefore, the results are sensitive to the inclusion of these counties. To
take one extreme example, Loving County Texas has over $10 million in new oil per
capita in one year with about 50 workers. For the sake of consistency, we exclude
all counties below a size threshold that excludes these outliers. The new production
in these counties is included in all the rest of our analysis including the state-level


                                          11
results, the distance results, and the county-size results.
       Our sample consists of eight years, 3,082 counties, and 24,646 county-year obser-
vations for each industry. Well data are missing for a few observations, making the
sample an unbalanced panel. The sample exhibits substantial variation in county-
level employment, with a coefficient of variation over three. For this reason, we
normalize all variables by historic employment, which we proxy for using the one-
year lag of total employment.
       We construct instruments using data on the presence of shale in a region (i.e.
plays) from the EIA. We assign each county to a specific play. Small plays with
less than ten counties are combined into a single “other” category, resulting in 23
designations of plays such as the Utica, Marcellus, Devonian, Antrim, New Albany,
Barnett, and Bakken shale plays.



5        Empirical Framework

Our estimating equation examines the percentage change in total wages. The de-
pendent variable ΔW agesit is the one-year change in annual wage payments across

all industries divided by the one-year lag of average employment. 11,12

       The key independent variable is the total value of oil and natural gas extracted
from wells that started producing in the current year measured in million dollars
per capita, N ewV alueit . New production is the variable of interest because it rep-
resents a potentially exogenous shock to local economic activity. New production is
a function of preexisting geology and the newly introduced technology of horizontal
drilling combined with fracking. These should be independent of other shocks o c-
  11
     All references to per capita data in the paper are referenced to average employment levels.
  12
     Given the large variation in county populations (levels of employment), we obtain similar but
noisier estimates if we instead regress annual changes of the level of employment on the level of
fossil fuel production.


                                               12
curring within the county. Ideally these shocks should occur independent of other
county characteristics. In the Appendix, Table A1 shows that the areas with frack-
ing are historically similar to other areas based on 2004 population, income, and
wage rates. This also shows that early adopting counties are similar to late adopting
counties.
       We control for county fixed effects, αi , and year fixed effects, ωt . Standard errors
are clustered by state-year in order to control for spacial correlation. 13 For county
i in year t, we estimate:


                        ΔW agesit = β ∗ N ewV alueit + αi + ωt + it                             (1)



5.1        Spatial Propagation

County-level analysis of the BLS data only includes employment that firms report
as being located in the county where the fracking activity is occurring. To the
extent that drillers are transient workers who are reported as being employed by
establishments in a different county (e.g. the company headquarters), county-level
results will understate the impact of new oil and gas production. In addition to
the reporting problem workers may not live and shop in the counties where the
new extraction is taking place. This will result in spillover economic activity in
neighboring counties that will not be picked up in the county-level analysis.
       Examining data aggregated at the state level will deal with both of these issues.
Firms are required to pay unemployment insurance premiums in the state where
the worker is located so state level aggregates should accurately reflect the location
of work. States are not the ideal level of aggregation because they vary widely in
  13
    Clustering at the county level, which will better deal with serial correlation, does not signifi-
cantly change any of our results.



                                                 13
size and many states contain multiple economic areas.
   We further extend our county-level analysis to include new production in sur-
rounding counties. We sum the value of new production and the change in income
with a 100 miles radius of the centroid of a county and divide it by the the pop-
ulation living within the 100 mile radius to generate new production and income
per capita. We estimate equation (1) on these summed values for each county. By
performing a similar analysis at different distances we can analyze the geographic
propagation of income and employment as we get farther from the source of the new
production.


5.2    Instrumental Variables

Our new production measure will be a function of the availability of the new resource
and the actions taken to extract it. While the former is clearly exogenous, the latter
may not be. It could be that some areas are fracked earlier because the cost of
gaining leases is low due to low land values or because wages are low due to high
unemployment. For this reason we will instrument for new production in each county
using geological formations.
   Our main approach is to use the time series of productivity in geological regions
(a play) to predict county-level production. We generate predictions for aggregate
new production in each county for each year by estimating:


                          ln(N ewV alueit ) = αi + λjt + it                       (2)


where αi is a dummy for each county and λjt represents a set of dummy variables for

each play-year combination. We can then generate a prediction for new production




                                         14
per capita for each county year pair:


                                                  ˆ
                            N ewVˆalueit = eα̂i +λjt /popit                      (3)


   The predicted values for new production per capita are based on the timing of
new production for all the counties within a particular play. Each individual county
represents a small part of the play’s production so that the instrument is exogenous
with respect to the idiosyncratic rollout of fracking within individual counties. We
end up with 23 plays with some counties in multiple plays. On average each play
contains 32 counties.
   These predicted values will be used as instruments in an IV regression where
new production is instrumented using our predicted values. We are using this two
step process to generate instruments because the functional form for predicting new
production is very different than the functional form when we specify the regres-
sion. We will focus on new production per person in our estimations because we
are interested in how new production impacts communities. The availability of new
production is geographic and orthogonal to the presence of people. A log specifi-
cation for generating predicted values allows us to include a multiplicative dummy
for each county. The predicted values for each county will incorporate the timing of
new production from the play dummies while controlling for the idiosyncratic level
of production in each county. Since we are getting all of our identification in the
second stage from the timing of new production our instruments will be valid.




                                          15
6        Income and Employment Results

Table 1 shows the results of estimating equation (1) for aggregate wages from the
BLS, and adjusted gross income (AGI), wages, and other income from the IRS.
Each entry in the table represents the coefficient from a different regression. The
OLS estimates suggest that one million dollars of new oil and gas production in
associated with a BLS wage increase of $35,000 within the county. The impact
increases substantially when we expand the geographic area of interest. At a 100
mile radius from the county centroid each million dollars of new production per
capita is associated with wage increases of $214,000. Aggregated to the state level
this increases to $287,000.
       As described in the previous section, the OLS results may be biased because
the choice of counties for drilling may be non-random. We deal with this potential
endogeneity by generating instruments based on the potential for fracking within
a particular county based on the geology of the region. For the remainder of the
paper we will confine our discussion to IV estimation while continuing to report
OLS results in the tables.
       Panel B of Table 1 reports our IV results. 14 These estimates suggest that one
million dollars of new oil and gas production in associated with a BLS wage increase
of $66,000 within the county. This increases substantially as we look more regionally.
At a 100 mile radius from the county centroid each million dollars of new production
is associated with wage increases of $243,000. Aggregated to the state level this
increases to $343,000.
       Results using IRS data suggest smaller wage effects, with one million of new
production associated with $27,000 in increased wages at the county level, $84,000
  14
    The first-stage results are reported in Table A2. Separate estimates are reported for oil values,
natural gas values, and the combined values. All F-stats are greater than 10.



                                                 16
within a 100 mile radius, and $171,000 at the state level. These point estimates
are one half to one third of the corresponding BLS wage results. We will tend to
rely on the BLS wage data when available because the BLS data reflect the county
where the firm is located, not where taxes are filed. We feel that this more reliably
captures the geographic dispersion of wages from new production and is therefore
measured with less error than the IRS data. This measurement error is attenuating
our coefficients toward zero in the IRS income results.
       The main advantage of using the IRS data is that the IRS Income measures
capture the income from royalty payments that is unavailable from the BLS. We
define IRS Other Income to be the difference between AGI and the sum of wages
and salaries, dividends, interest, and capital gains. This is an imperfect measure
of royalty income since it also includes business income and partnership income.
However since we are using changes in the this category for counties with a great
deal of new oil and gas extraction, the change in the royalty component is likely
to dominate the change in non-royalty income. If anything we risk overstating the
effects of new oil and gas production on royalties since new production in a county
will also raise business income. 15

       Our results suggest that one million dollars of new production leads to $61,000 at
the county level and $117,000 at the 100 mile level. At the state level, our coefficients
for IRS other are extremely noisy with insignificant point estimates. Combining the
BLS wage results with the IRS Other estimates from royalty payments we find that
almost 16 percent of the value of new production remains in the county of production
and 36 percent stays within a 100 mile radius.
  15
     Regressions on dividends, interest, and capital gains show no significant relationship with new
oil and gas production and are therefore not included in our tables.




                                                17
6.1       Geographic Dispersion of Income

The choice of a 100 mile radius for Table 1 was not a random one. Figure 3 shows
the results of a series of regressions of county-level income changes against the value
of new production within a radius of the centroid of the county. 16 As the distance

is increased, production from other counties is included in the analysis including
production occurring in other states. The coefficients at zero represent the impact
of production located within the county (these coefficients are identical to the values
reported in Table 1). Between zero and 50 miles very little new production is being
added. As we move from 50 to 100 miles production in adjacent counties is taken
into account and the coefficients rise. From 100 to 200 miles the coefficient on
Wages flattens while the coefficient on IRS Other Income continues to rise modestly.
This distance pattern is consistent with a commuting zone of 100 miles being the
most appropriate unit of observation. The continued rise of IRS Other income past
100 miles may indicate that land ownership is more geographically dispersed than
employment though we cannot reject that the impact at 100 miles is the same as at
200 miles.
      Splitting the results by county size provides additional evidence on the propaga-
tion of shocks in Table A3. We bin counties into 10 equally-sized deciles by initial
employment and estimate the main coefficient separately for each. Counties with
over 8,000 workers see significantly larger effects of new production that are statisti-
cally similar to the state results. This suggests that counties with larger populations
are more likely to see the employment gains remain within the county while smaller
counties will draw on surrounding counties for workers.
 16
      This figure reports instrumental variables results. OLS results are reported in Figure A1.




                                                 18
Figure 3: Wage Income (BLS) and Other Income (IRS) Effects Including Neighbors
within a Given Distance (IV)
                    300




                                                             Wages
         1000s Dollars ($2014)
          100             200




                                                             IRS Other Income
                    0




                                 0   50          100                 150              200
                                                 Miles

  Notes: We estimate the aggregate one-year change in annual income per capita for circles of
    various radii. We include all counties for whom the distance between the centroids of the
    originating county and each other county is within a given distance. Using two stage least
squares, we regress this measure on the aggregated total value (in millions of dollars) from wells
opened in the current year per capita within the corresponding circle. See text for discussion of
 the instrument. We control for county and year fixed effects. The figure reports the coefficient
   estimates and the 95 percent confidence interval where the standard errors are clustered by
                                             state-year.




                                               19
6.2     Industry-Level Income

Table 2 breaks down the BLS income results by industry. We will focus on the
IV results in Panel B. As in the previous section we find that one million dollars
of new production is associated with $66,000 of additional wages at the county
level. In Table 2 we see that $24,000 occurs in mining, and $16,000 in trade and
transportation. Added together, roughly two thirds of the income is in sectors that
are directly involved in extracting new gas and oil. Of the remainder, the largest
impact is in construction.
    At higher levels of aggregation the story is quite similar. Each million dollars of
new production is associated with $243,000 at the 100 mile level with $105,000 in
mining and $63,000 in transportation. At the state level wages increase $343,000
overall with $120,000 in mining and $75,000 in transportation. In all three cases
roughly two thirds of the wage increases occur in sectors directly related to extrac-
tion.



7       Employment

We find similar patterns in employment. Table 3 reports the results of regressions
using BLS employment by industry. Each million dollars of additional oil or gas
production generates an employment increase of 0.78 at the county level. Of this,
0.28 is in mining and 0.21 in transportation. At the 100 mile level we find an
employment increase of 2.49 with 0.95 in mining and 0.73 in transportation. At the
state level we find an employment increase of 3.34 with 1.21 in mining and 0.91 in
transportation. As with the income results, we find that about two thirds of the
increase is in mining and transportation. Of the remaining one third construction
plays the largest role followed by leisure.


                                          20
    Figure 4 shows the results of a series of regressions of county-level employment
changes against the value of new production within a radius of the centroid of the
county. Mirroring the income results, employment effects are much larger as one
considers effects beyond the immediate county. The employment effects reach a
maximum at 100 miles suggesting that the commuting radius is the correct unit of
observation, not the county.
    The impact of new production within a 100 mile radius are over three times as
large as with the county and quite similar to the impact at the state. This suggests
that our state results are driven by impacts outside the immediate county, but still
within the region where new production is located. Counties within the shale regions
are therefore seeing overall employment and wage effects that are substantially larger
than suggested by the county-level results and closer to the state results.
    The income and employment effects are extremely similar and are consistent
with each new job in a county paying roughly $100,000. We cannot, however say
with certainty whether this is the correct interpretation. It seems likely that the
increased activity led to a combination of new jobs along with higher wages for
existing jobs within the county and region. We cannot distinguish between these
two effects.



8     Robustness

8.1    Wells versus Production

Our preferred specifications use the per capita change in the value of oil and gas
production on the right hand side. There are several alternative measures of fracking
activity that were also considered. The increase in production value is a combination
of new wells drilled, the average production of each new well, and the price of oil and

                                          21
   Figure 4: Employment Effects Including Neighbors within a Given Distance
         Change in Annual Employment per Million ($2014)




                                                           3




                                                           2




                                                           1




                                                                                       IV
                                                                                       OLS
                                                           0
                                                               0   50    100     150     200
                                                                         Miles

Notes: We estimate the aggregate one-year change in annual employment per capita for circles of
     various radii. We include all counties for whom the distance between the centroids of the
 originating county and each other county is within a given distance. We regress this measure on
    the aggregated total value (in millions of dollars) from wells opened in the current year per
  capita within the corresponding circle. We control for county and year fixed effects. The figure
reports the coefficient estimates and the 95 percent confidence interval where the standard errors
                                     are clustered by state-year.




                                                                        22
gas during the production period. Because we include time effects in all regressions,
changes in oil and gas prices play a minor role.
   In Table A4, we consider whether the number of new wells has predictive power
independent of production because the process suggests a fixed labor cost to creating
a well regardless of the wells productivity. This did not turn out to be the case.
In regressions including both the value of production and well data, we find that
production data have greater predictive power. Part of the explanation may be
that productive wells are re-fracked more often and involve more trucking and more
extensive horizontal drilling. It may also be that the willingness to invest in new
wells is proportional to the expected production from these wells, leading to a strong
correlation between the costs of opening a well and the value of new production.
Because the well and production data are highly correlated with each other it is not
possible to separate out the effects.


8.2    Oil versus Gas

It is possible that new oil drilling and new gas drilling have different impacts. The
point estimates when we estimate new oil extraction and new gas production sep-
arately suggest that oil has a larger impact on wages than natural gas ($260,000
in wages per million for oil production versus $180,000 for gas production for our
preferred specification of county plus 100 miles using instrumental variables), but
that these differences are not statistically significant (Table A5).
   Figure A2 shows the results split by oil and gas at varying distances from the
county centroid. Between 0 and 100 miles the impact of natural gas and oil are
very similar. The impact of oil flattens out at distances larger than 100 miles while
natural gas continues to have marginal effect out to 200 miles, though the standard
errors are quite large.

                                          23
8.3    Rising versus Falling Fossil Fuel Prices

Oil prices have played a role in the timing of the fracking boom, with high prices
between 2005 and 2008, followed by a collapse during the Great Recession. We may
worry that our results are being driven by periods of high oil prices in ways not
captured by time dummies. We therefore split our sample by periods of rising and
falling prices. Oil and natural gas prices generally move together, but there are a
few periods where they diverge. We therefore split the sample based on whether a
county sees rising or falling prices for the dominant fuel in that county. Both the
rising and falling price samples include all the non-producing counties as a control
group. Table A6 shows our main results for each of these samples. The results do
not seem to be affected by the direction of prices.


8.4    More Recent Data

Our analysis has focused on the period 2005-2012 due to availability of the IRS data.
The BLS data is available through 2014. Tables A7 and A8 presents our results for
this extended sample using the BLS data. Adding these additional data reduces the
magnitude of all of our coefficients somewhat with about a twenty percent reduction
in our preferred IV specification. All coefficients remain highly significant.
   In order to explore this further we split the sample into three periods. The first
period, 2005 to 2008, includes the early years of the fracking boom but does not
include the Great Recession. The second period, 2009 to 2011 is during the Great
Recession and ends with our IRS sample. For the final period, 2012 to 2014, we
only have BLS data. This is a period with falling unemployment and a more mature
fracking industry. Table A9 present the results across these three time periods. The
first and second periods are very similar to each other though it is clear that the



                                          24
period during the Great Recession is providing a lot of the identification. This
suggests that our results are not being driven by the labor market weakness of the
recession. The results from the period 2012 to 2014 are extremely noisy.



9       Crime

A major concern with the fracking boom is the local impact on crime. Several
New York Times articles have discussed large crime increases in North Dakota and
Montana towns.17 In Table 4, we examine the impact of new production on crime

at the county level. Our OLS results show no significant increase in crime in any
category. For the IV results, the coefficient on murder is significant at the 10 percent
level. Given that we find only one coefficient that is weakly statistically significant
in a table of 16 coefficients, we do not consider our results to be evidence of crime
increases as a result of fracking.
      These news articles focus solely on the top five to ten counties as ranked by new
production per capita. In our data, the six counties in the top one percent of oil
drilling activity have over $750,000 of new production per capita during our sample
period. Our point estimate multiplied by production at the 99th percentile suggests
a violent crime rate increase of 40 percent with a 95 percent confidence interval of
-186 percent to +265 percent, and a 12 percent decrease in property crime with a 95
percent confidence interval of -122 percent to 98 percent. While these estimates do
not preclude the possibility of large increases in crime in some counties as a result
of new drilling activity, our analysis cannot reject relatively small increases in crime
for even the largest oil producing counties.
 17
      For example, crime has been written about Dickinson and Watford City, ND (Healy 2013).




                                              25
10        Discussion

What does this mean for the typical county that has fracking activity? This ques-
tion is complicated by the extremely skewed distribution of production within the
counties where fracking is taking place. There are 739 counties in the US that had
either new oil or gas production in the first year of our sample, 2005. The median
county in this group had $4,900 of new production per capita over the sample pe-
riod. Our results imply a 0.38 percent increase in employment and a $320 increase
in wages per capita. Counties at the 75th percentile in new production have over
five times the production of the median at $25,900 per capita. Our results suggest
a 2.00 percent increase in employment and a $1,700 increase in wages per capita
in these 140 counties. The top five percent of counties (about 37 counties) saw
production increases in excess of $290,000 per capita associated with a 23 percent
increase in employment and a $19,000 increase in wages per capita.
      This analysis only considers the direct impact on the county. Our results suggest
that including the surrounding counties increases the impact by a factor of more
than three. To put this in perspective we can consider a hypothetical state with
500,000 workers. The state contains one centrally located county of 10,000 workers
that extracts one million dollars of new oil and gas per capita. 18 Roughly one quarter
of the oil and gas rights are held by county residents with the other three quarters
held by other residents of the state living within a 100 mile radius.
      After fracking, employment in our county rises by 78 percent to 17,800. County
income from employment rises by 88 percent. Additionally, each of the incumbent
workers receives an average of $38,000 in royalty payments. At the state level,
employment rises by 33,400, a 7 percent increase. 19 The state unemployment rate
 18
      Our hypothetical state is roughly based on production figures from North Dakota.
 19
      Coefficients for employment and income for the state level analysis are taken from the IV



                                               26
falls. Aggregate state wage income rises by 20 percent. Additionally, each of the
incumbent workers receives an average of $2,300 in royalty payments.
    Given that the counties where fracking is taking place are geographically clus-
tered, the propagation of shocks over 100 miles suggests that the overall impact on
fracking counties is larger than would be expected if their production was taken
in isolation because they also benefit from production in the surrounding counties.
This may be particularly relevant when discussing fracking bans that affect entire
regions, like in New York State.
    Aggregating to the national level, we find $217 billion worth of new production
over our sample period. In mining, our state level IV coefficient of 1.21 suggests
262,000 new mining jobs. Over the same period there was an increase of about
300,000 jobs in mining and natural resources nationally. Our results can therefore
account for most of the US employment gain in the mining sector. We cannot reject
that the entire increase in mining is due to the new production in our sample. Mul-
tiplying this by our overall (all industries) state level jobs coefficient of 3.34 suggests
that 725,000 new jobs were created across the nation due to the new production.
Given a labor force of approximately 150 million in the US this suggests a 0.5 per-
cent increase in US aggregate employment due to new production of oil and natural
gas from 2005-2012, with an identical reduction of the US unemployment rate.



11       Conclusion

Our analysis is among the first comprehensive examinations of the effects of fracking
on income, employment, and crime. Fracking is particularly interesting because we
know the exact location of the wells and are able to measure the impacts at ever
results of Tables 1 and 2. For royalties, we use the 100 miles results.



                                                 27
                                  Figure 5: Revenue Decomposition by Distance

                        0.4




                        0.3                                                 Royalties
        Revenue Share




                        0.2                                                 Other Wages


                                                                            Trucking Wages
                        0.1

                                                                            Mining Wages

                        0.0
                              0     20   40   60    80        100     120      140      160   180   200
                                                              Miles




widening levels of geography. New production in our data is being driven by new
drilling technology interacted with the preexistence of appropriate geography. Our
new production is therefore exogenous to economic conditions at the time of the
new drilling. This allows us to study how income shocks propagate through local
and regional economies.
   Figure 5 summarizes our results. At the county level (at 0 miles distance) our
estimates suggest that roughly 13 percent of the value extracted stays in the county
in the form of higher income. Wages and royalty payments each account for about
half of the increase. Two thirds of the increased wages is in the mining and trucking
industries, with the remainder spilling over to construction, hospitality, banking,
and local government.
   While county impacts are substantial, the regional effects are several times larger.
As we move out to 100 miles 36 percent of the new value extracted remains within


                                                         28
the region. Two thirds of the income increase is in the form of higher wares and one
third as royalties. Mining accounts for 40 percent of the wage increase, trucking 25
percent, with the remainder in other industries.
   We find substantial increases in regional employment due to fracking. Each
million dollar of new production generates an increase in employment of 0.78 workers
at the county level, 2.49 within 100 miles, and 3.34 within the state. Aggregating
nationally we can explain all of the observed 300,000 increase in mining and oil
employment over our sample. Aggregating to the national level we conclude that
aggregate employment rose by 725,000 jobs due to fracking, causing a reduction in
the US unemployment rate of 0.5 percent during the Great Recession. This almost
certainly understates the impact as it only takes into account the direct impact of
the value of new extraction. For much of the nation the main impact of the fracking
boom was lower natural gas prices which do not play a role in our analysis.




                                        29
References
Allcott, Hunt and Daniel Keniston, “Dutch disease or agglomeration? The
    local economic effects of natural resource booms in modern America,” NBER
    Working Paper 20508, 2014.

Bartik, Alexander W., Janet Currie, Michael Greenstone, and Christo-
    pher R. Knittel, “The Economic Consequences of Hydraulic Fracturing,”
    Presentation, 2014.

Black, Dan, Terra McKinnish, and Seth Sanders, “The economic impact of
    the coal boom and bust,” The Economic Journal, 2005, 115 (503), 449–476.

Blanchard, Olivier Jean and Lawrence F. Katz, “Regional evolutions,” Brook-
    ings Papers on Economic Activity, 1992, 1 (1992), 1–61.

Bohi, Douglas R, “Technological improvement in petroleum exploration and de-
   velopment,” Productivity in Natural Resource Industries. RD Simpson. Wash-
   ington, DC, Resources for the Future, 1999, pp. 73–108.

Considine, Timothy J, Robert W Watson, and Nicholas B Considine,
   “The economic opportunities of shale energy development,” The Manhattan
   Institute, June, 2011.

Deller, Steven and Andrew Schreiber, “Mining and community economic
    growth,” The Review of Regional Studies, 2013, 42 (2), 121–141.

DOE, Ground Water Protection Council, Modern shale gas development in
  the United States: A primer, US Department of Energy, Office of Fossil Energy,
  2009.

EIA, US, “Annual Energy Outlook 2013,” 2013.

    , “Shale Gas Resources: An Assessment of 137 Shale Formations in 41 Countries
    Outside the United States,” 2013.

EPA, “Assessment of the Potential Impacts of Hydraulic Fracturing for Oil and
   Gas on Drinking Water Resources,” 2015.

FBI, US DOJ., “Uniform Crime Reporting Program Data: County-Level Detailed
   Arrest and Offense Data,” 2012.

Fetzer, Thiemo, “Fracking Growth,” CEP Discussion Paper, 2014.

Galbraith, K, “In oil boom, housing shortages and other issues,” New York Times,
    July 12 2012.


                                       30
Healy, Jack, “As Oil Floods Plains Towns, Crime Pours In,” New York Times,
   November 30 2013.

Howarth, Robert W, Anthony Ingraffea, and Terry Engelder, “Natural gas:
   Should fracking stop?,” Nature, 2011, 477 (7364), 271–275.

Jacobsen, Grant D and Dominic P Parker, “The economic aftermath of re-
    source booms: evidence from boomtowns in the american west,” Economic
    Journal, forthcoming 2014.

Joskow, Paul L, “Natural gas: from shortages to abundance in the United States,”
    The American Economic Review, 2013, 103 (3), 338–343.

Maniloff, Peter and Ralph Mastromonaco, “The Local Economic Impacts of
   Unconventional Shale Development,” 2014.

Marchand, Joseph, “Local labor market impacts of energy boom-bust-boom in
   Western Canada,” Journal of Urban Economics, 2012, 71 (1), 165–174.

Michaels, Guy, “The long term consequences of resource based specialisation,”
   The Economic Journal, 2011, 121 (551), 31–57.

Muehlenbachs, Lucija, Elisheba Spiller, and Christopher Timmins, “The
   housing market impacts of shale gas development,” American Economic Re-
   view, forthcoming.

Newell, Richard G. and Daniel Raimi, “Shale Public Finance: Local Govern-
   ment Revenues and Costs Associated with Oil and Gas Development,” Working
   Paper 21542, National Bureau of Economic Research September 2015.

Olmstead, Sheila M, Lucija A Muehlenbachs, Jhih-Shyang Shih, Ziyan
   Chu, and Alan J Krupnick, “Shale gas development impacts on surface wa-
   ter quality in Pennsylvania,” Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences,
   2013, 110 (13), 4962–4967.

Shoag, Daniel, “The impact of government spending shocks: Evidence on the mul-
   tiplier from state pension plan returns,” unpublished paper, Harvard University,
   2015.

Urbina, Ian, “Drilling Down: Fighting Over Oil and Gas Leases,” New York Times,
   December 1 2011.

    , “A Tainted Water Well and Concern There May Be More,” New York Times,
    August 3 2011.

Wang, Zhongmin and Alan Krupnick, “US Shale Gas Development: What Led
   to the Boom?,” 2013.

                                        31
Weber, Jeremy G, “The effects of a natural gas boom on employment and income
   in Colorado, Texas, and Wyoming,” Energy Economics, 2012, 34 (5), 1580–
   1588.

Weber, Jeremy G., “A decade of natural gas development: The makings of a
   resource curse?,” Resource and Energy Economics, 2013.




                                    32
                          Table 1: Effects of Fracking on Income
            Dependent Variable: One-Year Change in Wages and Salaries per Capita
              Main Independent Variable: Oil and Natural Gas Value ($Millions)
                       from Wells Opened in Current Year Per Capita
                                   (1)           (2)           (3)             (4)
                                BLS Wages      IRS AGI      IRS Wages     IRS Other Inc
                                                     Panel A: OLS
          County                 34,965***     49,418***     10,972***      38,276***
                                  (6,614)       (5,585)       (2,072)        (5,245)
          County +100 miles     214,230***    155,385***     63,224***      94,611***
                                 (13,513)      (18,896)       (7,396)        (15,189)
          State                 287,391***     176,707*     107,833***        82,915
                                 (17,480)      (99,691)      (26,835)        (109,790)
                                                      Panel B: IV
          County                 65,817***     89,623***     27,287***      60,710***
                                  (7,642)       (23,154)      (4,163)        (19,828)
          County +100 miles     243,210***    197,221***     83,689***      116,563***
                                 (18,208)      (33,865)       (11,237)       (25,923)
          State                 343,350***      66,416       171,242**        -51,017
                                 (49,008)      (171,527)      (65,110)       (194,397)
                                *** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.10

Notes: Each coefficient represents a separate regression. AGI is adjusted gross income. County
+100 miles includes all economic activity from counties within 100 miles radius. Standard errors,
clustered by state-year (or state), are in parentheses. There are 24,646 (408) observations in each
regression. The county sample excludes counties with 446 or fewer employees in 2004 (2 percent
of all counties).




                                                33
                                      Table 2: Effects of Fracking on Wages and Salaries by Industry
                                      Dependent Variable: One-Year Change in Wages and Salaries per Capita
                                        Main Independent Variable: Oil and Natural Gas Value ($Millions)
                                                 from Wells Opened in Current Year Per Capita
                                        (1)         (2)           (3)          (4)        (5)          (6)         (7)          (8)
                                       Total       Mining      Transport    Construct   Leisure     Financial   Local Gov      Other
                                                                              Panel A: OLS
              County                 34,965***    15,270***     9,019***    5,413***      859***     1,016***     2,608**        779
                                      (6,614)      (2,826)       (2,456)     (1,080)       (148)       (330)      (1,152)      (4,048)
              County +100 miles     214,230***    92,832***    57,550***    30,417***    5,147***    5,714***    2,745***    10,103***
                                     (13,513)      (10,522)     (4,217)      (2,319)       (507)      (1,344)      (908)      (2,999)
              State                 287,391***    101,256***   77,590***    40,758***    7,620***    8,618***    6,884***    44,665***
                                     (17,480)       (5,511)     (4,706)      (14,337)      (830)      (1,993)     (1,139)     (8,076)
34




                                                                                Panel B: IV
              County                 65,817***    23,743***    15,561***    9,245***     1,894***    1,785***     1,573*      12,017**
                                      (7,642)      (6,316)      (3,561)      (1,763)       (388)       (496)      (838)        (5,389)
              County +100 miles     243,210***    105,036***   62,643***    36,229***    6,079***    7,449***    3,925***    13,615***
                                     (18,208)      (13,045)     (4,975)      (2,971)       (536)      (1,607)     (1,210)     (2,744)
              State                 343,350***    119,566***   74,932***    67,742**    11,510***    9,279**      6,836**    53,485***
                                     (49,008)      (14,114)     (5,544)     (30,987)     (3,769)     (3,830)      (3,109)     (6,603)
                                                          *** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.10

     Notes: Each coefficient represents a separate regression. County +100 miles includes all economic activity from counties within 100 miles
     radius. Standard errors, clustered by state-year (or state), are in parentheses. There are 24,646 (408) observations in each regression. The
     county sample excludes counties with 446 or fewer employees in 2004 (2 percent of all counties).
                                          Table 3: Effects of Fracking on Employment by Industry
                                         Dependent Variable: One-Year Change in Employment per Capita
                                         Main Independent Variable: Oil and Natural Gas Value ($Millions)
                                                  from Wells Opened in Current Year Per Capita
                                            (1)      (2)         (3)         (4)        (5)         (6)         (7)         (8)
                                           Total    Mining    Transport   Construct Leisure      Financial   Local Gov     Other
                                                                              Panel A: OLS
                    County                0.44***   0.18***    0.12***      0.07***    0.03***    0.01***       0.05        -0.03
                                           (0.07)    (0.04)     (0.03)       (0.02)     (0.01)     (0.00)      (0.03)      (0.06)
                    County +100 miles     2.16***   0.82***    0.68***      0.36***    0.12***    0.05***      0.03*        -0.05
                                           (0.14)    (0.10)     (0.05)       (0.04)     (0.02)     (0.01)      (0.02)      (0.06)
                    State                 2.78***   0.95***    0.88***      0.47**     0.16***     0.06**       -0.07     0.33***
                                           (0.21)    (0.09)     (0.03)      (0.23)      (0.05)     (0.03)      (0.13)      (0.10)
35




                                                                                Panel B: IV
                    County                0.78***   0.28***    0.21***      0.11***    0.05***    0.02***       -0.01       0.13
                                           (0.08)    (0.08)     (0.04)       (0.03)     (0.01)     (0.01)      (0.02)      (0.08)
                    County +100 miles     2.49***   0.95***    0.73***      0.45***    0.13***    0.07***       0.04        -0.00
                                           (0.18)    (0.13)     (0.05)       (0.05)     (0.02)     (0.01)      (0.03)      (0.06)
                    State                 3.34***   1.21***    0.91***      0.86*       0.20**     0.10*        -0.36     0.42***
                                           (0.55)    (0.23)     (0.03)      (0.48)      (0.08)     (0.05)      (0.36)      (0.10)
                                                          *** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.10

     Notes: Each coefficient represents a separate regression. County +100 miles includes all economic activity from counties within 100 miles
     radius. Standard errors, clustered by state-year (or state), are in parentheses. There are 24,646 (408) observations in each regression. The
     county sample excludes counties with 446 or fewer employees in 2004 (2 percent of all counties).
                                                   Table 4: Effects of Fracking on Crime Rates
                                         Dependent Variable: One-Year Change in Crimes per 1000 People
                                         Main Independent Variable: Oil and Natural Gas Value ($Millions)
                                                  from Wells Opened in Current Year Per Capita
                                            (1)         (2)      (3)      (4)       (5)        (6)       (7)          (8)
                                         Property     Violent   Murder   Rape     Robbery    Assault   Larceny   Motor Vehicle
                                          Crime       Crime                                                         Theft
                       OLS                 -1.14       1.01      0.17     0.65      -0.24     0.44      3.64         1.91
                                          (11.53)     (4.74)    (0.21)   (0.55)    (0.27)    (4.58)    (8.63)       (1.48)
36




                       IV                  -9.60        3.88    0.76*     -0.07     -0.33      3.52      5.64         0.18
                                          (44.77)     (11.24)   (0.42)   (1.33)    (0.88)    (11.46)   (35.89)       (2.81)
                       Mean Dep. Var.      63.73       7.81     0.10      0.73     1.04       5.93      42.53         4.09
                                                           *** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.10

     Notes: Each coefficient represents a separate regression. County +100 miles includes all economic activity from counties within 100 miles
     radius. Standard errors, clustered by state-year (or state), are in parentheses. There are 24,646 (408) observations in each regression. The
     county sample excludes counties with 446 or fewer employees in 2004 (2 percent of all counties).
Appendix

Figure A1: Wage Income and Other Income Effects within a Given Distance (OLS)
                    300




                                                             Wages
         1000s Dollars ($2014)
          100             200




                                                             IRS Other Income
                    0




                                 0   50             100              150             200
                                                    Miles

   Notes: We estimate the aggregate one-year change in annual income per capita for circles of
     various radii. We include all counties for whom the distance between the centroids of the
 originating county and each other county is within a given distance. We regress this measure on
    the aggregated total value (in millions of dollars) from wells opened in the current year per
  capita within the corresponding circle. We control for county and year fixed effects. The figure
reports the coefficient estimates and the 95 percent confidence interval where the standard errors
                                     are clustered by state-year.




                                                i
      Figure A2: Wage Income Effects within a Given Distance by Fuel Type
                                 800




                                 600
         1000s Dollars ($2014)




                                 400




                                 200


                                                                                   Gas
                                                                                   Oil
                                   0
                                       0   50        100            150              200
                                                     Miles

    Notes: We estimate the aggregate one-year change in annual wages per capita for circles of
     various radii. We include all counties for whom the distance between the centroids of the
 originating county and each other county is within a given distance. We regress this measure on
    the aggregated total value (in millions of dollars) from wells opened in the current year per
  capita within the corresponding circle. We control for county and year fixed effects. The figure
reports the coefficient estimates and the 95 percent confidence interval where the standard errors
                                     are clustered by state-year.




                                                ii
        Table A1: Comparison of Historic Population and Income by Group
                           Panel A: Summary Statistics for 2004 by Group
                  Group     Observations Population       Income    Wage Rate
                                                         (millions)
                  1             2,113        42,609        $1,680     $38,310
                                           (126,956)      (6,540)    (12,762)
                  2              827         35,118        $1,300     $39,576
                                           (175,911)      (7,820)    (12,828)
                  3              116         54,576        $2,450     $38,885
                                           (182,231)      (9,560)    (12,963)
                  4               23         67,572        $2,570     $41,417
                                           (143,066)      (5,930)    (14,152)

                      Panel B: T-Statistics of Differences in Means across Groups

                                   Population     2      3        4
                                            1   -1.29   0.96    0.92
                                            2           1.11    0.87
                                            3                   0.31
                                      Income      2      3        4
                                            1   -1.35   1.19    0.64
                                            2           1.44    0.77
                                            3                   0.05
                                   Wage Rate      2       3       4
                                            1    2.42   0.47    1.14
                                            2           -0.54   0.66
                                            3                   0.82

Notes: Panel A reports the sample mean by group. Standard deviations are shown in parentheses.
Groups are defined as follows: group 1 is the control group without any drilling; group 2 is early
drillers starting in 2005 or 2006; group 3 is mid adopters starting in 2007-2010; and group 4 is late
adopters starting in 2011 or 2012. Panel B shows the t-statistics of the differences between means
for each pair of groups.




                                                  iii
                 Table A2: Instrumental Variables First Stage Results
                 Dependent Variable: Oil and Natural Gas Value ($Millions)
                       from Wells Opened in Current Year Per Capita
        Main Independent Variable: Instrumented Oil and Natural Gas Value ($Millions)
                                                   (1)        (2)       (3)
                                                All Fuels     Oil       Gas


                    Instrument for all value     1.30***
                                                  (0.37)
                    Instrument for oil value                5.16***
                                                             (0.44)
                    Instrument for gas value                          0.72***
                                                                       (0.14)
                    F Statistic                   12.19      135       25.49
                                  *** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.10

Notes: Each regression includes county fixed effects. Standard errors, clustered by state-year, are
in parentheses. There are 24,646 observations in each regression. See text for a description of the
instruments.




                                                iv
                    Table A3: Effects on Wages by Population Size
           Dependent Variable: One-Year Change in Wages and Salaries per Capita
             Main Independent Variable: Oil and Natural Gas Value ($Millions)
                      from Wells Opened in Current Year Per Capita
                                                    (1)          (2)
                                                    OLS          IV
                       Population: 0 to 1359       2,612***    3,079***
                                                     (483)       (971)
                       Pop: 1359 to 2425        31,732***      161,207
                                                 (10,968)     (119,530)
                       Pop: 2427 to 3767        45,734***     61,994***
                                                 (8,149)       (11,670)
                       Pop: 3767 to 5641           8,778***    32,076**
                                                    (1,251)    (15,364)
                       Pop: 5652 to 8123        22,245***      115,136
                                                 (3,699)      (182,892)
                       Pop: 8123 to 12,205     269,730***     342,541***
                                                (68,945)       (70,682)
                       Pop: 12,232 to 17,496   135,300***     263,980***
                                                (48,048)       (98,353)
                       Pop: 17,496 to 32,890   134,680***      804,687
                                                (51,462)      (568,883)
                       Pop: 32,945 to 77,334       69,278*     116,803*
                                                   (35,686)    (68,681)
                       Pop: Above 77,334        206,534**      28,393
                                                 (85,082)     (395,732)
                               *** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.10

Notes: Each coefficient represents a separate regression. AGI is adjusted gross income. Stan-
dard errors, clustered by state-year, are in parentheses. There are 25,132 observations in each
regression.




                                               v
                Table A4: Effects of Wells Versus Value of Production
            Dependent Variable: One-Year Change in Wages and Salaries per Capita
                                               1            2           3


                    Value of Production    34,965***                34,989***
                                            (6,614)                  (7,943)
                    Number of Wells                  69,223***         -183
                                                       (20,409)      (18,926)
                                *** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.10

Notes: Production is the total value of oil and natural gas ($Millions) from wells opened in the
current year per capita. Wells is the number of these wells per capita. Standard errors, clustered
by state-year, are in parentheses. There are 24,646 observations in each regression. The county
sample excludes counties with 446 or fewer employees in 2004 (2 percent of all counties).




                                                vi
                  Table A5: Effects of Fracking on Income by Fuel Type
            Dependent Variable: One-Year Change in Wages and Salaries per Capita
               Main Independent Variable: Oil or Natural Gas Value ($Millions)
                       from Wells Opened in Current Year Per Capita
                                   (1)           (2)             (3)            (4)
                                BLS Wages      IRS AGI        IRS Wages    IRS Other Inc
                                                  Panel A: Oil (OLS)
          County                 42,045***     57,671***       11,973***     46,129***
                                  (8,905)       (5,887)         (2,525)       (5,150)
          County +100 miles     218,242***    154,534***      59,461***      96,451***
                                 (16,407)      (20,332)        (7,075)        (16,698)
          State                 274,137***    284,087***       90,565***    194,476***
                                 (22,603)      (38,430)         (11,091)     (42,704)
                                                  Panel B: Gas (OLS)
          County                 24,387***     38,783***       10,655***     26,445**
                                  (6,356)       (14,597)        (4,063)      (12,692)
          County +100 miles     175,836***     162,172**      97,464***       77,027
                                 (37,056)       (81,650)       (24,105)      (63,709)
          State                 390,773***    -337,757**      208,139***    -464,570***
                                 (72,295)      (130,310)       (56,775)      (131,161)
                                                      Panel C: Oil (IV)
          County                 63,919***     79,051***       21,402***     58,154***
                                  (8,410)       (11,013)        (3,867)       (9,465)
          County +100 miles     259,832***    190,049***      72,427***     120,028***
                                 (20,138)      (24,909)        (9,146)       (19,678)
          State                 279,777***    288,617***       97,432***    199,707***
                                 (20,065)      (51,918)         (17,329)     (47,710)
                                                      Panel D: Gas (IV)
          County                 57,584***     105,255*        31,637***      67,534
                                  (14,658)     (56,888)         (7,757)      (48,617)
          County +100 miles     180,129***     227,448*       128,907***     104,066
                                 (34,601)      (127,393)       (31,066)      (96,275)
          State                 444,764***    -240,615**      269,854***    -405,763***
                                 (58,170)      (94,946)        (19,427)       (82,232)
                                *** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.10

Notes: Each coefficient represents a separate regression. AGI is adjusted gross income. County
+100 miles includes all economic activity from counties within 100 miles radius. Standard errors,
clustered by state-year (or state), are in parentheses. There are 24,646 (408) observations in each
regression. The county sample excludes counties with 446 or fewer employees in 2004 (2 percent
of all counties).



                                                vii
                  Table A6: Effects on Income by Direction of Price Shock
            Dependent Variable: One-Year Change in Wages and Salaries per Capita
              Main Independent Variable: Oil and Natural Gas Value ($Millions)
                       from Wells Opened in Current Year Per Capita
                                   (1)           (2)           (3)             (4)
                                BLS Wages      IRS AGI      IRS Wages     IRS Other Inc
                                             Panel A: Rising Prices (OLS)
          County                 35,150***     46,415***     11,019***       35,322***
                                  (9,277)       (6,801)       (2,125)         (6,010)
          County +100 miles     225,291***    161,723***     73,517***       95,506***
                                 (23,597)      (14,724)       (6,436)         (15,993)
          State                 325,391***      89,965      137,476***        11,181
                                 (13,356)      (222,952)     (38,670)        (178,458)
                                             Panel B: Falling Prices (OLS)
          County                 36,920***     62,953***     12,310***       50,457***
                                  (8,916)       (5,151)       (2,552)         (4,730)
          County +100 miles     207,986***    188,463***     60,356***       128,529***
                                 (16,035)      (13,800)       (7,206)         (13,154)
          State                 222,662***    213,883***       28,680        200,931**
                                 (52,487)      (71,627)       (37,606)        (96,184)
                                              Panel C: Rising Prices (IV)
          County                 61,273***     59,745***     21,485***        41,273**
                                  (10,153)      (19,726)      (2,485)         (18,808)
          County +100 miles     269,166***    189,897***     91,928***       110,168***
                                 (21,142)      (32,296)       (6,161)         (28,212)
          State                 362,350***      -217,711     234,005**        -220,282
                                 (37,143)      (458,640)      (92,901)       (337,310)
                                              Panel D: Falling Prices (IV)
          County                 67,886***    113,307***     28,820***       76,868***
                                  (6,897)      (13,538)       (5,556)         (8,232)
          County +100 miles     235,835***    221,229***     79,259***       142,620***
                                 (13,298)      (25,284)       (12,545)        (18,265)
          State                  356,493**    263,035***      125,511         145,368
                                 (156,650)     (42,768)      (108,888)       (120,084)
                                *** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.10

Notes: Each coefficient represents a separate regression. AGI is adjusted gross income. County
+100 miles includes all economic activity from counties within 100 miles radius. Standard errors,
clustered by state-year (or state), are in parentheses. There are 21,322 (306) observations in each
regression. The county sample excludes counties with 446 or fewer employees in 2004 (2 percent
of all counties).



                                               viii
                             Table A7: Effects of Fracking on Wages and Salaries by Industry: Full Sample
                                      Dependent Variable: One-Year Change in Wages and Salaries per Capita
                                        Main Independent Variable: Oil and Natural Gas Value ($Millions)
                                                 from Wells Opened in Current Year Per Capita
                                         (1)         (2)          (3)          (4)       (5)          (6)         (7)          (8)
                                        Total       Mining     Transport    Construct  Leisure     Financial   Local Gov      Other
                                                                              Panel A: OLS
                County                23,863***    10,600***    5,933***    3,337***     587***      615***     2,034***       758
                                       (4,511)      (1,962)      (1,620)     (1,075)      (120)       (194)       (726)      (2,224)
                County +100 miles    106,757***    48,374***   28,388***    18,830***   2,552***    2,849***    2,556***      3,885
                                      (27,104)      (10,934)    (7,687)      (3,346)      (759)       (917)       (703)      (2,803)
                State                136,025***    51,059***   36,080***    26,009***   2,332***    3,905***    6,102***     10,538
                                      (20,172)      (6,695)     (2,151)      (7,062)      (798)      (1,411)     (1,046)     (7,245)
ix




                                                                                Panel B: IV
                County                58,893***    23,524***   13,557***    7,364***    1,551***    1,615***    2,316***     8,968**
                                       (8,931)      (5,338)     (3,460)      (2,417)      (376)       (500)       (731)      (4,277)
                County +100 miles    214,039***    92,432***   53,757***    32,197***   5,254***    6,600***    4,691***    13,685***
                                      (25,363)      (11,692)    (8,064)      (3,377)      (791)      (1,294)     (1,124)     (2,898)
                State                288,331***    96,458***   59,061***    50,010**     8,461*     8,437*      9,822***     56,082*
                                      (102,897)     (28,554)    (7,930)     (24,104)     (4,502)    (4,800)      (2,259)     (32,342)
                                                          *** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.10

     Notes: Each coefficient represents a separate regression. County +100 miles includes all economic activity from counties within 100 miles
     radius. Standard errors, clustered by state-year (or state), are in parentheses. There are 30,790 (510) observations in each regression. The
     county sample excludes counties with 446 or fewer employees in 2004 (2 percent of all counties).
                                Table A8: Effects of Fracking on Employment by Industry: Full Sample
                                        Dependent Variable: One-Year Change in Employment per Capita
                                        Main Independent Variable: Oil and Natural Gas Value ($Millions)
                                                 from Wells Opened in Current Year Per Capita
                                            (1)      (2)         (3)         (4)      (5)           (6)         (7)        (8)
                                           Total    Mining    Transport   Construct Leisure      Financial   Local Gov    Other
                                                                            Panel A: OLS
                    County               0.31***    0.12***    0.08***      0.04**     0.02***    0.01***      0.04*       -0.00
                                          (0.05)     (0.03)     (0.02)      (0.02)      (0.01)     (0.00)      (0.02)     (0.04)
                    County +100 miles    1.01***    0.42***    0.33***     0.20***     0.06***    0.02***      0.03*       -0.05
                                          (0.30)     (0.09)     (0.09)      (0.04)      (0.02)     (0.01)      (0.02)     (0.04)
                    State                1.08***    0.42***    0.39***      0.27**       0.02     0.04***       0.02       -0.08
                                          (0.24)     (0.09)     (0.03)      (0.12)      (0.03)     (0.01)      (0.08)     (0.09)
x




                                                                               Panel B: IV
                    County               0.73***    0.27***    0.19***      0.11**     0.04***    0.02***       0.01       0.09
                                          (0.11)     (0.06)     (0.04)      (0.04)      (0.01)     (0.01)      (0.02)     (0.07)
                    County +100 miles    2.24***    0.86***    0.64***     0.40***     0.12***    0.07***      0.05*       0.02
                                          (0.27)     (0.11)     (0.09)      (0.05)      (0.02)     (0.01)      (0.03)     (0.05)
                    State                 2.79**    0.98**     0.71***       0.60        0.14       0.09        -0.24      0.51
                                          (1.19)    (0.40)      (0.14)      (0.36)      (0.10)     (0.06)      (0.32)     (0.45)
                                                         *** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.10

    Notes: Each coefficient represents a separate regression. County +100 miles includes all economic activity from counties within 100 miles
    radius. Standard errors, clustered by state-year (or state), are in parentheses. There are 30,790 (510) observations in each regression. The
    county sample excludes counties with 446 or fewer employees in 2004 (2 percent of all counties).
                       Table A9: Effects on Income by Period (IV)
            Dependent Variable: One-Year Change in Wages and Salaries per Capita
              Main Independent Variable: Oil and Natural Gas Value ($Millions)
                       from Wells Opened in Current Year Per Capita
                                    (1)           (2)           (3)              (4)
                                 BLS Wages      IRS AGI      IRS Wages      IRS Other Inc
                                               Panel A: Years 2005 to 2008
          County                   24,809        122,645         8,411         127,242
                                  (28,417)       (99,025)      (11,529)        (95,093)
          County +100 miles      321,311**      856,955**     179,186**       651,513**
                                 (132,388)      (400,983)      (70,223)       (320,696)
          State                    190,330       398,764        7,736          493,508
                                  (450,063)     (913,910)     (331,465)       (485,941)
                                               Panel B: Years 2009 to 2011
          County                 86,945***     127,750***     36,830***       92,293***
                                  (10,098)      (26,267)       (8,321)         (21,742)
          County +100 miles      289,763***    307,196***     94,344***      219,169***
                                  (26,186)      (41,755)       (14,005)       (39,283)
          State                  144,075**       61,994         13,637         96,061
                                  (59,399)      (330,931)      (40,599)       (264,040)
                                               Panel C: Years 2012 to 2014
          County                   174,160
                                  (105,658)
          County +100 miles      2,284,047*
                                 (1,242,824)
          State                   -646,702*
                                  (333,327)
                                 *** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.10

Notes: Each coefficient represents a separate regression. AGI is adjusted gross income. County
+100 miles includes all economic activity from counties within 100 miles radius. Standard errors,
clustered by state-year (or state), are in parentheses. There are 12,324, 9,239, and 9,237 (204, 153,
and 153) observations for Panels A, B, and C, respectively. The county sample excludes counties
with 446 or fewer employees in 2004 (2 percent of all counties).




                                                 xi
