NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

THE MIGRATION RESPONSE TO INCREASING TEMPERATURES
Cristina Cattaneo
Giovanni Peri
Working Paper 21622
http://www.nber.org/papers/w21622
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
October 2015

The research leading to these results has received funding from the Italian Ministry of Education,
University and Research and the Italian Ministry of Environment, Land and Sea under the GEMINA
project. The views expressed herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views
of the National Bureau of Economic Research.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peerreviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.
© 2015 by Cristina Cattaneo and Giovanni Peri. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed
two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice,
is given to the source.

The Migration Response to Increasing Temperatures
Cristina Cattaneo and Giovanni Peri
NBER Working Paper No. 21622
October 2015
JEL No. F22,Q1,R12
ABSTRACT
Climate change, especially the warming trend experienced by several countries, could affect
agricultural productivity. As a consequence the income of rural populations will change, and with
them the incentives for people to remain in rural areas. Using data from 116 countries between 1960
and 2000, we analyze the effect of differential warming trends across countries on the probability
of either migrating out of the country or from rural to urban areas. We find that higher temperatures
increased emigration rates to urban areas and to other countries in middle income economies. In poor
countries, higher temperatures reduced the probability of emigration to cities or to other countries,
consistently with the presence of severe liquidity constraints. In middle-income countries, migration
represents an important margin of adjustment to global warming, potentially contributing to structural
change and even increasing income per worker. Such a mechanism, however, does not seem to work
in poor economies.
Cristina Cattaneo
Fondazione Eni Enrico Mattei
cristina.cattaneo@feem.it
Giovanni Peri
Department of Economics
University of California, Davis
One Shields Avenue
Davis, CA 95616
and NBER
gperi@ucdavis.edu

1

Introduction

One of the long-run eﬀects of rising average surface temperatures is the disruption of productivity in agriculture. The optimal yield of agricultural products has been adjusted to local
temperature for centuries. Hence, productivity decreases as temperatures increase beyond a
country’s historical average (IPCC, 2014; Dell et al., 2014; Cline, 2007). Agriculture is still
a relevant source of income and employment in poor countries, especially in rural areas. One
potentially important margin of adjustment to declining agricultural productivity in poor
countries is migration from rural to urban areas, either within the home country or towards
another country. While some papers have begun to analyze how warming may aﬀect income
per person across countries over the long run (e.g. Dell et al 2012), and other studies have
analyzed the connection between temperature/precipitation and human migrations in some
specific countries (e.g. Bohra-Mishra et al., 2014; Dillon et al., 2011; Mueller et al., 2014;
Gray and Mueller, 2012a), only very few studies look at the systematic long-run eﬀect of
temperature change on emigration and rural-to-urban migration in poor and middle-income
countries in the world.1 This paper gathers data and proposes a model and simple empirical
framework to analyze the impact of temperature change on emigration rates in countries
where agriculture is still an important sector and many migrants originate from rural areas.
By impoverishing the rural population of poor countries and worsening their income perspectives, long-term warming may aﬀect migration in diﬀerent ways, depending on the initial
income of those rural populations. As previously suggested by studies such as Mayda (2010),
a decline in the income of the sending country may have a depressing eﬀect on the share of
emigrants from very poor countries. In these countries, individuals are near subsistence, so a
lower income worsens their liquidity constraint, implying potential migrants have a reduced
ability to pay migration costs. In this case, global warming may trap very poor rural workers who become unable to leave agriculture, worsening their poverty. To the contrary, in
countries in which individuals are not extremely poor, a decline in agricultural income may
provide incentives to migrate to cities or abroad. Decreasing agricultural productivity may
encourage a mechanism that ultimately leads to economic success for migrants, benefiting
their country of origin and shifting people out of agriculture into urban environments. The
inverted U-shape of migration rates as a function of income per person in the countries of
origin is usually rationalized in this type of framework. However, we are not aware of a
simple formalization of this model nor of a clean analysis which tests this non-monotonic
1

Cai et al. (2014) is probably the paper more closely related to ours. It analyzes specifically the link
between temperature, crop yields and migration to OECD countries. They use, however, yearly data between 1980-2000 and only migration to OECD coutries, capturing therefore short-run relationships and long
distance migration.

2

eﬀect by exploiting variation of an exogenous determinant of income per person, such as
temperature.
In this paper we use a simple framework that extends the classical Roy-Borjas (Roy,
1951; Borjas 1987) model and uses it to analyze the eﬀects of exogenous changes in agricultural productivity (due to temperature increase) and its opposite eﬀects on the probability
of emigration for poor or middle-income countries. In particular, the model predicts that a
long-run increase in temperature that decreases the income of rural populations in very poor
countries generates a poverty trap and lowers the probability of emigration. To the contrary, for middle-income countries, the decline in agricultural productivity pushes emigrants
out of rural areas. This stimulates urbanization and may speed the country’s structural
transformation, ultimately increasing its income per person. In accordance with the model’s
predictions, we find that in very poor countries increasing temperatures decrease emigration
and urbanization, while in middle-income countries they increase those measures. We then
show how long-run warming speeds the transition from agriculture to non-agriculture in
middle-income countries. Conversely, it slows this transition in poor countries — worsening
the poverty trap — as poor rural workers become less able to move to cities or abroad. We
also find that emigration in middle-income countries, induced by higher temperatures, is
local and is associated with a growth in GDP per person, while the decline in emigration
and urbanization in poor countries is associated with lower average GDP per person.
The rest of the paper is organized as follows. Section 2 reviews the literature on climate
and international migrations. Section 3 presents a simple variation of the Borjas-Roy model
relating agricultural productivity to migration rates at diﬀerent income levels. Section 4
describes the data and variables and section 5 presents the main empirical specifications
and the main estimates of the eﬀects of warming on migrations. Section 6 shows some
robustness checks and section 7 checks that the connection climate-migration is consistent
with the estimated eﬀects of climate on structural change and GDP across countries. Section
8 concludes the paper.

2

Literature Review

The literature analyzing the eﬀects of weather and climate events on migration is recent and
growing fast. Several papers have analyzed the impact of episodes of drought, high temperature, or low precipitation on rural emigration in some specific countries. Dillon et al.
(2011) analyze migration in Nigeria. Mueller et al. (2014) look at the connection between
temperature variation and migration in Pakistan. Gray and Mueller (2012a) consider the
link between draughts and emigration in Ethiopia, while Gray and Mueller (2012b) analyze
3

the eﬀect of flood on mobility in Bangladesh. Gray and Bilsborrow (2013) and Gray (2009)
analyze internal and international migration in Ecuador in response to rainfall. Henry et
al. (2004) look at the case of annual precipitations and migration in Burkina Faso. BohraMishra et al. (2014) analyze Indonesia and Kelley et al. (2015) focus on Syria. Because
of its extreme poverty and dependence on agricultural production and employment, SubSaharan Africa has been a main area of attention. Most of these studies, however analyze
the yearly correlation between weather phenomena and migration and may pick up temporary displacements rather than long-term trends. In multi-country studies of sub-Saharan
Africa, Barrios et al. (2006) analyze the link between average rainfall and urbanization, and
Marchiori et al. (2012) estimate how temperature and precipitation anomalies have aﬀected
migration in sub-Saharan Africa.
Another case that has been studied in depth is the connection between climate and
migration out of Mexico. Looking at Mexico-US migrations Munshi (2003) was the first to
show the connection between low rainfall and migration rates from Mexico to the US. More
recently, Feng et al. (2010) confirm the relation between weather and migration from Mexico.
However, Auﬀhammer and Vincent (2012) demonstrate this eﬀect vanishes after they control
for a richer set of covariates. Overall, the existing literature on weather/climate change and
migration focuses on within country data and usually on gross yearly migration rates. Hence
it fails to provide a general picture on the potential long-run eﬀect of weather changes on
migration across countries. Some econometric analyses at the macro level exist, but they
mainly focus on the consequences of natural disasters, such as droughts, earthquakes, floods,
storms, and volcanic eruptions. They do not directly tackle the question regarding the eﬀect
of changes in average temperatures on migrations in the long-run. Beine and Parsons (2015)
produced an accurate study that focuses on bilateral migration and analyzes the impact
of extreme weather events, deviations and anomalies in temperatures from the long-run
averages, after one controls for many other bilateral factors. The narrow focus on partial
eﬀects and on some extreme events makes that paper diﬀerent from ours. Our paper diﬀers
from all the previous ones by considering all countries of the world and explicitly analyzing
the eﬀects of temperature on migration within a simple Roy-Borjas model of migration and
average productivity. In so doing, it identifies a crucial distinction of temperature increases
on poor and middle-income countries and tests whether such distinctions and other additional
implications are supported by the data. Finally the paper closer to our approach is Cai et
al (2014). In this paper the authors analyze how yearly bilateral migration flows depend on
yearly temperatures at origin for a panel of 163 countries of origin into 42 OECD destinations
for the period 1980-2010. The structure of the analysis implies that these are short-run
elasticity responses (within the year) and only includes migration to OECD countries. The
4

authors do not separate between poor and middle income countries and use quite noisy data
on gross flows of migrants, instead of Census based data on net migrations. Significant
short-run temporary migration can be captured by that design. We are more interested in
the long-run impact of slow changing temperature and precipitation on migration rates.

3
3.1

A Simple Framework
The migration decision

Consider two countries defined as "Poor",  and "Middle-Income",  where workers, who
are potential migrants to a third country "Rich" (), live and work. We consider a very
simple two-period model, in the spirit of Roy-Borjas (Roy, 1951; Borjas, 1987), that delivers
a "hump-shaped" emigration rate as a function of the country of origin’s income per person
(consistently with the empirical literature from Zelinsky (1971) to Hatton and Williamson
(1994, 2003 and 2011)). In the first period, individuals diﬀer in their skills, work in their
country of origin ( or ), and earn the local wage. At the beginning of the second period,
individuals choose between migrating to country  or staying in their country, based on the
comparison of their wage during the second period. If they stay in the country of origin they
earn  . If they migrate to  they earn  , but must pay up-front monetary and nonmonetary migration costs. For simplicity (and without loss of insight) we assume individuals
have 0 discount rate, the wage in the country of origin for period 1 and 2 are identical, and
no uncertainty exists. The wage of individual  when residing in country of origin  (=  )
in the first and second period can be written as:
 =  +   

 =  

(1)

where  is the basic income/wage in country  earned by a person with median skills. We
can imagine this term depends positively on agricultural productivity — among other factors
— especially as the economy of country  and  depend on agriculture and agriculturerelated sectors. Through agricultural productivity, therefore, the median income in country
 depends on its temperature  , expressed as:  ( ) The term   represents the return
to skills in country . The term  is a measure of skills of individual  that we assume, for
simplicity, as normally distributed with an average of 0 and a standard deviation of 1. If the
same individual were to migrate to country  he/she would earn the following wage instead:
 =  +   

5

(2)

For simplicity we have assumed the skills of the individual, measured by   are perfectly
transferable from  or  to country . However, the returns to skills in country  are
diﬀerent than in the origin country. Following strong evidence from the existing literature
(Grogger and Hanson (2011) and Ortega and Peri (2012)) we assume the rich country has
higher median wage and higher skill premium than the poor and middle-income countries.
Moreover, following most of the literature on climate change (Dell et al., 2014), we assume
temperature changes have an eﬀect on agricultural productivity (relevant for country  =
  ), but not (or much less) on non-agricultural productivity (relevant for country )
so that the dependence of  on  can be ignored. These assumptions correspond to
the following restrictions on the parameters:    and      for  =  .2 For
simplicity, we also assume the distribution of skills,  , is identical in country  and 
and the cost of migrating from either of them to  the rich country, is equal and can be
expressed as ( +  ) where  are monetary costs of migrating — such as cost of
relocating, traveling, and searching — while  are the non-monetary (psychological) costs.
Both are expressed in units of labor compensation. Following Grogger and Hanson (2012)
we assume individual’s have linear preferences in their net wages (i.e. wages net of migration
costs), and within this very simple framework the decision to migrate for individual  implies
a comparison between the net income when migrating and staying. Thus, the individual will
migrate from country  to  if:
 +    −  −    +    

(3)

or more simply:
 

 ( ) −  +  + 

 − 

(4)

Condition (4) has been typically thought of in the literature as a "selection" equation.
The parameter restriction      implies "positive selection". Namely, as shown in equation (4), only individuals with skills above a certain level have incentives to migrate. This
is consistent with abundant evidence as summarized, for instance, in Docquier et al. (2011).
Alternatively, we can see equation (4) as an incentive-compatible constraint. Namely, individuals from country  will migrate only if their gains from migration (wages at destination) exceed the opportunity cost (wage at home) plus migration costs (monetary and
non-monetary). The lower the threshold in (4), the larger is the share of individuals for
2

Under these assumptions, and if costs of migration are equal between  and ,  and , and  and
 , we do not have to consider potential migration between  and  as workers from either country would
want to migrate to 

6

which the incentive constraint is satisfied. The migration decision, however, should also
satisfy a "feasibility" constraint . If we assume migration takes place at the beginning of
the second period and individuals in country  and  cannot borrow (liquidity constraint),
then they can migrate only if the monetary costs of migration does not exceed their total
savings at the end of period 1, which, in our simple model, is at most equal to  . With
labor as the only source of income and assuming monetary costs of migrations must be paid
up front, the necessary condition for feasibility — which can be called a liquidity constraint
— can be written simply as:
 ( ) +     

(5)

or:
 

3.2

 −  ( )


(6)

Implications on Emigration Rates

Using the fact that individual skills  are distributed in the population of country  as a
normal with 0 mean and unitary variance, the two conditions (4) and (6) above imply the
fraction of people who will migrate from country  is equal to one minus the cumulative
density of a normal distribution at the highest of the two thresholds defined in (4) and (6).
For each country only one of the two thresholds can be binding. It is easy to see that the
"incentive" threshold (4) is increasing in the "median" income  ( ), while the "liquidity"
threshold (6) is decreasing in it. The monotonicity of the two thresholds implies that there
is a value of ∗ (∗ ) for which they are identical and we consider that value as marking the
divide between "Poor" ( ) and "Middle income" () countries3 . Hence, this model provides
two very clear predictions:
Proposition 1 For Middle-Income Countries, an increase in average temperature is associated with an increase in the emigration rate.
Proof. For countries whose median income is higher than ∗ (∗ ), defined as Middleincome countries, , only the threshold (4) is binding. Hence the share of people migrating
is the one with skills above that threshold, given by:
¶
µ
 ( ) −  +  + 

=1−Φ
 
 − 
3

That value is defined as: ∗ (∗ ) =

(  −  ) +  ( − − )


7

(7)

where Φ is the CDF of a standard normal distribution. The expression on the right hand
side is decreasing in  (because the CDF Φ is a monotonically increasing function). If we
assume that increases in temperature  decrease basic agricultural productivity  , then the
expression is increasing in  
The intuition is straightforward. As lower agricultural productivity implies lower median
income, in middle-income countries this eﬀect increases the incentive (and hence probability)
of migrating and hence raises the emigration rate. For those countries the liquidity constraint
does not bind.
Proposition 2 For Poor Countries an increase in average temperature is associated with a
decrease in the emigration rate.
Proof. For countries whose median income is lower than ∗ (∗ ), defined as Poor countries,  diﬀerently than for the other group, only the liquidity threshold (6) is binding.
Hence the share of people migrating is the one with skills above that threshold, given by:
¶
µ
 −  ( )

=1−Φ
 


(8)

where Φ is the CDF of a standard normal distribution. The expression on the right hand side
is now increasing in  . If, as before, we assume that increases in temperature  decrease
median productivity  , then the expression above would be decreasing in  .
The intuition is also straightforward. In poor countries, the liquidity constraint is binding.
Hence, lower agricultural productivity makes people poorer, decreasing their ability to pay
migration costs, hence reducing the emigration rate. For these countries the incentive to
migrate is very high, but individuals are simply too poor to aﬀord migration, which is only
worsened by lower agricultural productivity.
Figure 1 illustrates these two cases in Panels 1 and 2, respectively. Panel 1 represents
the skill distribution in the middle-income country. We see the migrating population is
the one in the shaded area with skills above  ( ), the skill-threshold determined by the
incentive-constraint. On the contrary, the skill-threshold driven by the liquidity constraint,
 ( ), is not binding and, hence, irrelevant. The arrows in the graph represent the shift
of the thresholds implied by an increase in temperature,  . As a consequence of increases
in temperature, the upper (incentive) threshold moves to the left, while the lower (liquidity)
threshold — irrelevant for middle- income countries — moves to the right. This implies the
area below the skill density distribution and to the right of the threshold increases. Panel 2
shows the picture for poor countries. We assume the same relative distribution of skills, but
in this case the ordering of the thresholds is switched. The liquidity threshold that moves
8

to the right as  increases is now binding. This implies a smaller mass of people migrating
as a consequence of higher temperatures.
By taking logarithms and log-linearizing both sides of each equation (7) and (8) and
merging them into one equation, we obtain the basic equation and prediction for our empirical
test and analysis. Namely, considering a generic country  that can be  (middle income)
or  (poor) we can write:
µ


ln
 

¶

=  +  ln  +   ln  ∗ ( ∈  ) + 

(9)

In (9) the dependent variable is the natural logarithm of the migration rates from
country  and it depends on the logarithm of the average temperatures in the country, ln  
To capture the diﬀerent dependence in poor and middle-income countries, we allow for a
linear term whose coeﬃcient  captures the eﬀect of temperature on emigration rates in
middle-income countries. We then add an interaction with the dummy ( ∈  ) that is
equal to 1 if country  is a poor country, for which the "liquidity threshold" is binding and
0 otherwise. With this notation, the parameter  captures the elasticity of emigration rates
to average temperature for medium-income countries and  +   captures the elasticity for
poor countries. The term  captures potential determinants of migration costs in country
of origin  Let us also notice that if we interpret "" as the urban areas, and  and  as
the rural areas in the Middle-income or Poor country, the model above can be interpreted
as a model of rural-to-urban migration. Even in that case, it makes sense that migration
is skill-intensive and the incentive condition aﬀects migration in middle-income countries,
while the liquidity constraint aﬀects it in poor countries. Hence the consequence of warming
would be more urbanization in middle-income countries, but less urbanization in very poor
countries. The prediction of the model can be summarized, within the compact format of
expression (9) above, as follows:
1. As the average temperature of a middle-income country increases, reducing its agricultural productivity relative to urban productivity, we expect workers to migrate abroad
and to the cities at higher rate. Therefore the model predicts   0.
2. As the average temperature of a poor country increases, reducing its agricultural productivity, we expect workers whose average income is very low to have fewer resources
to pay for their migration possibilities. Therefore the model predicts  +    0
Our empirical analysis focuses on estimating the link between temperature and emigration, and will provide important evidence to evaluate the predictions of the model.

9

4

Data and Summary Statistics

In order to test the empirical predictions of the model, we merge data on the average temperature and on international migration and urbanization for all available countries in the
world between 1960 and 2000.4 The data on temperatures are taken from Dell et al. (2012).
In our empirical specifications we also control for a measure of annual precipitation, whose
long-run behavior can aﬀect agricultural productivity. This variable is used as a control
in Dell et al (2012) because changes in precipitation can be an important aspect of longrun climate trends aﬀecting agricultural productivity. Moreover, given that precipitation
and temperature are historically correlated, both temperature and precipitation need to be
included in the empirical specification to obtain unbiased coeﬃcients (Auﬀhammer et al.,
2013). The (terrestrial) monthly mean temperature and precipitation data at 05×05 degree
resolution, obtained from weather stations (Matsuura and Willmott, 2007), are aggregated
into country-year averages using the population in 1990 at 30 arc second resolution (CIESIN
et al. 2004) as weights. In an alternative approach, used as a robustness check, the weather
station data are averaged using area, rather than population, weights. In some specifications,
in order to analyze whether long-term warming aﬀects countries by increasing the probability of extreme weather events, we also include the incidence of droughts, floods, storms and
extreme heat as controls. Those data are taken from the International Disaster Database
compiled by the Centre for Research on the Epidemiology of Disasters (Guha-Sapir et al.,
2015).
The migration data are taken from Ozden et al. (2011), and include bilateral migrant
stocks between 116 countries in the last five available census years spanning the period from
1960 to 2000. The advantage of these data is that they include migrations from 116 countries
to 116 countries, so many more destinations than only considering OECD (as done in Cai et
al 2014). The other advantage is that the source of these data are national censuses, much
more accurate in counting foreign-born than yearly flow measures. The disadvantage is that
data are only available every ten years and hence can capture long-run migration tendencies
but not short-run temporary migration flows. In our current analysis, focussed on long-run
relationships this is not an issue.
Drawing from the bilateral data, we compute net emigration flows as diﬀerences between
stocks in two consecutive censuses. We first sum all net flows for the same countries of origin
and compute emigration rates as the ratio between the aggregate net flow of emigrants in
the decade relative to the origin country population at the beginning of the decade.5 The
4

Further details on the data and the full list of countries classified as either "poor" or "middle income"
can be found in the Data Appendix A.
5
Bilateral net flows that are negative (usually very small numbers) are set to 0 as they may be due to

10

data on urbanization rates are taken from the World Urbanization Prospects (UN, 2014).
They measure the share of the population of a country living in urban areas between 1960
and 2000 available over ten year intervals. For GDP per capita the main sources are the
Penn World Table (2009) and the World Development Indicators (World Bank, 2015). Data
on the value added in agriculture are from the World Development Indicators (World Bank,
2015).
Consistently with our model, the set of countries of origin we consider for our analysis
are those that can be considered "poor" or "middle income" according to their income
per person. These are the countries for which temperature changes may have the largest
productivity eﬀect, because agriculture contributes a significant share of GDP. In practice
we define poor and middle-income countries in two ways. In a first definition, we consider
all non-OECD countries,6 for a total of 115 countries, as part of our sample. In a second
definition we rank countries by PPP-adjusted per capita GDP in 1990, taken from the Penn
World Table, and we choose those below the top quintile, which leaves us with 116 countries
in the sample of countries of origin. In the first definition we consider poor countries those
in the bottom quartile of the non-OECD sample income distribution, measured as PPPadjusted per capita GDP in 1990. In the second definition, poor countries are those in the
bottom quintile of the sample income distribution, computed before excluding rich countries.
Under both definitions we end up with the same list of 30 poor countries, while the list of
85 (or 86) middle-income countries is somewhat diﬀerent between the two definitions (see
the Data Appendix for each list). Ideally, one would want to use 1970 as the reference year
to partition countries between poor and middle income, but this choice would drastically
reduce the sample of countries as not all countries have available GDP data for 1970. Given
the relative stability of country ranking in per capita GDP we are confident that our choice,
based on 1990 GDP per capita ranking, would mostly overlap with one based on the 1970
definition of GDP per person. The countries near the threshold between poor and middle
income are those with yearly income per person around $1,500 in 1990. This is clearly a low
threshold, implying a large share of the "poor" countries are in sub-Saharan Africa. For rural
population in these countries, which tends to be the poorest portion within the country, the
liquidity constraints is clearly very relevant as they likely live on an income of a few dollars
per day. Saving some hundreds of dollars needed to move out of the country can be very
hard for these families. The threshold between middle-income and rich countries was instead
around $15,000 per person in 1990 which was about the income per person of Portugal or
mortality of the stock of emigrants abroad.
6
The Organization for Economic Cooperation and Development (OECD) is usually considered as the club
of developed countries. It includes most of the countries in the world with high GDP per person.

11

Greece. Rich countries are important destinations for migrants from poor and middle-income
countries of origin, but they are not included in our analysis as sending countries.
Table 1 provides the summary statistics of the variables of interest for the two groups of
countries (poor and middle income) separately when we include all non-OECD economies.
Several features of the data are worth discussing. First, the average ten-year emigration rate
for middle-income countries is 4.2%, including migration to both OECD and non-OECD
destinations. This average is much higher than for poor countries, whose decennial net rate
is 1.8%. This is consistent with the idea that emigration rate grows with income, up to a
certain level. Second, income per capita and urbanization rates are much higher in middleincome countries than in poor countries. In particular, the share of urban population is
42% in middle-income countries and only 19% in poor countries. Both are far from the level
of urbanization in rich countries (around 75%). Additionally, a substantial share of valueadded production in poor countries comes from agriculture, around 35%, and agriculture is
a non-negligible source of GDP (accounting for about 16%) in medium-income countries, as
well.
The diﬀerences in emigration rates and temperature trends are depicted in Figures 2 and
3. The graphs show the evolution of emigration rates and temperatures for ten selected poor
and middle-income countries, chosen to be each at a decile of the overall distribution for
the total four decade change. In each figure we standardize the average emigration rate and
average temperature of each country in the first decade to zero, making even small variations
apparent. The left-hand panel of Figure 2 shows that emigration rates are relatively stable
during the period in middle-income countries, with most countries experiencing changes of
only few percentage points. Exceptions are Albania, whose emigration rate increased 28
percentage points, and Algeria, whose emigration rate decreased, especially between the
first and second decade, by 9 percentage points. For poor countries, we can observe a larger
proportion of increasing emigration rate than decreasing it, with a significant amount of
variation.
As for temperature, Figure 3 shows that over the considered period temperatures increased in the large majority of middle-income and poor countries. As one can see from the
figure, the last decade was generally warmer for all countries than the first; the temperature
changes over the period are in fact positive with the exception of countries in the bottom
decile of the distribution of temperature changes. We also observe significant variation in the
amount of warming experienced over three decades, with a range of about 1 degree Celsius
separating the top two deciles for both middle-income and poor countries.
Figure 4 shows our most interesting stylized fact. It plots long-term changes in temperature against long-term changes in emigration rates for poor and middle-income countries
12

separately, along with a fitted regression line. In particular, we take the diﬀerence between
the (natural log of) average temperatures and emigration rates in the first two decades (196080) and in the last two decade (1981-2000) of our data and plot one against the other. The
diﬀerence in the relationship between the two groups of countries is clear. Middle-income
countries show a positive (albeit not strong) correlation while poor countries show a negative
correlation between temperature changes (expressed in logs) and emigration. Qualitatively
these are the types of correlations predicted by our model. We will test the robustness of
these correlations more systematically in the next section.

5

Empirical Specification and Results

Following specification (9) suggested by the model, we estimate the following empirical specification:

 =  +  ln( ) +   ln( ) ∗  + + ln( ) +   ln( ) ∗  +  +  +  +  (10)
The variable  captures the outcome of interest in country  and in the decade beginning
with year  (= 1960 1970 1980 1990). It will be alternatively the natural logarithm of
the emigration rates (described in the previous section) or the average urbanization rate,
computed as the urban population over the total population of country  during the decade
beginning in .7  represents the average temperature of country  during each decade
beginning with year  and  captures the ten year average precipitation. The inclusion
of both temperature and precipitation in the estimated specification follows the literature
that studies the eﬀect of climate change on any outcome. Both the natural logarithm of
the temperature and of the precipitation are entered linearly, as well as interacted with the
dummy  that equals one if country  is categorized as "Poor". This allows diﬀerent
elasticity estimates for poor and middle-income countries, a point emphasized in the model.
We also include country fixed eﬀects,  , capturing fixed country characteristics such as their
geography and institutions. The term  captures region-decade dummies in order to absorb
regional factors of variation in economic conditions over time and  are decade fixed eﬀects
interacted with a poor country dummy, to capture diﬀerential time variation in the group
of countries considered as "poor" relative to those considered as "middle income".  is a
random error term that can have a correlation within country; hence our choice to cluster at
the country level when estimating. As emphasized in the previous section, we only consider a
7

For urbanization rates, our first decade starts in year 1950 as we have data going back to that date.

13

sample of middle-income and poor countries of origin. In the main specification we apply the
first definition of poor and middle-income countries and include only non-OECD countries
of origin equating OECD to rich countries. Alternatively, in robustness checks we apply the
second definition and consider as "rich" (and drop from the country of origin sample) those
countries in the top quintile of the income per person distribution. The dummy for "poor"
countries is defined as equal to one for countries in the bottom quartile of the sample income
distribution in the non-OECD sample. It is equal to one for countries in the bottom quintile
of the income distribution (determined before excluding rich countries) in the sample that
excludes top income countries.
Specification (10) is based on the model presented in section (3). It also represents a
simple reduced-form linear relationship between temperature and migration allowing such a
relation to vary depending on the initial income per person in the country of origin. While
it is clear that average temperature is an exogenous variable, the real question is: through
what channels does temperature operate on migration? In our model and analysis we focus
on specific implications of a model in which the main channel operates through a decrease in
agricultural productivity and rural income, both of which are not easily observable variables
for our panel of countries. One option would be to include several controls such as population size, sociopolitical environment, probability of conflicts and others in the regression
to reduce the scope of omitted channels. However, as those variables may themselves be
aﬀected by agricultural productivity, including them may produce a bias in the estimation
by introducing an over-controlling problem. The estimation of an equation that controls for
both temperature and other variables that are influenced by the temperature or agricultural
productivity would not capture the total net eﬀect of temperature on migration (Dell et al.,
2014). The paper by Beine and Parsons (2015), for instance, introduces a very large number
of controls and does not find a correlation between temperature and bilateral migration.
By absorbing many potential variables correlated with agricultural productivity in the regression that paper may obscure some of the eﬀects that we are considering. Therefore, we
decided to remain parsimonious in our models (as done in Jones and Olken, 2010 or Dell et
al., 2012) by including only fixed eﬀects as controls. We then directly analyze the potential
channels of the eﬀects by assessing the impact of temperature on income per person and
agricultural value added as outcomes to see whether the estimated eﬀects on those variables
are consistent with the working of our model.

14

5.1

Eﬀects on International Migration

The main estimated coeﬃcients capturing the eﬀects of average temperature on international
migrations are presented in Table 2. Columns (1) to (4) and (7)-(8) show estimates in
which we use the population weights for the aggregation of weather station temperature and
precipitation data, while Columns (5) and (6) aggregate temperature data using area weights.
In Columns (1) to (6) OECD countries are excluded from the origin countries, so the sample
of poor and middle-income countries is defined as non-OECD ones. In Columns (7) and (8)
countries in the top quintile of income per capita distribution are dropped in identifying poor
and middle-income countries. The estimated specifications in Columns (2), (6) and (8) are
exactly as shown in equation (10). In Columns (1), (5) and (7) we omit the interaction of
temperature with the "poor country" dummy to obtain the average eﬀect of temperature on
emigration, averaging all countries. In Specifications (3) and (4) we also include a dummy
called "prevalently agricultural" to denote countries in the top quartile of the distribution
of agricultural value added as a share of GDP. This dummy and its interaction with the
logarithm of temperature is used in place of Column (3) or together with Column (4), the
interaction of temperature with the "poor country" dummy. Agricultural prevalence should
be an alternative to GDP per person to identify poor countries, and to single out those on
which temperature may have a strong impact on productivity via its eﬀect on agriculture.
This is an important check, as we presume agricultural productivity is the channel through
which temperature aﬀects migration. The number of observations varies between 114 and
116 countries over four decades, except when we include an interaction using the share of
value added in agriculture (Columns 3 and 4), which reduces the number of observations
significantly.
Two results emerge from Table 2. These results are consistent and robust across diﬀerent specifications. The first is, when not including the interaction with the "poor country"
dummy, Column (1) displays a non-significant eﬀect of the average temperature on emigration rates for the full sample of poor and middle-income countries. Similarly, no significant
eﬀect is found on the precipitation variable. The second result, however, is that when we
allow the coeﬃcient on the temperature variable to vary between middle-income and poor
countries (as we do in Column 2 and beyond) by adding an interaction with the "Poor country" dummy, the coeﬃcient on temperature in middle-income countries () turns positive
and statistically significant at the 5% confidence level, while the coeﬃcient of the interaction between the "poor country" dummy and the temperature (  ) becomes negative, quite
large in absolute value, and significant at the 1% level. The net eﬀect of temperature on
emigration in poor countries, obtained by adding  and   , is reported in the second-to-last

15

row of Table 2: it is also negative and statistically significant.8 The estimated coeﬃcients
in Column (2) indicate that a one percent increase in temperature increases international
migration rates by four percent in middle-income countries, whereas it decreases emigration
rates in poor countries by 16 percent, ceteris paribus. This implies a middle-income country
with an average yearly temperature of 22 degree Celsius (the average of our sample) would
experience a 20% increase in the rate of emigration if its average yearly temperature increased
by one degree (roughly a 5% increase). Hence, at the average, this will imply an increase
of the emigration rate from 0.042 to 0.05, with a 0.8 percentage point higher emigration
rate. The same one degree Celsius warming in a poor country, however, would generate an
80% decrease in the rate of emigration (from 0.018 to 0.004). This seems a significant but
reasonable impact. The only previous study that allows a comparison of magnitude for this
eﬀect is Cai et al (2014). In that study the basic specification (in their Table 2 Column 2)
finds that an increase in temperature equal to one degree centigrade produces an increase
in emigration rates to the average destination (and hence overall) by about 0.047 log points
(i.e. 4.7%). This is an elasticity of the eﬀect within one year. Our ten year elasticity for
middle income countries is four time larger (20%), while for low income countries we obtain
a negative elasticity. As emphasized above, Cai et al (2014) use gross rates and do not diﬀerentiate a response between poor countries and middle income ones, although the countries
with large agricultural shares that they include are likely relatively poor.
The coeﬃcients on the variable "Precipitation" () and Precipitation interacted with the
"poor country" dummy (  ) are not statistically significant; we do not detect a comparable
eﬀect of precipitation on migration. Several other studies find small or non-significant eﬀect
of rainfall or flooding on the probability of migrating (e.g. Aufhammer and Vincent, 2012;
Bohra-Mishra et al 2014; Mueller et al, 2014). We inquire further into this relationship by
including only the precipitation variable in the regression, as warming can be related to
increased probability of draught and act as a confounding factor. The estimates, reported
in Table A1 of the appendix, show no significant correlation between precipitation and
migration even when the variable "temperature" is omitted. Using specifications similar
to those of Table 2, in fact, we observe that the estimated coeﬃcient on the precipitation
variable is never significant. According to these results, agriculture-related emigration is
mainly due to changes in temperature, rather than changes in precipitations.
If the negative eﬀect on migration in poor countries proceeds from lower agricultural
8

The "poor country" dummy identifies countries in the bottom of the country-of-origin income per capita
distribution. This includes countries with income per person below $1,500 in 1990 as "poor". In a robustness
check (not reported), we use a less stringent definition of "poor" by including countries in the lowest tercile
of the income distribution. This includes all countries with GDP per person below 2,000$ as poor. The
results, available upon request, are very similar to those reported in Table 2.

16

productivity and liquidity constraints, as assumed by our simple model, then it should be
particularly strong for countries heavily depending on agriculture. Granted that there is a
strong negative correlation between the share of agriculture in GDP and income per person,
so that poor countries have, in general, a larger share of agriculture value added in GDP, we
explicitly include a dummy in Column (3) capturing those countries with a large agricultural
sector. Their productivity and incomes are likely to be more aﬀected by warming temperatures. We compute a dummy for a country being "prevalently agricultural", which is equal to
one if a country belongs to the top quartile in the world distribution of agriculture as a share
of GDP.9 Columns (3) and (4) add interactions between temperature/precipitation and the
agricultural dummy to Specification (10). The coeﬃcients of the temperature-agricultural
interaction are negative and statistically significant when included instead of the interactions
with "poor" (Column 3) and even when included in addition to those variables (in Column
4). In particular, conditional on a country being poor, an increase in average temperature
by 1% (about 0.2 degree Celsius at the sample average) decreases the rate of emigration
by an additional 12 percent if the country is also highly agricultural-dependent. When included together, the "poor country" and "prevalently agricultural" dummies interacted with
the temperature have similar coeﬃcients. Finally, notice that diﬀerent definitions of our
sample (non-OECD versus countries below the top quintile of GDP per person) and a different weighting of the temperature data do not make much of a diﬀerence in the estimates.
Hence, we will mostly use the non-OECD definition of poor and middle-income countries
and population weights.
In Table 3 we present some robustness checks that confirm the results in Table 2. In
this case, we divide the sample and analyze the eﬀects of temperature and precipitation on
emigration for middle-income countries (Columns 1-4) and poor countries (Columns 5-6)
separately. This implies that we allow all the coeﬃcients in our model (not only those on
average temperature) to diﬀer between these two groups of countries. The point estimates
in Table 3 are in line with the corresponding coeﬃcients in Table 2. An increase in temperature by 1% in middle-income countries increases emigration rates by about 4%. The same
average temperature increase in poor countries decreases emigration rates by about 21%.
The precipitation variable does not appear to have any significant eﬀect on either group.
Another simple implication that the eﬀects we are estimating proceed through the impact of climate on agricultural income and not from other omitted channels is that average
temperature should not have any impact on the emigration rates from rich countries. Agriculture is not an important source of income for those countries and rural population in those
9

As in the case of GDP per capita, the choice of the year for drawing the distribution was determined by
the availability of data. For the agricultural share the year 2000 was chosen.

17

countries is a small percentage of the total. Hence one would not expect either positive or
negative migration eﬀects of temperature in these countries. In general we do not include
rich countries of origin in our analysis, as agricultural productivity is much less relevant there
(and possibly less subject to weather fluctuations). In column (7) of Table 2 we check that
the irrelevance of temperature for net emigration rates in rich countries is confirmed by the
data. In a specification similar to (1), including only OECD countries as origin, we find an
estimate of the impact of temperature on emigration rates that is very small in value (1.04)
and not significant at all.10
In Table 3 we also investigate whether the eﬀect of temperatures on migration varies
depending on the country being in the group of warmer (hotter than the median) or cooler
(colder than the median) countries in the world within each income group. As the eﬀect
of our regressions (because of country fixed eﬀects) are identified on the change in temperature over the considered decades, one might expect that countries starting with high
temperatures might suﬀer worse consequences from average warming. Even if adaptation to
increasing temperature is possible at any level of temperature by choosing the optimal crop
mix and optimal mix of crops and animal activities, at high temperatures the overall profitability of agriculture declines (Mendelsohn et al., 1994; IPCC, 2014). For example, higher
temperatures in the tropics reduce the size of the agro-climatic zones suitable for perennial
crops. They also reduce the growing season length, influence the composition of farming
systems towards livestock-dominated food production (IPCC, 2014), and force farmers to
adopt climate-resistant crops. All these adaptation measures, however, prove to be less productive and therefore, at higher temperatures, average warming may be more detrimental.
It may also be, however, that changes in temperature are damaging to any poor country’s
agricultural productivity, at least for a while, because local crops and production have been
adapted and perfected for centuries to a certain yearly cycle of temperatures and a systematic
alteration of that is damaging to productivity at any level of temperature. Moreover keep
in mind that we are considering poor or middle income countries in which technological and
scientific adjustment of agricultural practices to climate changes may be slow. Specifications
(2), (4) and (6) include in the regression an interaction of the temperature variable with
the dummy for countries that are warmer than the median. The stratification of the sample
implies that (2) and (4) estimate the eﬀect only on middle-income countries and (6) only
on poor ones. In no case do we find significant interaction eﬀects. Increases in temperature
are equally damaging for agriculture both in cold and warm countries and they translate in
more migration in middle-income countries while poor countries respond with less migration,
10

A similar non-significant eﬀect is found when the sample of rich countries is selected on the basis of GDP
per capita.

18

possibly because of the tight liquidity constraint. This result is somewhat in contrast with
Borha-Mishra et al (2014) who find a positive eﬀect of temperature on emigration rates in
Indonesian villages only for values above the median of 25 degree Celsius. Their identification is however based on variation over time, for one country only and their focus is on net
emigration from a village rather than international emigration.
The opposite eﬀects of temperature on the emigration rate in poor and middle-income
countries is consistent with the model presented in section 3 and with simple economic
logic that emphasize both the presence of incentives and constraints. If secular heating
damages agricultural productivity, countries with a large dependence on agriculture and
very low income experience a substantial worsening of their liquidity and hence of their
ability to pay for emigration. On the other hand, middle-income countries experience a
worsening of potential earnings but, as long as people can aﬀord emigration costs, this
increases their willingness to emigrate. The finding is clearly related to the widespread
regularity (summarized for instance in Clemens, 2014) that emigration rates have a humpshaped relation with income per person in the country-of-origin. An increase in income in
very poor countries allows them to pay the costs and increases emigration rates. Past a
certain level, however, higher income reduces the incentives to migrate. Most studies find
the inversion in this relation takes place between 3,000 and 5,000 $ per person, which is a
level in the low-range of the middle-income countries of our sample. Hence, consistently with
that literature, the negative eﬀect we find on poor countries can be fully due to worsening
of income and of liquidity constraints.
In Tables A2 and A3 of the Appendix we explore two further robustness checks. In Table
A2 we consider decade diﬀerences in emigration rates and temperature and omit the country
fixed eﬀects in the panel. The estimated eﬀects of temperature and its interaction with the
"poor" dummy are somewhat attenuated relative to the estimates in levels, as can happen
if diﬀerencing increases the noise-to-signal ratio. However, the positive impact on middleincome countries is still significant and the estimated coeﬃcient on "poor countries" is still
negative (although not significant). Table A3, instead, shows the results of a "long-diﬀerence"
estimation. In this case we take diﬀerences (between temperature and emigration rates) over
thirty years — between the seventies and nineties — and we estimate a cross-sectional regression
in long diﬀerences. Comparing the long-run estimates of Table A3 and the corresponding
medium-run coeﬃcients of Table 2 we see that elasticities are larger in the second case. One
may conclude that protracted episodes of temperature increase have even stronger eﬀects
on the very long-run propensity to migrate, especially in poor countries. This may imply
that, by worsening income perspectives in rural areas, an increase in average temperatures
may have damaging eﬀects on income that amplify with time as the possibility of emigration
19

becomes ever more remote. Overall, the pattern emerging consistently across specifications
is that increased temperature encourages emigration in middle-income countries, but reduces
it in poor countries. This eﬀect is significant and for poor countries it may imply, especially
in the long-run, a reduced ability of people to emigrate and escape poverty.

5.2

Eﬀects on Urbanization

International migration is certainly a way to take advantage of economic opportunities and
is also a way to escape local rural poverty. However, most of the population does not
migrate internationally because of high costs, lack of information and limited opportunities
(e.g. Pritchett, 2006). Internal migration, especially from rural areas to urban areas and
cities, is an alternative. While the economic returns to internal migration are lower, it is
less costly than emigration. The same ideas, developed in the model of section 3, can be
applied to rural-urban migrants. Increased temperatures will aﬀect agriculture productivity
more than urban activities and, thus, will mainly aﬀect the income of rural populations.
Moreover, the returns to skills are likely to be larger in the city than in the countryside (as
the model postulates). In very poor countries, the rural population may be so poor that
it lacks the income to overcome the information and cost barriers for migrating to the city.
This may actually be the main reason preventing migration in poor countries. Hence, a
decrease in current income would make the transition to cities even less likely. In middleincome countries, instead, liquidity constraints may be less severe for rural workers, and
so a worsening of their income perspectives in agriculture may increase inflow into cities.
Thus, we can use a measure of "urbanization" as the outcome of interest, namely the share
of total population of a country living in cities. The change in this variable is mainly due
to rural-urban migration. We analyze the eﬀects of increasing average temperatures and
precipitation on urbanization, just as we did for international migration rates.
The structure of Table 4 follows exactly that of Table 2, except that the outcome variable
is the share of population living in urban areas relative to total population in the country.
Columns (1)-(4) and (7)-(8) calculate the average temperature in a country by using population weights, while Columns (5)-(6) use area weights. Columns (1)-(6) use the non-OECD
sample, while (7)-(8) use the countries in the bottom and fourth quintiles of GDP per person as the sample. Considering the results in Columns (1) and (2), the findings suggest a
similar behavior of rural-urban migration as was found for international migration. Namely,
an increase in average temperatures increases the degree of urbanization, speeding up the
rural-urban transition in middle-income countries, but slows it down in poor countries. A 5%
increase in temperature at the average (22 degree Celsius), equal to about one degree Cel-

20

sius, increases urbanization rates by 4 percentage points in middle-income countries, while
it decreases it by the same amount in poor countries. Considering poor countries have an
average urbanization rate of around 19% in this period, and the increase in urbanization was
about 20 percentage points per decade over the considered period, an increase in temperature by one degree Celsius may slow the urbanization process very significantly. As in the
case of international migration, precipitation does not appear to have a significant eﬀect on
urbanization. On the contrary, the interaction between precipitation and the "poor country"
dummy has a marginally significant eﬀect in three specifications. This eﬀect, however, is not
robust and only significant at the 10% level, so we do not think it is evidence of an additional productivity eﬀect. In Column (3) we confirm the negative eﬀect of temperature on
rural-urban migration exists on "prevalently agricultural" countries (as much as on "poor"
countries), but Column (4) shows that when we include both interactions, only the one with
"poor" remains significant.
Some studies (e.g. Marchiori et al, 2012) postulate a direct connection between ruralurban migration and international migration. Namely, they consider rural populations affected by weather shocks as first moving into cities, increasing urbanization rates and crowding urban centers. International migration proceeds from this as a consequence of crowding
and a decrease in income/amenities in cities. This is a reasonable possibility and our results
are consistent with it. However, rural populations may directly migrate abroad, and the
crowding of cities may decrease income (crowding), or increase it (agglomeration), so that
international migration may not be a direct consequence of urbanization. In our framework,
we consider urbanization and international migrations as two possible outcomes, both driven
by a decline in rural income, but not necessarily sequential or linked. Individuals in rural
areas are more aﬀected by temperature and, hence, their migration behavior to cities or
abroad could be aﬀected. The results from Table 4 show increases in temperature have the
same type of eﬀects on rural-urban migration as on international emigration, strengthening
the plausibility of our interpretation.

5.3

Where do People Migrate in Response to Warming?

Are rich and far away countries the main destination for people who move out of middleincome countries as a consequence of warming and lower agricultural productivity? Or are
these individuals prevalently moving to nearby countries that are experiencing somewhat
better economic opportunities? Does warming produce a large scale movement of individuals from middle-income countries in Africa, Asia and Latin America to rich countries in
Europe and North America? Or does it produce a more local reallocation across middle-

21

income countries within a region? In order to analyze this question, we compute the net
emigration rates for each country of our sample, separating emigrants to OECD and nonOECD countries. Table 5 presents the findings using this split. We then separate emigration
between destinations within 1,000 Km from the origin and farther destinations and we calculate separate rates for short-distance and long-distance emigration. Table 6 shows the
estimates in this case.
The estimates in Table 5 show a very interesting pattern of temperature-induced emigration. Columns 1-4 show the eﬀect on emigration rates to non-OECD destinations. Columns
5-8 show the impact on emigration rates to OECD destinations. Inclusion of the interaction between temperature and the Poor-country dummy varies by column. Two findings
are worth noting. First, increasing in temperatures increases emigration rates from middleincome countries only to non-OECD destinations. It has no significant eﬀect on emigration
to OECD countries. This result is consistent with our proposed channel, as emigration is
driven by a worsening of local opportunities and not by an increase in opportunities in rich
countries. Hence, migrants move to where they have better chances of finding a job given
their current constraints. This "push" factor (decreased rural income) increases migration
to similar economies rather than to OECD economies. On the other hand, the immigrationreducing eﬀect for poor countries (due to worsening opportunities) aﬀects both types of
destinations, as potential emigrants become less likely to leave the country. Similarly and
consistently with those estimates, Table 6 — whose structure mirrors that of Table 5 — shows
higher temperatures increase emigration rates to close destinations (1000 Km.) for middleincome countries, while poor countries experience a decrease of emigration rates to any other
country (the standard error on the estimated eﬀects in Columns 2 and 4 are rather large,
however). Combining the eﬀect on poor and middle-income countries, it appears that increases in average temperatures may actually decrease overall emigration to OECD countries.
Middle-income countries are not more likely to experience emigration towards those destinations, while poor countries experience a reduction in emigration rates. This is bad news
for the potential income of individuals from non-OECD countries, for which emigration to
rich countries constitutes one of the best options for increasing their household income and
economic well-being.11
11

In an alternative (unreported) way of testing the eﬀect of warming on the destination distance, we
have
the "average distance" of emigrants, where the weighted distance variable is given by:
P calculated
  where  is the geographical distance between origin j and destination i. Increases

∗


  
in temperature significantly decreases the average distance of emigration from middle-income countries.

22

6

Robustness Checks

We conducted a variety of robustness checks and present the results in the Appendix at
the end of the paper. However, we will summarize them here. First, we have focused
our attention on countries in sub-Saharan Africa (SSA). This specific group includes most
of the poor countries and also those whose productivity is more likely to be aﬀected by
temperature increases. Moreover, several of the previous studies (e.g. Barrios et al 2012 and
Marchiori et al 2006) have considered only sub-Saharan African Countries in their analysis
of extreme weather events and migration. In Column (1) of Table A4 we have included a
dummy, "SSA", in the place of "poor" and an interaction term between temperature (and
precipitation) and the "SSA" dummy. In Column (2) we have included both the SSA and
the "poor country" dummy, as well as their interactions. Columns (1) and (2) analyze the
eﬀect on emigration rates, while Columns (3) and (4) look at the impact on urbanization
rates. A variety of interesting results emerge, mostly confirming the previous ones. First,
temperature has a negative impact on emigration out of SSA countries and is mainly due to
them being poor and primarily rural countries. In Column (1) the interaction is negative and
significant, while in Column (2) we find no diﬀerence for sub-Saharan Africa once we allow
for a diﬀerent coeﬃcient on poor countries. Hence, our analysis shows that SSA countries’
migration response to temperature increases looks in line with the response of other poor
countries: hotter climate reduces the ability of rural populations to migrate. A second eﬀect,
however, is now estimated as significant and is consistent with the temperature eﬀect and
that is the eﬀect of Ln(precipitation). Drier climates are associated with higher emigration
rates for non-SSA countries and lower emigration-rates for SSA countries. These eﬀects are
significant at the 10% level and are robust to the inclusion of the "poor" dummy interactions,
revealing a role for precipitation as a driver of agricultural productivity in SSA. This may be
due to the fact that SSA countries are more aﬀected by drier climate because of their rural
nature, or that investments in irrigation are rare among farm households in this area of the
world. Moreover, this finding indicates that some regions of frequent droughts (e.g., East
Africa) are extremely dependent on seasonal water. A decline in precipitation and an increase
in temperature (both of which would be associated with lower agricultural productivity in
this region) will drive lower emigration, leaving people in a worsening condition of poverty.
Once we allow for this eﬀect in SSA countries, higher temperature and lower precipitation
push emigration from the other countries that are not as poor. So, in line with their extreme
poverty and dependence on agriculture, as well as consistent with the fact that emigration
rates out of SSA countries are rather low, worsening agricultural productivity due to warmer
and drier weather reduces rural-urban migration and emigration from sub-Saharan Africa.

23

Table A5 includes a variable that captures the realization of extreme temperatures during
a decade in a country. The variable measures the number of years of a decade in which the
temperature was above or below two standard deviations of the 1960-2000 period mean for
the country. Temperature anomalies, both above and below the mean, have been more
likely in the most recent decades. The occurrence of one extreme episode in the decade was
registered 117 times. Out of these, 58 cases happened between 1990 and 2000, 21 between
1990 and 1980, 23 between 1970 and 1980 and 15 between 1960 and 1970. For some countries,
these temperature anomalies have occurred twice and three times within a single decade, but
these occurrences were rather rare.
We added to the basic Specification the count of the extreme temperature events per
decade as well as its interaction with the "poor country" dummy variable. Columns (1)-(6)
of Table A5 show that emigration rates in middle- income countries are not influenced by the
occurrence of temperature anomalies, nor do they matter for migration in poor countries,
regardless of the specification of countries we use. Columns (7) and (8) focus specifically
on extremely high temperature years (only anomalies in the high temperature range), but
again we do not find significant eﬀects.
Given that climate change is expected to bring an intensification of natural disasters,
such as droughts, floods, storms and extreme heat, we count the total number of natural
disasters in each specific decade, computed from the international Disaster Database (GuhaSapir et al., 2015). In Table A6 we added this variable along with its interaction with the
"poor country" dummy variable. We find that emigration rates are not influenced by the
occurrence of natural disasters. In further specifications (not reported but available upon
request) we have included each type of natural disaster, namely droughts, floods, storms and
extreme heat, individually in the regression as count of their occurrences in the decade. We
do not find, however, any impact. It likely that natural disasters and rare weather events
drive diﬀerent types of migration, more akin to local mobility and potentially reversed in
years of good weather. Hence natural disasters may be responsible for the displacement of
people in near areas, generating nonpermanent transitions, but in the long run, as they are
rare and they only occur in some countries, they may not aﬀect significantly rural-urban
and international migration when looking at all countries. This finding is consistent with
the analysis of Beine and Parsons (2015) who do not find direct impact of the same type
of events on bilateral migration and with the analysis of Bohra-Mishra et al (2014) for the
migration behavior in Indonesian villages. This last paper finds a permanent migration
response in Indonesia (a middle income country) to long-run increases in temperature but
not to episodic disasters. Mueller et al. (2014) report that heat stress but not flooding has
a significant eﬀect on migration in Pakistan.
24

Finally, Table A7 specifies temperature in levels, rather than logarithms. The estimated
values are comparable to those obtained using the log specification. An increase in one degree
Celsius would increase emigration rates by 27% in middle-income countries (using Column
(2) coeﬃcients) and decrease emigration rates by 86% in poor countries. This is similar to
the results reported in Table 2.

7

Eﬀects on Structural Change and GDP

In the previous sections we have estimated a reduced-form relationship between temperature (and precipitation) and emigration/urbanization rates across countries. We have shown
these correlations are consistent with the following interpretation: increased temperatures
decrease agricultural productivity and exacerbates the liquidity constraint for rural populations in poor countries, reducing their ability to emigrate, but increases incentives for rural
populations in middle-income countries to emigrate. While several checks confirmed this
interpretation is plausible, and while the "exogenous" nature of temperature and its variation across countries relative to local economic and social conditions ensure that reverse
causality problems are likely limited, it is hard to really identify the exact channels of the
estimated eﬀects. One could argue higher temperatures have other disruptive eﬀects in poor
countries besides their impact on agriculture (increased conflict, wars, aﬀects on health and
fertility) that also reduce emigration rates. Admitting it is hard to identify those channels
fully and precisely, we want to emphasize the agricultural productivity channel. Hence, we
will test several other plausible implications derived from our model, in which the migration response (or lack of it) is prevalently linked to rural income (agricultural productivity).
Higher temperatures influence the emigration rates by lowering agricultural productivity
both in poor and in middle-income countries. While in middle-income countries lower agricultural productivity translates into higher emigration rates, and hence a further reduction in
agricultural value added, the existence of liquidity constraints in poor countries implies that
lower agricultural productivity prevents people from leaving and, hence, this second channel
of potential decline in agriculture value added as share of GDP is muted. This would imply
that higher temperatures should have a negative impact on value added in agriculture as a
share of GDP, and that this eﬀect should be particularly strong in middle- income countries
in which emigration also causes a decline in the number of agricultural workers. To test
this hypothesis, we regress a reduced-form relationship between temperature and agricultural value added as a percent of GDP and show the coeﬃcient estimates in Table 7. As
before, we consider only middle-income and poor countries and obtain the data on value
added in agriculture as a share of GDP from the World Development Indicators (World
25

Bank, 2015). In line with expectations, increases in temperature significantly decrease the
agricultural share of GDP for middle-income countries (Columns (2) and (4)). However, for
poor countries the eﬀect is more imprecisely estimated and not significantly diﬀerent from 0
(although positive in point estimate, see last row of the Table). This is consistent with the
idea that in middle-income countries the direct eﬀect of warming (producing a decrease in
agricultural productivity) and the indirect eﬀect (inducing migration of rural population to
cities or abroad) both contribute to reduced value added in agriculture. In poor countries,
to the contrary, only the direct eﬀect is present and in aggregate may be less significant.
Therefore, lower agricultural productivity because of higher temperatures, combined with
the possibility of migrating (to cities or abroad) may simply speed up the structural transformation of some middle-income countries away from rural economies toward more urban
and productive economies. Though, in very poor countries where migration mechanisms do
not work, the loss in agricultural productivity does not trigger a structural change from rural
to urban economies.
The previous channel, operating through a structural transformation, encouraged or
slowed by warming, suggests another implication of our theory. Warming could be associated with an increase in GDP per capita in middle- income countries where rural workers
move to more productive cities. Instead, it should be associated with a decrease of GDP
per capita in poor countries where rural workers are stuck in an impoverished agricultural
sector. We test this implication in Table 8 in which the dependent variable is the logarithm
of GDP per capita, obtained from the Penn World Table (2009) in Columns (1)-(2) and
(5)-(6) or from the World Development Indicators (World Bank, 2015) in columns (3)-(4)
and (7)-(8). Consistently with these predictions, middle-income countries experience growth
in GDP per person (Columns (2), (4), (6), and (8)). The mobility of workers into cities
(with higher productivity potential) and the out-migration of poor rural workers result in
a positive eﬀect, significant at the 5% level, of between 1.4 and 2.3. To the contrary, poor
countries experience a negative impact of higher temperatures on income per person, with
an interaction term that is negative and significant.
Overall, warming temperatures increase GDP per capita in middle-income countries while
negatively aﬀecting GDP per capita in poor countries. While this result confirms what
was found by Dell et al 2012, and hence it is not new, our model and previous analysis
provides an additional explanation, linked crucially to the role of mobility/migration as a
margin of adjustment to these weather/agricultural productivity shocks. In countries in
which agricultural productivity is not so low as to be at subsistence level, a worsening of
economic opportunities in agriculture pushes individuals to migrate to cities and to other
countries, opening them up to better opportunities and eventually helping to raise the average
26

income of a country. Urbanization and moving out of agriculture are crucial mechanisms to
the increase of GDP, and in countries at middle-income levels, warming can be an additional
push to realize these gains. However, in places in which agricultural productivity is so low as
to leave rural populations liquidity constrained and limited to agriculture, then warming and
subsequently lower agricultural productivity may slow economic transformation and growth.
These eﬀects ultimately contribute to a poverty trap.

8

Discussion and Conclusions

In this paper we have focused on the potential impact the increase in average temperature,
experienced in many countries during the last few decades, may have on internal and international migration. We have assumed the main impact of temperature increase is through
an eﬀect on agricultural productivity and, hence, countries experiencing larger increases may
have suﬀered decline in agricultural productivity. This channel, which should mainly aﬀect
rural populations, has a varied consequence on emigration rates depending on the income
level of potential migrants. In very poor countries, where the main obstacle to migration is
that people are so poor they cannot aﬀord the cost of emigration, warming and lower rural
income may imply less emigration. That is, rural populations go even deeper into poverty
and subsistence mode as a consequence of low agricultural productivity. In countries where
income is not as low, however, lower agricultural productivity will enhance the incentives
to migrate either to cities or abroad. Consistent with these predictions, we find climatic
warming is associated with significantly higher emigration rates in middle-income countries
and significantly lower rates in poor countries (income per capita lower than 1,500 $ per
person, which includes many sub-Saharan Africa countries). We also show, as a consequence
of the migration out of rural poverty encouraged by warming, middle-income countries are
better oﬀ in terms of their GDP per capita. Poor countries, on the contrary, are made worse
oﬀ and may be further trapped in poverty as a consequence of climatic warming.

27

References
Auﬀhammer M. and J. R. Vincent (2012) "Unobserved time eﬀects confound the identification of climate change impacts" Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences. vol.
109(30), pages 11973-11974.
Auﬀhammer M., S. M. Hsiang, W. Schlenker and A. Sobelz (2013) "Using Weather Data and
Climate Model Output in Economic Analyses of Climate Change" Review of Environmental
Economics and Policy, 7(2), 181-198
Barrios Salvador, Luisito Bertinelli and Eric Strobl (2006) "Climatic change and rural-urban
migration: The case of sub-Saharan Africa" Journal of Urban Economics, vol. 60(3), pages
357-371.
Beine M. and C. Parsons (2015) “Climatic Factors as Determinants of International Migration” The Scandinavian Journal of Economics, 117(2): 723—767
Bohra-Mishra Pratikshya, Michael Oppenheimer and Solomon M. Hsiang (2014) "Nonlinear
permanent migration response to climatic variations but minimal response to disasters"
Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences, vol 111(27), pages 9780-9785.
Borjas G. J. (1987) “Self-Selection and the Earnings of Immigrants”, The American Economic Review. 77(4): 531-553
Cai, Ruohong, Shuaizhang Feng, Mariola Pytliková and Michael Oppenheimer, (2014) "Climate Variability and International Migration: The Importance of the Agricultural Linkage," CReAM Discussion Paper Series 1418, Centre for Research and Analysis of Migration
(CReAM), Department of Economics, University College London.
Clemens M. (2014) "Does Development reduce Migration?" IZA Discussion Papers 8592,
Institute for the Study of Labor (IZA)
CIESIN - Columbia University, United Nations Food and Agriculture Programme - FAO,
and Centro Internacional de Agricultura Tropical - CIAT (2004) Gridded Population of the
World, Version 3 (GPWv3): Population Count Grid. Palisades, NY: NASA Socioeconomic
Data and Applications Center (SEDAC)
Cline, William R., 2007, "Global Warming and Agriculture: Impact Estimates by Country", Washington: Center for Global Development and Peterson Institute for International
Economics.

28

Dell M., B. Jones and B. Olkien (2012) "Temperature Shocks and Economic Growth: evidence from the last half Century" American Economic Journal: Macroeconomics, 4(3):
66—95.
Dell M., B. Jones and B. Olkien (2014) "What Do We Learn from the Weather? The New
Climate-Economy Literature," Journal of Economic Literature, 52(3): 740-98
Dillon Andrew; Valerie Mueller and Sheu Salau (2011) "Migratory Responses to Agricultural
Risk in Northern Nigeria" American Journal of Agricultural Economics, vol. 93(4), pages
1048-1061
Docquier, F. & Marfouk, A. & Özden, C. & Parsons, C. ( 2011) "Geographic, Gender
and Skill Structure of International Migration," MPRA Paper 47917, University Library of
Munich, Germany.
Feng Shuaizhang, Alan B. Krueger and Michael Oppenheimer (2010)"Linkages among climate change, crop yields and Mexico-US cross-border migration" Proceedings of the National
Academy of Sciences, vol. 107(32), pages 14257-14262.
Gray C. L. (2009) "Environment, Land, and Rural Out-migration in the Southern Ecuadorian
Andes" World Development, 37(2): 457-468
Gray C. L. and Richard Bilsborrow. (2013) "Environmental influences on human migration
in rural Ecuador" Demography 50(4): 1217-1241.
Gray C. L. and Valerie Mueller (2012a) "Drought and population mobility in rural Ethiopia"
World Development 40(1): 134—145
Gray C. L. and Valerie Mueller (2012b) "Natural disasters and population mobility in
Bangladesh" Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences,109(16)
Grogger, Jeﬀrey, and Hanson, Gordon H. (2011) ‘Income maximization and the selection
and sorting of international migrants’, Journal of Development Economics, 95/1, 42-57.
Guha-Sapir D., R. Below, Ph. Hoyois - EM-DAT (2015) International Disaster Database —
www.emdat.be — Université Catholique de Louvain — Brussels — Belgium
Hatton, T.J. & J.G. Williamson (1994). What Drove the Mass Migrations from Europe in
the Late Nineteenth Century? Population and Development Review 20 (3): 533—559

29

Hatton, T.J. and J.G. Williamson (2003) "Demographic and Economic Pressure of Emigration out of Africa" The Scandinavian Journal of Economics Volume 105, Issue 3, pages
465—486, September 2003
Hatton, T.J. & J.G. Williamson (2011). "Are third world emigration forces abating?" World
Development 39(1): 20-32.
Henry S., B. Schoumaker and C. Beauchemin (2004) "The impact of rainfall on the first
out-migration: A multilevel event-history analysis in Burkina Faso" Population and Environment, vol. 25(5), pages 423-460.
IPCC (2014) "Fifth Assessment Report: Impacts, Adaptation, and Vulnerability" UNEP,
Washington DC.
Jones B. and B. A. Olken (2010) "Climate Shocks and Exports," American Economic Review,
vol. 100(2), pages 454-59
Kelley Co. P., Shahrzad M., M. A. Cane, R. Seager and Y Kushnir (2015) "Climate change
in the Fertile Crescent and implications of the recent Syrian drought", Proceedings of the
National Academy of Sciences, vol. 112(11), pages 3241-3246.
Marchiori L., Maystadt J.F and I. Schumacher (2012) "The impact of weather anomalies on
Migration in Sub-Saharan Africa" Journal of Environmantal Economics and Management,
63: 355-374.
Matsuura,
K, and C. J. Willmott
and Precipitation:
1900—2006 Gridded
http://climate.geog.udel.edu/~climate/

(2007) “Terrestrial Air Temperature
Monthly Time Series, Version 1.01”

Mayda A.M. (2010) “International migration: A panel data analysis of the determinants of
bilateral flow” Journal of Population Economics, October 2010, 23 (4): pp. 1249-1274.
Mendelsohn R.; W. D. Nordhaus and D. Shaw (1994) “The Impact of Global Warming on
Agriculture: A Ricardian Analysis” American Economic Review 84(4): 753-771.
Mueller Valerie A., Clark L.Gray and Katrina Kosec (2014) "Heat stress increases long-term
human migration in rural Pakistan", in Nature Climate Change, vol. 4, farm types and
irrigation as an adaptation to climate change 182-185.
Munshi Kaivan (2003) "Networks in the modern economy. Mexican migrants in the US labor
market" Quarterly Journal of Economics, vol. 118(2), pages 549-599.
30

Ortega F. and G. Peri (2012) “The Eﬀect of Income and Immigration Policies on International Migration.” Migration Studies, Volume 1, page 1-28; Oxford University Press. DOI:
10.1093/migration/mns004.
Ozden C.; C. R. Parsons; M. Schiﬀ and T. L. Walmsley (2011) Where on Earth is Everybody?
The Evolution of Global Bilateral Migration 1960—2000. World Bank Economic Review,
25(1), pages: 12 - 56
Penn World Table (2009) Version 6.3, http://datacentre.chass.utoronto.ca/pwt/
Pritchett Lant (2006) "Let their people come: breaking the gridlock on international labor
mobility" Center for Global Development, Washington DC.
Roy, A.D. (1951) “Some thoughts on the distribution of earnings” Oxford Economic Papers,
3, (2) : 135-46.
UN (2014) "World Urbanization Prospects: The 2014 Revision", Department of Economic
and Social Aﬀairs, Population Division, United Nations publication
World Bank (2015) "World Development Indicators" http://data.worldbank.org/datacatalog/world-development-indicators
Zelinsky W. (1971) "The Hypothesis of the Mobility Transition." Geographical Review 61
(2): 219-249.

31

A

Data Appendix

The migration data used in this paper are taken from Ozden et al. (2011) and include
matrices of bilateral migrant stocks in five available census years spanning 1960—2000, for
226 countries of origin and 226 countries of destination. To compute the emigration rates
used in the estimations, first we compute bilateral emigration net flows as diﬀerences between
bilateral stocks in two consecutive censuses. Then we sum all bilateral flows for the same
countries of origin j, setting negative values to 0, as they are likely be due to mortality of
the stock of emigrants abroad. The emigration rate from country of origin  is the ratio
between the aggregated net flows from origin country  and the origin country population
at the beginning of the decade. The computed emigration rates span the period from 1970
to 2000.
The temperature and precipitation data are taken from Dell et al. (2012). The (terrestrial) monthly mean temperature and precipitation data at 0.5X0.5 degree resolution
obtained from weather stations (Matsuura and Willmott, 2007) are aggregated into countryyear averages using the population in 1990 at 30 arc second resolution as weights or alternatively using area weights.
By merging the two datasets and considering only "Poor and Middle-income" countries,
we were able to compile final datasets with 114, 115 and 116 countries. The exact number
depends on the weights used to aggregate the weather station data (population or area),
and on the way we defined “Poor or Middle-income" countries, whether by excluding OECD
countries, or by considering the country GDP per capita.
Given that the emigration rates were only available at decade level, temperature and
precipitation have been averaged over the 10 years of the decade. For almost all countries
the data were available for four decades. Only for Namibia, the first decade available is 1990.
List of poor countries
Afghanistan, Benin, Burkina Faso, Burundi, Cambodia, Central African Republic, Democratic Republic of Congo, the Equatorial Guinea, Ethiopia, Gambia, Ghana, Guinea-Bissau,
Lao People’s Democratic Republic, Lesotho, Liberia, Madagascar, Malawi, Mali, Mozambique, Nepal, Niger, Nigeria, Rwanda, Somalia, Sudan, United Republic of Tanzania, Togo,
Uganda, Yemen and Zambia
List of middle-income countries (population weights and excluding OECD countries)
Albania, Algeria, Angola, Argentina, Bahamas, Bangladesh, Belize, Bhutan, Bolivia,
Botswana, Brazil, Brunei Darussalam, Bulgaria, Cameroon, Cape Verde, Chad, China,
Colombia, Comoros, Congo, Costa Rica, Cote d’Ivoire, Cuba, Cyprus, Djibouti, Dominican
32

Republic, Ecuador, Egypt, El Salvador, Fiji, Gabon, Guatemala, Guinea, Guyana, Haiti,
Honduras, India, Indonesia, Iran, Iraq, Jamaica, Jordan, Kenya, Kuwait, Lebanon, Libya,
Malaysia, Mauritania, Mauritius, Morocco, Namibia, Nicaragua, Oman, Pakistan, Panama,
Papua New Guinea, Paraguay, Peru, Philippines, Puerto Rico, Qatar, Romania, Russia,
Saint Vincent and the Grenadines, Samoa, Sao Tome and Principe, Saudi Arabia, Senegal,
Serbia and Montenegro, Sierra Leone, Solomon Islands, South Africa, Sri Lanka, Suriname,
Swaziland, Syrian Arab Republic, Thailand, Trinidad and Tobago, Tunisia, United Arab
Emirates, Uruguay, Vanuatu, Venezuela, Viet Nam, Zimbabwe
List of middle-income countries (population weights and excluding top income countries according to GDP pc)
Albania, Algeria, Angola, Argentina, Bangladesh, Belize, Bhutan, Bolivia, Botswana,
Brazil, Bulgaria, Cameroon, Cape Verde, Chad, Chile, China, Colombia, Comoros, Congo,
Costa Rica, Cote d’Ivoire, Cuba, Cyprus, Djibouti, Dominican Republic, Ecuador, Egypt, El
Salvador, Fiji, Gabon, Greece, Guatemala, Guinea, Guyana, Haiti, Honduras, India, Hungary, Indonesia, Iran, Iraq, Jamaica, Israel, Jordan, Kenya, Republic of Korea, Lebanon,
Libya, Malaysia, Mauritania, Mauritius, Morocco, Mexico, Namibia, Nicaragua, Pakistan,
Panama, Papua New Guinea, Paraguay, Peru, Philippines, Poland, Portugal, Romania, Russia, Saint Vincent and the Grenadines, Samoa, Sao Tome and Principe, Senegal, Serbia and
Montenegro, Sierra Leone, Solomon Islands, South Africa, Sri Lanka, Suriname, Swaziland,
Syrian Arab Republic, Thailand, Trinidad and Tobago, Tunisia, Turkey, Uruguay, Vanuatu,
Venezuela, Viet Nam, Zimbabwe.
List of middle-income countries (area weights and excluding OECD countries)
Albania, Algeria, Angola, Argentina, Bahamas, Bangladesh, Belize, Bhutan, Bolivia,
Botswana, Brazil, Brunei Darussalam, Bulgaria, Cameroon, Cape Verde, Chad, China,
Colombia, Comoros, Congo, Costa Rica, Cote d’Ivoire, Cuba, Cyprus, Djibouti, Dominican
Republic, Ecuador, Egypt, El Salvador, Fiji, Gabon, Guatemala, Guinea, Guyana, Haiti,
Honduras, India, Indonesia, Iran, Iraq, Jamaica, Jordan, Kenya, Kuwait, Lebanon, Libya,
Malaysia, Mauritania, Mauritius, Morocco, Mongolia, Namibia, Nicaragua, Oman, Pakistan,
Panama, Papua New Guinea, Paraguay, Peru, Philippines, Puerto Rico, Qatar, Romania,
Samoa, Sao Tome and Principe, Saudi Arabia, Senegal, Serbia and Montenegro, Sierra Leone,
Solomon Islands, South Africa, Sri Lanka, Suriname, Swaziland, Syrian Arab Republic, Thailand, Trinidad and Tobago, Tunisia, United Arab Emirates, Uruguay, Vanuatu, Venezuela,
Viet Nam, Zimbabwe.

33

Tables and Figures
Table 1: Summary Statistics
Countries Included in The Sample:
Variable
Emigration rate (emigration flows/population)
Temperature, °C (pop weight)
Precipitation, 100s mm/year (pop weight)
Temperature, °C (area weight)
Precipitation, 100s mm/year (area weight)
Share of Urban Population
Emigration rate (to non-OECD destinations)
Emigration rate (to OECD destinations)
Emigration rate ( to close destinations)
Emigration rate (to distant destinations)
Agriculture, value added (% of GDP) (WDI source)
GDP per capita, constant, PPP (Penn World Table source)
GDP per capita, constant, local currency unit (WDI source)

Non-OECD Sample
Middle-Income Countries
Observations Mean
338
0.042
338
22.118
338
13.406
330
22.334
330
13.231
420
0.422
338
0.014
338
0.028
289
0.009
338
0.033
242
16.298
332
8’197
290
467’717

Std. Dev.
0.084
4.925
8.818
5.037
9.229
0.222
0.034
0.073
0.037
0.065
11.147
12’896
1’512’382

Non-OECD Sample
Poor Countries
Observations
Mean
120
0.018
120
23.499
120
11.407
120
23.606
120
11.033
145
0.194
120
0.014
120
0.004
104
0.010
120
0.009
83
34.787
114
1’167
96
179’070

Std. Dev.
0.020
4.172
5.157
4.200
5.695
0.112
0.018
0.004
0.018
0.011
11.992
776
419’531

Note: The first three columns of the table show the summary statistics including as country of origin of immigrants non-OECD countries, excluding those in the bottom quartile
of the GDP per capita distribution. The remaining three columns show the summary statistics for the sample of non-OECD countries in the bottom quartile of the per-capita
GDP distribution. The sample is supposed to include countries of the world that are “Poor” or “Middle Income”.

34

Table 2: Temperature and Emigration
Poor and Middle-Income countries of origin included, years 1970-2000.
Dependent Variable= Ln(Emigration/Population)

(1)

(2)

(3)

(4)

(5)

Population weights. Non-OECD
Countries of origin

Ln(Temperature)

1.931
(1.892)

Ln(Temperature) X Poor

3.755**
(1.661)
-19.967***

2.695
(1.904)

(6.607)
Ln(Temperature) X prevalently agricultural
Ln(Precipitation)

-0.309
(0.352)

Ln(Precipitation)X Poor

-0.223
(0.325)

Ln(Precipitation) X prevalently agricultural
Country of origin Fixed Effects
Decade X Region effects
Decade X Poor effects
Observations
R-squared
Number of countries of origin

yes
yes
yes

yes
yes
yes

(7)

Area weights. Non-OECD
Countries of origin

3.836**
(1.790)
-17.546***

-23.996***
(8.457)
-0.032
(0.396)

(5.068)
-15.939*
(8.285)
-0.113
(0.395)

-2.246
(1.423)

-0.373
(2.623)
-1.674
(1.577)

yes
yes
yes

yes
yes
yes

-1.399
(1.912)

(6)

0.597***
(0.074)

0.627***
(0.064)
-17.203***

(8)
Population weights.
Countries of origin
exclude top income
quintile

2.689
(1.746)

(6.369)

0.057
(0.350)

-0.018
(0.342)

(7.118)

-0.369
(0.422)

-0.543
(1.978)

yes
yes
yes

yes
yes
yes

4.398***
(1.224)
-20.134***

-0.276
(0.393)
-1.313
(1.921)

yes
yes
yes

yes
yes
yes

458

458

414

414

450

450

462

462

0.179

0.201

0.202

0.216

0.186

0.204

0.195

0.218

115

115

104

104

114

114

116

116

Temperature effect on poor countries
-16.212**
-13.711*
-16.576**
-15.736**
Temperature effect on agricultural countries
-21.301**
-12.103
Note: Each column corresponds to a different Least Square estimated regression with fixed effects. The sample of countries for columns 1-6 are all non-OECD countries. In
columns 1-4 the weather station data are averaged using population weights. Columns 5-6 use area as weight. Columns 7-8 use a sample of poor/middle-income countries of
origin in the bottom to the fourth quintiles in the per-capita GDP distribution. The standard errors are cluster by country of origin. *, **, *** indicate significance at the 10, 5
and 1% confidence level.

35

Table 3: Temperature and Emigration
Separate estimation for Poor and Middle-Income countries of origin 1970-2000

Dependent Variable= ln(Emigration rates).

ln Temperature

(1)
(2)
Non-OECD Middle Income Countries

Middle-income Countries,
excluding top and bottom
quintile of GDP per person

(5)

(6)

(7)

Poor countries: bottom quartile of
Rich countries
GDP per person in Non-OECD sample (OECD)

3.933**
(1.762)
-1.695
(5.336)

4.523***
(1.277)

4.179***
(1.324)
4.815
(4.814)

-21.531***
(6.831)

-17.661***
(5.858)
14.475
(14.972)

-0.253
(0.326)

-0.235
(0.433)
-0.041
(0.645)

-0.306
(0.390)

-0.119
(0.650)
-0.332
(0.756)

-1.617
(2.371)

1.595
(2.225)
-5.676***
(1.965)

yes

yes

yes

yes

yes

yes

ln Prec. Interacted with wet
Country of origin Fixed Effects

(4)

3.801**
(1.742)

ln Temp. interacted with hot
ln Precipitations

(3)

1.045
(2.22)

-0.649
(0.644)

yes

Decade X Region effects

yes

yes

yes

yes

yes

yes

yes

Observations

338

338

342

342

120

120

0.225

0.226

0.256

0.259

0.250

0.312

120
0.28

85

85

86

86

30

30

30

R-squared
Number of countries of origin
Temp. effect in hot countries

2.238

8.994*

-3.186

Note: Each column corresponds to a different Least Square estimated regression with fixed effects. The sample of countries for columns 1-2 are non-OECD countries, excluding
those in the bottom quartile of GDP per capita distribution. Columns 3-4 include countries that are not in the top or bottom quintile of the world GDP per capita distribution.
Columns 5-6 use countries of origin in the bottom quartile of the per-capita GDP distribution. Column (7) includes only OECD countries. The weather station data are averaged
using population weights. The standard errors are cluster by country of origin. *, **, *** indicate significance at the 10, 5 and 1% confidence level.

36

Table 4: Temperature and Urbanization
Poor and Middle-Income countries of origin included, years 1960-2000.
Dependent Variable= Urban Population as share
of total

Ln(Temperature)

(1)

(3)

(4)

Ln(Temperature) X Poor
-0.017
(0.037)

(0.461)
-1.661***
(0.566)
0.003

(0.422)

(0.039)
-0.156*
(0.087)

(0.043)

-0.033

(0.398)

(0.036)

Ln(Temperature) X prevalently agricultural

-1.580***
(0.523)

Ln(Precipitation) X prevalently agricultural

0.001
(0.073)

0.091
(0.083)

Ln(Precipitation)X Poor

Observations
R-squared
Number of countries of origin

yes
Yes
yes

yes
Yes
yes

yes
Yes
yes

(6)

Area weights. Non-OECD
Countries of origin
0.495
0.918*

(0.496)
-1.365**
(0.634)
-0.033
(0.044)
-0.125
(0.097)
-0.824
(0.579)

Country of origin Fixed Effects
Decade X Region effects
Decade X Poor effects

(5)

Population weights. Non-OECD
Countries of origin
0.376
0.863*
0.656
0.908*
(0.342)

Ln(Precipitation)

(2)

-0.030

yes
Yes
yes

(7)

Population weights. Countries of
origin exclude top income quintile
0.165
0.455

(0.482)
-1.785***
(0.596)
-0.020

(0.274)

(0.038)
-0.169**
(0.080)

(0.039)

yes
Yes
yes

(8)

(0.356)
-1.175**
(0.476)
0.024

0.001

yes
Yes
yes

(0.044)
-0.159*
(0.086)

yes
Yes
yes

yes
Yes
yes

565

565

510

510

448

448

570

570

0.723

0.733

0.723

0.727

0.689

0.702

0.753

0.759

114

114

103

103

113

113

115

115

Temp. effect on poor countries
-0.798**
-0.457
-0.867**
-0.720**
Note: Each column corresponds to a different Least Square estimated regression with fixed effects. The sample of countries for columns 1-6 are all non-OECD countries. In
columns 1-4 the weather station data are averaged using population weights. Columns 5-6 use area as weight. Columns 7-8 use a sample of poor/middle-income countries of
origin in the bottom to the fourth quintiles in the per-capita GDP distribution. The standard errors are cluster by country of origin. *, **, *** indicate significance at the 10, 5
and 1% confidence level.

37

Table 5: Temperature and Emigration, OECD versus non OECD destinations
Poor and Middle-Income countries of origin included, years 1970-2000.
Dependent Variable= ln(Emigration rates).

(1)

(2)

(3)

(4)

NON OECD destinations
Non-OECD
Countries of origin
Countries of origin
exclude top income
quintile
ln Temperature

(5)

(6)

(7)

(8)

OECD destinations
Non-OECD
Countries of origin exclude
Countries of origin
top income quintile

3.381
(2.380)

4.975***
(1.823)
-17.172***
(6.499)

4.397*
(2.577)

5.918***
(1.897)
-18.079**
(7.209)

-1.668
(1.890)

-0.486
(1.828)
-12.923***
(4.822)

-0.930
(1.491)

0.072
(1.321)
-12.000***
(4.540)

0.091
(0.360)

0.126
(0.369)
-0.774
(1.703)

0.446
(0.462)

0.515
(0.485)
-1.062
(1.711)

-0.320
(0.411)

-0.226
(0.423)
-1.337
(1.385)

-0.724
(0.458)

-0.659
(0.476)
-0.889
(1.401)

Country of origin Fixed Effects
Decade X Region effects
Decade X Poor effects

yes
Yes
yes

yes
Yes
yes

yes
Yes
yes

yes
Yes
yes

yes
Yes
yes

yes
Yes
yes

yes
Yes
yes

yes
Yes
yes

Observations
R-squared
Number of countries of origin
Tem effect on poor countries

458
0.115
115

458
0.129
115
-12.197*

462
0.080
116

462
0.095
116
-12.161*

458
0.407
115

458
0.413
115
-13.410***

462
0.441
116

462
0.446
116
-11.928***

ln Temp. interacted with poor
ln Precipitations
ln Prec. interacted with poor

Note: Each column corresponds to a different Least Square estimated regression with fixed effects. In columns 1-4 we only include emigration to non-OECD
destinations. In columns 5-8 we include emigrants to OECD destinations. Columns 1-2 and 5-6 use as a sample of poor/middle-income countries those non in OECD.
Columns 3-4 and 7-8 instead use countries of origin in the bottom to the fourth quintiles in the per-capita GDP distribution. The weather station data are averaged
using population weights. The standard errors are cluster by country of origin. *, **, *** indicate significance at the 10, 5 and 1% confidence level.

38

Table 6: Temperature and Emigration by destination distance
Poor and Middle-Income countries of origin included, years 1970-2000.

Dependent Variable= ln(Emigration/population).

(1)

(2)

(3)

(4)

Close destinations (<1000 km)
Non-OECD
Countries of origin
Countries of origin
exclude top income
quintile
ln Temperature

8.953**
(3.505)

10.452***
(3.242)
-20.439
(13.260)
-0.409

7.892*
(4.185)

-0.247
(2.057)

(0.705)

(0.718)
-4.050
(3.250)

(0.820)

(0.840)
-3.580
(3.316)

Country of origin Fixed Effects
Decade X Region effects
Decade X Poor effects

yes
Yes
yes

yes
Yes
yes

yes
Yes
yes

Observations

393

393

0.106
106

-0.668

ln Prec. interacted with poor

R-squared
Number of countries of origin
Tem effect on poor countries

(6)

(7)

(8)

Distant destinations (> 1000 km)
Non-OECD
Countries of origin exclude
Countries of origin
top income quintile

9.424**
(3.736)
-22.198
(13.563)
-0.497

ln Temp. interacted with poor
ln Precipitations

(5)

1.442
(1.530)
-18.398**
(7.080)
-0.296

1.406
(1.861)

(0.379)

(0.376)
-1.540
(1.566)

(0.415)

(0.409)
-1.443
(1.577)

yes
Yes
yes

yes
Yes
yes

yes
Yes
yes

yes
Yes
yes

yes
Yes
yes

391

391

458

458

462

462

0.115

0.084

0.093

0.201

0.219

0.228

0.248

106

106

106

115

115

116

116

-0.764

-9.987

-12.774

-0.396

-16.956**

-0.496

3.042**
(1.346)
-19.614**
(7.563)
-0.392

-16.572**

Note: Each column corresponds to a different Least Square estimated regression with fixed effects. In columns 1-4 we only include emigration to close destinations
(<1000 Km) destinations. In columns 5-8 we include emigrants to distant destinations (>1000 Km). Columns 1-2 and 5-6 use as a sample of poor/middle-income
countries those non in OECD. Columns 3-4 and 7-8 instead use countries of origin in the bottom to the fourth quintiles in the per-capita GDP distribution. The weather
station data are averaged using population weights. The standard errors are cluster by country of origin. *, **, *** indicate significance at the 10, 5 and 1%
confidence level.

39

Table 7: Temperature and agriculture share in GDP years 1970-2000
Poor and Middle-Income countries of origin included, years 1970-2000.
(1)
Dependent variable (VA in agriculture/GDP)
Temperature

Non-OECD
Countries of origin

(3)

(4)

Countries of origin exclude top income
quintile

-1.435

-2.205*

-1.502

-2.656*

(1.341)

(1.256)
3.846
(3.857)
-0.672**
(0.295)

(1.685)

(1.566)
5.295
(4.282)
-0.681**
(0.307)

Temperature X poor
Precipitations

(2)

-0.598**
(0.277)

Precipitation X poor

-0.607**
(0.288)

0.895
(1.052)

0.795
(1.111)

Country of origin Fixed Effects

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

Decade X Region effects
Decade X Poor effects

Yes
Yes

Yes
Yes

Yes
Yes

Yes
Yes

325
0.328
94

325
0.334
94
1.641

317
0.338
90

317
0.346
90
2.639

Observations
R-squared
Number of countries of origin
Temperature effect in poor countries

Note: Each column corresponds to a different Least Square estimated regression with fixed effects. The sample of countries for columns 1-2
are all non-OECD countries. Columns 3-4 use a sample of poor/middle-income countries of origin in the bottom to the fourth quintiles in the
per-capita GDP distribution. The weather station data are averaged using population weights. Data on the share of agriculture in GDP are
from a World Development Indicator database. The standard errors are cluster by country of origin. *, **, *** indicate significance at the 10,
5 and 1% confidence level.

40

Table 8: Temperature and GDP per capita
Poor and Middle-Income countries of origin included, years 1970-2000.

Dependent Variable= ln(GDP per capita)

Ln(Temperature)

(4)
(2)
(3)
Non-OECD Countries of origin
Penn World Table source
WDI source
(1)

1.750**

2.283**

1.462*

1.909**

1.021

1.414**

1.106

1.492**

(0.837)

(0.981)
-5.910**
(2.811)
0.427**

(0.752)

(0.772)
-5.147*
(2.614)
0.383**

(0.705)

(0.631)
-4.785*
(2.710)
0.439**

(0.710)

(0.641)
-4.747*
(2.577)
0.401**

Ln(Temperature) X poor
ln Precipitations

(5)
(6)
(7)
(8)
Countries of origin exclude top income quintile
Penn World Table source
WDI source

0.382**
(0.169)

ln (Precipitations) X poor
Country of origin Fixed Effects
Decade X Region effects

Yes
Yes

Decade X Poor effects
Observations
R-squared
Number of countries of origin
Tem effect on poor countries

Yes
446
0.303
113

0.358**

(0.174)
-0.569
(0.512)
Yes
Yes

(0.149)

Yes
446
0.314
113
-3.626

Yes
386
0.297
107

Yes
Yes

0.392**

(0.158)
-0.499
(0.498)
Yes
Yes

(0.178)

Yes
386
0.305
107
-3.238

Yes
450
0.380
114

Yes
Yes

0.373**

(0.184)
-0.514
(0.539)
Yes
Yes

(0.146)

Yes
450
0.388
114
-3.370

Yes
392
0.399
109

Yes
Yes

(0.156)
-0.443
(0.488)
Yes
Yes
Yes
392
0.406
109
-3.255

Note: Note: Each column corresponds to a different Least Square estimated regression with fixed effects. The sample for columns 1-4 are all non-OECD countries.
Columns 5-8 use a sample of poor/middle-income countries of origin in the bottom to the fourth quintiles in the per-capita GDP distribution. The weather station
data are averaged using population weights. Columns 1-2 and 5-6 use data on GDP from Penn World Table. Columns 3-4 and 7-8 instead use data on GDP from a
World Development Indicator database. The standard errors are cluster by country of origin. *, **, *** indicate significance at the 10, 5 and 1% confidence level.

41

Table Appendix
Table A1: Precipitations and emigration
Poor and Middle-Income countries of origin included, years 1970-2000.

(1)
Dependent Variable=
Ln(Emigration/Population)

ln Precipitations

Population weights. Non-OECD
Countries of origin
-0.399
(0.364)

ln (Precipitations) X poor
Country of origin Fixed Effects
Decade X Region effects
Decade X Poor effects
Observations
R-squared
Number of countries of origin
Predicted effect on poor countries

(2)

Yes
Yes
Yes
462
0.162
116

-0.364
(0.342)
-0.363
(2.067)
Yes
Yes
Yes
462
0.162
116
-0.727

(3)

(4)

Area weights. Non-OECD
Countries of origin
-0.070
(0.361)

Yes
Yes
Yes
456
0.154
115

-0.164
(0.360)
0.910
(1.690)
Yes
Yes
Yes
456
0.155
115
0.746

(5)

(6)

Population weights. Countries of origin
exclude top income quintile
-0.485
(0.426)

Yes
Yes
Yes
466
0.175
117

-0.451
(0.406)
-0.305
(2.097)
Yes
Yes
Yes
466
0.175
117
-0.756

Note: Each column corresponds to a different Least Square estimated regression with fixed effects. The sample of countries for columns 1-4 are all non-OECD countries. In
columns 1-2 and 5-6 the weather station data are averaged using population weights. Columns 5-6 use area as weight. Columns 7-8 use a sample of poor/middle-income
countries of origin in the bottom to the fourth quintiles in the per-capita GDP distribution. The standard errors are cluster by country of origin. *, **, *** indicate significance at
the 10, 5 and 1% confidence level.

42

Table A2: Temperature and emigration, decade differences
Poor and Middle-Income countries of origin included, years 1970-2000.
Dependent Variable= ln(Emigration rates )

(1)

(2)

Non-OECD Countries of origin
ln(Temperature)
 Ln(Precipitation)

2.291*
(1.281)
-0.416
(0.376)

 ln(Temp) X poor

2.911**
(1.368)

(4)
(3)
Countries of origin exclude top income
quintile
2.656**
(1.223)
-0.361
(0.452)

3.408***
(1.299)

Year X Area

yes

-6.302
(5.070)
-0.648
(2.156)
yes

Year X Poor

yes

yes

yes

yes

343
0.156
343
No

343
0.159
343
No
-3.391

346
0.175
346
No

346
0.179
346
No
-4.145

 Ln(Precipitation) X poor

Observations
R-squared
Number of countries of origin
Country fixed effects
 ln(Temp) effect on poor countries

yes

-7.553
(5.384)
-0.932
(2.166)
yes

Note: Each column corresponds to a different estimated regression. The sample for columns 1-2 are all non-OECD countries. Columns 3-4 use a sample of
poor/middle-income countries of origin in the bottom to the fourth quintiles in the per-capita GDP distribution. The units of observations are decadedifferences for each country. Method of estimation is ordinary least squares. The weather station data are averaged using population weights. The standard
errors are cluster by country of origin. *, **, *** indicate significance at the 10, 5 and 1% confidence level.

43

Table A3: Temperature and emigration. Long differences
Poor and Middle-Income countries of origin included, 1970-2000

(1)

(2)

Dependent Variable= ln(Emigration rates )

OECD
origin countries excluded

ln(Temperature)

2.904
(2.792)

4.277*
(2.481)
-35.339***

 ln(Temp) X poor
 ln (Precipitations)

(8.906)
-0.197
(0.444)
-3.649**
(1.808)

-0.269
(0.424)

 ln (Precipitations) X poor
Area Dummies
Poor Dummy
Observations
R-squared

Yes
Yes
114
0.211

Yes
Yes
114
0.271

Tem effect on poor countries

-31.062***

(3)
(4)
Countries of origin exclude top income
quintile
2.450
(2.457)

-0.524
(0.471)

Yes
Yes
115
0.248

3.637*
(2.040)
-35.299***
(8.676)
-0.496
(0.490)
-3.281*
(1.757)
Yes
Yes
115
0.307
-31.663***

Note: Each column corresponds to a different estimated regression. The sample for columns 1-2 are all non-OECD countries.
Columns 3-4 use a sample of poor/middle-income countries of origin in the bottom to the fourth quintiles in the per-capita GDP
distribution. The units of observations are the difference between the average temperatures in the last decade of our sample
(1990-2000) and the average temperatures in the first decade (1970–1980). The weather station data are averaged using
population weights. Method of estimation is ordinary least squares. *, **, *** indicate significance at the 10, 5 and 1% confidence
level.

44

Table A4: Temperature and emigration/urbanization. Additional Interactions with SSA
Poor and Middle-Income countries of origin included, 1970-2000
(1)

(2)

Dependent Variable
Ln(Emigration rates)
ln (Temperature)

Ln(Precipitation)

Country of origin Fixed Effects
Decade X Region effects
Decade X Poor effects
Observations
R-squared
Number of countries of origin
Tem effect on poor countries

Dependent variable: Urbanization
Rates

3.778**
(1.715)
-19.966**
(8.721)

0.848**
(0.398)

0.972**
(0.430)
-1.237
(0.964)

-11.139**
(5.438)
-0.680*
(0.348)

-0.249
(6.663)
-0.583*
(0.313)
-2.683

-1.325*
(0.744)
0.017
(0.042)

-0.649
(1.077)
0.017
(0.042)
-0.085

Ln(Precipitation) X (poor)
Ln(Precipitation)X SSA

(4)

3.274*
(1.666)

ln (Temp) X Poor
ln (Temp) X SSA

(3)

2.237*
(1.274)
yes
yes
yes
458
0.203
115

(1.742)
3.114**
(1.391)
Yes
Yes
Yes
458
0.221
115
-16.188*

-0.149*
(0.076)
Yes
Yes
Yes
565
0.731
114

(0.090)
-0.104
(0.079)
yes
yes
yes
565
0.734
114
-0.265

Note: Each column corresponds to a different Least Square estimated regression with fixed effects. The sample includes non-OECD
countries. Columns 1-2 use the natural logarithm of emigration rates as dependent variable. Columns 3-4 use urbanization rates as
dependent variable. The weather station data are averaged using population weights. The standard errors are cluster by country of
origin. *, **, *** indicate significance at the 10, 5 and 1% confidence level

45

Table A5: Control for Extreme Temperatures and Emigration
Poor and Middle-Income countries of origin included, 1970-2000
Dependent Variable= ln(Emigration rates)

(1)

(2)

(3)

(4)

Population weights. OECD
origin countries excluded

ln (Temperature)
Ln(Precipitation)
Extreme Temperature

(6)

(7)

Population weights. Countries of origin
exclude top income quintile

(8)

(9)

Population weights. OECD
origin countries excluded. Only hotter
extremes (excluded colder extremes)

1.390
(1.998)
-0.265
(0.375)
0.106

3.101*
(1.578)
-0.321
(0.369)
0.102

3.099*
(1.601)
-0.321
(0.370)
0.103

2.048
(1.989)
-0.277
(0.446)
0.084

3.641***
(1.304)
-0.341
(0.443)
0.082

3.661***
(1.315)
-0.348
(0.443)
0.074

1.477
(1.967)
-0.335
(0.363)
0.026

3.240**
(1.590)
-0.382
(0.356)
0.020

2.884*
(1.604)
-0.385
(0.357)
0.065

(0.068)

(0.068)
-18.338***
(6.570)
0.004
(1.871)

(0.074)
-18.336***
(6.559)
0.001
(1.881)

(0.066)

(0.065)
-18.442***
(6.961)
0.016
(1.884)

(0.072)
-18.466***
(6.970)
0.065
(1.891)

(0.085)

(0.084)
-18.566***
(6.510)
-0.067
(1.887)

(0.093)
-17.475***
(6.609)
-0.191
(1.888)

ln (Temperature) X Poor
Ln(Precipitation) X Poor
Extreme Temperature X poor
Country of origin Fixed Effects

(5)

-0.002
(0.176)
yes

yes

yes

0.047
(0.176)
yes

yes

yes

-0.278
(0.236)
yes

yes

yes

Decade X Region effects

yes

yes

yes

yes

yes

yes

yes

yes

yes

Decade X Poor effects

yes

yes

yes

yes

yes

yes

yes

yes

yes

448
0.183
112

448
0.203
112

448
0.203
112

456
0.198
114

456
0.219
114

456
0.219
114

448
0.177
112

448
0.198
112

448
0.201
112

Observations
R-squared
Number of countries of origin

Temperature effect on poor countries
-15.237**
-15.237**
-14.800**
-14.805**
-15.326**
-14.591**
Note: Each column corresponds to a different Least Square estimated regression with fixed effects. The sample for columns 1-3 and 7-9 are all non-OECD countries. Columns
4-6 use a sample of poor/middle-income countries of origin in the bottom to the fourth quintiles in the per-capita GDP distribution. The “Extreme temperature” variable is
defined as the number of years in a decade in which the temperature was above or below two standard deviations of the 1960-2000 period mean for the country. In column 79 only the episodes of temperature above the average plus two standard deviations are included in the definition of ‘Extreme temperature”. The weather station data are
averaged using population weights. The standard errors are cluster by country of origin. *, **, *** indicate significance at the 10, 5 and 1% confidence level.

46

Table A6: Control for natural Disasters and emigration
Poor and Middle-Income countries of origin included, 1970-2000
Dependent Variable= ln(Emigration rates)

(1)

(2)

(3)

(4)

Population weights. OECD
origin countries excluded

ln (Temperature)
Ln(Precipitation)
Natural Disasters

(5)

(6)

Population weights. Countries of origin
exclude top income quintile

1.561

3.414**

3.382*

2.404

4.153***

4.141***

(1.787)
-0.264
(0.354)
-0.007*

(1.695)
-0.196
(0.329)
-0.005

(1.709)
-0.196
(0.330)
-0.005

(1.641)
-0.322
(0.423)
-0.005

(1.244)
-0.248
(0.397)
-0.004

(1.251)
-0.247
(0.397)
-0.004

(0.004)

(0.004)
-19.310***
(6.628)
-1.314
(1.901)

(0.004)
-19.368***
(6.641)
-1.446
(1.826)

(0.004)

(0.005)
-19.661***
(7.134)
-1.254
(1.914)

(0.005)
-19.693***
(7.195)
-1.324
(1.858)

ln (Temperature) X Poor
Ln(Precipitation) X Poor
Natural Disasters X poor

0.010
(0.031)

0.005
(0.031)

Country of origin Fixed Effects

yes

yes

yes

yes

yes

yes

Decade X Region effects

yes

yes

yes

yes

yes

yes

Decade X Poor effects

yes

yes

yes

yes

yes

yes

458
0.183
115

458
0.203
115

458
0.204
115

462
0.198
116

462
0.219
116

462
0.219
116

Observations
R-squared
Number of countries of origin

Temperature effect on poor countries
-15.896**
-15.986**
-15.508**
-15.553**
Note: Each column corresponds to a different Least Square estimated regression with fixed effects. The sample for columns 1-3 are all non-OECD countries. Columns 4-6 use a
sample of poor/middle-income countries of origin in the bottom to the fourth quintiles in the per-capita GDP distribution. The “natural Disasters” variable is defined as the
number of times in a decade that a natural disaster occurred .The weather station data are averaged using population weights. The standard errors are cluster by country of
origin. *, **, *** indicate significance at the 10, 5 and 1% confidence level.

47

Table A7: Temperature and emigration, Robustness check Temperature in levels
Poor and Middle-Income countries of origin included, 1970-2000
Dependent Variable= ln(Emigration
rates).

Temperature
Precipitations

(1)

(2)

(4)

Population weights. OECD
origin countries excluded

Area weights. OECD origin
countries excluded

0.036
(0.161)
-0.030
(0.028)

-0.151
(0.150)
-0.025
(0.031)

Temperature X poor

0.267*
(0.155)
-0.013
(0.024)
-1.127***

Country of origin Fixed Effects
Decade X Region effects

yes
yes

(0.336)
-0.159
(0.116)
yes
yes

Decade X Poor effects
Observations
R-squared
Number of countries of origin

yes
458
0.057
115

yes
458
0.178
115

Precipitations X poor

Tem effect on poor countries

(3)

-0.860***

0.075
(0.166)
-0.012
(0.028)
-0.844**

(5)

(6)

Population weights. Countries of origin
exclude top income quintile
0.101
(0.166)
-0.037
(0.027)

0.352**
(0.157)
-0.021
(0.023)
-1.219***

yes
yes

(0.343)
-0.120
(0.155)
yes
yes

yes
yes

(0.352)
-0.154
(0.116)
yes
yes

yes
452
0.166
114

yes
452
0.183
114

yes
462
0.193
116

yes
462
0.225
116

-0.7691**

-0.867***

Note: Each column corresponds to a different Least Square estimated regression with fixed effects. The sample of countries for columns 1-4 are all non-OECD countries. In
columns 1-2 the weather station data are averaged using population weights. Columns 3-4 use area as weight. Columns 5-6 use a sample of poor/middle-income countries of
origin in the bottom to the fourth quintiles in the per-capita GDP distribution. The standard errors are cluster by country of origin. *, **, *** indicate significance at the 10, 5
and 1% confidence level.

48

Figure 1: Temperature increase and Migration-Skill Thresholds
Illustration of the Theoretical model
Panel 1: Middle Income Country

Density of
population

Liquidity
Treshold

Incentive
Treshold

Increase in T
Increase in T

I

L

The shaded area
represents the
mass of migrants

 skills

Panel 2: Poor Country

Density of
population

Liquidity
Treshold

Incentive
Treshold
Increase in T

Increase in T

I

L

49

The shaded area
represents the
mass of migrants

skills

Figure 2: Cumulated Changes in Emigration Rates
Selected countries at each decile of the distribution, 1970-2010

Panel 1:Middle Income Countries
Standardized Emigration Rates
-.02 0
.02 .04 .06 .08

Standardized Emigration Rates
-.1
0
.1
.2
.3

Panel 2: Poor Countries

1970

1980

1990

2000

1970

Year
Albania rate
Bhutan rate
Cameroon rate
Honduras rate
Panama rate

1980

1990

2000

Year
Algeria rate
Bulgaria rate
Guatemala rate
Mauritius rate
Paraguay rate

Benin rate
CongoDR rate
Ethiopia rate
Liberia rate
Mozambique rate

Burundi rate
EquatorialGuinea rate
Gambia rate
Malawi rate
Tanzania rate

Figure 3: Cumulated Changes in Average Temperatures
Selected countries at each decile of the distribution, 1970-2000
Panel 1: Middle Income Countries
Standardized Temperature
-1
-.5
0
.5
1

Standardized Temperature
-2
-1
0
1

Panel 2:Poor Countries

1970

1980

1990

2000

1970

Year
Argentina wtem
Djibouti wtem
ElSalvador wtem
Peru wtem
SolomonIslands wtem

1980

1990
Year

Botswana wtem
Egypt wtem
Panama wtem
Samoa wtem
Uruguay wtem

Afghanistan wtem
Ethiopia wtem
Liberia wtem
Nigeria wtem
Sudan wtem

50

CentralAfricanRepublic wtem
Lesotho wtem
Mozambique wtem
Rwanda wtem
Tanzania wtem

2000

Figure 4: Change in Emigration Rates and in Average Temperature

4

Panel 1: Middle Income Countries

BX

TH

BL
TP

IS

JO

RO

BU

PL

FJ SL

NU

PE

ID
SF TD
IV MX
WZ HO
BR
MY
VC
DR
HU HA
JM
CN
RP
CV
IZKS
IN
BP
MR
PK AR
CE
MU
GB
LE EG
CO
ZI
WS SY
SG
IR
VE
AO MO
MPCF BFKU
NH GV
LY
UY
BH
PP
RQ
CM
YI
PM
PA
SA
BT CH
CI
KE
CU
TU
GR
QA
GY
EC

ES

GT

NS

DJ

CY
CS
BC

TS

PO

AE

BG
AG

-4

Changes in Emigration Rates
-2
0
2

AL

-.02

0

.02
.04
Changes in Temperature

.06

.08

1

Panel 2: Poor Countries
CB
LT

ET
SO

AF

CG
MZ

LI

Changes in Emigration Rates
-1
-.5
0
.5

VM
LA

EK

UG

SU

PU
NI
NP
GA
CD
ZA
YM

GH

UV

TZ

TO
MA
CT

ML

MI

NG

RW

-1.5

BN

BY

0

.01

.02
.03
Changes in Temperature

.04

.05

Note: The graphs plot on the horizontal axis the natural logarithm of the average temperatures between 2000 and
1981 minus the natural logarithm of the average temperatures between 1960 and 1980. On the vertical axis the
natural logarithm of the average emigration rates between 1990 and 2000 minus the average emigration rates
between 1970 and 1980.

51

