                               NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                    MODELING UNCERTAINTY IN CLIMATE CHANGE:
                           A MULTI-MODEL COMPARISON

                                       Kenneth Gillingham
                                       William D. Nordhaus
                                          David Anthoff
                                        Geoffrey Blanford
                                        Valentina Bosetti
                                        Peter Christensen
                                        Haewon McJeon
                                            John Reilly
                                            Paul Sztorc

                                       Working Paper 21637
                               http://www.nber.org/papers/w21637


                      NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                               1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                 Cambridge, MA 02138
                                     October 2015




The authors are grateful to the Department of Energy and the National Science Foundation for primary
support of the project. Reilly and McJeon acknowledge support by the U.S. Department of Energy,
Office of Science. Reilly also acknowledges the other sponsors the MIT Joint Program on the Science
and Policy of Global Change listed at http://globalchange.mit.edu/sponsors/all. The Stanford Energy
Modeling Forum has provided support through its Snowmass summer workshops. Kenneth Gillingham
currently works as a Senior Economist for the Council of Economic Advisers (CEA). The CEA disclaims
responsibility for any of the views expressed herein, and these views do not necessarily represent the
views of the CEA or the United States government. None of the authors has a conflict of interest to
disclose. The views expressed herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views
of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.

© 2015 by Kenneth Gillingham, William D. Nordhaus, David Anthoff, Geoffrey Blanford, Valentina
Bosetti, Peter Christensen, Haewon McJeon, John Reilly, and Paul Sztorc. All rights reserved. Short
sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided
that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
Modeling Uncertainty in Climate Change: A Multi-Model Comparison
Kenneth Gillingham, William D. Nordhaus, David Anthoff, Geoffrey Blanford, Valentina
Bosetti, Peter Christensen, Haewon McJeon, John Reilly, and Paul Sztorc
NBER Working Paper No. 21637
October 2015
JEL No. O44,Q48,Q54

                                              ABSTRACT
The economics of climate change involves a vast array of uncertainties, complicating both the analysis
and development of climate policy. This study presents the results of the first comprehensive study
of uncertainty in climate change using multiple integrated assessment models. The study looks at model
and parametric uncertainties for population, total factor productivity, and climate sensitivity. It estimates
the pdfs of key output variables, including CO2 concentrations, temperature, damages, and the social
cost of carbon (SCC). One key finding is that parametric uncertainty is more important than uncertainty
in model structure. Our resulting pdfs also provide insights on tail events.

Kenneth Gillingham                                    Peter Christensen
School of Forestry and Environmental Studies          Yale University
Yale University                                       195 Prospect Street
195 Prospect Street                                   New Haven, CT 06511
New Haven, CT 06511                                   peter.christensen@yale.edu
and NBER
kenneth.gillingham@yale.edu                           Haewon McJeon
                                                      Pacific Northwest National Laboratory
William D. Nordhaus                                   5825 University Research Court
Yale University, Department of Economics              Suite 3500
28 Hillhouse Avenue                                   College Park, MD 20740
Box 208264                                            Haewon.McJeon@pnnl.gov
New Haven, CT 06520-8264
and NBER                                              John Reilly
william.nordhaus@yale.edu                             Joint Program on the Science
                                                      and Policy of Global Change
David Anthoff                                         Massachusetts Institute of Technology
Energy and Resources Group                            1 Amherst St. (Bldg. E40)
University of California, Berkeley                    Cambridge, MA 02139
Berkeley, CA 94720-3310                               jreilly@mit.edu
anthoff@berkeley.edu
                                                      Paul Sztorc
Geoffrey Blanford                                     Yale University
EPRI                                                  28 Hillhouse Avenue
3420 Hillview Ave                                     New Haven, CT 06511
Palo Alto, CA 94304                                   paul.sztorc@gmail.com
gblanford@gmail.com

Valentina Bosetti
Bocconi University
Fondazione Eni Enrico Mattei
valentina.bosetti@feem.it
   I. Introduction

        A central issue in the economics of climate change is understanding and
dealing with the vast array of uncertainties. These range from those regarding
economic and population growth, emissions intensities and new technologies, to the
carbon cycle, climate response, and damages, and cascade to the costs and benefits
of different policy objectives.
        This paper presents the first comprehensive study of uncertainty of major
outcomes for climate change using multiple integrated assessment models (IAMs).
The six models used in the study are representative of the models used in the IPCC
Fifth Assessment Report (IPCC 2014) and in the U.S. government Interagency
Working Group Report on the Social Cost of Carbon or SCC (US Interagency Working
Group 2013). We focus our efforts in this study on three key uncertain parameters:
population growth, total factor productivity growth, and equilibrium climate
sensitivity. For the estimated uncertainty in these three parameters, we develop
estimates of the uncertainty to 2100 for major variables, such as emissions,
concentrations, temperature, per capita consumption, output, damages, and the
social cost of carbon.
        Our approach is a two-track methodology that permits reliable quantification
of uncertainty for models of different size and complexity. The first track involves
performing model runs over a set of grid points and fitting a surface response
function to the model results; this approach provides a quick and accurate way to
emulate running the models. The second track develops probability density
functions for the chosen input parameters (i.e., the parameter pdfs) using the best
available evidence. We then combine both tracks by performing Monte Carlo
simulations using the parameter pdfs and the surface response functions.
        This methodology provides a transparent approach to addressing uncertainty
across multiple parameters and models and can easily be applied to additional
models and uncertain parameters. An important aspect of this methodology, unlike
virtually all other model comparison exercises, is its replicability. The approach is
easily validated because the data from the calibration exercises are relatively
compact and are compiled in a compatible format, the surface responses can be
estimated independently, and the Monte Carlo simulations can be easily run in
multiple existing software packages.
        This paper is structured as follows. The next section discusses the statistical
considerations underpinning our study of uncertainty in climate change. Section III
presents our methodology for the two-track approach, while the next section
discusses selection of calibration runs. Section V gives the derivation of the

                                                                                      2
probability distributions. Section VI gives the results of the model calculations and
the surface response functions, and section VII presents the results of the Monte
Carlo estimates of uncertainties. We conclude with a summary of the major findings
in section VIII. The Appendices provide further background information.

   II. Statistical Considerations

      A. Background on Uncertainty in Climate Change

       Climate change science and policy have focused largely on projecting the
central tendencies of major variables and impacts. While central tendencies are
clearly important for a first-level understanding, attention is increasingly on the
uncertainties in the projections. Uncertainties take on great significance because of
the possibility of non-linearities in responses, particularly the potential for
triggering thresholds in earth systems, in ecosystem, or in economic outcomes. To
be sure, uncertainties have been explored in major reports, such as the IPCC
Scientific Assessment Reports from the first to the fifth. However, these have mainly
examined differences among models as a tool for assessing uncertainties about
future projections. As we indicate below, our results suggest that parametric
uncertainty is quantitatively more important than differences across models for
most variables.
       In recent reviews of climate change, there is an increasing focus on improving
our understanding of the uncertainties. For example, in 2010 the Inter-Academy
Review of the IPCC, the primary recommendation for improving the usefulness of
the report was about uncertainty:

            The evolving nature of climate science, the long time scales involved,
      and the difficulties of predicting human impacts on and responses to climate
      change mean that many of the results presented in IPCC assessment reports
      have inherently uncertain components. To inform policy decisions properly, it
      is important for uncertainties to be characterized and communicated clearly
      and coherently. (InterAcademy Council 2010)

      In a recent report, the U.S. Congressional Budget Office also voiced its
concerns about uncertainty:

      In assessing the potential risks from climate change and the costs of
      averting it, however, researchers and policymakers encounter
      pervasive uncertainty. That uncertainty contributes to great


                                                                                    3
      differences of opinion as to the appropriate policy response, with some
      experts seeing little or no threat and others finding cause for
      immediate, extensive action. Policymakers are thus confronted with a
      wide range of recommendations about how to address the risks posed
      by a changing climate—in particular, whether, how, and how much to
      limit emissions of greenhouse gases. (CBO 2005)

       The focus on uncertainty has taken on increased urgency because of the great
attention given by scientists to tipping elements in the earth system. An influential
study by Lenton et al. (2008) discussed important tipping elements such as the large
ice sheets, large-scale ocean circulation, and tropical rain forests. Some
climatologists have argued that global warming beyond 2 °C will lead to an
irreversible melting of the Greenland ice sheet (Robinson et al. 2012). Once
uncertainties are fully included, policies will need to account for the probability that
paths may lead across tipping points, with particular concern for ones that have
irreversible elements.
       A further set of questions involves the potential for fat tails in the distribution
of parameters, of outcomes, and of the risk of catastrophic climate change. (A fat- or
thick-tailed distribution is one where the probability of extreme events declines
slowly, so the tail of the distribution is thick. An important example is the power-law
or Pareto distribution, in which the variance of the process is unbounded for certain
parameter values.)
       The issue arises because of the combination of outcomes that are potentially
catastrophic in nature and probability distributions with fat tails. The combination
of these two factors may lead to situations in which focusing on central tendencies is
completely misleading for policy analysis. In a series of papers, Martin Weitzman
(see especially Weitzman 2009) has proposed a dramatically different conclusion
from standard analysis in what he has called the Dismal Theorem. In the extreme
case, the combination of fat tails, unlimited exposure, and high risk aversion implies
that the expected loss from certain risks such as climate change is unbounded and
we therefore cannot perform standard optimization calculations or cost-benefit
analyses.
       There are to date many studies of the implications of uncertainty for climate
change and climate-change policy or of uncertainty in one or many parameters
using a single model. Some notable examples include Reilly et al. (1987), Peck and
Teisberg (1993), Nordhaus and Popp (1997), Pizer (1999), Webster (2002), Baker
(2005), Hope (2006), Nordhaus (2008), Webster et al. (2012), Anthoff and Tol
(2013), and Lemoine and McJeon (2013).


                                                                                         4
       To date, however, the only published study that aims to quantify uncertainty
in climate change for multiple models is the U.S. government Interagency Working
Group report on the social cost of carbon, which is published in Greenstone et al.
(2013) and more extensively described in IAWG (2010). This study used three
models, two of which are included in this study, to estimate the social cost of carbon
for U.S. government purposes. However, while it did examine uncertainty, the cross-
model comparison focused on a single uncertain parameter (equilibrium climate
sensitivity) for its formal uncertainty analysis; all other uncertain parameters in the
models were left uncertain with the modelers’ pdfs. Even with this single uncertain
parameter, the estimated social cost of carbon varies greatly. The 2015 social cost of
carbon in the updated IAWG (2013) is $38 per ton of CO2 using the median estimate
versus $109 per ton of CO2 using the 95 percentile (both in 2007 dollars and using a
3% discount rate), which would imply very different levels of policy stringency. The
IAWG analysis also used combinations of model inputs and outputs that were not
always internally consistent. Comparison of the uncertainties in a consistent
manner in different models is clearly an important missing area of study.


           B. Central approach of this study

       This project aims to quantify the uncertainties of key model outcomes
induced by uncertainty in important parameters. We hope to learn the degree to
which there is precision in the point estimates of major variables that are used in
major integrated assessment models. Put differently, the research question we aim
to answer from this study is: How do major parameter uncertainties affect the
distribution of possible outcomes of major outcomes; and what is the level of
uncertainty of major outcome variables?
       We call this question one of “classical statistical forecast uncertainty.” The
study of forecasting uncertainty and error has a long history in statistics and
econometrics. See for example Clements and Hendry (1998, 1999) and Ericsson
(2001). The standard tools of forecasting uncertainty have virtually never been
applied to models in the energy-climate-economy areas because of the complexity of
the models and the non-probabilistic nature of both inputs and structural
relationships.
       Key uncertainties that we will examine include both projections and policy
outcomes. For example, what are the uncertainties of emissions, concentrations,
temperature increases, and damages in a baseline projection? What is the
uncertainty in the social cost of carbon? How do uncertainties across models
compare with the uncertainties within models generated by parameter uncertainty?


                                                                                      5
One of the key contributions of this work is that it has the potential to highlight
areas where reducing uncertainty will have a high payoff.

           C. Uncertainty in a broader context

        There are several uncertainties in climate change that face both natural and
social scientists and decision makers. Among the important ones are: (1) parametric
uncertainty, such as uncertainty about climate sensitivity or output growth; (2)
model or specification uncertainty, such as the specification of the aggregate
production function; (3) measurement error, such as the level and trend of global
temperatures; (4) algorithmic errors, such as ones that find the incorrect solution to
a model; (5) random error in structural equations, such as those due to weather
shocks; (6) coding errors in writing the program for the model; and (7) scientific
uncertainty or error, such as when a model contains an erroneous theory.
        This study focuses primarily on the first of these, parametric uncertainty, and
to a limited extent on the second, model uncertainty. We focus on the first because
there are major uncertainties about several parameters, because this has been a key
area for study in earlier approaches, and because it is a type of uncertainty that
lends itself most readily to model comparisons. In addition, since we employ six
models, the results provide some information about the role of model uncertainty,
although we do not develop a formal approach to model uncertainty. We recognize
that parameter and model uncertainties are but two of the important questions that
arise, but a rigorous approach to measuring the contribution of these uncertainties
will make a major contribution to understanding the overall uncertainty of climate
change.
        From a theoretical point of view, the measures of uncertainty can be viewed
as applying the principles of judgmental or subjective probability, or “degree of
belief,” to measuring future uncertainties. This approach, which has its roots in the
works of Ramsey (1931), de Finetti (1937), and Savage (1954), recognizes that it is
not possible to obtain frequentist or actuarial probability distributions for the major
parameters in integrated assessment models or in the structures of the models. The
theory of subjective probability views the probabilities as akin to the odds that
informed scientists would take when wagering on the outcome of an uncertain
event. For example, suppose the event was population growth from 2000 to 2050.
The subjective probability might be that the interquartile range (25%, 75%) was
between 0.5% and 2.0% per year. In making the assessment, the scientist would in
effect say that it is a matter of indifference whether to bet that the outcome when
known would be inside or outside that range. While it is not contemplated that a bet



                                                                                      6
would actually occur (although that is not unprecedented), the wager approach
helps frame the probability calculation.

      III. Methodology

            A. Overview of our two track approach

       In undertaking an uncertainty analysis, the project contemplated two
potential approaches. In one approach, each model would do a Monte Carlo
simulation in which it would do many runs where the chosen uncertain parameters
are drawn from a joint pdf. While potentially feasible for some models, such an
approach is excessively burdensome and likely infeasible at the scale necessary to
have reliable estimates.
       We therefore developed a second approach which we call the “two-track
Monte Carlo.” This approach separates the model calibration runs from generation
of the parameter pdfs and the Monte Carlo estimates. At the core of the approach are
two parallel tracks, which are then combined to produce the final results. The first
track uses model runs from six participating economic climate change integrated
assessment models to develop surface response functions; these runs provide the
relationship between our uncertain input parameters and key output variables. The
second track develops probability density functions characterizing the uncertainty
for each analyzed uncertain input parameter. We combine the results of the two
tracks using a Monte Carlo simulation to characterize statistical uncertainty in the
output variables.

            B. The approach in equations

      It will be helpful to show the structure of the approach analytically. We can
represent a model as a mapping from exogenous and policy variables and
parameters to endogenous outcomes. The models can be written symbolically as
follows:

(1)          Y m  H m ( z,  , u )

In this schema, Ym is a vector of model outputs for model m; z is a vector of
exogenous and policy variables;  is a vector of model parameters; u is a vector of
uncertain parameters to be investigated; and Hm represents the model structure. We
emphasize that models have different structures, model parameters, and choice of
input variables. However, we can represent the arguments of H without reference to
models by assuming some are omitted.

                                                                                      7
       The first step in the project is to select the uncertain parameters for analysis.
Once the parameters are selected, each model then does selected calibration runs.
The calibration runs take as a central set of parameters the base or reference case
for each of the models. It then makes several runs that add or subtract specified
increments from each of the base values of the uncertain parameters. This produces
a set of input and outputs for each model.

     More precisely, here is the procedure for the first track of the approach. Each
model has a baseline run with base values for each of the uncertain parameters.
                                      b       b       b
Denote the base parameter values as (um ,1 , um ,2 , um ,3 ). The next step determines a grid
of deviation values of the uncertain parameters that each model adds or subtracts
from the base values of the uncertain parameters. Denote these deviation values as
 G  (1,1,1 , 1,1,2 ,...,  5,5,5 ). The  G vector represents 125 = 5 x 5 x 5 deviations from
the modelers’ base parameter values. So, for example, the vector 1,1,1 would
represent one of the 125 grid vectors that takes the first value for each uncertain
parameter. Suppose that 1,1,1  (0.014, .02, 2). Then that calibration run would
calculate the outcomes for Y m  H m ( z ,  , umb ,1  .014, umb ,2  .02, umb ,3  2) , where again u mb , k is
the base value for uncertain parameter k for model m. Similarly,  3,3,3  (0, 0, 0). For
that deviation value, the calibration run would calculate the outcomes for
Y m  H m ( z ,  , umb ,1 , umb ,2 , umb ,3 ), which is the model baseline run.

      The third step is to estimate surface response functions (SRFs) for each model
and variable outcome. Symbolically, these are the following functions:

(2)              Y m  R m (u1  umb ,1 , u2  umb ,2 , u3  umb ,3 )  R m (um,1 , um,2 , um,3 )



The SRFs are fit over the observations of the u m , k from the calibration exercises
(125 each for the baseline and for the carbon-tax cases). The SRFs are linear-
quadratic-interaction equations as described below.

       The second track of the project provides us with probability density functions
for each of our uncertain parameters, f k (uk ) . These are developed on the basis of
external information as described below.

      The final step is to estimate the cumulative distribution of the output
variables, G m (Y m ). These are the distributions of the outcome variables Y m for


                                                                                                                8
model m, where we note that the distributions will differ by model. The
distributions are calculated by Monte Carlo methods, for a sample size of N:
                     N
(3)   G m (Y m )     1 if H
                     n 1
                                   ( um,1 , num,2 , num,3 )  Y m , otherwise = 0  / N
                                  m n




      The notation here is that n u m , k is the nth draw of random variable u k in the
Monte Carlo experiment. This unintuitive equation simply states that the cumulative
distribution is equal to the fraction of outcomes in the Monte Carlo simulation
where the SRF yields a value of the outcome variable that is less than Y m . The
distribution of outcomes for each variable and model is conditional on the model
structure and on the harmonized uncertainty of the uncertain parameters. For a
classic study of Monte Carlo methods, see Hammersley and Handscomb (1964).

            C. Integrated Assessment Models

       The challenge of analysis and policies for global warming is particularly
difficult because it spans many disciplines and parts of society. This many-faceted
nature also poses a challenge to natural and social scientists, who must incorporate
a wide variety of geophysical, economic, and political disciplines into their
diagnoses and prescriptions. The task of integrated assessment models (IAMs) is to
pull together the different aspects of a problem so that projections, analyses, and
decisions can consider simultaneously all important endogenous variables. IAMs
generally do not pretend to have the most detailed and complete representation of
each included system. Rather, they aspire to have, at a first level of approximation,
models that operate all the modules simultaneously and with reasonable accuracy.
       The study design was presented at a meeting where many of the established
modelers who build and operate IAMs were present. All were invited to participate.
After some preliminary investigations and trial runs, six models were able to
incorporate the major uncertain parameters into their models and to provide most
of the outputs that were necessary for model comparisons. The following is a brief
description of each of the six models. Table A5 in the appendix provides further
details on each model.
       The DICE (Dynamic Integrated model of Climate and the Economy) was first
developed around 1990 and has gone through several extensions and revisions. The
latest published version is Nordhaus (2014) with a detailed description in Nordhaus
and Sztorc (2014). The DICE model is a globally aggregated model that views the
economics of climate change from the perspective of neoclassical economic growth
theory. In this approach, economies make investments in capital and in emissions


                                                                                           9
reductions, reducing consumption today, in order to lower climate damages and
increase consumption in the future. The special feature of the model is the inclusion
of all major elements in a highly aggregated fashion. The model contains about 25
dynamic equations and identities, including those for global output, CO2 emissions
and concentrations, global mean temperature, and damages. The version for this
project runs for 60 five-year periods. It can be run in either an Excel version or in
the preferred GAMS version. The version used for this study dates from December
2013 and adds loops to calculate the outcomes for different uncertain parameters.
The runs were implemented by William Nordhaus and Paul Sztorc.
        The FUND model (Climate Framework for Uncertainty, Negotiation, and
Distribution) was developed primarily to assess the impacts of climate policies in an
integrated framework. It is a recursive model that takes exogenous scenarios of
major economic variables as inputs and then perturbs these with estimates of the
cost of climate policy and the impacts of climate change. The model has 16 regions
and contains explicit representation of five greenhouse gases. Climate change
impacts are monetized and include agriculture, forestry, sea-level rise, health
impacts, energy consumption, water resources, unmanaged ecosystems, and storm
impacts. Each impact sector has a different functional form and is calculated
separately for each of the 16 regions. The model runs from 1950 to 3000 in time
steps of 1 year. The source code, data, and a technical description of the model are
public (www.fund-model.org), and the model has been used by other modeling
teams (e.g., Revesz et al. (2014)). FUND was originally created by Richard Tol (Tol,
1997) and is now jointly developed by David Anthoff and Richard Tol. The runs
were implemented by David Anthoff.
        The GCAM (Global Change Assessment Model) is a global integrated
assessment model of energy, economy, land-use, and climate. GCAM is a long-term
global model based on the Edmonds and Reilly model (Edmonds and Reilly 1983a, b,
c). GCAM integrates representations of the global economy, energy systems,
agriculture and land use, with representations of terrestrial and ocean carbon
cycles, and a suite of coupled gas-cycle and climate models. The climate and physical
atmosphere in GCAM is based on the Model for the Assessment of Greenhouse-Gas
Induced Climate Change (MAGICC) (Meinshausen et al. 2011). The global economy
in GCAM is represented in 14 geopolitical regions, explicitly linked through
international trade in energy commodities, agricultural and forest products, and
other goods such as emissions permits. The scale of economic activity in each region
is driven by population size, age, and gender as well as labor productivity. The
model is dynamic-recursively solved for a set of market-clearing equilibrium prices
in all energy and agricultural good markets every 5 years over 2005-2095. The full


                                                                                   10
documentation of the model is available at a GCAM wiki (Calvin and et al. 2011).
GCAM is open-source, but is primarily developed and maintained by the Joint Global
Change Research Institute. The model runs were performed by Haewon McJeon.
       The MERGE model (Model for Evaluating Regional and Global Effects of
greenhouse gas reduction policies) is an integrated assessment model describing
global energy-economy-climate interactions with regional detail. It was introduced
by Manne et al. (1999) and has been continually developed since; a recently
published description is in Blanford et al. (2014). MERGE is formulated as a multi-
region dynamic general equilibrium model with a process model of the energy
system and a reduced-form representation of the climate. It is solved in GAMS via
sequential joint non-linear optimization with Negishi weights to balance inter-
regional trade flows. The economy is represented as a top-down Ramsey model in
which electric and non-electric energy inputs are traded off against capital and labor
and production is allocated between consumption and investment. The energy
system includes explicit technologies for electricity generation and non-electric
energy supply, with a resource extraction model for fossil fuels and uranium. The
climate model includes a five-box carbon cycle and tracks all major non-CO2
greenhouse gases and non-CO2 forcing agents explicitly. Temperature evolves as a
two-box lag process, where uncertainty about climate sensitivity is considered
jointly with uncertainty about the response time and aerosol forcing. The version
used for study includes 10 model regions and runs through 2100, with climate
variables projected for an additional century. The runs were implemented by
Geoffrey Blanford.
       The MIT IGSM (Integrated Global Systems Model) was developed in the early
1990’s and has been continually updated. It includes a general circulation model of
the atmosphere and its interactions with oceans, atmospheric chemistry, terrestrial
vegetation, and the land surface. Its economic component represents the economy
and anthropogenic emissions. The full IGSM is described in Sokolov et al. (2009) and
Webster et al. (2012). The version of the economic component applied here is
described in Chen et al. (2015). The earth system component is a simplified general
circulation model resolved in 46 latitude bands and 11 vertical layers in the
atmosphere with an 11 layer ocean model. The land system includes 17 vegetation
types. The economic component is a multi-sector, multi-region applied general
equilibrium model, an empirical implementation consistent with neo-classical
economic theory. For the current project, the model operates in a recursive fashion
in which the economy drives the earth system model but without feedbacks of
climate impacts on the economic system. The economic component is solved for 5
year time steps in GAMS-MPSGE and for this exercise was run through 2100. The


                                                                                    11
earth system component solves on 10 minute time steps (the vegetation model on
monthly time steps). The simulations for this exercise were conducted by Y.-H.
Henry Chen, Andrei Sokolov, and John Reilly.
       The WITCH (World Induced Technical Change Hybrid) model was developed
in 2006 (Bosetti et al. 2006) and has been developed and extended since then. The
latest version is fully described in Bosetti et al. (2014). The model divides the world
into 13 major regions. The economy of each region is described by a Ramsey-type
neoclassical optimal growth model, where forward-looking central planners
maximize the present discounted value of utility of each region. These optimizations
take account of other regions' intertemporal strategies. The optimal investment
strategy includes a detailed appraisal of energy sector investments in power-
generation technologies and innovation, and the direct consumption of fuels, as well
as abatement of other gases and land-use emissions. Greenhouse-gas emissions and
concentrations are then used as inputs in a climate model of reduced complexity
(Meinshausen et al. 2011). The version used for this project runs for 30 five-year
periods and contains 35 state variables for each of the 13 regions, running on the
GAMS platform. The runs were implemented by Valentina Bosetti and Giacomo
Marangoni.

IV.     Choice of uncertain parameters and grid design

           A. Choice of uncertain parameters

       One of the key decisions in this study was to select the uncertain parameters.
The criteria for selection were (at least after the fact) clear. First, each parameter
must be important for influencing uncertainty. Second, parameters should be ones
that can be varied in each of the models without excessive burden and without
violating the spirit of the model structure. Third, the parameters should be ones that
can be represented by a probability distribution, either on the basis of prior
research or feasible within the scope of this project.
       At an initial meeting, an experiment was undertaken in which each of the
models was given six uncertain parameters or shocks to test for feasibility. At the
end of this initial test experiment, two of the modeling teams decided not to
participate because the initial parameters could not be easily incorporated in the
model design or because of time constraints. Three of the parameters fulfilled the
above-mentioned criteria, and these were the ones that were incorporated in the
final set of experiments.
       The final list of uncertain parameters were the following: (1) The rate of
growth of productivity, or per capita output; (2) the rate of growth of population;

                                                                                     12
and (3) the equilibrium climate sensitivity (equilibrium change in global mean
surface temperature from a doubling of atmospheric CO2 concentrations).
       Additionally, it was decided to do two alternative policy scenarios. One was a
“Base” run in which no climate policies were introduced; and the second, labelled
“Carbon Tax” (and sometimes “Ampere”) introduced a rapidly rising global carbon
tax.2 A run based on carbon prices was selected (instead of quantitative limits)
because many models had undertaken similar runs in other model comparison
projects, so they were relatively easy to implement.
       Several other parameters were carefully considered but rejected. A pulse of
emissions was rejected because it had essentially no impact. A global recession was
rejected for the same reason. It was hoped to add uncertainties for technology (such
as those concerning the rate of decarbonization, the cost of backstop technologies,
or the cost of advanced carbon-free technologies), but it proved impossible to find
one that was both sufficiently comprehensive and could be incorporated in all the
models. Uncertainty about climate damages was excluded because half the models
did not contain damages. A final possibility was to analyze policy runs that had
quantitative limits rather than carbon prices. For example, some models had
participated in model comparisons in which radiative forcings were limited. This
approach was rejected because the carbon tax proved easier to define and
implement. Additionally, earlier experiments indicated that quantitative limits were
often found infeasible, and this would cloud the interpretation of the results.3




2The Carbon Tax run was selected from the AMPERE model comparisons to reduce the
burden on many of the modelers and so that the results from this study can be compared to
those from the AMPERE inter-model comparison study (Kriegler et al. 2015). The specific
scenario chosen is known in the AMPERE study as "CarbonTax$12.50-increasing.” The full
AMPERE scenario database can be found online at https://secure.iiasa.ac.at/web-
apps/ene/AMPEREDB.

3 See particularly the results for Energy Modeling Forum 22 reported in a special issue in
Energy Economics (e.g., see Clarke and Weyant (2009)). Many models found that tight
constraints were infeasible for their base runs. A quantitative limit would almost surely
have found that large numbers of the 125 scenarios were infeasible for any tight limit on
temperature or radiative forcings.


                                                                                             13
           B. Description of uncertain parameters

      We next describe the three uncertain parameters contained in the study. It
turned out that harmonizing these across models was more complicated than was
originally anticipated, as described below.

      (1) The rate of growth of population. Uncertainty about the rate of growth
of population was straightforward. For global models, there was no ambiguity about
the adjustment. The uncertainty was specified as plus or minus a uniform
percentage growth rate each year over the period 2010-2100. For regional models,
the adjustment was left to the modeler. Most models assumed a uniform change in
the growth rate in each region.

       (2) The rate of growth of productivity, or per capita output. The original
design had been to include a variable that represented the uncertainty about overall
technological change in the global economy (or averaged across regions). The
results of the initial experiment indicated that the specifications of technological
change differed greatly across models, and it was infeasible to specify a comparable
technological variable that could apply for all models. For example, some models
had a single production function, while others had multiple sectors.
       Rather than attempt to find a comparable parameter, it was decided to
harmonize on the uncertainty of global output per capita growth from 2010 to 2100.
Each modeler was asked to introduce a grid of changes in its model-specific
technological parameter that would lead to a change in per capita output of plus or
minus a given amount (to be described in the next section). The modelers were then
instructed to adjust that change so that the range of growth rates in per capita GDP
from 2010 to 2100 in the calibration exercise would be equal to the desired range.

       (3) The climate sensitivity. Modeling uncertainty about climate sensitivity
proved to be one of the most difficult issues of harmonization across the different
models. While all models have modules to trace through the temperature
implications of changing concentrations of GHGs, they differ in detail and
specification. The major problem was that adjusting the equilibrium climate
sensitivity generally required adjusting other parameters in the model that
determine the speed of adjustment to the equilibrium; the adjustment speed is
sometimes represented by the transient climate sensitivity. This problem was
identified late in the process, after the second-round runs had been completed, and
modelers were asked to make the adjustments that they thought appropriate. Some
models made adjustments in parameters to reflect differences in large climate


                                                                                   14
models. Others constrained the parameters so that the model would fit the historical
temperature record. The differing approaches led to differing structural responses
to the climate sensitivity uncertainty, as will be seen below.

           C. Grid design

       In the first track, the modeling teams provide a small number of calibration
runs that include a full set of outputs for a three-dimensional grid of values of the
uncertain parameters. For each of the uncertain parameters, we selected five values
centered on the model’s baseline values. Therefore, for 3 uncertain parameters,
there were 125 runs each for the Base and the Carbon Tax policy scenarios.
       On the basis of these calibration runs, the next step involved estimating
surface-response functions (SRFs) in which the model outcomes are estimated as
functions of the uncertain parameters. The hope was that if the SRFs could
approximate the models accurately, then they could be used to simulate the
probability distributions of the outcome variables accurately. An initial test
suggested that the SRFs were well approximated by quadratic functions. We
therefore set the range of the grid so that it would span most of the space that would
be covered by the distribution of the uncertain parameters, yet not go so far as to
push the models into parts of the parameter space where the results would be
unreliable.
       As an example, take the grid for population growth. The central case is the
model’s base case for population growth. Each model then uses four additional
assumptions for the grid for population growth: the base case plus and minus 0.5%
per year and plus and minus 1.0% per year. These would cover the period 2010 to
2100. For example, assume that the model had a base case with a constant
population growth rate of 0.7% per year from 2010 to 2100. Then the five grid
points for population growth would be constant growth rates of -0.3%, 0.2%, 0.7%,
1.2%, and 1.7% per year. Population after 2100 would have the same growth rate as
in the modeler’s base case. These assumptions mean that population in 2100 would
be (0.99)90, (0.995)90, 1, (1.005)90, and (1.01)90 times the base case population for
2100.
       For productivity growth, the grid was similarly constructed, but adjusted so
that the growth in per capita output for 2100 added -1%, -0.5%, 0%, 0.5%, and 1%
to the growth rate in each year for the period 2010-2100.
       For the climate sensitivity, the modelers were to add to the baseline
equilibrium climate sensitivity -3°C, -1.5°C, 0 °C, 1.5°C, and 3°C. It turned out that
the lower end of this range caused difficulties for some models, and for these the



                                                                                    15
modelers reported results only for the four higher points in the grid or substituted
another low value.
      In principle, then, for track I each model reported 5 x 5 x 5 model results for
both the Base case and the Carbon Tax policy assumptions.

     V. Approach for developing probability density functions

           A. General considerations

       The three uncertain parameters have been the subject of uncertainty analysis
in earlier studies. For each parameter, we reviewed earlier studies to determine
whether there was an existing set of methods or distributions that could be drawn
upon. The desirable features of the distributions is that they should reflect best
practice, that they should be acceptable to the modeling groups, and that they be
replicable. It turned out that the three parameters used three different approaches,
as will be described below.

           B. Population

       Population growth has been the subject of projections for many years, and
numerous groups have undertaken uncertainty analyses for both countries and at
the global level. Our review found only one research group that had made long-term
global projections of uncertainty for several years, which was the population group
at the International Institute for Applied Systems Analysis (IIASA) in Austria. (For a
discussion, see O'Neill et al. (2001)). The IIASA demography group is under the
direction of demographer Wolfgang Lutz.
    The IIASA stochastic projections were developed over a period of more than a
decade and are widely used by demographers. The methodology is summarized as
follows: “IIASA’s projections…are based explicitly on the results of discussions of a
group of experts on fertility, mortality, and migration that is convened for the
purpose of producing scenarios for these vital rates” (See
http://www.demographic-research.org/volumes/vol4/8/4-8.pdf) The latest
projections from 2013 (Lutz et al. 2014) are an update to the previous projections
from 2007 and 2001 (Lutz et al. 2008), 2001). The methodology is described as
follows:

   The forecasts are carried out for 13 world regions. The forecasts presented here
   are not alternative scenarios or variants, but the distribution of the results of
   2,000 different cohort component projections. For these stochastic simulations
   the fertility, mortality and migration paths underlying the individual projection

                                                                                        16
   runs were derived randomly from the described uncertainty distribution for
   fertility, mortality and migration in the different world regions. (Lutz, Sanderson,
   and Scherbov 2008)

The background methods are described as follows on page 219 of O'Neill et al.
(2001):

        The IIASA methodology is based on asking a group of interacting experts to
    give a likely range for future vital rates, where "likely" is defined to be a
    confidence interval of roughly 90% (Lutz 1996, Lutz et al. 1998). Combining
    subjective probability distributions from a number of experts guards against
    individual bias, and IIASA demographers argue that a strength of the method is
    that it may be possible to capture structural change and unexpected events that
    other approaches might miss. In addition, in areas where data on historical
    trends are sparse, there may be no better alternative to producing probabilistic
    projections.

    For this study, we are aiming for a parsimonious parameterization of population
uncertainty. This is necessary because of the large differences in model structure.
We therefore selected the uncertainty about global population growth for the period
2010-2100 as the single parameter of interest. We fitted the growth-rate quantiles
from the IIASA projections to several distributions, with normal, log-normal, and
gamma being the most satisfactory. The normal distribution performed better than
any of the others on five of the six quantitative tests of fit for distributions. Based on
these results, we therefore decided to recommend the normal distribution for the
pdf of population growth over the period.

     In addition, we did several alternative tests to determine whether the
projections were consistent with other methodologies. One set of tests examines the
projection errors that would have been generated using historical data. A second
test looks at the standard deviation of 100-year growth rates of population for the
last millennium. A third test examines projections from a report of the National
Research Council that estimated the forecast errors for global population over a 50-
year horizon (see NRC (2000), Appendix F, p. 344). While these all gave slightly
different uncertainty ranges, they were similar to the uncertainties estimated in the
IIASA study.

    On the basis of this review, we decided to use a normal distribution for the
growth rate of population based on the IIASA study that has a standard deviation of
the average annual growth rate of 0.22 percentage points per year over the period


                                                                                       17
2010-2100. More details with a background memorandum on the results are
available from the authors.

           C. Climate Sensitivity

        An important parameter in climate science is the equilibrium or long-run
response in the global mean surface temperature to a doubling of atmospheric
carbon dioxide. In the climate science community, this is called the equilibrium
climate sensitivity. With reference to climate models, this is calculated as the
increase in average surface temperature with a doubled CO2 concentration relative
to a path with the pre-industrial CO2 concentration. This parameter also plays a key
role in the geophysical components in the IAMs used in this study. In the remainder
of this paper, we will follow the convention in the geosciences and call it the
equilibrium climate sensitivity (ECS).
        Given the importance of the ECS in climate science, there is an extensive
literature estimating probability density functions. These pdfs are generally based
on climate models, the instrumental records over the last century or so,
paleoclimatic data such as estimated temperature and radiative forcings over ice-
age intervals, and the results of volcanic eruptions. Much of the literature estimates
a probability density function using a single line of evidence, but a few papers
synthesize different studies or different kinds of evidence.
        We focus on the studies drawing upon multiple lines of evidence. The IPCC
Fifth Assessment report (AR5) reviewed the literature quantifying uncertainty in
the ECS and highlighted five recent papers using multiple lines of evidence (IPCC
2014). Each paper used a Bayesian approach to update a prior distribution based on
previous evidence (the prior evidence usually drawn from instrumental records or a
climate model) to calculate the posterior probability density function. Since each
distribution was developed using multiple lines of evidence, and in some cases the
same evidence, it would be inconsistent to assume that they were independent and
simply to combine them. Further, since we could not reliably estimate the degree of
dependence of the different studies, we could not synthesize them by taking into
account the dependence. We therefore chose the probability density function from a
single study and performed robustness checks to using the results from alternative
studies cited in the IPCC AR5.
        The chosen study for our primary estimates is Olsen et al. (2012). This study
is representative of the literature in using a Bayesian approach, with a prior based
on previous studies and a likelihood based on observational or modeled data, such
as global average surface temperatures or global total heat content. The prior in
Olsen et al. (2012) is primarily based on Knutti and Hegerl (2008). That prior is then

                                                                                    18
combined with output variables from the University of Victoria ESCM climate model
(Weaver et al. 2001) to determine the final or posterior distribution.
       Olsen et al. (2012) was chosen for the following reasons. First, it was
recommended to us in personal communications with several climate scientists.
Second, it was representative of the other four studies we examined and falls into
the middle range of the different estimates.4 Third, sensitivity analyses of the effect
on aggregate uncertainty of changing the standard deviation of the Olsen et al.
(2012) results found that the sensitivity was small (see the section below on
sensitivity analyses). Appendix 1 provides more details on Olsen et al. (2012) and
also presents a figure comparing this study to the other studies in the IPCC AR5.
       Note that the US government used a version of the Roe and Baker distribution
calibrated to three constraints from the IPCC for its uncertainty estimates (IAWG
2010). Specifically, the IAWG Report modified the original Roe and Baker
distribution to assume that the median value is 3.0 °C, the probability of being
between 2 and 4.5 °C is two-thirds, and there is no mass below zero or above 10 °C.
The modified Roe and Baker distribution has a higher mean ECS than any of the
models (3.5 °C) and a much higher dispersion (1.6 °C as compared to 0.84 °C from
Olsen et al. 2012).
       The estimated pdf for Olsen et al. (2012) was derived as follows. We first
obtained the pdf from the authors. This pdf was provided as a set of equilibrium
temperature values and corresponding probabilities. We then explored families of
distributions that best approximated the numerical pdf provided. We found that a
log-normal pdf fits the posterior distributions extremely well.
       To find the parameters of the fitted log-normal pdf, we minimize the squared
difference between the posterior density function from Olsen et al. and the log-
normal pdf over the support of the distribution (the L2 or Euclidian norm). In other
words, we minimize the sum of the square of the vertical differences between the
posterior pdf and a log-normal pdf over all grid points values in the Olsen et al.
(2012) distribution.5 Figure 1 shows the Olsen et al. (2012) pdf, along with the fitted
log-normal density function. The fit is extremely close, with the log-normal
distribution always within 0.14% of the Olsen et al. (2012) pdf for any grid point
value.

4In tests, we found that the Olsen et al. (2012) distribution is similar to a simple mixture
distribution of all five distributions. We calculate this mixture distribution by taking the
average probability over all distributions at each temperature increase.

5More precisely we minimize over the range of the Olsen et al. distribution, [1.509, 7.4876]
°C, with a grid point spacing of 0.1508 °C.


                                                                                               19
Figure 1. The Olsen et al. (2012) probability density function along with the fitted
log-normal distribution used in our analysis.




           D. Total Factor Productivity

    Uncertainty in the growth of productivity (or output per capita) is known to be a
critical parameter in determining all elements of climate change, from emissions to
temperature change to damages (Nordhaus 2008). Climate models generally draw
their estimates of emissions trajectories from background models of economic
growth such as scenarios prepared for the IPCC or studies of the Energy Modeling
Forum. No major studies, however, rely on statistically-based estimates of emissions
and economic growth.
    Forecasts of long-run productivity growth involve active debates on issues such
as the role of new technologies and inventions (Brynjolfsson and McAfee 2012,
Gordon 2012), potential increases in the research intensity and educational
attainment in emerging economies (Fernald and Jones 2014, Freeman 2010), and
institutional reform and political stability (Acemoglu et al. 2005). While the
empirical literature on economic growth has provided evidence in support of
various underlying models, no existing study contains sufficient information to
derive a probability distribution for long-run growth rates.


                                                                                       20
    The historical record provides a useful background for estimating future trends.
However, it is clear from both theoretical and empirical perspectives that the
processes driving productivity growth are non-stationary. For example, estimates of
the growth of global output per capita for the 18th, 19th, and 20th century are 0.6, 1.9,
and 3.7 percent per year (DeLong 2015 in
http://holtz.org/Library/Social%20Science/Economics/Estimating%20World%20
GDP%20by%20DeLong/Estimating%20World%20GDP.htm). To the extent that
experts on economic growth possess valid insights about the likelihood and possible
determinants of long-run growth patterns, then information drawn from experts
can add value to forecasts based purely on historical observations or drawn from a
single model. Combining expert estimates has been shown to reduce error in short-
run forecasts of economic growth (Batchelor and Dua 1995). However, there are
few expert studies on long-run growth (see Appendix 2 for discussion) and, to our
knowledge, there has been no systematic and detailed published study of
uncertainty in long-run future growth rates.
    To develop estimates of uncertainties, the project team, led by Peter Christensen,
undertook a survey of experts on economic growth to determine both the central
tendency and the uncertainty about long-run growth trends. Our survey utilized
information drawn from a panel of experts to characterize uncertainty in estimates
of global output for the periods 2010-2050 and 2010-2100. We defined growth as
the average annual rate of real per capita GDP, measured in purchasing power
parity (PPP) terms. We asked experts to provide estimates of the average annual
growth rates at 10th, 25th, 50th, 75th, 90th percentiles.
    Beginning in the summer of 2014, we sent out surveys to a panel of 25 economic
growth experts. As of June 2015, we collected 11 complete results with full
uncertainty analysis for the period 2010-2100. A summary of the procedure is
provided in Appendix 2, and a complete report will be prepared separately.
    There are many different approaches to combining expert forecasts (Armstrong
2001) and aggregating probability distributions (Clemen and Winkler 1999). We
assume that experts have information about the likely distribution of long-run
growth rates. Their information sets are defined by estimates for 5 different
percentiles. We begin by assuming that the estimates are independent across
experts and then examined the distributions that best fit the percentiles for each
expert and for the combined estimates (average of percentiles) across experts.
    We found it useful for this project to characterize the expert pdfs with commonly
used distributions so that the Monte Carlo estimates could be easily implemented. In
testing the distributions for each expert, we found that most experts’ estimates can



                                                                                      21
be closely fitted by a normal distribution; similarly, the combined distribution is
well fitted by a normal distribution. Details are provided in Appendix 2.
    The resulting combined normal distribution has a mean growth rate of 2.29%
per year and a standard deviation of the growth rate of 1.15% per year over the
period 2010-2100. (The mean growth rate of per capita GDP in the base runs of the
six models is slightly lower at 1.9% per year over this period.) We test different
approaches for combining the expert responses and find little sensitivity to the
choice of aggregation method. Figure 2 shows the fitted individual and combined
normal pdfs (explained in Appendix 2). In the Monte Carlo estimates below, we
chose a standard deviation of the growth rate of per capita output of 1.12% per year
(based on the first 11 responses). This value is used in this draft, but will be updated
with the addition of further responses.




Figure 2. Individual and combined pdfs for annual growth rates of output per capita,
2010 – 2100 (average annual percent per year)

For the methods, see Appendix 2.




                                                                                      22
   It is useful to compare the survey results with historical data. If we take the long-
term estimates from Maddison (2003), the 100-year variability of growth over the
ten centuries from 1000 to 2000 was 1.5% per year, with a range of -0.1% to 3.7%
per year. The variability in these century-step data is higher than the experts’
estimate of 1.15% per year.
   Global growth rates based on detailed national data are available since 1900. The
standard deviation of annual growth rates over this period was 2.9% per year, while
the standard deviation of 25-year growth rates was 1.2 or 1.4% per year depending
upon the source. The variability of growth in recent years was lower than for the
entire period since 1900. The standard deviation in the annual growth rate during
the period 1975-2000 was 1.1% per year. We cannot easily translate historical
variabilities into century-long variabilities without assuming a specific stochastic
structure of growth rates.

VI.     Results of Modeling Studies

           A. Model results and lattice diagrams

    We begin by providing results on the calibration runs and the surface response
functions. For each model, there is a voluminous set of inputs and output variables
from 2010 to 2100. The full set (consisting of 46,150 x 22 elements) clearly cannot
be fully presented. We restrict our focus here to some of the most important results,
and consign further results to Appendix 3, with the full results available online at
time of publication.
    To help visualize the results, we have developed lattice diagrams to show how
the results vary across uncertain variables and models. Figure 3 is a lattice diagram
for the increase in global mean surface temperature in 2100. Within each of the nine
panels, the y-axis is the global mean surface temperature increase in 2100 relative
to 1900. The x-axis is the value of the equilibrium temperature sensitivity. Going
across panels on the horizontal axis, the first column uses the grid value of the first
of the five population scenarios (which is the lowest growth rate); the middle
column shows the results for the modeler’s baseline population; and the third
column shows the results for the population associated with the highest population
grid (or highest growth rate).
    Going down panels on the vertical axis, the first row uses the highest growth rate
for TFP (or the fifth TFP grid point); the middle row shows TFP growth for the
modelers’ baselines; and the bottom row shows the results for the slowest grid
point for the growth rate of TFP. Note that in all cases, the modelers’ baseline values


                                                                                      23
generally differ, but the differences in parameter values across rows or columns are
identical.
   To understand this lattice graph, begin in the center panel. This panel uses the
modeler’s baseline population and TFP growth. It indicates how temperature in
2100 across models varies with the ECS, with the differences being 1.5 °C between
the ECS grid points. A first observation is that the models all assume that the ECS is
close to 3 °C in the baseline. Next, is that the resulting baseline temperature
increases for 2100 are closely bunched between 3.75 and 4.25 °C. All curves are
upward sloping, indicating a greater 2100 temperature change is associated with a
higher ECS.
   As the ECS varies from the baseline values, the model differences are distinct.
These can be seen in the slopes of the different model curves in the middle panel of
Figure 3. We will see below that the impact of a 1 °C change in ECS on 2100
temperature varies by a factor of 2½ across models. For example, DICE, MERGE, and
GCAM have relatively responsive climate modules, while IGSM and FUND climate
modules are much less responsive to ECS differences. The difference across models
becomes larger as we move from the bottom-left to the upper right-hand panel,
corresponding to increasing population and TFP growth from bottom left to top
right. This result highlights key differences in both the economic and climate
components of the different models.




                                                                                    24
Figure 3. Lattice diagram for 2100 temperature increase
This lattice diagram shows the differences in model results for 2100 global mean
surface temperature across population, total factor productivity and temperature
sensitivity parameters. The central box uses the modelers’ baseline parameters and
the Base policy.


       Another important relationship to examine is how different models react to
the carbon prices. Figure 4 shows the percentage reduction in CO 2 emissions in the
Carbon Tax scenario v. the Base run. The horizontal axis shows the magnitude of the
carbon tax. One key feature of all models is that attaining zero emissions would
require extremely high carbon prices.




                                                                                 25
                                              120%



       Percentage reduction (Ampere v base)
                                              100%


                                               80%


                                               60%


                                               40%
                                                                                       DICE            FUND

                                               20%                                     GCAM            IGSM

                                                                                       MERGE           WITCH
                                                0%
                                                     0        100         200          300       400           500
                                                                       Carbon price ($/tCO2)


Figure 4. Carbon tax and emissions reductions by model
Models show differing response to higher carbon prices. Note that the carbon prices
are all associated with given dates and are common for all models. The points to the
far left are for 2010, while the ones at the far right are for 2100. These estimates are
for the modelers’ baseline parameters.


      There are many other results of the modeling exercise. Appendix 3 contains
further lattice diagrams, including those for per capita consumption, emissions, and
damages, as well as additional tables of results. However, the primary purpose of
the present study is to determine the impact of uncertainties, so we leave the model
comparisons of major outputs aside at this point.

                                              B. Results of the estimates of the surface response functions

      Recall that track I provides the model outcomes (such as output, emissions,
and temperature) for each grid-point of a 5 x 5 x 5 x 2 grid of the values of the
uncertain parameters and policies. The next step in the analysis is to fit surface
response functions (SRFs) to each of the model outputs. These SRFs then will be
used, when combined with the Track II probability distributions just discussed, to
provide probability distributions of the outcome variables for each model.




                                                                                                                     26
      We undertook extensive analysis of different approaches to estimating the
SRFs. The initial and eventually preferred approach was a linear-quadratic-
interactions (LQI) specification. This took the following form:
              3         3     j
   Y   0   i ui    ij ui u j
             i 1       j 1 i 1

      In this specification, ui and u j are the uncertain parameters. The Y are the
outcome variables for different models and different years (e.g., temperature for the
FUND model for 2100 in the Base run for different values of the 3 uncertain
parameters). The parameters  0 , i , and  i j are the estimates from the SRF
regression equations. We suppress the subscript for the model, year, policy, and
variable.
       Table 1 shows a comparison of the results for temperature and log of output
for the linear (L) and LQI specifications for the six models. All specifications show
marked improvement of the equation fit in the LQI relative to the L version. Looking
at the log output specification (the last column in the bottom set of numbers), the
residual variance in the LQI specification is essentially zero for all models. For the
temperature SRF, more than 99.5% of the variance is explained by the LQI
specification. The standard errors of equations for 2100 temperature range from
0.05 to 0.18 °C for different models in the LQI version.




                                                                                      27
Table 1. Linear parameters in of SRF for temperature and log output for linear (L)
and liner-quadratic-interactions (LQI) specifications

The linear parameters are the coefficients on the linear term in the SRF regressions.
Because the data are decentered (remove the medians), the linear terms in the
higher-order polynomials are the derivatives or linear terms at the median values of
the uncertain parameters.


       The equations are fit as deviations from the central case, so coefficients are
linearized at the central point, which is the modelers’ baseline set of parameters.
Looking at the LQI coefficients for temperature, note that the effect of the ECS on
2100 temperature varies substantially among the models. At the high end, there is
close to a unit coefficient, while at the low end the variation is about 0.4 °C per °C in


                                                                                        28
ECS change. For TFP, the impacts are relatively similar except for the WITCH model,
which is much lower. This is likely due to implementation of the TFP changes as
input-neutral technical change (rather than changes in labor productivity, as in
several other models). For population, the LQI coefficients vary by a factor of three.
       For log of output, several models have no feedback from ECS to output and
thus show a 0.000 value. The impact of TFP is almost uniform by design. Similarly,
the impact of population on output is very similar.
       We tested seven different specifications for the SRF: Linear (L), Linear with
interactions (LI), Linear quadratic (LQ), Linear, quadratic, linear interactions (LQI)
as shown above, 3rd degree polynomial with linear interactions (P3I), 4th degree
polynomials with second degree interactions (P4I2), and fourth degree polynomial
with fourth degree interactions and polynomial three-way interactions (P4I4S3).
For virtually all models and specifications, the accuracy increased sharply as far as
the LQI specification. However, as is shown in Figure 5, very little further
improvement was found for the more exotic polynomials. In addition to the
polynomial interpolations, we investigated several alternative techniques, including
Chebyshev polynomials and basis-splines. We found no improvement from these
other approaches.


                        L          LQ          LI         LQI             LQI++
                 0.10

                                                                All
                 0.08                                           Temp(2100)
                                                                Conc(2100)
                 0.06                                           Y(2100)
          1-R2




                 0.04



                 0.02



                 0.00



Figure 5. Residual variance for all variables, models, and specifications indicates that
for nearly all models, there is little to be gained adding further polynomial terms beyond
LQI.


                                                                                       29
       In summary, we found that the linear-quadratic-interaction (LQI)
specification of the surface response function performed extremely well in fitting
the data in our tests. The reason is that the models, while highly non-linear overall,
are generally close to quadratic in the three uncertain parameters. We are therefore
confident that they are a reliable basis for the Monte Carlo simulations.

      C. Reliability of the MUP procedures with extrapolation

       One issue that arises in estimating the distributions of outcome variables is
the extent to which the calibration runs in track I adequately cover the range of the
pdfs from track II. For both population and the equilibrium temperature sensitivity,
the calibration runs cover at least 99.9 % of the range of the pdfs. However, when
setting the calibration range for TFP based on earlier informal estimates, we
underestimated the variability of the final pdfs. As a result, the calibration runs only
extend as far as the 83 percentile at the upper end, requiring us to extrapolate
beyond the range of the calibration runs.
       Since it was not possible to repeat the calibration runs with an expanded grid,
we tested the reliability of the extrapolation and the two track approach with two
models. We first examined the reliability for TFP with the base case in the DICE
model. This was done by making runs with increments of TFP growth up to 3
estimated standard deviations (i.e., up to a global output growth rate of 6.1% per
year to 2100). These runs cover 99.7% of the distribution. We then estimated a
surface response function for 2100 temperature over the same interval as for the
calibration exercises and extrapolated outside the range. The results showed high
reliability of the estimated SRF for temperature increase up to about 2 standard
deviations above the baseline TFP growth rate. Beyond that, the SRF tended to
overestimate the 2100 temperature. (Similar results were found for CO2
concentrations and the damage-output ratio in the DICE model.) The reason for the
overestimate is that carbon fuels become exhausted at high growth rates, so raising
the growth rate further above the already-high rate has a relatively small effects on
emissions, concentrations, 2100 temperature, and the damage ratio. Note that this
implies that the far upper tail of the temperature distribution using the corrected
SRF will show a thinner tail than the one generated by the SRF estimated over the
calibration runs.
       We also performed a more comprehensive comparison of the MUP
procedures with a full Monte Carlo using the FUND model. For this, we took the pdfs
for the three uncertain variables and ran a Monte Carlo for the full FUND model with
1 million draws. We then compared the means and standard deviations of different

                                                                                      30
variables for the two approaches. We tested four different specifications of the SRFs
to determine whether these would produce markedly different outcomes. The
results indicated that the MUP procedure provided reliable estimates of the means
and standard deviations of all variables that we tested except FUND damages.
Excepting damages, for the preferred LQI estimate, the absolute average error of the
mean for the MUP procedure relative to the FUND Monte Carlo was 0.3%, while the
absolute average error for the standard deviation was 1.2%. For damages, the
errors were 7% and 44%, respectively. Additionally, the percentile estimates for the
MUP procedure (again except for damages) were accurate up to the 90th percentile.
And, as will be noted below, the estimates for the parameters of the tails of the
distributions were accurate for all variables except damages. A note providing
further details on the comparisons is available from the authors.

VII.    Results of the Monte Carlo simulations

           A. Distributions for major variables

       For the Monte Carlo simulations, we took the SRFs for each
parameter/model/year/policy and made 1,000,000 draws from each pdf for the
three uncertain parameters. We then examined the resulting distributions. This
sample size was chosen because the results were reliable at that level. The bootstrap
standard errors of the means and the standard deviations were generally less than
0.1% of the mean or standard deviation. The exception was for damages, where the
bootstrap standard error of the estimated standard deviations was about 0.2% of
the value for the FUND model. We treat each pdf independently, but recognize that
there may be some correlation between realizations of population and GDP.
However, explorations into this revealed that it did not substantially influence our
findings.
       Table 2 shows statistics of the distribution of the draws for each of the major
outcome variables, with averages taken across all six models. We also show the
estimates for the linear and LQI versions to illustrate the sensitivity of the results to
the SRF specification. The last column shows the coefficient of variation for each
variable. Note that these estimates are within-model (parametric uncertainty)
results and do not include across-model variability. The results highlight that
emissions, economic output, and damages have the highest coefficient of variation,
underscoring that the uncertainty in these output variables is greater than for other
variables, such as CO2 concentrations and temperature. This is the result of both the
underlying pdfs used and the models themselves.



                                                                                       31
Table 2. Results of Monte Carlo simulations for averages of all models
The table shows the values of all variables for 2100, except for the social cost of
carbon, which is for 2020. Damages and SCC are for three models.


       Table 3 shows the percentile distribution for all major variables for all models
with results for the base case. The detailed results by models are provided in the
appendix. A key result is the distribution of temperature increase for 2100. The
median increase across all models is 3.79 °C above 1900 levels. The 95th percentile
of the increase is 5.46 °C. Given the size of the interquartile range, these results
definitely indicate that there are substantial uncertainties in all aspects of future
climate change and its impacts in all the models investigated here.




Table 3. Distribution of all major variables, average of six models
The date for all variables is 2100 except for the SCC, which is 2020. Damages and
SCC are for three models.




                                                                                      32
       Table 4 shows the distribution for global temperature increase in 2100 by
model. The temperature distributions of the six models are on the whole reasonably
close. The median ranges from 3.6 to 4.2°C, with IGSM being the lowest and MERGE
being the highest. The interquartile range varies from 0.99 °C (FUND) to 1.39 °C
(DICE). The 10-90% ranges from 1.91 °C (WITCH) to 2.65 °C (DICE). Since the
variability in the random parameters is the same, the differences are due to model
structures.
       One interesting feature is the temperature distribution in the tails. The 99 th
percentile ranges from 5.6 (WITCH) to 7.1 °C (MERGE), while the far tail of the
99.9th percentile ranges from 6.2 (WITCH) to 8.5 °C (MERGE).




Table 4. Distribution of temperature change in the Base case, 2100, °C

       Table 5 shows the distribution of the SCC for the three models that provide
these estimates. These are the estimates of the present value of the flow of future
marginal damages of emissions in 2020. Two of the models (WITCH and DICE) use
similar quadratic damage functions and are roughly comparable in the middle of the
distribution, but the range is much smaller in WITCH. 6 The FUND model has much
lower damages (due to a different damage function), and the SCC distribution is an
order of magnitude lower than the other two models. Note that the central estimate
of the SCC here is $13.30 per ton of CO2. This is much lower than the preferred
estimate of the US government for 2020, which is $46 per ton in 2011$ with a 3%
annual discount rate. However, the base case discount rates in the MUP runs for the
models that report average 4½% per year to 2050. The IAWG estimate at a 5%
discount rate is $13 per ton and therefore consistent with the estimates presented
here.




6In WITCH multiple regions are modeled, hence the global SCC is the result of the
aggregation of regional SCC.


                                                                                    33
Table 5. Distribution of social cost of carbon, 2020 (2005$ per ton CO2)

      Figure 6 shows the results for the temperature distributions for the models
on a percentile scale. The shapes of the distributions are similar, although they differ
by as much as 1 °C in scale across most of the distribution.



                                                   9
                                                           DICE             FUND
                                                   8
              Temperature increase, 2100 (deg C)




                                                   7       GCAM             IGSM

                                                   6       MERGE            WITCH

                                                   5

                                                   4

                                                   3

                                                   2

                                                   1

                                                   0
                                                       -   20        40            60      80   100
                                                                   Percentile of results


  Figure 6. Percentiles of the change in temperature in 2100 across the six models.


       An important question that this study can address is whether, based on the
current model structures and the assumptions about uncertain parameters, the
distributions of outcomes are thin or fat tailed. For these tests, we define a fat tailed
distribution as one that has an infinite-variance Pareto or power-law distribution in
the tails (based on the discussion in Schuster 1984). Variables with a Pareto
distribution have infinite variance when the shape parameter is below 2, and they
have an infinite mean with a parameter equal to or less than one. As an informal
test, we can examine the ratio of the values of the output variables at the 99th and

                                                                                                      34
99.9th percentile. For a normal distribution, the ratio of these is 1.33. For Pareto
distributions with slope values of 2.0, 1.8, and 1.5, the ratios are 3.7, 3.9, and 5.2. If
we examine the Monte Carlo estimates, the maximum ratio is 1.56, which occurs for
damages in the DICE and FUND models. While this suggests a tail that is slightly
fatter than the normal distribution, it falls far short of the slope associated with an
infinite-variance Pareto process.
         Before presenting the results, we reiterate the concern that the calibration
runs do not extend far into the tails for TFP. This implies that the results on tails
reported here rely on extrapolations of the SRF outside the sample range. We
comment below on our replication of the tail estimates with the FUND model, which
are generally accurate. We also emphasize that the estimates of the tails are derived
from the interaction of the models with the assumed pdfs. To the extent that the
models omit discontinuities or sharp non-linearities, or that our assumed pdfs are
too thin-tailed, then we may underestimate the thickness of the tails.
         We can also use a formal test of the Pareto shape parameter, although this is
more complicated because it requires assumptions about the minimum of the
Pareto region (statistical techniques are from Rytgaard 1990). Examining the top
10% of the damage distribution for the DICE model (the most skewed of the
variables), we find that the parameter of the Pareto distribution above the 1% right
tail is estimated to be 4.7 ( + 0.047), which is well below the infinite-variance
threshold of 2. The Pareto parameter estimate for the 0.1% tail is 7.03 ( + 0.22).
These tests reject the hypothesis that the distributions are fat-tailed in the sense of
belonging to an infinite-variance Pareto distribution. The results are due to both the
structures of the models and the nature of the shocks. Nothing in the models
prevents the generation of fat tails in this situation, but they may miss critical non-
linearities, so the tests are not by any means conclusive.
         We examined the validity of the results for the tails using the full Monte Carlo
estimate of the FUND model discussed above. For these, we compared the informal
tests (ratio of the variables at the 99.9%ile to the 99%ile). The MUP calculations
were very accurate for all variables except damages, whereas for damages the MUP
calculations underestimated the skewness (overestimated the Pareto tail). We also
examined the Pareto parameter in the full FUND Monte Carlo and found that the
estimate was significantly above the threshold of an infinite variance process.
         The results can also be seen in box plots. Figure 7 shows the box plot for
temperature increase to 2100. Figure 8 shows the box plot for the CO 2
concentrations for 2100. Both of these underscore that while there are differences
between the models in the way that they are run for this study, they are perhaps



                                                                                        35
smaller than one might have expected – and are much smaller than the within-
model variation. We show this formally in the next section.




                                Temperature increase, 2100 (deg C)
                     7


                     6


                     5


                     4


                     3


                     2


                     1


                     0
                         DICE    FUND    GCAM    IGSM   MERGE        WITCH


Figure 7. Box plot for the increase in temperature across models in 2100.
Note on boxplots: Dot is mean. Horizontal line is median. Shaded area around line is
95% confidence interval of median (usually too small to see). Box contains
interquartile range (IQR or 25 %ile to 75 %ile). The upper staple (horizontal bar) is
set at the median plus 2 times the IQR, while lower staple is set at the median minus
2 times the IQR. The upper stable is approximately the 95%ile for most variables.
Because of skewness of the variables, the lower staple represents far outliers, and is
generally around the 0.1%ile.




                                                                                    36
                                   CO2 Concentrations, 2100, ppm
                  1,800

                  1,600

                  1,400

                  1,200

                  1,000

                    800

                    600

                    400

                    200
                          DICE FUND   GCAM IGSM       MERGE WITCH


Figure 8. Box plot for CO2 concentrations, 2100.
For explanation of boxplots, see Figure 7.



    B. Model uncertainty v. parametric uncertainty

       In examining the uncertainties of climate change and other issues, a common
approach has been to look at the differences among forecasts, models, or
approaches (“ensembles”) and to assume that these are a reasonable proxy for the
uncertainties about the end result or endogenous variables. In the area of climate
models, for example, researchers have often looked at the equilibrium climate
sensitivities in different climate models and assumed that the dispersion would be
an accurate measure of the actual uncertainty of the ECS.

      It is conceptually clear that the ensemble approach is an inappropriate
measure of uncertainty of outcomes. The difference among models represents a
measure of structural uncertainty. For example, alternative climate models might
have different ways of including cloud feedbacks. Taking all the differences among
the models would indicate how state-of-the-art models differ on the processes and
variables that they include. Even here, however, existing models are likely to have
an incomplete understanding and will therefore underestimate structural
uncertainty. However, from a conceptual vantage point, they generally do not

                                                                                      37
explicitly model and consider parametric uncertainty. In IAMs, to come closer to
home, differences in models reflect differences in assumptions about growth rates,
production functions, energy systems, and the like. But few models explicitly include
parametric uncertainty about these variables. Differences in population growth, for
example, are very small relative to measures of uncertainty based on statistical
techniques because many models use the same estimates of long-run population
trends.

       We can use the results of the Monte Carlo simulations to estimate the relative
importance of parametric uncertainty and model uncertainty. We can write the
results of the Monte Carlo simulations schematically as follows. Assume that the
                                              m
model outcome for variable i and model m is Yi and that the uncertain parameters
are ui and u j :

               3                 3     j
Yi m  im   im ui     im, j ui u j
              i 1               j 1 i 1



For a given distribution of each of the uncertain parameters, the variance of Yi
including model variation is:
                           3                          3    j
 2 (Yi )   2 (i )   ( im )2  2 (ui )  ( im, j )2  2 (ui ) 2 (u j )
                          i 1                       j 1 i 1


The first term on the right hand side is the variance due to model differences (or
structural uncertainty), while the second and third terms are the variance due to
parameter uncertainty. For this purpose, we include the interaction of the model
coefficients (           and                ) and the parameter uncertainties [ 2 (ui )] as parametric
                      m                m
                      i                i, j

uncertainty because they would not be included in ensemble uncertainty. The other
terms vanish because we assume that the parametric uncertainties are independent.
While dependence will add further terms on the right-hand side of the equation for
the variance, it will not affect the fraction due to structural differences due to the
first term.

       We can easily estimate the total uncertainty and the structural uncertainty for
different variables. The results are shown in Table 6. For most variables, virtually all
the variance is explained by parametric uncertainty. For example, 94% of the
variance of the 2100 temperature increase in all the models is explained by
parametric uncertainty, and only 6% is explained by differences in model means.
This fact is easily seen in the box charts in Figures 7 and 8. The only variable for

                                                                                                        38
which model uncertainty is important is the social cost of carbon, for which four-
fifths of the total variance is due to model differences.

       We can put these results in terms of the variabilities due to different factors.
If we take the calculated temperature increase to 2100, the overall standard
deviation is 0.84 °C including both model and parametric uncertainty. The standard
deviation of the model means alone is 0.21 °C. So the variability measured in terms
of standard deviations of the temperature increase is underestimated by a factor of
four using the ensemble technique.

       The net effect of these results is sobering. They indicate that the technique of
relying upon ensembles as a technique for determining the uncertainty of future
outcomes is (at least for the major climate change variables) highly deficient.
Ensemble uncertainty tends to underestimate overall uncertainty by a significant
amount.




   Table 6. Fraction of uncertainty (variance) explained by model differences.


           C. Sensitivity of the results to parameter variability

        An important question is the extent to which the results are sensitive to the
individual pdfs for the uncertain parameters. To test for sensitivity, we performed
an experiment where we increased the standard deviation of each of the pdfs by a
factor of 2, both one at a time and together. For a doubling of the standard deviation
of all parameters, the increase in the standard deviation of 2100 temperature was a




                                                                                      39
factor of 1.83 for all models together. We believe that this is less than two because
the short-run temperature impact is not proportional to the ECS.
       Table 7 shows the results changing the uncertainty by a factor of two one
parameter at a time for the average of the 6 models for all variables which are
produced by the six models. The number shows the ratio of the standard deviation
of the 2100 value of the variable in the sensitivity case relative to the case with
assumed pdfs. Doubling all uncertainties produces close to a doubling of the output
uncertainty, with some deviations because of non-linearities.
       Doubling population uncertainty has a small effect on all variables except
population. Doubling equilibrium temperature uncertainty raises the uncertainty of
2100 temperature by 40% but has no significant effect on other uncertainties. The
major sensitivity is TFP uncertainty. Doubling this uncertainty leads to close to
doubling of the uncertainty of other major economic variables, and to an increase of
62 percent in the uncertainty of 2100 temperature. This result is similar to a result
in van Vuuren et al. (2008), which suggests that uncertainty in GDP growth
dominates the uncertainty in emissions.




Table 7. Sensitivity of outcomes for changes in standard deviation of each uncertain
parameter by factor of 2

The figure gives the ratio of the standard deviation of the variable at the top of the
column to the standard deviation in the base run. For example, doubling the
standard deviation of population increased the standard deviation of 2100
temperature by 6%.


      The summary on sensitivity of the results to the pdfs shows an important and
surprising result. On the whole, the results are insensitive to changes in the
population growth pdf; are moderately sensitive to the uncertainty about


                                                                                         40
equilibrium temperature sensitivity on temperature (as well as to damages and the
social cost of carbon, not shown); and are extremely sensitive to the uncertainty
about the rate of growth of productivity. While long-run productivity growth has the
greatest impact on uncertainty, it is also the least carefully studied of any of the
parameters we have examined. This result suggests that much greater attention
should be given to developing reliable estimates of the trend and uncertainties
about long-run productivity.

VIII.   Conclusions

       This study is the first multi-model analysis of parametric uncertainty in
economic climate-change modeling. The approach is based on estimating classic
statistical forecast uncertainty. The central methodology consists of two tracks.
Track I involves doing a set of model calibration runs for the six models and three
uncertain parameters and estimating a surface response function for the results of
those runs. Track II involves developing pdfs for key uncertain parameters. The two
tracks are brought together through a set of Monte Carlo simulations to estimate the
output distributions of multiple output variables that are important for climate
change and climate-change policy. This approach is replicable and transparent, and
overcomes several obstacles for examining uncertainty in climate change.
       Here are the key results. First, the central projections of the integrated
assessment models (IAMs) are remarkably similar at the modeler’s baseline
parameters. This result is probably due to the fact that models have been used in
model comparisons and may have been revised to yield similar baseline results.
However, the projections diverge sharply when alternative assumptions about the
key uncertain parameters are used, especially at high levels of population growth,
productivity growth, and equilibrium climate sensitivity.
       Second, despite these differences across models for alternative parameters,
the distributions of the key output variables are remarkably similar across models
with different structures and levels of complexity. To take year 2100 temperature as
an example, the quantiles of the distributions of the models differ by less than ½ °C
for the entire distribution up to the 95th percentile.
       Third, we find that the climate-related variables are characterized by low
uncertainty relative to those relating to most economic variables. For this
comparison, we look at the coefficient of variation (CV) of the Monte Carlo
simulations. As shown in Table 2, CO2 concentrations, radiative forcings, and
temperature (all for 2100) have relatively low CV. Output and damages have
relatively high CV. As examples, the model-average coefficient of variation for
carbon dioxide concentrations in 2100 is 0.28, while the coefficient of variation for

                                                                                   41
climate-change damages is 1.29. The social cost of carbon has an intermediate CV
within models, but when model variation is included the CV is close to that of output
and damages. These results highlight the importance of further research on
economic variables and damage functions for reducing uncertainty and improving
policymaking (e.g., see Pizer et al. 2014 and Drouet et al. 2015).
        Fourth, we find much greater parametric uncertainty than structural (across
model) uncertainty for all output variables except the social cost of carbon. For
example, in examining the uncertainty in 2100 temperature increase, the difference
of model means (or the ensemble uncertainty) is approximately one-quarter of the
total uncertainty, with the rest driven by parametric uncertainty. While looking
across six models by no means spans the space of methods, the six models examined
here are representative of the differences in size, structure, and complexity of IAMs.
This result is important because of the widespread use of ensemble uncertainty as a
proxy for overall uncertainty and highlights the need for a re-orientation of research
towards examining parametric uncertainty across models.
        A fifth interesting finding of this analysis is the lack of evidence in support of
fat tails in the distributions of emissions, global mean surface temperature, or
damages. Population growth, total factor productivity growth, and climate
sensitivity are very likely to be three of the key uncertain parameters in climate
change. Yet, based on both informal and formal tests, the models as currently
constructed find that the tails are relatively thin. The decline in probabilities
associated with a change in any of the variables is much larger than would be
associated with an infinite-variance Pareto process. As discussed above, we
emphasize that these findings should be interpreted in the context of the current
group of models and the assumed pdfs. The results do not rule out fat tails, but they
do provide empirical evidence against fat tails in outcomes investigated in this study
for the current set of models and the distributions of the three uncertain variables
considered here. These results tend to support the use of expected benefit-cost
analysis for climate change policy, in contrast to suggestions by some authors that
neglect of fat tail events may vitiate standard analyses (Weitzman 2009).
        Sixth, we find that within a wide range of uncertainty, changes in dispersion
of two of the uncertain parameters taken singly have a relatively small effect on the
uncertainty of the output variables, these being population growth and equilibrium
temperature sensitivity. However, uncertainty about productivity growth has a
major impact on the uncertainty of all the major output variables. The reason for
this is that the uncertainty of productivity growth from the expert survey
compounds greatly over the 21st century and induces an extremely large uncertainty



                                                                                       42
about output, emissions, concentrations, temperature change, and damages by the
end of the century.
       As in any study, this analysis is intentionally sharply focused. By analyzing
parametric uncertainty in three key parameters, we do not claim to be capturing all
uncertainties in climate change. As we describe above, there are many uncertainties
that cannot be captured using the statistical framework developed here. But by
providing detailed estimates of uncertainty across a range of IAMs that are currently
being used in the policy process, we believe that we have significantly improved the
understanding of uncertainty in climate change. Moreover, our new two-track
methodology is well-suited for expansion to additional parameters and models, and
can be readily used to explore additional concerns, such as the interaction between
carbon policies and uncertainty.




                                                                                   43
Appendix 1. Further Details on the Choice of ECS Distribution

        This appendix explains the procedure for developing the pdf for climate
sensitivity. The study began by reviewing the five probability density functions for
equilibrium climate sensitivity (ECS) used in the IPCC AR5 that draw upon multiple
lines of evidence. These are Aldrin et al. (2012), Libardoni and Forest (2013), Olsen
et al. (2012), Annan and Hargreaves (2006), and Hegerl et al. (2006). Figure A1
illustrates the log-normal fits to each of these distributions (fits by the present
authors).




Figure A1. Log-normal distributions fit to the probability density functions cited in
the IPCC AR5. The distribution shown here is from the updated Libardoni & Forest
(2013) figures.




       Our chosen study, Olsen et al. (2012), is representative of the studies in both
its methodology and results. It uses a Bayesian approach. The prior distribution was
constructed to fit the “most likely” values and “likely” ranges in Figure 3 in Knutti
and Hegerl (2008) based on the summary statistics of the “current mean climate
state” and “Last Glacial Maximum models.” Olsen et al. assume an inverse Gaussian
(Wald) distribution and obtain this prior by assuming independence between the



                                                                                        44
current mean climate state and the last glacial maximum models, and then
computing the mixture distribution.

       The posterior distribution is then calculated by using a Markov Chain Monte
Carlo simulation to update the prior with a likelihood function. The likelihood is
based on several different tracers, such as global average atmospheric
surface/ocean surface temperatures and global total heat content. These tracers
come from the University of Victoria ESCM climate model, which consists of a three-
dimensional ocean general circulation model coupled with a
thermodynamic/dynamic sea-ice model. The authors assume independence, so that
the likelihood of both observations is equal to the product of the likelihoods.

       The parameters of the log-normal distribution fit to Olsen et al. are μ =
1.10704 and σ = 0.264. The major summary statistics of the reference distribution in
the study are the following: mean = 3.13, median = 3.03, standard deviation = 0.843,
skewness = 0.824, and kurtosis = 4.23. In implementing the Monte Carlo for each
model, we retained the mean ECS for that model. We then imposed a log-normal
distribution that retained the arithmetic standard deviation of the ECS (i.e., a
standard deviation of 0.843) based on the Olsen et al. (2012) distribution.




                                                                                  45
Appendix 2. Expert Survey on Total Factor Productivity

        A key component of the project was determining the uncertainty in
productivity (or, as operationally defined, output per capita). A review of existing
studies indicated that there were no detailed studies of future output uncertainties
out to 2100 that we could rely on. We therefore decided to undertake an expert
elicitation. The detailed results of the survey will be shortly available separately as a
working paper. This appendix sketches the methods and summarizes the
preliminary results. Note that the current results include only 11 of the respondents,
and the complete survey results will be used for the final publication.

      2.1    Survey Design

       In determining the probability distribution of future productivity growth, a
major difficulty is the non-stationarity of this variable. It is clearly non-stationary if
one examines historical data. From a theoretical point of view, we would expect
non-stationarity because the major determinants of long-run growth – invention
and technological change – involve new and different processes rather than
replication of some underlying process. For this reason, it is important to overlay
any empirical study with expert views.
       Expert opinion has been used systematically in a very limited number of
studies of economic growth. For example, Webster et al. (2002) analyze uncertainty
in the GDP growth rate out to 2100 (as a proxy for changes in labor productivity)
using estimates collected from an elicitation of 5 experts from a single institution.
This seemed too thin a base for the present study.
       In this study, we conducted a survey of expert predictions about uncertainty
in global annual growth rates for the period 2010-2100. Experts provided responses
using an online survey (see Figure A2 for the response format). The panel of experts
was selected through a process of nomination by leading economists.
       We asked experts about growth rates in high-, medium-, and low-income
countries, as well as about global aggregate rates. As part of the survey, we alerted
experts to problems of overconfidence and include a warm-up section that was
designed to increase awareness of their personal overconfidence. In addition, we
asked experts about any ambiguities that they experienced in the survey and




                                                                                       46
provided them with historical data on growth rates for the period 1900-2000 from
Barro-Ursua (2010) and Maddison (2003). 7




      Figure A2. Response Format for Expert Survey


       The survey was comprised of 4 sets of questions about growth rates: (1)
central estimates (50th percentile) for growth rates for 2010-2050 and 2010-2100,
(2) estimates of uncertainty based on providing the 10th, 25th, 75th, and 90th
percentiles of the growth rates, (3) the projected magnitude of effects of positive
and negative shocks to the economy, and (4) near-term predictions (for the
following year). We asked each expert to describe the rationale for their response as
well as an explanation of major positive and negative shocks. The survey also asked
experts to identify outside sources of information that were used to generate
forecasts and to rank their own expertise overall and for particular regions.

      2.2    Combining Expert Distributions

       We use two methods to estimate the mean and standard deviation for the
best-fitting combined normal distribution of growth rates for the period 2010-2100.

       The first method assumes that experts have estimates of quantiles of the
distribution of long-run growth rates. The combined pdf is then the distribution that
minimizes the sum of squared differences between the combined normal


7Barro-Ursua Macroeconomic Data available at: rbarro.com/data-sets/. Maddison is from
Angus Maddison (2003). Available at: http://www.theworldeconomy.org/statistics.htm.


                                                                                    47
distribution at each quantile and the average of the quantile estimates of the
experts. The second method begins with estimates of the parameters of the best-
fitting normal distribution for each expert; and then takes the sample means of the
parameters of the experts for the combined normal distribution.
        We find very little difference between the two methods. For the preliminary
sample, the mean growth rates of per capita output for the two methods are 2.29
and 2.30, respectively for methods 1 and 2. The combined standard deviations are
1.15 and 1.17, respectively.
        The combined pdfs along with 11 preliminary responses are shown in Figure
2 in the main text. The current procedure uses the sample mean of the standard
deviation for the Monte Carlo estimates, but we are considering using a robust
estimator for the final report.




                                                                                  48
Appendix 3. Additional Lattice Diagrams

       We include here further lattice diagrams. The structure is as described in the
text. The only difference is the output variable, which is shown at the top of the
graph.

      Note that the first group of diagrams is for the base runs, while the second
group is for the runs with carbon taxes (Carbon Tax or Ampere runs).




                                                                                     49
50
51
52
53
54
        Appendix 4. Additional Tables and Graphs

  Table A1. Overview of global integrated assessment models included in this study.



Model     Number  Time         Variables        Key Characteristics         Selected
            of    Horiz        Included                                    Reference
         Economic   on                                                          s
          Regions
DICE     1        2010-       1,2,3,5,6      Optimal growth model,         (Nordhaus
                  2300                       endogenous GDP and            and Sztorc
                                             temperature, exogenous        2014)
                                             population, SWF is CES
                                             with respect to
                                             consumption.
FUND     16           1950-   1,2,3,4,5,6,   Multi-region, multi-gas,      (Anthoff
                      3000    7              detailed damage functions,    and Tol
                                             exogenous scenarios           2010,
                                             perturbed by model            2013)
GCAM     14           2005-   1,2,3,4,5,7    Integrated energy-land-       (Calvin and
                      2095                   climate model with            et al. 2011)
                                             technology detail;
                                             exogenous population and
                                             GDP; endogenous energy
                                             resources, agriculture, and
                                             temperature; economic
                                             costs are calculated for
                                             producer and consumer
                                             surplus change
IGSM     16           2100    1,2,3,4,5,7    Full general circulation      (Chen et al.
                                             model linked to a multi       2015,
                                             sector-multi region           Sokolov et
                                             general equilibrium model     al. 2009,
                                             of the economy with           Webster et
                                             explicit advanced             al. 2012)
                                             technology options
MERGE    10           2100    1,2,3,4,5,7    Ramsey model coupled          (Blanford

                                                                                        55
                                              with energy process            et al. 2014)
                                              model, multiple regions,
                                              endogenous GDP and
                                              temperature, exogenous
                                              population
WITCH       13          2150     1,2,3,4,5,6 Optimal growth model,           (Bosetti et
                                ,7            endogenous GDP and             al. 2006)
                                              temperature, exogenous
                                              population, SWF is CES
                                              with respect to
                                              consumption.
Notes: SWF = social welfare function, CES = constant elasticity of substitution. For
variables included the key is:
1 = GDP, population
2 = CO2 emissions, CO2 concentrations
3 = global temperature
4 = multiple regions
5 = mitigation
6 = damages
7 = non-CO2 GHGs




                                                                                        56
Results of Monte Carlo simulations for models and major variables
[All variables are 2100 except SCC, which is 2020]




                                                                    57
                           CO2 emissions, 2100 (billions tons CO2)
                  500


                  400


                  300


                  200


                  100


                    0


                 -100
                        DICE   FUND   GCAM     IGSM   MERGE     WITCH




Figure for box plots for CO2 emissions, 2100. For discussion of box plots, see Figure
7.




                                                                                    58
                                  DICE     FUND WITCH



Figure for box plots for social cost of carbon, 2020. For discussion of box plots, see
Figure 7.




                                                                                         59
Estimates from surface response functions by variable and model.




                                                                   60
Goodness of fit of worst fitting LQI variable by model.

       Table shows the residual variance (1-R2) for the worst fitting of the
equations. For example, in the LQI specification, the worst SRF for the DICE model is
the equation for population, which has a residual variance of 0.00706. For the
MERGE model, the worst equation is for CO2 emissions. Note as well that the only
two models for which the worst equation has a significant reduction in residual
variation from LQI to LQI++ are the IGSM and WITCH models.




                                                                                   61
References

Acemoglu, D., S. Johnson, and J. Robinson. 2005. "Institutions as a Fundamental
       Cause of Long-run Growth." In Handbook of Economic Growth, edited by
       Philippe Aghion and Steven Durlauf. North-Holland.
Anthoff, D., and R. Tol (2010). "On International Equity Weights and National
       Decision Making on Climate Change." Journal of Environmental Economics and
       Management 60(1): 14-20.
Anthoff, D., and R. Tol (2013). "The Uncertainty About the Social Cost of Carbon: A
       Decomposition Analysis Using FUND." Climatic Change 117(3): 515-530.
Armstrong, J. Scott. (2001). "Combining forecasts." Principles of forecasting. Springer
       US, 417-439.
Baker, E. (2005). "Uncertainty and Learning in a Strategic Environment: Global
       Climate Change." Resource and Energy Economics 27(1): 19-40.
Batchelor, Roy, and Pami Dua (1995). "Forecaster diversity and the benefits of
       combining forecasts." Management Science 41.1 (1995): 68-75.
Blanford, G., J. Merrick, R. Richels, and R. Steven (2014). "Trade-offs Between
       Mitigation Costs and Temperature Change." Climatic Change 123(3-4): 527-
       541.
Bosetti, V., C. Carraro, M. Galeotti, E. Massetti, and M. Tavoni (2006). "WITCH: A
       World Induced Technical Change Hybrid Model." Energy Journal 27(SI2): 13-
       37.
Bosetti, V., C. Carraro, E. Massetti, and M. Tavoni. 2014. Climate Change Mitigation,
       Technological Innovation and Adaptation: Edward Elgar Publishers.
Brynjolfsson, E., and A. McAfee. 2012. Race Against the Machine: How the Digital
       Revolution is Accelerating Innovation, Driving Productivity, and Irreversibly
       Transforming Employment and the Economy: Digital Frontier Press.
Calvin, K., and et al. 2011. GCAM Wiki Documentation.
       http://wiki.umd.edu/gcam/index.php?title=Main_Page. College Park, MD:
       Joint Global Change Research Institute.
CBO. 2005. Uncertainty in Analyzing Climate Change: Policy Implications.
       Washington, DC: Congressional Budget Office.
Chen, Y.-H., S. Paltsev, J. Reilly, J.F. Morris, and M.H. Babiker. 2015. The MIT EPPA6
       Model: Economic Growth, Energy Use, and Food Consumption, MIT Joint
       Program Report Number 278. Cambridge, MA.



                                                                                     62
Clarke, L., and J. Weyant (2009). "Introduction to the EMF 22 Special Issue on
      Climate Change Control Scenarios." Energy Economics 31(2): S63.
Clemen, Robert T., and Robert L. Winkler (1999). "Combining probability
      distributions from experts in risk analysis." Risk analysis 19.2: 187-203.
Clements, M., and D. Hendry. 1998. Forecasting Economic Time Series. Cambridge,
      UK: Cambridge University Press.
Clements, M., and D. Hendry. 1999. Forecasting Non-stationary Economic Time Series.
      Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.
de Finetti, B. (1937). "La prevision: Ses lois logiques, ses sources subjectives."
      Annales de l'Institut Henri Poincaré 7: 1-68.
Edmonds, J., and J. Reilly (1983a). "Global Energy and CO2 to the Year 2050." Energy
      Journal 4(3): 21-47.
Edmonds, J., and J. Reilly (1983b). "Global Energy Production and Use to the Year
      2050." Energy 8(6): 419-432.
Edmonds, J., and J. Reilly (1983c). "A Long-term Global Energy-economic Model of
      Carbon Dioxide Release From Fossil Fuel Use." Energy Economics 5(2): 74-88.
Ericsson, N. 2001. Forecast Uncertainty in Economic Modeling. Washington, DC:
      Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System International Finance
      Discussion Papers.
Fernald, J., and C. Jones. 2014. The Future of U.S. Economic Growth. Cambridge, MA:
      National Bureau of Economic Research Working Paper 19830
Freeman, R. 2010. "What Does Global Expansion of Higher Education Mean for the
      United States?" In American Universities in a Global Market, 373-404.
      University of Chicago Press.
Gordon, R. 2012. Is U.S. Economic Growth Over? Faltering Innovation Confronts the
      Six Headwinds. Cambridge, MA: National Bureau of Economic Research
      Working Paper 18315.
Greenstone, M., E. Kopits, and A. Wolverton (2013). "Developing a Social Cost of
      Carbon for US Regulatory Analysis: A Methodology and Interpretation."
      Review of Environmental Economics and Policy 7(1): 23-46.
Hammersley, J.M., and D.C. Handscomb. 1964. Monte Carlo Methods. New York: John
      Wiley and Sons.
Hope, C. (2006). "The Marginal Impact of CO2 from PAGE2002: An Integrated
      Assessment Model Incorporating the IPCC's Five Reasons for Concern."
      Integrated Assessment 6(19-56).
IAWG. 2010. Technical Support Document: Social Cost of Carbon for Regulatory
      Impact Analysis Under Executive Order 12866. Washington, DC: Interagency
      Working Group on the Social Cost of Carbon.


                                                                                  63
IAWG. 2013. Technical Support Document: Technical Update of the Social Cost of
       Carbon for Regulatory Impact Analysis Under Executive Order 12866.
       Washington, DC: Interagency Working Group on the Social Cost of Carbon.
InterAcademy Council. 2010. Climate Change Assessments: Review of the Processes
       and Procedures of the IPCC, 2010, Harold Shapiro, chair.
IPCC. 2014. Fifth Assessment Report of the Intergovernmental Panel on Climate
       Change. Cambridge, UK and New York, NY: Cambridge University Press.
Knutti, R., and G. Hegerl (2008). "The Equilibrium Sensitivity of the Earth's
       Temperature to Radiation Changes." Nature Geoscience 1: 735-743.
Kriegler, E., N. Peterman, V. Krey, V.J. Schwanitz, G. Luderer, S. Ashina, V. Bosetti, J.
       Eom, A. Kitous, A. Mejean, L. Paroussos, F. Sano, H. Turton, C. Wilson, and D.
       Van Vuuren (2015). "Diagnostic Indicators for Integrated Assessment Models
       of Climate Change." Technological Forecasting and Social Change 90(A): 45-
       61.
Lemoine, D., and H. McJeon (2013). "Trapped Between Two Tails: Trading Off
       Scientific Uncertainties via Climate Targets." Environmental Research Letters
       8: 1-10.
Lenton, T., H. Held, E. Kriegler, J. Hall, W. Lucht, S. Rahmstorf, and H.J. Schellnhuber
       (2008). "Tipping Elements in the Earth's Climate System." Proceedings of the
       National Academy of Sciences 105(6): 1786-1793.
Lutz, W., ed. 1996. The Future Population of the World: What Can We Assume Today?
       London: Earthscan Publication Ltd.
Lutz, W., W. Butz, and S. KC. 2014. World Population and Human Capital in the
       Twenty-First Century. Oxford, UK: Oxford University Press.
Lutz, W., W. Sanderson, and S. Scherbov. 1998. "Expert-based Probabilistic
       Projections." In Frontiers of Population Forecasting, edited by Wolfgang Lutz,
       J.W. Vaupel and D.A. Ahlburg, 139-155. Population and Development Review.
Lutz, W., W. Sanderson, and S. Scherbov. IIASA's 2007 Probabilistic World Population
       Projections, IIASA World Population Program Online Data Base of Results
       2008. Available from
       http://www.iiasa.ac.at/web/home/research/researchPrograms/WorldPopul
       ation/Reaging/2007_update_prob_world_pop_proj.html.
Manne, A., R. Mendelsohn, and R. Richels (1999). "MERGE: A Model for Evaluating
       Regional and Global Effects of Greenhouse Gas Reduction Policies." Energy
       Policy 23(1): 17-34.
Meinshausen, M., S.C. Raper, and T. Wigley (2011). "Emulating Coupled Atmosphere-
       Ocean and Carbon Cycle Models with a Simpler Model, MAGICC6 - Part I:



                                                                                       64
        Model Description and Calibration." Atmospheric Chemistry and Physics 11:
        1417-1456.
Nordhaus, W. 2008. A Question of Balance: Weighing the Options on Global Warming
        Policies. New Haven, CT: Yale University Press.
Nordhaus, W., and D. Popp (1997). "What is the Value of Scientific Knowledge? An
        Application to Global Warming Using the PRICE Model." Energy Journal 18(1):
        1-45.
Nordhaus, W., and P. Sztorc. 2014. DICE 2013: Introduction and User's Manual. New
        Haven, CT: Yale University.
NRC. 2000. Beyond Six Billion: Forecasting the World's Population. Washington, DC:
        National Academy Press.
O'Neill, B., D. Balk, M. Brickman, and M. Ezra (2001). "A Guide to Global Population
        Projections." Demographic Research 4(8): 203-288.
Olsen, R., R. Sriver, M. Goes, N. Urban, D. Matthews, M. Haran, and K. Keller (2012).
        "A Climate Sensitivity Estimate Using Bayesian Fusion of Instrumental
        Observations and an Earth System Model." Geophysical Research Letters
        117(D04103): 1-11.
Peck, S., and T. Teisberg (1993). "Global Warming Uncertainties and the Value of
        Information: An Analysis Using CETA." Resource and Energy Economics 15(1):
        71-97.
Pizer, W. (1999). "Optimal Choice of Climate Change Policy in the Presence of
        Uncertainty." Resource and Energy Economics 21(3-4): 255-287.
Pizer, W., M. Adler, J. Aldy, D. Anthoff, M. Cropper, K. Gillingham, M. Greenstone, B.
        Murray, R. Newell, R. Richels, A. Rowell, S. Waldhoff, and J. Wiener (2014).
        "Using and Improving the Social Cost of Carbon." Science 346(6214): 1189-
        1190.
Ramsey, F. 1931. "Truth and Probability." In The Foundations of Mathematics and
        Other Logical Essays, edited by Richard Bevan Braithwaite, 156-198. London,
        UK: Kegan, Paul, Trench, Trubner and Company.
Reilly, J., J. Edmonds, R. Gardner, A. Brenkert (1987) "Monte Carlo Analysis of the
        IEA/ORAU Energy/Carbon Emissions Model." Energy Journal 8:1-29.
Revesz, R., P. Howard, K. Arrow, L. Goulder, R. Kopp, M. Livermore, M. Oppenheimer,
        and T. Sterner (2014). "Global Warming: Improve Economic Models of
        Climate Change." Nature 508(7495): 173-175.
Robinson, A., R. Calov, and A. Ganopolski (2012). "Multistability and Critical
        Thresholds of the Greenland Ice Sheet." Nature Climate Change 2: 429-432.
Rytgaard, Mette (1990). "Estimation in the Pareto distribution." Astin Bulletin 20.02:
        201-216.


                                                                                    65
Savage, L. 1954. The Foundations of Statistics. New York: John Wiley and Sons.
Schuster, Eugene F. (1984). ”Classification of Probability Laws by Tail Behavior,”
       Journal of the American Statistical Association, Vol. 79, No. 388: 936-939.
Sokolov, A., P.H. Stone, C. Forest, R. Prinn, M. Sarofim, M. Webster, S. Paltsev, A.
       Schlosser, D. Kicklighter, S. Dutkiewicz, J. Reilly, C. Wang, B. Felzer, J. Melillo,
       and H. Jacoby (2009). "Probabilitistic Forecast for 21st Century Climate Based
       on Uncertainties in Emissions (without Policy) and Climate Parameters."
       Journal of Climate 22(19): 5175-5204.
Tol, Richard (1997) "On the Optimal Control of Carbon Dioxide Emissions - An
       Application of FUND." Environmental Modelling and Assessment, 2: 151-163.
US Interagency Working Group. 2013. Technical Update of the Social Cost of Carbon
       for Regulatory Impact Analysis Under Executive Order 12866. Washington,
       DC: Executive Office of the President.
van Vuuren, D., B. de Vries, A. Beusen, and P. Heuberger (2008). "Conditional
       Probabilistic Estimates of 21st Century Greenhouse Gas Emissions Based on
       the Storylines of the IPCC-SRES Scenarios." Global Environmental Change, 18:
       635-654.
Weaver, A., M. Eby, E. Wiebe, C. Bitz, P. Duffy, T. Ewen, A. Fanning, M. Holland, A.
       MacFadyen, D. Matthews, K. Meissner, O. Saenko, A. Schmittner, H. Wang, and
       M. Yoshimori (2001). "The UVic Earth System Climate Model: Model
       Description, Climatology, and Applications to Past, Present and Future
       Climates." Atmosphere-Ocean 39(4): 361-428.
Webster, M. (2002). "The Curious Role of Learning: Should We Wait for More Data?"
       Energy Journal 23(2): 97-119.
Webster, M., M.H. Babiker, M. Mayer, J. Reilly, J.M. Harnisch, M. Sarofim, and C. Wang
       (2002). "Uncertainty in Emissions Projections for Climate Models."
       Atmospheric Environment 36(22): 3659-3670.
Webster, M., A. Sokolov, J. Reilly, C. Forest, S. Paltsev, A. Schlosser, C. Wang, D.
       Kicklighter, M. Sarofim, J. Melillo, R. Prinn, and H. Jacoby (2012). "Analysis of
       Climate Policy Targets Under Uncertainty." Climatic Change 112(3-4): 569-
       583.
Weitzman, M. (2009). "On Modeling and Interpreting the Economics of Catastrophic
       Climate Change." Review of Economics and Statistics 91(1): 1-19.




                                                                                         66
