                               NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                    MEASURING ECONOMIC POLICY UNCERTAINTY

                                         Scott R. Baker
                                         Nicholas Bloom
                                         Steven J. Davis

                                       Working Paper 21633
                               http://www.nber.org/papers/w21633


                     NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                              1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                Cambridge, MA 02138
                                    October 2015




We thank Adam Jorring, Kyle Kost, Adulla Al-Kuwari, Sophie Biffar, Jörn Boehnke, Vladimir Dashkeyev,
Olga Deriy, Eddie Dinh, Yuto Ezure, Robin Gong, Sonam Jindal, Ruben Kim, Sylvia Klosin, Jessica
Koh, Peter Lajewski, David Nebiyu, Rebecca Sachs, Ippei Shibata, Corinne Stephenson, Naoko Takeda,
Sophie Wang and Peter Xu for research assistance and the National Science Foundation, the MacArthur
Foundation, the Sloan Foundation, Toulouse Network for Information Technology, and the Becker
Friedman Institute, Initiative on Global Markets and the Stigler Center at the University of Chicago
for financial support. We thank Matt Gentzkow, Kevin Hassett, Greg Ip, John Makin, Johannes Pfeifer,
Itay Saporta, Sam Schulhofer-Wohl, Jesse Shapiro, Erik Sims, Stephen Terry and many seminar and
conference audiences for comments. The views expressed herein are those of the authors and do not
necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.

© 2015 by Scott R. Baker, Nicholas Bloom, and Steven J. Davis. All rights reserved. Short sections
of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full
credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
Measuring Economic Policy Uncertainty
Scott R. Baker, Nicholas Bloom, and Steven J. Davis
NBER Working Paper No. 21633
October 2015
JEL No. D80,E22,E66,G18,L50

                                               ABSTRACT

We develop a new index of economic policy uncertainty (EPU) based on newspaper coverage frequency.
Several types of evidence – including human readings of 12,000 newspaper articles – indicate that
our index proxies for movements in policy-related economic uncertainty. Our US index spikes near
tight presidential elections, Gulf Wars I and II, the 9/11 attacks, the failure of Lehman Brothers, the
2011 debt-ceiling dispute and other major battles over fiscal policy. Using firm-level data, we find
that policy uncertainty raises stock price volatility and reduces investment and employment in policy-sensitive
sectors like defense, healthcare, and infrastructure construction. At the macro level, policy uncertainty
innovations foreshadow declines in investment, output, and employment in the United States and,
in a panel VAR setting, for 12 major economies. Extending our US index back to 1900, EPU rose
dramatically in the 1930s (from late 1931) and has drifted upwards since the 1960s.


Scott R. Baker                                         Steven J. Davis
Kellogg School of Management                           Booth School of Business
Department of Finance                                  The University of Chicago
2169 Campus Dr                                         5807 South Woodlawn Avenue
Evanston, IL 60208                                     Chicago, IL 60637
s-baker@kellogg.northwestern.edu                       and NBER
                                                       Steven.Davis@ChicagoBooth.edu
Nicholas Bloom
Stanford University
Department of Economics
579 Serra Mall
Stanford, CA 94305-6072
and NBER
nbloom@stanford.edu




Daily and Monthly Indices of Economic Policy Uncertainty are available at:
www.PolicyUncertainty.com
1. INTRODUCTION
    Concerns about policy uncertainty have intensified in the wake of the Global Financial
Crisis, serial crises in the Eurozone, and partisan policy disputes in the United States. For
example, the Federal Open Market Committee (2009) and the IMF (2012, 2013) suggest that
uncertainty about U.S. and European fiscal, regulatory, and monetary policies contributed to a
steep economic decline in 2008-09 and slow recoveries afterwards.1
        To investigate the role of policy uncertainty, we first develop an index of economic
policy uncertainty (EPU) for the United States and examine its evolution since 1985.2 Our index
reflects the frequency of articles in 10 leading US newspapers that contain the following triple:
“economic” or “economy”; “uncertain” or “uncertainty”; and one or more of “congress”,
“deficit”, “Federal Reserve”, “legislation”, “regulation” or “White House”. As seen in Figure 1,
the index spikes near tight presidential elections, Gulf Wars I and II, the 9/11 attacks, the 2011
debt-ceiling dispute and other major battles over fiscal policy. We extend our newspaper-based
approach to measuring policy uncertainty along three dimensions: back in time, across countries,
and to specific policy categories.
        To push back to 1900, we rely on archives for six major US newspapers published
throughout the last century. As shown in Figure 2, this long-span EPU index highlights pre-
World War II political developments and shocks like the Gold Standard Act of 1900, the
outbreak of World War I, the Versailles conference in 1919, and a sustained surge in policy
uncertainty from late 1931 when President Hoover, and then President Roosevelt, introduced a
rash of major new policies. The index also shows an upward drift since the 1960s, perhaps due to
rising political polarization or the growing economic role for government (Baker et al., 2014).
        Using similar methods, we construct EPU indices for eleven other countries, including all
G10 economies. These indices are particularly helpful in countries with fewer alternative
uncertainty measures. We also develop category-specific policy uncertainty indices for the US
by specifying more restrictive criteria for those articles that contain our triple of terms about the
economy, policy, and uncertainty. As examples, Figure 3 plots indices of healthcare policy
uncertainty and national security policy uncertainty based on the presence of additional terms
1
  “[W]idespread reports from business contacts noted that uncertainties about health-care, tax, and environmental
policies were adding to businesses' reluctance to commit to higher capital spending.” (FOMC minutes, 15-16
December 2009) See, also, IMF (2012, pages xv-xvi and 49-53, and 2013, pages 70-76).
2
  Our data are available at monthly and daily frequencies on www.policyuncertainty.com and are carried by
Bloomberg, Haver, FRED and Reuters.


                                                                                                               1
like “healthcare”, “hospital” or “health insurance” and “war”, “terrorism” or “department of
defense”, respectively. Category-specific shocks and policy initiatives are clearly visible.
       Our approach to measuring policy uncertainty raises potential concerns related to
newspaper reliability, accuracy, bias, and consistency. To address these concerns, we evaluate
our EPU index in several ways. First, we show a strong relationship between our measure of
economic policy uncertainty and other measures of economic uncertainty, e.g., implied stock-
market volatility. Second, we compare our index to other measures of policy uncertainty, e.g.,
the frequency with which the Federal Reserve System’s Beige Books mention policy uncertainty.
Third, we find very similar movements in EPU indices based on right-leaning and left-leaning
newspapers, suggesting that political slant does not seriously distort our overall EPU index.
       Fourth, we conducted an extensive audit study of 12,000 randomly selected articles
drawn from major US newspapers. Working under our close supervision, teams of University of
Chicago students underwent a training process and then carefully read overlapping sets of
articles, guided by a 65-page reference manual and weekly team meetings. The auditors assessed
whether a given article discusses economic policy uncertainty based on our criteria. We use the
audit results to select our policy term set, evaluate the performance of our computer-automated
methods, and construct additional data. There is a high correlation between our human- and
computer-generated indices (0.86 in quarterly data from 1985 to 2012 and 0.93 in annual data
from 1900 to 2010). The discrepancy between the human and computer-generated indices is
uncorrelated with GDP growth rates and with the level of economic policy uncertainty.
       Finally, our indices have a market-use validation: Commercial data providers that include
Bloomberg, FRED, Haver and Reuters carry our indices to meet demands from banks, hedge
funds, corporates and policy makers. This pattern of market adoption suggests that our indices
contain useful information for a range of decision makers.
       In Section 4 we assess the effects of EPU on the economy in two ways. First, we exploit
firm-level differences in exposure to a particular aspect of policy – government purchases of
goods and services – to estimate the effects of policy uncertainty working through one channel.
To do so, we use micro data from the Federal Registry of Contracts and data on government
healthcare spending to calculate the share of firm and industry revenues derived from sales to the
government. Next, in firm-level regressions that include time and firm fixed effects and other
controls, we find that firms with greater exposure to government purchases respond to policy



                                                                                                2
uncertainty with heightened stock price volatility and reduced investment and employment.
Adding the VIX as an explanatory variable (interacted with firm-level exposure to government
purchases), we still find strong effects of policy uncertainty on stock volatility, investment and
employment, which points to a policy uncertainty channel at work rather than a broader
uncertainty effect. We also find that firms in the defense, healthcare and financial sectors are
especially responsive to their own category-specific EPU measures, confirming the information
value of these measures and providing additional evidence of policy uncertainty effects.
         These firm-level results point to a causal impact of policy uncertainty on investment and
employment in sectors that rely heavily on government spending. But they offer limited guidance
about the magnitude of aggregate effects, in part because they capture only one specific policy
uncertainty channel (government purchases of goods and services).
         Our second approach fits vector autoregressive (VAR) models to US data and to an
international panel VAR that exploits our EPU indices for 12 countries. The US VAR results
indicate that a policy uncertainty innovation equivalent to the actual EPU increase from 2005-06
to 2011-12 foreshadows declines of about 6% in gross investment, 1.2% in industrial production
and 0.35% in employment. The 12-country panel VAR yields similar results. These VAR results
are not necessarily causal, but they suggest policy uncertainty shocks have material effects.3 One
interpretation of the micro and macro evidence is that policy uncertainty retards investment,
hiring and growth in policy sensitive sectors like defense, healthcare and construction, and these
sectors are important enough for policy uncertainty to matter at the aggregate level.
         This paper relates to at least three literatures. The first is research on the impact of
uncertainty on growth and investment. Theoretical work on this topic dates at least to Bernanke
(1983), who points out that high uncertainty gives firms an incentive to delay investment and
hiring when investment projects are costly to undo or workers are costly to hire and fire.4 Of
course, once uncertainty recedes, firms increase hiring and investment to meet pent-up demand.
Other reasons for a depressive effect of uncertainty include precautionary spending cutbacks by
households, upward pressure on the cost of finance (e.g., Gilchrist et al., 2014, and Pastor and
Veronesi, 2013), managerial risk-aversion (e.g., Panousi and Papanikolaou, 2012), and
3
  Stock and Watson (2012) use our EPU index to investigate the factors behind the 2007-2009 recession and slow
recovery and come to a similar conclusion – namely, that policy uncertainty is a strong candidate to partly explain
the poor economic performance, but causal identification is hard.
4
  Dixit and Pindyck (1994) offer a detailed review of the early theoretical literature. Recent empirical papers include
Bloom (2009), Bloom, Floetotto, Jaimovich, Saporta and Terry (2014), Bachman et al. (2013) and Scotti (2014).


                                                                                                                     3
interactions between nominal rigidities and search frictions (Basu and Bundick, 2014 and Leduc
and Liu, 2015).
        Second, there is a literature focused explicitly on policy uncertainty. Friedman (1968),
Rodrik (1991), Higgs (1997) and Hassett and Metcalf (1999), among others, consider the
detrimental economic effects of monetary, fiscal, and regulatory policy uncertainty. More
recently, Born and Pfeifer (2014) and Fernandez-Villaverde at al. (2015) study policy uncertainty
in DSGE models, finding moderately negative effects, while Pastor and Veronesi (2012, 2013)
model the theoretical links among fluctuations, policy uncertainty, and stock market volatility.5
        Finally, there is a rapidly growing literature on text search methods – using newspaper
archives, in particular – to measure a variety of outcomes. Examples include Gentzkow and
Shapiro (2010), Hoberg and Phillips (2010), Boudoukh et al. (2013), and Alexopoulos and
Cohen (2015). Our work suggests that newspaper text search can yield useful proxies for
economic and policy conditions stretching back several decades, which could be especially
valuable in earlier eras and in countries with fewer data sources.
        Section 2 describes the data we use to construct our policy uncertainty indices. Section 3
evaluates our EPU measures in several ways and develops additional evidence about movements
in policy-related uncertainty over time. Section 4 estimates the firm-level effects of policy
uncertainty and the dynamic responses of aggregate outcomes to policy uncertainty shocks.
Section 5 concludes and offers some thoughts about directions for future research.


2. MEASURING ECONOMIC POLICY UNCERTAINTY
    We build indices of policy-related economic uncertainty based on newspaper coverage
frequency.6 We aim to capture uncertainty about who will make economic policy decisions, what
economic policy actions will be undertaken and when, and the economic effects of policy actions
(or inaction) – including uncertainties related to the economic ramifications of “non-economic”

5
  In other related work, Julio and Yook (2012) find that investment falls around national elections, Durnev (2010)
finds that corporate investment becomes less responsive to stock prices in election years, Brogaard and Detzel
(2015) find that policy uncertainty reduces asset returns, Handley and Limao (2012) find that trade-policy
uncertainty delays firm entry, Gulen and Ion (2015) find negative responses of corporate investment to our EPU
index, and Giavazzi and McMahon (2012) find that policy uncertainty led German households to increase savings in
the run-up to the close and consequential general elections in 1998.
6
  Earlier drafts of this paper include index components based on (a) the present value of future scheduled tax code
expirations and (b) disagreement among professional forecasters over future government purchases and consumer
prices. However, to extend our EPU measures over time and across countries, we focus here on the newspaper
approach, while continuing to report the other components at www.policyuncertainty.com.


                                                                                                                 4
policy matters, e.g., military actions. Our measures capture both near-term concerns (e.g., when
will the Fed adjust its policy rate) and longer-term concerns (e.g., how to fund entitlement
programs), as reflected in newspaper articles. We first describe the construction of our monthly
and daily EPU indices for the US from 1985 onwards and then turn to indices for specific policy
categories, indices for other countries, and historical indices for the US and UK.
2.1 US economic policy uncertainty indices from 1985
        Our modern monthly EPU index for the US relies on 10 leading newspapers: USA
Today, Miami Herald, Chicago Tribune, Washington Post, Los Angeles Times, Boston Globe,
San Francisco Chronicle, Dallas Morning News, New York Times, and Wall Street Journal. We
search the digital archives of each paper from January 1985 to obtain a monthly count of articles
that contain the following triple: ‘uncertainty’ or ‘uncertain’; ‘economic’ or ‘economy’; and one
of the following policy terms: ‘congress’, ‘deficit’, ‘Federal Reserve’, ‘legislation’, ‘regulation’
or ‘white house’ (including variants like ‘uncertainties’, ‘regulatory’ or ‘the Fed’). In other
words, to meet our criteria, an article must contain terms in all three categories pertaining to
uncertainty, the economy, and policy. We use our audit study to select the policy terms, as
explained in Section 3.1.
        An obvious difficulty with these raw counts is that the overall volume of articles varies
across newspapers and time. Thus, we scale the raw counts by the total number of articles in the
same newspaper and month, which yields a monthly EPU series for each newspaper. We
standardize each newspaper-level series to unit standard deviation from 1985 to 2010 and then
average across the ten papers by month. Finally, we normalize the 10-paper series to a mean of
100 from 1985 to 2009. Figure 1 plots the resulting index, which shows clear spikes around the
Gulf Wars, close presidential elections, 9/11, the 2009 stimulus debate, the Lehman Brothers
bankruptcy and TARP legislation in late 2008, the summer 2011 debt-ceiling dispute and the
battle over the “Fiscal Cliff” in late 2012, among other events and developments.7
        In addition to our monthly index, we also produce a daily EPU index using the Newsbank
news aggregator, which covers around 1,500 US newspapers. Newsbank’s extensive coverage
yields enough articles to generate a meaningful daily count. Taking monthly averages of our
7
  Some notable political events do not generate high EPU according to our index. For instance, our EPU index
shows no large spike in connection with the partial federal government shutdowns from November 1995 to January
1996. We find more than 8,000 articles about these shutdowns in Newsbank archives, but less than 25% also
mention the economy, less than 2% mention uncertainty, and only 1% mentions both. Thus, politically tumultuous
episodes do not necessarily raise economic policy uncertainty, at least by our measure.


                                                                                                            5
daily index, it correlates at 0.85 with our 10-paper monthly index, indicating a high degree of
similarity. Because papers enter and exit the Newsbank archive, and its count of newspapers
expands greatly over time, compositional shifts potentially distort the longer-term behavior of
the daily EPU index. Hence, we focus below on our 10-paper monthly EPU index, but the daily
index provides a useful high-frequency alternative.8
2.2 EPU indices for policy categories
        To create indices for policy categories, we apply additional criteria to those articles that
contain our triple of terms about the economy, policy and uncertainty. The additional criteria
involve the presence of one or more category-relevant terms: “the Fed”, “central bank”, “interest
rate”, “inflation” and so on for the monetary policy category, for example. The appendix reports
the full set of terms that define our eleven policy categories and sub-categories. We use
Newsbank for the category indices, because its high text density facilitates measurement by time
period and policy category. As seen in Figure 3, the national security EPU index spiked sharply
in connection with the 9/11 attacks, Gulf War I and the onset of Gulf War II. The healthcare EPU
index rose sharply during the Clinton healthcare reform initiative in 1993-94 and has fluctuated
at high levels from 2009 to 2014.
        Table 1 reports all eleven category-specific EPU indices.9 It also reports an overall
Economic Uncertainty (“EU”) index that drops the policy requirement in the EPU index. The
first two rows report average EU and EPU values for the indicated periods, expressed relative to
the average EPU value from 1985 to 2014. For example, the EU value of 218.2 says the (scaled)
frequency of EU articles from 1985:1 to 1990:6 is somewhat more than twice the average
frequency of EPU articles from 1985 to 2014. The next eleven rows report relative frequency
values for specific policy categories and time periods. For example, the 54.1 value for “National
Security” says the frequency of EPU articles during 2001:9 to 2002:12 that mention national
security matters is 54 percent of the 1985-2014 average EPU frequency and 42 percent
(54.1/128.5) of the EPU frequency from 2001:9 to 2002:12.
        Fiscal matters, especially tax policy, stand out in Table 1 as the largest source of policy
uncertainty, especially in recent years. The fiscal policy EPU index rose from values near 33 in
the pre-crisis years to 61.5 in 2008:9 to 2009:12 and 78.3 from 2010 to 2013. Healthcare policy

8
 We update the daily EPU index at approximately 9am EST each day and post it at www.policyuncertainty.com.
9
  In contrast to Figure 3, which normalizes each category-specific EPU series to 100, Table 1 expresses each
category-specific EPU series as a percentage of the overall EPU frequency from 1985 to 2014.


                                                                                                          6
is the second largest source of elevated EPU in recent years. Policy uncertainty related to
financial regulations and entitlement programs also rose sharply after 2008, but from initially
lower levels. Concerns related to sovereign debt and currency crises are up by an order of
magnitude during 2010 to 2013, but from such a low base as to have little impact on the overall
EPU index. EPU concerns related to monetary policy are important throughout the 1985-2014
period, but perhaps surprisingly, they are not elevated in recent years by our measure. We
interpret this result as a reflection of low and stable inflation rates in recent years, which
apparently drive newspaper coverage more than disputes among professional economists about
unconventional monetary policies.10
         Several other researchers develop measures related to uncertainty about government
behavior. Marina Azzimonti (2015) constructs a newspaper index of partisan conflict at the
federal level that shows similarities to our EPU index but also notable departures – e.g., war and
national security threats produce declines in partisan conflict but increases in policy uncertainty.
Shoag and Veuger (2015) develop policy uncertainty indices for US states based on newspapers
and other indicators, finding a strong negative link to state-level economic performance.
Fernandez-Villaverde et al. (2015) estimate stochastic volatility processes for US capital taxes,
labor taxes and government expenditures in a DSGE model, finding correlations with our EPU
index of 0.44, 0.31, and 0.67, respectively. Jurado, Ludvigson, and Ng (2015) derive uncertainty
measures from common variation in the unforecastable components of macroeconomic
indicators. Their main uncertainty measure correlates at 0.42 with our EPU index.
2.3 EPU indices for other countries
         We also construct EPU indices for eleven other major economies. As with our US index,
we fist obtain a monthly count of articles that contain a triple of terms about the economy (E),
policy (P) and uncertainty (U). We then scale the raw counts, standardize each newspaper’s
variation, average across papers in a country by month, and normalize.11 To help develop
suitable E, P and U term sets, we consulted persons with native-level fluency and economics
expertise in the relevant language and country. Our P term set differs across countries for reasons
both obvious (e.g., using “BOJ” for Japan) and idiosyncratic (e.g., inclusion of “customs duties”


10
   Other evidence also points to subdued levels of inflation uncertainty in recent years. See Nalewaik (2015) for a
presentation and discussion of evidence based on time-series models, surveys and financial markets data.
11
   For certain papers outside the US, search platform limitations preclude us from scaling by the count of all articles.
In these cases, we instead scale by the count of articles containing the common and neutral term “today”.


                                                                                                                      7
for India). Appendix A lists the term sets and newspapers for each country-level EPU index. We
perform all searches in the native language of the newspaper, drawing on archives for seven
newspapers in India, six each in Canada and South Korea, two each in France, Germany, Italy,
Japan, Spain and the United Kingdom, and one each in China and Russia.12
        Figure 4 displays the EPU index for Russia, and Appendix Figures A1-A10 display the
other country-level indices.13 The Russian index responds to Russian military conflicts, major
political developments in Ukraine, the Russian Financial Crisis in 1998, the Lehman Brothers
failure in 2008, the 2013 “taper tantrum” triggered by a perceived shift in US monetary policy,
and other developments. While the Russian index is noisy, reflecting our reliance on a single
paper, it shows that our approach yields useful information even for countries with strong
restrictions on press freedoms. Looking at EPU indices across twelve countries, we see that a
wide variety of global and domestic factors drive movements in our newspaper-based measures
of policy uncertainty.
2.4 Long-span EPU indices for the US and UK
        We also construct long-span monthly EPU indices back to 1900 for the United States
(drawing on digital archives for the Wall Street Journal, New York Times, Los Angeles Times,
Boston Globe, Chicago Tribune and Washington Post) and the United Kingdom (Times of
London and the Guardian). Based on informal audits and our review of word usage patterns in
newspapers and other text sources, we expanded the E term set for the historical indices to
include “business”, “industry”, “commerce” and “commercial”. The expanded and narrower E
term sets yield very similar results in recent decades, but the expanded set seems to perform
better in the early decades of the 20th century. Based on results of the audit analysis described
below, we also expanded the P term set for the historical indices to include “tariff” and “war”.
        Figure 2 and Figure A11 in the appendix display the historical EPU indices for the US
and UK. Indices for these two countries exhibit both similarities and notable differences. For
example, the elevation of EPU levels in the 1930s is dramatic in the US but modest in the UK,
which experienced a less severe output fall during the Great Depression. World Wars I and II are
more prominent in the UK EPU series. Gulf Wars I and II are associated with sharp EPU spikes


12
   Censorship and state control of the media present special challenges for Russia and China. For China, we use the
South China Morning Post, the leading English-language newspaper in Hong Kong. For Russia, we rely on
Kommersant, which focuses on financial matters and is reportedly fairly free of government pressures.
13
   We provide regular monthly updates of the country-level EPU indices at www.policyuncertainty.com.


                                                                                                                 8
in both countries. The mid 1970s stands out as a period of unusually high EPU in the UK, which
suffered severe economic turmoil during the late 1970s and saw the resignation of Prime
Minister Harold Wilson, but not in the US. The post-1960s upward drift of EPU evident for the
US is absent for the UK. This long-span US-UK comparison reinforces our earlier inference that
a broad mix of domestic and international developments influences the extent of policy
uncertainty in any given country.


3. EVALUATING OUR POLICY UNCERTAINTY MEASURES
         As remarked in the Introduction, using newspaper-based measures of economic policy
uncertainty raises several issues about accuracy and potential bias. This section explains how we
sought to address those issues. We start with a discussion of our audit study, which relies on
human readings of newspaper articles. We use the audit study to select our P term set, compare
the time-series behavior of human and computer-generated EPU indices, and collect other
information about the nature of policy uncertainty. Next, we consider the role of political slant in
our EPU index. Lastly, we compare our newspaper-based index to other measures of uncertainty:
stock market volatility, the frequency of uncertainty and policy uncertainty discussions in the
Beige Books, the share of the “Risk Factors” section in firms’ 10-K filings devoted to
government policies and regulations, and the frequency of large daily stock market moves
triggered by news about government policy.
3.1 Audit Study Based on Human Readings
         We spent six months developing an audit process designed to evaluate and refine our US
EPU indices and another 18 months running a large-scale human audit study. During the latter
phase, student teams working under our close supervision read and coded articles drawn from
eight newspapers from 1900 to 2012.14 We now describe the audit process and results.
         Audit process: The authors began by reading a few hundred newspaper articles, typically
in batches of fifty, and comparing notes to develop classification criteria, an audit template in the
form of an Excel file, and the first draft of a guidebook for auditors. Early on, we concluded that
the largest payoff to an audit study involved selecting and evaluating the “policy” or P term set.
Accordingly, the formal audit study described below samples from the universe of articles that

14
   To construct our EPU index, it suffices to recover counts of articles that contain certain terms. In contrast, we
need full-text articles (machine-readable files or images) to carry out the audit study. We could not access full-text
articles for the Boston Globe or USA Today, but we did so for the other eight newspapers.


                                                                                                                    9
meet our “economy” and “uncertainty” criteria, which concentrates our (expensive) human
resources on samples that are highly germane for our purposes.15
         Next, we conducted a pilot audit. Working with a team of student research assistants, we
read and coded 2,000 randomly selected newspaper articles. To identify coding difficulties and
weaknesses in our training materials, we held weekly review sessions with the auditors and
assigned many articles to multiple auditors. We used the pilot study to develop a training process
and to refine our audit guide. The resulting 65-page guide serves as both a training tool and
reference manual in our full-scale audit. It explains how to assess whether an article meets our
criteria for economic uncertainty and economic policy uncertainty and how to code each field in
the audit template.16 The pilot study also led to improvements in the audit process. For example,
to ensure that auditor-learning effects are not confounded with differences across papers or over
time, the full-scale audit study presents articles to auditors in a randomized order.
         To conduct the full-scale audit, we recruited and trained new teams of research assistants.
Each new auditor underwent a training process that included a review of the audit guide and
template, trial codings of at least 100 articles (not included in the audit sample), a one-on-one
meeting to review the trial codings, and additional trial codings and feedback when needed. We
met with the audit teams on a weekly basis to address questions, review “hard calls” and coding
differences, and maintain esprit de corps. The auditors reviewed 12,009 articles from 1900 to
2012 that we selected using a two-stage approach:17 First, we specified a target sample size
(higher in 1985-2011 and certain key earlier years), and then we randomly sampled a number of
articles for each newspaper and month. To monitor audit quality and sharpen incentives for
careful work, we randomly assigned about one quarter of the articles to multiple auditors.
         Selecting a P term set: When an auditor codes an article as EPU=1, he or she also records
the policy terms contained in the passages about economic policy uncertainty. Using these
records, we identified 15 terms that appear often in newspaper discussions of EPU from 1985 to

15
   Only 0.5 percent of the articles in our 10 leading newspapers satisfy both the “economy” and “uncertainty”
criteria. Thus, the vast majority of all articles read by our auditors would be useless for selecting and evaluating our
P term set if we were to sample randomly from all newspaper articles.
16
   The guide includes coding instructions, numerous examples, and FAQs. For example, one of the FAQs asks “Are
remarks about uncertain tax revenues grounds for EPU=1?” and answers “Yes, if the article attributes uncertainty
about tax revenues partly or entirely to uncertainty about policy choices…. No, if the article attributes uncertainty
about tax revenues entirely to uncertainty about economic conditions …” The audit guide is available at
www.policyuncertainty.com/Audit_Guide.pptx.
17
   We reviewed more than 15,000 articles across the pre-audit phase, pilot audit, auditor training exercises and full-
scale audit, but we draw only on the 12,009 articles in the full-scale audit for our analysis here.


                                                                                                                    10
2012: “regulation”, “budget”, “spending”, “policy”, “deficit”, “tax”, “federal reserve”, “war”,
“white house”, “house of representatives”, “government”, “congress”, “senate”, “president”, and
“legislation” (and variants like “regulatory”, “taxation”, etc.). We then considered the
approximately 32,000 term-set permutations with four or more of these policy terms. For each
permutation, we generated computer assignments of EPUC = 0 or 1 for each article in the sample.
By comparing these computer assignments to the human codings, we obtain a set of false
positives (EPUC=0, EPUH=1) and false negatives (EPUC=1, EPUH=0) for each permutation. We
chose the P term set that minimizes the gross error rate – i.e., the sum of false positive and false
negative error rates. This process yields our baseline policy term set for the EPU index in Figure
1: “regulation”, “deficit”, “federal reserve”, “white house”, “congress”, and “legislation”.
         Appendix Figures B1 to B6 display alternative EPU indices constructed by dropping the
six baseline terms, one at a time. Inspecting these figures, it is apparent that the time-series
behavior of our EPU index is not particularly sensitive to any single policy term. We also
experimented with compound text filters, e.g., adding {government AND tax} to the baseline
term set. In this regard, we focused on terms that materially lowered the false negative rate
relative to the baseline term set.18 “Tax” is the leading example in this regard. Somewhat to our
surprise, we were unable to develop simple compound text filters that achieved a lower gross
error rate than our baseline term set.
         We repeated this process to obtain the P term set for the historical EPU index in Figure 2,
which makes use of all six terms in the P set for the modern index plus “tariff” and “war”.
Adding these two policy terms accords well with the prominent role of tariffs and tariff revenues
in the first half of the 20th century and with US participation in World Wars I and II, the Korean
War and the Vietnam War, all of which involved much greater per capita rates of US military
deployments and casualties than more recent military conflicts.
     Time-Series Comparison: We chose the P term set for our computer-automated EPU index
to minimize the gross error rate relative to the human benchmark provided by our audit study. To
assess the time-series performance implied by our automated classifications, we now compare
movements over time in human and computer-generated EPU indices. To do so, we compute the
fraction of audit-sample articles with EPUH=1 in each quarter from 1985 to 2012, multiply by the


18
  At the cost of even greater increases in the false positive error rate, of course – otherwise, the term in question
would have been part of the baseline set.


                                                                                                                  11
EU rate for our 10 newspapers, and normalize the resulting human EPU index to 100 over the
period. To obtain the corresponding computer EPU index, we instead use the fraction of audit-
sample articles with EPUC=1. Figure 5 compares these human and computer EPU indices. There
are differences between the two series – e.g., a larger spike for the summer 2011 debt-ceiling
dispute in the human EPU index – but they are quite similar, with a correlation of 0.86.
Repeating the same type of comparison using annual data from 1900 to 2010 in appendix Figure
C1, we find a correlation of 0.93 between the human and computer EPU indices.
    Figures 5 and C1 provide some assurance that our computer-automated EPU classifications
track the actual time-series variation in the intensity of concerns about EPU, as judged by
intelligent human beings. In this regard, it’s worth stressing that our term-set selection criterion
makes no use of time-series variation. So Figures 5 and C1 offer something of an independent
check on the performance of our automated classification criteria. However, it’s also important
to understand the limitations of these comparisons. They incorporate our computer-automated
EU assignments and, more fundamentally, they rely on the content of newspaper articles. We use
other methods, as discussed below, to assess the reliability of newspaper content for the purposes
of constructing an EPU index.
     For downstream econometric applications, we also care about the time-series properties of
net error rates in the computer EPU index. Calculating this net error rate from the series in Figure
5, we find that it is essentially uncorrelated with quarterly real GDP growth rates (correlation of
-0.02) and with the “true” (i.e., human) EPU rate in the audit sample (correlation of 0.004).
    Other Audit Results: Our audit study also speaks to several other questions related to our
EPU index. First, only 5 percent of audit-sample articles with EPUH=1 mainly discuss actual or
prospective declines in policy uncertainty. Apparently, reporters and editors do not regard falling
uncertainty as particularly newsworthy. Second, 10 percent of EPUH=1 articles discuss
uncertainty about who will make future economic policy decisions, 68 percent discuss
uncertainty about what economic policies will be undertaken (or when), and 47 percent discuss
uncertainty about the economic effects of past, present or future policy actions. Third, the share
of EPUH=1 articles that discuss who will make future economic policy decisions triples in
presidential election years, as compared to other years, indicating that the nature of policy
uncertainty shifts substantially over the election cycle. Fourth, 32 percent of EPUH=1 articles
mention policy matters in other countries, often alongside domestic policy concerns.



                                                                                                 12
3.2 Political Slant in Newspaper Coverage of EPU
     Our audit study does not address the potential for political slant to skew newspaper
coverage of EPU. If right-leaning (left-leaning) newspapers seriously overplay EPU when
Democrats (Republicans) are in power, political slant could distort measured changes in our
index. To investigate this issue, we split our 10 newspapers into the 5 most ‘Republican’ and 5
most ‘Democratic’ papers using the media slant index of Gentzkow and Shapiro (2010). They
assign slant values based on how frequently newspapers use words preferred by one party or the
other in their Congressional speech. For example, a newspaper that frequently uses “death tax”,
“personal accounts” and “war on terror” (terms preferred by Republicans) falls on the right side
of their slant index, and a newspaper that frequently uses “estate tax”, “private accounts” and
“war in Iraq” (terms preferred by Democrats) falls on the left side. Appendix Figure C3 plots the
“left” and “right” versions of our EPU index. They move together closely, with a correlation of
0.92. This finding suggests that political slant does not seriously distort variation over time in
newspaper coverage of EPU and is not a major concern for our index.
3.3 Comparisons to Other Measures of Uncertainty and Policy Uncertainty
       Another way to evaluate our EPU index is by comparison to other measures of
uncertainty and policy uncertainty. The most obvious comparator is the VIX, an index of 30-day
option-implied volatility in the S&P500 stock index, available since 1990. As seen in Figure 6,
the VIX and the EPU index often move together (correlation of 0.58), but they also show distinct
variation. For example, the VIX reacts more strongly to the Asian Financial Crisis, the
WorldCom Fraud and the Lehman Brothers collapse – events with a strong financial and stock-
market connection. In contrast, the EPU index shows stronger responses to war in the Gulf
region, the election of a new president, and political battles over taxes and government spending
– events that clearly involve major policy concerns but also affect stock market volatility.
       Of course, the two measures differ conceptually in several respects. While the VIX
reflects implied volatility over a 30-day look-ahead period, our EPU index involves no explicit
horizon. The VIX pertains to uncertainty about equity returns, while the EPU index reflects
policy uncertainty, and not just for equity returns. The VIX covers publicly traded firms only,
which account for about one-third of private employment (Davis et al., 2007). To throw some
light on the role of these differences, we create a newspaper-based index of equity market
uncertainty. Specifically, we retain our E and U term sets but replace the P term set with “stock



                                                                                               13
price”, “equity price” or “stock market”. The resulting index, shown in Appendix Figure C2,
correlates with the VIX at 0.73, considerably higher than the EPU-VIX correlation.19
        This result tells us two things. First, it demonstrates that we can construct a reasonable
proxy for an important type of economic uncertainty using frequency counts of newspaper
articles – a proof-of-concept for our basic approach. Second, the stronger correlation of the
newspaper-based equity index with the VIX confirms that differences in topical scope between
the VIX and the EPU index are an important source of distinct variation in the two measures.
        Other Text Sources: We also consider uncertainty indicators based on the Beige Book
releases before each regularly scheduled meeting of the Federal Open Market Committee
(FOMC). The Beige Book, published eight times a year, summarizes in roughly 15,000 words
the views and concerns expressed by business and other contacts to the twelve regional Federal
Reserve Banks. We count the frequency of “uncertain*” in each Beige Book, normalized to
account for variation in word count.20 We also read each passage that contains “uncertain*” to
judge whether it pertains to policy matters and, if so, we record the policy category.
        Figure 7 shows the resulting quarterly frequency counts per Beige Book (BB). It
highlights many of the same shocks and policy developments as the EPU index in Figure 1. The
quarterly time-series correlation between the EPU index and the BB policy uncertainty indicator
is 0.54. The BB policy uncertainty indicator shows little immediate response to the financial
crisis but begins to rise in the second half of 2009 and is at highly elevated levels from 2010 to
2013. In a categorical breakdown analogous to Table 1 (not shown), the Beige Books also point
to fiscal policy as the most important source, by far, of elevated policy uncertainty in recent
years. Financial regulation and sovereign debt concerns figure more prominently in the Beige
Books than in newspapers. In sharp contrast to newspapers, the Beige Books almost never
mention monetary policy uncertainty.
        Figure 7 also shows a policy uncertainty indicator based on textual analysis of 10-K
filings. For each 10-K filing, we count sentences in the Risk Factors section (mandatory since
fiscal year 2005) that contain one or more of the policy terms listed in Appendix C. We then
divide by the total number of sentences in the Risk Factors section and average over firms by


19
   We make no effort here to develop an optimal term set for the news index of equity market uncertainty, something
we are currently pursuing in other work. Instead, Figure C2 reflects our first attempt and can surely be improved.
20
   That is, we divide the raw frequency count by the number of words in the Beige Book and rescale to preserve the
average frequency count per Beige Book over the sample period.


                                                                                                                14
year to obtain the series in Figure 7.21 While the temporal coarseness of the 10-K filings
precludes fine-grained comparisons, our analysis reveals a strong upward drift after 2009 in the
degree to which firms express concerns about their exposure to policy-related risk factors.
         Daily Stock Market Jumps: Finally, following Baker, Bloom and Davis (2015), we
characterize all large daily moves (greater than |2.5%|) in the S&P stock index from 1900 to
2012. In each instance, we locate and read the next-day New York Times and Wall Street Journal
articles that cover the stock move. We record the explanation(s), according to the article, and
classify it as policy-related or not. The idea is that higher policy uncertainty leads to a greater
frequency of large equity market moves triggered by policy-related news. As seen in Figure C4,
we find precisely that. The correlation of the annual frequency count of daily stock market jumps
triggered by policy news and the annual version of the EPU index in Figure 2 is 0.78. The 1930s
and the period during and after the Great Recession stand out in both series.
3.4 Summary
         In summary, our audit study and comparison to other text sources and types of data
indicate that our newspaper-based EPU indices contain useful information about the extent and
nature of economic policy uncertainty. Compared to other policy uncertainty measures,
newspaper-based indices offer distinct advantages: They can be extended to many countries and
backwards in time, sometimes by a century or more. For large countries like the US, it is feasible
to construct useful newspaper-based indices at a daily frequency and by region. And newspaper-
based indices are readily disaggregated and parsed to develop category-specific indices.


4. ESTIMATING THE EFFECTS OF POLICY UNCERTAINTY
         To investigate whether policy uncertainty matters for economic outcomes, we take two
complementary approaches. The first uses firm-level data, yielding better causal identification,
but capturing only one channel of impact (government purchases of goods and services). The
second uses macro data in VAR analyses, capturing multiple channels of influence but offering
weaker identification of causal effects. Combining the two approaches, we conclude there is
evidence that policy uncertainty raises stock price volatility and lowers investment rates and
employment growth rates for firms in government-exposed sectors like defense, healthcare and

21
   The average length of the Risk Factors section of 10-K filings has grown steadily over time, perhaps because
firms are providing increasingly detailed discussions in this regard. For this reason, we prefer to scale by the total
number of sentences, so as not to overstate the rising importance of policy-related risk factors.


                                                                                                                  15
construction, and that these effects are large enough to matter for aggregate investment,
employment, and output.
4.1 Firm-level Analysis of Policy Uncertainty Effects
        Our firm-level analysis considers option-implied stock price volatility, as a proxy for
firm-level uncertainty, and real activity measures like investment rates and employment growth.
We use US panel data on publicly listed firms and an identification strategy that differentiates
firms by exposure to uncertainty about government purchases of goods and services. To measure
this exposure, we draw on two sources of information. For firms in Health Services (SIC 80), we
use the government share of US healthcare expenditures in 2010, which we calculate as 43.8% in
Appendix F. For all other industries, we exploit micro data in the Federal Registry of Contracts
from 2000 to 2013 as follows.
        As a first step, we match the federal contracts database to Compustat firms using DUNS
numbers and the names of the parent firm and their US subsidiaries.22 This match yields the
parent firm’s revenue derived from Federal contracts, which we allocate to 3-digit SIC industries
using industry codes and line-of-business data in Compustat. We then aggregate revenues and
contract awards to obtain the ratio of federal purchases to revenues in each 3-digit industry by
year. To smooth out high-frequency variation from lumpy contract awards, we average these
ratios from 2000 to 2013 to obtain our exposure measure for each 3-digit SIC. At the top end,
firms operating in the Guided Missiles and Space Vehicles and Parts Industry (SIC 376) derive
78% of their revenues (in SIC 376) from sales to the federal government. The corresponding
figure for selected other industries with high exposures to federal purchases is 39% for Ordnance
and Accessories (SIC 348), 27% for Search, Detection, Navigation, Guidance & Aeronautical
Systems (SIC 381), 21% for Engineering Services (SIC 871), 20% for Aircrafts and Parts (SIC
372), 15% for Ship and Boat Building and Repairing (SIC 373), 11% for Blank Books, Loose
Leaf Binders, and Bookbinding (SIC 278), and 9% for Heavy Construction (SIC 160). Direct
sales to the federal government are comparatively small in most other industries.
        In a second step, we measure each firm’s exposure to government purchases as its
revenue-weighted mean (across it lines of business) of the industry-level exposure measures


22
  We do so using Dunn & Bradstreet’s US database of all public and private firms, which includes a firm name,
DUNS number, industry and ownership information. In this way, we capture federal contracts of the publicly listed
parent firm (e.g. “General Electric”) and contracts with subsidiaries of the parent firm (e.g. “General Electric
Capital Services” and “USA Instruments”).


                                                                                                              16
calculated in the first step. If the firm operates in a single 3-digit SIC, then its exposure measure
equals the corresponding industry exposure measure. We prefer this two-step approach because
it may lessen the scope for reverse causality, and because industry-level measures may better
proxy for the firm’s ex ante exposure to uncertainty about government purchases. As we show in
our robustness investigation, results are similar for a variety of other exposure measures.
4.1.1 Implied Stock Price Volatility
       Table 2 displays results for the estimated effects of policy uncertainty on firms’ 30-day
implied stock price volatility. We obtain this measure from Options Metrics, which calculates the
30-day volatility implied by firm-level equity options. These options have been traded since the
mid-1990s on the Chicago Board of Options and Exchange (CBOE, 2014), and our data begin in
1996. We use this volatility measure in quarterly regressions to match the quarterly company
accounts, averaging the implied volatility measure over all trading days in the quarter. We run
regressions on a sample that runs from 1996 to 2012 and weight by firm sales, giving more
weight to the larger firms that also tend to have more actively traded equity options.
       Column (1) reports a very basic specification that regresses logged 30-day implied
volatility on our EPU index and the ratio of federal government purchases to GDP, a control for
the first moment of policy. Log(EPU) is highly statistically significant, with the coefficient of
0.432 indicating that a 1% EPU increase is associated with a roughly 0.4% increase in firm-level
implied volatility. To put this magnitude in perspective, our EPU index rose by 84 log points
(131%) from 2005-06 to 2011-2012, which implies an estimated upward shift of 36.3 log points
(44%) in average firm-level implied volatility. The negative coefficient on the control variable in
Column (1) says that, conditional on log(EPU), average firm-level implied volatility is lower
when the ratio of federal purchases to GDP is higher.
       Column (2) contains the key result. We add a full set of firm and time fixed effects to
control for unobserved factors that differ across firms and unobserved common factors that vary
over time. The log(EPU) and Federal Purchases/GDP terms drop out, as they are collinear with
the time effects. But we now interact these measures with our firm-level measures of exposure to
government purchases. This specification tests if firms with more exposure to government
purchases are more responsive to policy uncertainty movements. Intriguingly, we find very
strong evidence for such effects. The coefficient of 0.215 on the log(EPU)*Intensity measure




                                                                                                  17
suggests that for every 1% increase in our policy uncertainty index a firm with, say, a 50%
government revenue share would see its stock volatility rise by 0.11%.23
        Column (3) evaluates to what extent our EPU measure tells us anything different from the
VIX index, the most commonly used proxy for overall economic uncertainty. As noted in
Section 3.3, our EPU index and the VIX have a correlation coefficient of 0.58. Adding the VIX
in a specification without firm or time effects knocks out the statistical significance of the EPU
term, while the coefficient on the VIX is large (at 0.734) and highly significant. This result is
unsurprising since the VIX is the 30-day implied volatility on the S&P500 index, and it should
be highly correlated with the average 30-day implied volatility for publicly listed US firms.
        Column (4) again adds time and firm fixed effects, and we now interact the EPU, Federal
Purchases/GDP and VIX measures with the intensity of the firm’s exposure to government
purchases. Strikingly, we now find that the EPU index has a large and significant coefficient,
while the VIX drops out entirely. Combining columns (3) and (4) reveals that the 30-day implied
volatility is best explained by the VIX index for the average firm, but the EPU index provides
additional explanatory power for the implied volatility of firms in sectors with high government
exposure – like defense, healthcare, engineering services and heavy construction.
        Columns (5) and (6) run a similar evaluation for the Economic Uncertainty (EU) index,
yielding similar results. In column (5) we run a regression with the EPU, EU and Federal
Purchases/GDP measures, but no time or firm fixed effects. The EU index dominates with a
large and highly significant coefficient, knocking out the EPU measure. Again, this result is not
surprising – the EU index reflects the overall frequency of newspaper articles about economic
uncertainty, without any stipulation that these articles also discuss policy. Column (6) adds time
and firm fixed effects, and we again interact the key measures with each firm’s exposure to
government purchases. As before, the EPU measure dominates the general uncertainty measure
in the interacted specification with controls for firm and time effects. Indeed, the EU measure
now takes on the opposite sign. In summary, while the EU index is more closely related to the
average firm-level implied volatility in the specification (5) that excludes firm and time effects,
the EPU index outperforms the EU index in terms of explaining firm-specific movements in
option-implied volatility, and the EPU effects are large.


23
  Using a quite different empirical design and source of variation, Kelly, Pastor and Veronesi (2015) find evidence
that policy uncertainty related to election outcomes also raises option-implied stock market volatility.


                                                                                                                18
           Finally, in column (7) we add category-specific EPU measures from Section 2.2 for firms
in defense, healthcare and construction. Reassuringly, we see that all three of these measures are
positive and statistically significant at the 1 to 10 percent level. This result tells us, for example,
that implied volatility for defense firms is most responsive to the National Security EPU index,
which jumped up in Gulf Wars I and II and after the 9/11 terrorist attacks, as we saw in Figure 3.
Similarly, implied volatility for firms in the healthcare sector is especially responsive to the
Healthcare EPU index, which rose during the Clinton healthcare reform initiative and in response
to uncertainties surrounding the Affordable Care Act.
           Table 3 presents a wide range of additional robustness results for specifications that
include firm and year fixed effects. Columns (1) and (2) consider realized volatility and 182-day
implied volatility to look at longer and shorter uncertainty horizons, yielding very similar results.
Column (3) adds forecasts for government purchases relative to GDP24 (interacted with firm-
level exposure) as an additional control, and Column (4) uses actual future government
purchases relative to GDP (again interacted) as a control. Column (5) replaces our preferred
firm-level exposure measure (calculated by the two-step method described above) with a one-
step measure calculated directly from the firm’s own sales to the federal government. Column
(6) uses the Belo et al. (2013) measure of industry-level exposure to government purchases,
which exploits the input-output matrix to capture direct and indirect effects of government
purchases. Column (9) restricts attention to firms with at least $500 million in annual sales.
These alternative measures and specifications yield highly statistically significant results similar
to Column (2) in Table 2.
           Columns (7) and (8) in Table 3 consider two entirely different approaches to measuring
firm-level exposure to government policy risks. In column (7), we measure exposure by the slope
coefficient in a regression of the firm’s daily stock returns on our daily EPU index from 1985 to
1995, which pre-dates the sample period in Tables 2 and 3. Using this “beta” measure of policy
risk exposure, we again find positive and statistically significant effects of EPU on firm-level
volatility. In Column (8), we use the policy risk exposure measure that we derived from 10-K
filings and plotted over time in Figure 7. Now, however, we use that measure at the firm level,
averaging over available years. We again find sizable positive effects of EPU on firm-level
volatility, but the coefficient on the log(EPU) interaction term is less statistically significant than

24
     These forecasts come from the Federal Reserve Bank of Philadelphia’s Survey of Professional Forecasters.


                                                                                                                19
in the other columns, and the standard error is large. We lose more than one-quarter of our
sample when using this measure,25 which contributes to the loss in precision. Moreover, the
measure used in column (8) reflects the firm’s perceived exposure to policy risk factors from
2006 onwards only, whereas the regression sample starts in 1996.
        Finally, Appendix Table A1 returns to the baseline specification in Table 2 Column (2)
and replaces the key log(EPU) interaction term by log(EPU/X), where X corresponds to the
newspaper-based E (“Economy”), P (“Policy”), U (“Uncertainty), EP, EU or PU index. These
variants involve different choices about how to scale the EPU frequency counts. As shown in
Table A1, all of these variants yield slope coefficients on the key log(EPU/X)*Intensity variable
that are statistically indistinguishable from the point estimate in Table 2 Column (2), and all are
statistically significant except for the specification that uses log(EPU/EU). As we’ve already
seen in Table 2 Column (6), however, when we allow the log(EPU) and log(EU) terms to enter
freely into the interacted specification, the coefficient on the log(EPU)*Intensity remains large
and statistically significant. Thus, the main finding in Tables 2 and 3 does not rest on how we
scale the frequency of newspaper articles about economic policy uncertainty.
4.1.2 Investment Rates and Employment Growth
        Table 4 investigates how policy uncertainty affects firm-level investment rates and
employment growth. We now have data from 1985 to 2012 and, as before, weight by firm sales.
We use our preferred measure of the firm’s policy exposure intensity and a full set of time and
firm effects in all Table 4 specifications. Column (1) displays a regression of the firm-level
investment rate on log(EPU)*Intensity and (Federal Purchases/GDP)*Intensity. The former has a
significant negative coefficient of -0.032, and the latter has a significant positive coefficient.
These results are in line with standard predictions of investment-under-uncertainty models, e.g.,
Bernanke (1983), Dixit and Pindyck (1994) and Bloom, Bond and Van Reenen (2007).
        The magnitude of the estimated policy uncertainty effect is sizable. To see this point,
recall that the EPU index rose 84 log points from 2005-06 to 2011-12. For a firm that sells 25%
of its output to the federal government, this EPU increase and the coefficient on

25
  Several factors are in play. First, the SEC did not mandate a Risk Factors discussion before 2006, so we cannot
obtain this measure for firms that delisted before 2006. Second, some publicly listed firms are exempt from the Risk
Factors disclosure requirement, and some may not comply. Third, our web-scraping and automated text-reading
methods may not capture all relevant 10-K filings, perhaps because some firms present their discussion of Risk
Factors in an unusual format. Fourth, it is not always possible to match data from 10-K filings to Compustat. Our
match rates compare favorably to similar efforts by other researchers. See Appendix E for additional discussion.


                                                                                                                 20
log(EPU)*Intensity in Column (1) imply an investment rate drop of 0.67 percentage points
(=0.84*0.032*0.25*100), about one tenth of the average firm-level investment rate of 6.6
percentage points. Hence, for firms with high exposures to government purchases, the estimates
imply that elevated policy uncertainty in recent years materially depressed investment.
       In column (2) we control for (Forecasted Federal Purchases/GDP)*Intensity, given the
forward-looking nature of investment decisions, and obtain very similar results on the main
coefficient of interest. In column (3) we include the average (Federal Purchases/GDP)*Intensity
value in the next 12 quarters as an alternative control for future expectations, and again find a
significant negative coefficient on investment. Finally, in column (4) we add the category-
specific measures and find statistically significant negative effects for the Healthcare EPU index
and the Financial Regulation EPU index. That is, the frequency of newspaper articles about these
types of policy uncertainty has additional explanatory power for the investment rates of firms
that operate in sectors most affected by these types of policy.
       Columns (5) to (8) investigate the effect of EPU on annual firm-level rate employment
growth rates. (Compustat lacks quarterly employment data.) As with investment rates, we find
sizable and statistically significant negative effects of policy uncertainty on employment growth
rates for firms with high exposure to government policy. Consider again an 84 log point increase
in the EPU index and a firm that sells 25% of its output to the federal government. Given these
values, the coefficient of -0.213 on log(EPU)*Intensity in Column (5) implies a drop in the
annual employment growth rate of 4.5 percentage points. The only qualitative difference
between the investment rate and employment growth results involves the category-specific EPU
variables. They are statistically insignificant in the employment growth regression except for
(Financial Regulation EPU)*Intensity, which has a positive coefficient that is significant at the
10% level. Taken at face value, this potentially surprising result suggests that greater uncertainty
about financial regulatory policy post 2008 raised employment at firms in the financial industry.
       Finally, in column (9) we consider the impact on sales as a placebo test. While the real-
options literature highlights how uncertainty suppresses demand for input factors with
adjustment costs – the short-run impact on output should be smaller according to this class of
theories. Consistent with this prediction, the estimated effect of log(EPU)×Intensity in column
(9) is negative but not statistically significant, while the (Federal Purchases/GDP)*Intensity
variable remains positive and significant. Hence, our results suggest that policy uncertainty



                                                                                                 21
reduces near-term investment and employment for firms in policy-exposed sectors, but the near-
term impact on their output levels is more limited.
4.2 Policy Uncertainty and Aggregate Economic Activity
       As an alternative approach to evaluating the economic effects of policy uncertainty, we
now consider VAR models that exploit time-series variation at the country level. Drawing causal
inferences from VARs is challenging, in part because policy – and policy uncertainty – can
respond to current and future economic conditions. Despite the challenges, VARs are useful for
characterizing dynamic relationships, and they provide information about the magnitude of
policy uncertainty effects under certain identifying assumptions. At a minimum, VARs let us
gauge whether policy uncertainty shocks foreshadow weaker macroeconomic performance
conditional on standard macro and policy variables.
       We start by fitting a VAR to monthly US data from January 1985 to December 2012. To
recover orthogonal shocks, we use a Cholesky decomposition with the following ordering: the
EPU index, the log of the S&P 500 index, the federal funds rate, log employment, and log
industrial production. Our baseline VAR specification includes three lags of all variables. Figure
8 depicts the model-implied responses of industrial production and employment to a 90-point
EPU innovation, equal in size to the EPU index change from its average value in 2005-06
(before the financial crisis and recession) to its average value in 2011-12 (a period with major
fiscal policy battles and high EPU levels). Figure 8 shows maximum estimated drops of 1.2% in
industrial production and 0.35% in employment. These responses are statistically significant and
moderate in size, being about one-third as large as a typical business cycle fluctuation. Since
aggregate US investment data are not available at a monthly frequency, we also estimated an
analogous VAR model on quarterly data from 1985 to 2012, using the same type of Cholesky
decomposition to identify shocks. As shown in Appendix Figure C6, gross aggregate investment
exhibits a peak decline of about 6% in response to a 90-point EPU innovation.
       Figure 9 shows that the basic character of the impulse response functions is robust to
several modifications of the specification, variable set, causal ordering and sample period: six
lags instead of three in the VAR, a bivariate VAR (EPU and industrial production), a bivariate
VAR with reverse ordering, including the VIX (after the EPU index), including the EU index
(after the EPU index), dropping the S&P500 index, including time trends, and using a sample
period that runs from 1920 (when industrial production data become available) until 1984. These



                                                                                               22
results are very much in line with the estimated effects of election uncertainty in Julio and Yook
(2012) and Durnev (2010), despite their distinct empirical approaches.
        A potential concern is whether, and to what extent, our estimated impulse response
functions reflect bad news generally rather than policy uncertainty shocks in particular. Including
the S&P500 stock market index in the VAR mitigates this concern, given that stock markets are
forward looking and that stock prices incorporate many sources of information. Our baseline
VAR also includes other “first-moment” variables: log employment, log industrial production,
and the fed funds rate. Still, the EPU index may embed first-moment information not captured by
these variables. To investigate this issue, we also considered VARs that include the Michigan
Consumer Sentiment Index.26 When we place the Michigan index after the EPU index in the
causal ordering, the estimated peak effect of a policy uncertainty shock on industrial production
falls by about one-third (Appendix Figure C7). When we place the Michigan index first in the
causal ordering, the peak effect shrinks by about half. These results indicate that, conditional on
the other variables, our EPU index and the Michigan index contain overlapping information that
has value for predicting future output and employment movements.
        Perhaps this result is unsurprising. The Michigan index captures a mix of first-moment
and second-moment concerns, as expressed by households in survey data. The relationship
between “confidence” and uncertainty is a murky one, and the two concepts are tightly linked at
a deep level in some theoretical models, e.g., Ilut and Schneider (2014). In any event, the EPU
index has several important advantages relative to consumer confidence indices: EPU indices can
be extended to many countries, pushed back in time by a century or more in some countries,
computed in near real-time on a daily basis, and parsed in many ways as illustrated by our
category-specific EPU indices.
        Figure 10 shows impulse response functions for a panel VAR fit to monthly data from
1985 to 2012 on the twelve countries for which we have an EPU index. The panel VAR
specification parallels the baseline specification that underlies Figure 8, except that we use the

26
   The Michigan index reflects phone surveys of consumers and seeks to determine how consumers view the short-
term economy, the long-term economy, and their own financial situation. It takes the difference between the percent
answering positively and the percent answering negatively for each of 5 questions, then averages these differences
and normalizes by the base period (December 1968) total. The Michigan index has a correlation of -0.742 with our
EPU index. We chose the Michigan index as the more commonly used consumer confidence index, but other
consumer confidence indices are highly correlated with the Michigan Index – for example, the Bloomberg
Confidence index has a correlation of 0.943 with the Michigan index, and the Conference Board Confidence index
has a correlation of 0.912 with the Michigan index.


                                                                                                                23
unemployment rate in place of log(employment). As before, we rely on a Cholesky
decomposition to identify shocks and display responses to a 90-point EPU innovation, which is
well within the range of EPU movements experienced by the individual countries. The twelve-
country panel VAR yields results that are similar to the US results in Figure 8. In particular, the
international panel VAR implies that a 90-point EPU innovation foreshadows a peak drop in
industrial production of about 1 percent and a rise in the unemployment rate of about 25 basis
points. Appendix Figure C8 shows that the basic character of the panel VAR results is robust to a
variety of alternative specifications, variable sets, and weighting methods. Other researchers who
use our EPU indices in multi-country time-series analyses also find that policy uncertainty
shocks foreshadow deteriorations in macroeconomic outcomes (IMF, 2013).


5. CONCLUSION
   We develop new measures of economic policy uncertainty for the United States and eleven
other major economies. We use these new measures to investigate the effects of policy
uncertainty on firm-level stock price volatility implied by equity options, firm-level investment
rates and employment growth rates and on aggregate investment, output and employment. Our
findings are broadly consistent with theories that highlight negative economic effects of
uncertainty shocks. The magnitudes of our estimated effects suggest that elevated policy
uncertainty in the United States and Europe in recent years had material harmful effects on
macroeconomic performance.
   From a methodological perspective, we show how to tap newspaper archives to develop and
evaluate new measures of interest to macroeconomists, financial economists, economic
historians and other researchers. In this regard, it’s worth stressing that newspapers are available
for countries around the world, and they have circulated in similar form for decades in most
countries and for centuries in some countries. This ubiquity, coupled with modern databases and
computers, offers tremendous possibilities for drawing on newspaper archives to deepen our
understanding of broad economic, political and historical developments through systematic
empirical inquiries. As illustrated by our category-specific EPU indices and annotated charts,
newspapers also offer much potential for assessing the role of specific developments and shocks,
at least as perceived by contemporary observers.




                                                                                                 24
                                        References

Alexopoulos, Michelle and Jon Cohen, 2015. “The Power of Print: Uncertainty Shocks, Markets,
      and the Economy,” International Review of Economics and Finance, forthcoming.
Azzimonti, Marina, 2015. “Partisan Conflict and Private Investment,” NBER Working Paper
      21723.
Bachmann, Rüdiger, Steffen Elstener, and Eric Sims, 2013. “Uncertainty and Economic Activity:
      Evidence from Business Survey Data,” American Economic Journal: Macroeconomics, 5,
      no. 2 (May), 217-249.
Baker, Scott, Nicholas Bloom, Brandice Canes-Wrone, Steven J. Davis and Jonathan Rodden,
      2014. “Why Has US Policy Uncertainty Risen Since 1960?” American Economic Review,
      Papers & Proceedings, 104, no. 5 (May), 56-60.
Baker, Scott, Bloom, Nicholas and Davis, Steven J., 2015. “What triggers stock market jumps?”
      Work in progress presented at the January 2015 ASSA meetings.
Basu, Susanto and Brent Bundick (2014), “Uncertainty shocks in a model of effective demand”,
      NBER working paper 18420.
Belo, Federico, Vito D. Gala and Jun Li, 2013. “Government Spending, Political Cycles, and the
      Cross Section of Stock Returns,” Journal of Financial Economics, 107, no 2, 305-324.
Bernanke, Ben S., 1983. “Irreversibility, Uncertainty and Cyclical Investment,” Quarterly
      Journal of Economics, 97, no. 1 (February), 85–106.
Bloom, Nicholas, 2009. “The Impact of Uncertainty Shocks,” Econometrica, 77 no. 3 (May),
      623-685.
Bloom, Nicholas, Stephen Bond, and John van Reenen, 2007. “Uncertainty and Investment
      Dynamics,” Review of Economic Studies, 74, 391-415.
Bloom, Nicholas, Max Floetotto, Nir Jaimovich, Itay Saporta and Stephen Terry, 2014. “Really
      Uncertain Business Cycles,” working paper, Stanford.
Born, Benjamin and Johannes Pfeifer, 2014. “Policy Risk and the Business Cycle,” Journal of
      Monetary Economics, 68 (November), 68-85.
Boudoukh, Jacob, Ronen Feldman, Shimon Kogan, and Matthew Richardson, 2013. “Which
      News Moves Stock Prices? A Textual Analysis” NBER Working Paper 18725.
Brogaard, Jonathan and Andrew Detzel, 2015. “The Asset Pricing Implications of Government
      Economic Policy Uncertainty,” Management Science, 61, no. 1 (January), 3-18.
Campbell, John L., Hsinchun Chen, Dan S. Dhaliwal, Hsin-min Lu and Logan B. Steele, 2014.
      “The Information Content of Mandatory Risk Factor Disclosures in Corporate Filings,”
      Review of Accounting Studies, 19, 396-455.
Chicago Board Options Exchange, 2004. “VIX CBOE Volatility Index,” White Paper.
Davis, Steven J., John Haltiwanger, Ron Jarmin and Javier Miranda 2007. “Volatility and
      Dispersion in Business Growth Rates: Publicly Traded versus Privately Held Firms,”
      NBER Macroeconomics Annual, 21, 107-180.
Dixit, Avinash K. and Robert S. Pindyck, 1994. Investment Under Uncertainty. Princeton, NJ:
      Princeton University Press.
Durnev, Art, 2010. “The Real Effects of Political Uncertainty: Elections and Investment
      Sensitivity to Stock Prices,” working paper, McGill University, September.
Fernandez-Villaverde, Jesus, Pablo Guerron-Quintana, Keith Kuester, and Juan Rubio-Ramirez,
      2015. “Fiscal volatility shocks and economic activity,” American Economic Review,
      forthcoming.


                                                                                           25
Friedman, Milton, 1968. “The Role of Monetary Policy,” American Economic Review, 58, no. 1
      (March), 1-17.
Federal Open Market Committee, 2009. Minutes of the December 2009 Meeting,
      http://www.federalreserve.gov/monetarypolicy/fomcminutes20091216.htm.
Gentzkow, Matthew and Jesse M. Shapiro, 2010. “What Drives Media Slant? Evidence from US
      Daily Newspapers,” Econometrica 78, no. 1 (January), 35-71.
Giavazzi, Francesco and Michael McMahon, 2012. “Policy Uncertainty and Household
      Savings,” Review of Economics & Statistics, 94, no. 2 (May), 517-531.
Gilchrist, Simon, Jae W. Sim and Egon Zakrajsek, 2014. “Uncertainty, Financial Frictions, and
      Investment Dynamics,” NBER Working Paper 20038.
Gulen, Huseyin and Mihai Ion, 2015. “Policy uncertainty and corporate investment,” working
      paper, Purdue University.
Handley, Kyle and Nuno Limao, 2012. “Trade and Investment under policy uncertainty: Theory
   and Firm Evidence,” American Economic Journal: Policy, forthcoming.
Hassett, Kevin A. and Gilbert E. Metcalf, 1999. “Investment with Uncertain Tax Policy: Does
      Random Tax Policy Discourage Investment?” Economic Journal, 109, no. 457 (July), 372-
      393.
Higgs, Robert, 1997, “Regime Uncertainty: Why the Great Depression Lasted So Long and Why
      Prosperity Resumed After the War,” The Independent Review, 1, no. 4 (Spring), 561-590.
Hoberg, Gerard, and Gordon Phillips, 2010. “Product Market Synergies and Competition in
      Mergers and Acquisitions: A Text-Based Analysis.” Review of Financial Studies, 23, no.
      10, 3773–3811.
Ilut, Cosmin and Martin Schneider, 2014. “Ambiguous Business Cycles,” American Economic
      Review, 104, no. 8, 2368-2399.
International Monetary Fund, 2012, “World Economic Outlook: Coping with High Debt and
      Sluggish Growth”, October, IMF Press.
International Monetary Fund, 2013, “World Economic Outlook: Hopes, Realities, Risks,” April,
      IMF Press.
Julio, Brandon and Youngsuk Yook, 2012. “Political Uncertainty and Corporate Investment
      Cycles,” Journal of Finance, 67, no. 1 (February), 45-83.
Jurado, Kyle, Ludvigson, Sydney and Ng, Serena, 2015. “Measuring Uncertainty,” American
   Economic Review, 105, no.3 (March), 1177-1216.
Kelly, Bryan, 2015. “The Price of Political Uncertainty: Theory and Evidence from the Option
   Market,” Journal of Finance, forthcoming.
Leduc, Sylvain and Zheng Liu, 2015. “Uncertainty Shocks Are Aggregate Demand Shocks,”
   Federal Reserve Bank of San Francisco working paper, May.
Nalewaik, Jeremy, 2015. “Regime-Switching Models for Estimating Inflation Uncertainty,”
   working paper, Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, August.
Panousi, Vasia and Dimitris Papanikolaou, 2012. “Investment, idiosyncratic risk and
      ownership,” Journal of Finance, 67, no. 3 (June), 1113-1148.
Pastor, Lubos and Pietro Veronesi, 2012. “Uncertainty about Government Policy and Stock
      Prices,” Journal of Finance, 67, no. 4 (August), 1219-1264.
Pastor, Lubos and Veronesi, Pietro, 2013. “Political Uncertainty and Risk Premia,” Journal of
      Financial Economics, 110, no. 3 (December), 520-545.
Rodrik, Dani, 1991. “Policy Uncertainty and Private Investment,” Journal of Development
      Economics, 36, no. 2 (October), 229-242.



                                                                                          26
Scotti, Chiara, 2014. “Surprise and Uncertainty Indexes: Real-Time Aggregation of Real-
   Activity Macro Surprises,” working paper, Federal Reserve Board.
Shoag, Daniel and Stan Veuger, 2015. “Uncertainty and the Geography of the Great Recession,”
   AEI Economic Policy Working Paper 2015-07.
Stock, James and Mark Watson. 2012. “Disentangling the Channels of the 2007-2009
      Recession,” Brookings Panel on Economic Activity, Spring, 81-135.




                                                                                         27
 Table 1: Economic Policy Uncertainty by Policy Category and Time Period, 1985 to 2014
                                     1985:1-      1990:7-     1992:1-     2001:9-     2003:1 –     2007:7-      2008:9-      2010:1-     1985:1-
                      Time period
                                     1990:6       1991:12     2001:8      2002:12      2007:6      2008:8       2009:12      2013:10     2014:12
                                     Mid 80s                   1990s                   2000s        Early        Lehman      Fiscal
                                                   Gulf                    9/11                                                          Overall
                                     to Gulf                   boom                    boom        Credit      collapse &    Policy
                                                   War I                  attacks                                                        Average
                                      War I                   to 9/11                              Crunch       recession    Battles
 Overall Economic Uncertainty         218.2	     349.8	     185.9	     326.9	      159.8	     184.8	       370.9	     252.1	     219.3	  
 Economic Policy Uncertainty          109.6	     141.9	      88.1	     128.5	       71.4	      83.4	       132.1	     127.5	     100.0	  
 Fiscal Policy                         49.6	      59.6	      35.9	      55.4	       32.3	      33.1	        61.5	      78.3	      46.1	  
  - Taxes                              39.9	      48.4	      31.9	      51.2	       30.2	      31.4	        56.9	      68.1	      40.3	  
  - Government Spending & Other        22.7	      26.8	      12.1	      17.3	        8.5	       6.6	        17.1	      33.2	      17.1	  
 Monetary Policy                       32.7	      41.8	      26.1	      45.2	       22.2	      31.6	        27.8	      26.1	      28.1	  
 Healthcare                             7.0	      15.4	      14.9	      18.4	       13.1	      13.4	        29.3	      39.3	      17.3	  
 National Security                     25.0	      53.6	      18.0	      54.8	       25.4	      15.9	        21.3	      19.8	      23.8	  
 Regulation                            15.7	      23.0	      14.5	      19.6	       11.2	      15.5	        29.2	      28.1	      17.4	  
  - Financial Regulation                3.3	       7.0	       1.3	       5.3	        1.7	       3.6	        10.2	       6.1	       3.3	  
 Sovereign Debt & Currency Crises       1.4	       0.6	       2.3	       0.5	        0.4	       0.3	         0.4	       3.9	       1.6	  
 Entitlement Programs                   7.3	      12.6	      11.5	      18.7	        8.8	       8.2	        15.3	      24.7	      12.4	  
 Trade Policy                           3.8	       4.0	       6.3	       2.6	        1.7	       2.0	         1.4	       2.1	       3.8	  
 Sum of Policy Categories             142.5	     210.7	     129.5	     215.1	      115.2	     120.0	       186.3	     222.2	     150.6	  
 Ratio of EPU To Overall EU            0.50	      0.41	      0.47	      0.39	       0.45	      0.45	        0.36	      0.51	      0.47	  

Notes: Queries run 12 February 2015 on US newspapers in Access World News Newsbank, using the category-specific policy term sets listed
in Appendix B. Except for the last row, all entries are expressed relative to the average EPU frequency from 1985 to 2014. “Overall
Economic Uncertainty” quantifies the frequency of articles that meet our “economy” and “uncertainty” requirements (i.e., dropping the
“policy” requirement) and is also expressed relative to the average EPU frequency from 1985 to 2014. The category-specific index values
sum to more than 100 for two reasons: First, we use a few policy terms in more than one policy category. For example, “Medicaid” appears in
the term sets for both Healthcare and Entitlement Programs. Second, a newspaper article that meets the “economy”, “policy” and
“uncertainty” criteria can refer to more than one policy category.



                                                                                                                                             28
Table 2: Firm-Level Effects of Policy Uncertainty on Option-Implied Stock Price Volatility
Dep Var: Log(30-day implied vol)         (1)          (2)        (3)          (4)            (5)                  (6)            (7)
Log(EPU)                              0.432***               -0.044***                   -0.752***
                                       (0.010)                 (0.013)                     (0.027)
Log(EPU)×Intensity                                 0.215**                 0.228**                             0.545***         0.082
                                                   (0.069)                 (0.100)                              (0.202)        (0.117)
Log(VIX)                                                      0.734***
                                                               (0.016)
Log(VIX)×Intensity                                                          -0.020
                                                                           (0.117)
Log(EU)                                                                                   1.080***
                                                                                           (0.027)
Log(EU)×Intensity                                                                                              -0.301**
                                                                                                                (0.177)
Federal Purchases/GDP                   -19.30***                   -7.75***                    -17.40***
                                          (1.50)                      (1.49)                      (1.49)
(Federal Purchases/GDP)×                               -29.45*                    -29.70**                      -29.93*         -31.08
Intensity                                              (12.72)                     (12.36)                      (12.66)        (13.24)
Defense EPU*Defense Firm                                                                                                      0.048***
                                                                                                                               (0.012)
Healthcare EPU*Health Firm                                                                                                     0.071*
                                                                                                                               (0.043)
Financial Regulation                                                                                                          0.144***
EPU*Finance Firm                                                                                                               (0.030)
Firm and Time Effects                       No           Yes           No            Yes            No            Yes            Yes

Notes: The sample contains 136,742 observations on 5,624 firms from 1996 to 2012. The dependent variable is the 30-day implied
volatility for the firm, averaged over all days in the quarter. Intensity is the firm’s exposure to federal government purchases of goods
and services computed by the two-step method described in Section 4. Federal Purchases/GDP is from NIPA tables. Log(EU) is the
log of the newspaper-based Economic Uncertainty index. Defense EPU*Defense Firm is the National Security EPU index from
Table 1 multiplied by 1 for firms in the defense industry (SICs 348, 372, 376, 379, 381 and 871) and 0 otherwise, and analogously for
Healthcare EPU*Health Firm (SICs 800 to 809) and Finance EPU*Finance Firm (SICs 600 to 699). All regressions weighted by
average sales of the firm during the sample period. Standard errors based on clustering at the firm level.


                                                                                                                                       29
Table 3: Robustness Checks for Firm-Level Effects of Policy Uncertainty on Option-Implied Stock Price Volatility
                                  (1)           (2)           (3)        (4)          (5)          (6)         (7)         (8)        (9)
                                             182-day         Add     Add 12 qtrs     Firm-      Belo et                   10-K    $500m+
                               Realized                                                                       Beta
               Specification                 Implied     Purchase      Future        level     al. (2013)                 Risk       Sales
                               Volatility                                                                   Intensity
                                            Volatility    Forecast    Purchases    Intensity   Intensity                Measure     Firms
Log(EPU)×Intensity             0.346***      0.178***     0.175***    0.258***     0.192***    0.456***     0.283**      0.378*   0.237***
                                (0.089)       (0.073)      (0.070)     (0.086)      (0.045)     (0.101)     (0.118)     (0.217)    (0.071)
(Federal Purchases/             -23.72      -27.47***    -58.28***      -7.05       -14.20       -13.60      6.157       27.16      -31.03
GDP)×Intensity                  (14.71)       (11.77)      (15.35)     (16.74)      (10.03)     (27.64)     (14.97)     (64.17)    (12.40)
(Forecasted Federal                                       32.61***
Purchases/GDP)×Intensity                                    (6.27)
Firm and Time Effects            Yes           Yes           Yes        Yes          Yes         Yes          Yes         Yes       Yes
Observations                   136,742       136,742      136,742      73,822      136,742     134,544      133,465     112,123    42,785
Number of Firms                 5,624         5,624         5,624      3,189        5,624       5,537        5,489       3,817     1,070

Notes: The sample period is 1996 to 2012. The dependent variable is the 30-day implied volatility for the firm, averaged over all days
in the quarter, except that column (1) uses the realized daily volatility over the quarter, and column (2) uses the average 182-day
implied volatility. See the notes to Table 2 for additional variable definitions. Standard errors based on clustering at the firm level.




                                                                                                                                        30
Table 4: Cross-Firm Effects of Policy Uncertainty on Investment Rates and Employment Growth Rates
                               (1)         (2)         (3)          (4)        (5)         (6)         (7)         (8)          (9)
     Dependent Variable:       I/K         I/K         I/K          I/K       ΔEmp        ΔEmp        ΔEmp        ΔEmp         ΔRev

Log(EPU)×Intensity          -0.032***   -0.032***    -0.024**    -0.031***   -0.213**    -0.227**    -0.220**    -0.207**      -0.128
                              (0.010)     (0.010)     (0.011)      (0.010)    (0.084)     (0.089)     (0.118)     (0.084)     (0.096)
Δ(Federal Purchases/         8.20***     8.04***     12.12***     8.23***      10.79     15.60***       3.19       11.58      20.39**
GDP)×Intensity                 (2.86)      (2.86)      (3.18)       (2.87)     (7.41)      (8.04)     (12.56)      (7.58)      (9.43)
Δ(Forecasted Federal                        1.01                                         -4.65***
Purchases/GDP)×Intensity                  (0.828)                                          (2.89)
Defense EPU × Defense                                               0.094                                          -2.53
Firm                                                               (0.314)                                         (1.60)
Healthcare EPU × Health                                           -0.422*                                           1.16
Firm                                                               (0.231)                                         (1.42)
Financial Regulation EPU                                         -0.270***                                        0.636*
× Finance Firm                                                     (0.076)                                        (0.353)
Periodicity                 Quarterly   Quarterly    Quarterly   Quarterly    Yearly      Yearly       Yearly      Yearly      Yearly
3 Years Fed Exp leads          No          No          Yes           No        No          No           Yes          No          No
Observations                709,120     709,120      411,832      709,120    162,006     162,006      108,718     162,006     151,653
Number of Firms              22,358      22,358       14,190       22,358    17,151      17,151       13,018      17,151       15,929

Notes: The sample period runs from 1985 to 2012. All columns include a full set of firm and time effects. I/K is the investment rate
defined as CapExt/(Net Plant, Property and Equipment)t-1. ΔEmp is the employment growth rate measured as (empt - empt-1)/
(0.5×empt + 0.5×empt-1), and ΔRev is the corresponding revenue growth rate. Δ(Federal Purchases/GDP)×Intensity is the change in
(Federal Purchases/GDP) from NIPA tables in the next quarter in quarterly specifications and in the next year in annual specifications,
multiplied by the firm-level policy exposure intensity variable. Δ(Forecast Federal Purchases/GDP)×Intensity instead uses the
mean forecasted change in (Federal Purchases/GDP), drawing on NIPA data for the current values and forecast data for the future
values. See the notes to Table 2 for additional variable definitions. For presentation purposes, we scale the point estimates and
standard errors by 100 for the variables involving category-specific EPU terms. Standard errors based on clustering at the firm level.




                                                                                                                                    31
Figure 1: Economic Policy Uncertainty Index for the US, 1985 to 2014
              300                                                                                                       Debt
                                                                                                                       Ceiling




                                                                                                                                                Govt. Shutdown
                                                                                 9/11                                  Dispute

                                                                                                           Lehman




                                                                                                                                 Fiscal Cliff
              250




                                                                                                          and TARP
                                                                                        Gulf
                                                Gulf                                    War II
  Policy Uncertainty Index




                                                                          Bush                                      Euro
                                                War I                    Election
                    200




                                     Black                                                                          Crisis
                                    Monday                          Russian                        Stimulus
                                                    Clinton                                        Debate
                                                    Election      Crisis/LTCM
100       150 50




                             1985            1990          1995           2000               2005                 2010                                2015
 Notes: Index reflects scaled monthly counts of articles containing ‘uncertain’ or ‘uncertainty’, ‘economic’ or ‘economy’, and one or
 more policy relevant terms: ‘regulation’, ‘federal reserve’, ‘deficit’, ‘congress’, ‘legislation’, or ‘white house’. The series is normalized
 to mean 100 from 1985-2009 and based on queries run on 2 February, 2015 for the USA Today, Miami Herald, Chicago Tribune,
 Washington Post, LA Times, Boston Globe, SF Chronicle, Dallas Morning News, NY Times, and the Wall Street Journal.
Figure 2: US Historical Index of Economic Policy Uncertainty                                                          Debt
              300                               Great                                                         Lehman Ceiling
                             T




                                                                                                                                        Fiscal Cliff
                             Gold            Depression,                                                     and TARP
                             Standard Act     New Deal Great
                                                                                                         9/11




                                                                                                                   Gulf War II
                               McKinley        and FDR Depression
                               Assassination             Relapse                              Gulf
                                             Versailles                                                  Asian
                                                                                              War I
                                               Conf.                                                   Financial
                                                              Truman-                                    Crisis
                      200
 Policy Uncertainty Index




                                  Start of                                                   Black
                                  WW I                         Dewey                         Monday
                                               Immigration
                                               Act of 1924
                                                              election
                                                                                   OPEC I
                                                                        Wage &              OPEC II
                                                                        Price
                                                                        Controls
      100




                                                                                   Tet
              0




                            1900   1910     1920       1930   1940   1950   1960    1970     1980     1990    2000               2010
Notes: Index reflects scaled monthly counts of articles in 6 major newspapers (Washington Post, Boston Globe, LA Times, NY Times,
Wall Street Journal, and Chicago Tribune) that contain the same triple as in Figure 1, except the economy term set includes
“business”, “commerce” and “industry” and the policy term set includes “tariffs” and “war”. Data normalized to 100 from 1900-2011.
Figure 3: National Security and Healthcare EPU Indices, 1985 to 2014
                                                                                                       Affordable
                           Healthcare Policy Uncertainty
                                                                                                        care act
                           National Security Policy Uncertainty
                                                              Gulf War II
                                 Gulf
        400




                                 War I


                                     Clinton healthcare              9/11
          300
 Index Value




                                        reform effort
 200    100
        0




                1985       1990              1995               2000              2005               2010              2015
                                                               Year
Notes: Indices reflect scaled monthly counts of articles containing the same triple as in Figure 1 and one or more terms pertaining to
national security (e.g., “war”, “terrorism”, or “department of defense”) and healthcare (e.g., “healthcare”, “hospital”, or “health
insurance”), respectively, for the National Security and Healthcare indices. Each series is normalized to mean 100 from 1985-2009 and
based on queries run Jan 18, 2015 on Access World News Newsbank newspaper archive, which covers about 1,500 US papers.
Figure 4: Index of Economic Policy Uncertainty for Russia
                                 Kizlyar hostage crisis;
450                               PM Chubais resigns                                                                                                 Kiev
                                                      Second                                                                     Duma elections
                                                                                                                                  and protests Euromaidan;
       Acting PM                             Russian Chechen                                                                                       Crimea
400                                                                                                                              against election
      Gaidar resigns                         military  War                       Timoshenko                                                       annexation
                                                                                                                                      fraud




                                                                                                            Lehman Brothers Failure
                                             exits                                 resigns;
         Constitutional Crisis




350                                        Chechnya                              Terror attack
                                                                                  in Nalchik




                                                                                                                                                                    Taper Tantrum
                                                                                                                                                   Putin election
300
                                                   Russian                 Orange         Parliament




                                                                                                       Medveded election
                                                   financial             Revolution       dismissed
250                                                  crisis              in Ukraine       In Ukraine
                                                                 Putin                                                                  Terror
                                                               becomes                                                                attacks in
200                                                                                                                                   Nalchik &
                                                                  PM
                                                                                                                                      Stavropol
150




                                                                                                                                                                                    Conflict
100


                                   First




       2014 4 Ukraine
 50
                                  Chechen
                                    War
  0
       1993 4

       1994 4

       1995 4

       1996 4

       1997 4

       1998 4

       1999 4

       2000 4

       2001 4

       2002 4

       2003 4

       2004 4

       2005 4

       2006 4

       2007 4

       2008 4

       2009 4

       2010 4

       2011 4

       2012 4

       2013 4
      1992 10

      1993 10

      1994 10

      1995 10

      1996 10

      1997 10

      1998 10

      1999 10

      2000 10

      2001 10

      2002 10

      2003 10

      2004 10

      2005 10

      2006 10

      2007 10

      2008 10

      2009 10

      2010 10

      2011 10

      2012 10

      2013 10
Index reflects scaled monthly counts of articles in Kommersant with Russian terms for ‘uncertain’ or ‘uncertainty’, ‘economic’ or
‘economy’, and one or more selected policy terms. The series is normalized to 100 and runs from October 1992 to August 39 2014.
Figure 5: Human and Computer EPU Indices, 1985 to 2012, Quarterly

                                                                                                             Human


                  Computer
                                          Correlation=0.86




Notes: Index comparison from 1985 Q1 to 2012 Q1 based on 3,723 articles (4,388 audits) in the Chicago Tribune, Dallas Morning
News, LA Times, Miami Herald, NY Times, San Francisco Chronicle, Washington Post and Wall Street Journal. Series are plotted
quarterly to reduce sampling variability, with an average of 33 articles per quarter. Each series is normalized to 100 from 1985-
2009. See text for additional discussion of the audit process and this comparison.
Figure 6: U.S. EPU Compared to 30-Day VIX, January 1990 to July 2015
                                                                                                                      Lehman
                                           300                                                                        Failure, TARP
                                                                                                                                   Debt Ceiling
                                                                                                                                   Dispute




                                                                                                                                                                     60
                                                                                             9/11




                                                                                                                                                        Government
                                                                                                                                                        Shutdown
Economic Policy Uncertainty Index (Blue)




                                                                                                    WorldCom




                                                                                                                                         Fiscal Cliff
                                           250




                                                                                                    Fraud




                                                                                                                                                                     50
                                                                                                       Gulf
                                                                                                       War II
                                                                                                                              Euro-
                                                   Gulf
                                                                               Russian                                        zone
                                                   War I
                                                                               Crisis,                                        Crisis
                                           200




                                                                               LTCM




                                                                                                                                                                               40
                                                                               Default                            Stimulus
                                                        Clinton




                                                                                                                                                                       VIX (red)
                                                                                       Bush                        Debate
                                                        Election
                                                                          Asian       Election
                                                                          Financial
                                           150




                                                                          Crisis




                                                                                                                                                                     30
                                           100




                                                                                                                                                                     20
                                           50




                                                                                                                                                                     10
                                                 1990              1995               2000                 2005              2010                          2015
Notes: The figure shows the U.S. EPU Index from Figure 1 and the monthly average of daily values for the 30-day VIX.
 Figure 7: Policy Uncertainty Measures Based on Textual Analysis of the
 Fed’s Beige Books and Section 1A (Risk Factors) of Firms’ 10K Filings
                                                                                                    Debt
30                                                                           Gulf                   Ceiling      Fiscal                  13
            Beige Book Normalized Uncertainty Count
                                                                             War II                 Fight        Cliff
            Beige Book Normalized Policy Uncertainty Count
25                                                                                                                                       12
            Policy Share of 10-K Risk Factors                                            Tax Cut




                                                                                                                        Govt. Shutdown
                                                                                         Expiration
20                                                                                       Battle                                          11
           Black                           Tax Reform Act
           Monday             Gulf         and Healthcare                            Lehman
15                            War I        Policy Initiative                         Failure                                             10

                                                                       9/11
10                                                                                                                                       9

5                                                                                                                                        8

0                                                                                                                                        7
     1983 Q2
     1984 Q2
     1985 Q2
     1986 Q2
     1987 Q2
     1988 Q2
     1989 Q2
     1990 Q2
     1991 Q2
     1992 Q2
     1993 Q2
     1994 Q2
     1995 Q2
     1996 Q2
     1997 Q2
     1998 Q2
     1999 Q2
     2000 Q2
     2001 Q2
     2002 Q2
     2003 Q2
     2004 Q2
     2005 Q2
     2006 Q2
     2007 Q2
     2008 Q2
     2009 Q2
     2010 Q2
     2011 Q2
     2012 Q2
     2013 Q2
     2014 Q2
 Notes: The left scale shows frequency counts per Beige Book (normalized by word count) of “uncertainty” and references to policy
 uncertainty. The right scale reports the percentage of sentences in Section 1A (Risk Factors) of annual 10-K filings that contain one
 or more of the policy terms listed in Appendix C. The correlation between the Beige Book Normalized Policy Uncertainty Count
 and the EPU index is 0.54.
Figure 8: Industrial Production and Employment Responses to EPU Shock,
VAR Fit to Monthly U.S. Data from January 1985 to December 2012
                         1
                                                                             Notes: VAR-estimated
                                                                             impulse          response
                                                                             functions for industrial
IP Response, %




                                                                             production              and
                                                                             employment to an EPU
                         0




                                                                             innovation equal to the
                                                                             increase in the EPU
                                                                             index from its 2005-2006
                                                                             to its 2011-2012 average
                         -1




                                                                             value, with 90 percent
                                                                             confidence          bands.
                                                                             Identification based on
                                                                             three     lags    and     a
                         -2




                                                                             Cholesky decomposition
                               0   6   12         18        24       30   36 with      the     following
                                                                             ordering: EPU index,
                         .2




                                                                             log(S&P 500 index),
                                                                             federal reserve funds
Employment Response, %




                                                                             rate, log employment,
                                                                             log industrial production.
                         0
                         -.2
                         -.4
                         -.6




                               0   6   12         18       24        30   36

                                            Months after EPU shock
Figure 9: U.S. Industrial Production Response to an EPU Shock,
Alternative Samples, Specifications and Identification Assumptions
                                     .5


                                                                                                        Six months
                                                                                                        of lags
 Industrial Production Response, %




                                                                                                                          Adding EU
                                     0




                                                Reverse bivariate: log
                                                industrial production, EPU
                                                                                                                    Adding VIX
                                                                      Baseline
                                     -.5




                                                                      (+ symbols)
                                                                                                 Adding a
                                                                                                time trend
                                     -1




                                            1920-
                                            1984                                                             Bivariate: EPU and log
                                            Sample                           No S&P                          industrial production
                                     -1.5




                                                                             index

                                            0            6              12            18         24               30             36
                                                                             Months after EPU Shock
Notes: The baseline case involves the same sample period, VAR specification and identification as in Figure 8. The other cases
depart from the baseline as indicated. We place EU and VIX after EPU in the ordering. For the “1920-1984” response function, we
use monthly data from 1920 to 1984 on log industrial production and EPU in a bivariate VAR with EPU ordered first.
Figure 10: Responses to an EPU Shock in a Twelve-Country Panel VAR
                             0
                                                                                    Notes: Panel-VAR estimated
Industrial Production, %


                                                                                    impulse response functions
                                                                                    for industrial production and
                                                                                    unemployment to an EPU
                             -.5




                                                                                    innovation equal to the
                                                                                    increase in the average US
                                                                                    EPU value from 2005-2006 to
                                                                                    2011-2012,         with     90%
                             -1




                                                                                    confidence                bands.
                                                                                    Identification based on three
                                                                                    lags     and      a     Cholesky
                             -1.5




                                                                                    decomposition        with    the
                                                                                    following      ordering:    EPU
                                                                                    index,      log(stock     market
                                    0   6   12         18       24        30   36   index), unemployment rate,
                                                                                    and log industrial production.
Unemployment Rate Response




                                                                                    We use own-country data and
                                                                                    a full set of country fixed-
                             .4




                                                                                    effects in the panel VAR.
                                                                                    Country-level       data     are
                                                                                    weighted by the square root
                             .3




                                                                                    of the number of newspapers
                                                                                    used in the EPU index. Fit to
                                                                                    monthly data for Canada,
                             .2




                                                                                    China, France, Germany,
                                                                                    India, Italy, Japan, Korea,
                                                                                    Russia, Spain, UK and the
                             .1




                                                                                    US from January 1985 to
                                                                                    December         2012,     where
                                                                                    available.
                             0




                                    0   6   12         18       24        30   36
                                                 Months after EPU shock
                                                                     Not Intended for Publication

                                          Appendix
   A. Newspapers, Archives, and EPU Term Sets

United States (1985-, monthly): We search the LA Times, USA Today, Chicago Tribune,
Washington Post, Boston Globe, and Wall Street Journal using Proquest newspaper archives; the
Miami Herald, Dallas Morning News, Houston Chronicle, and San Francisco Chronicle using the
Access World News Newsbank service; and the New York Times using its own online archive.
Because the New York Times archive occasionally yields unstable article counts for recent dates,
we replaced the Times with the Houston Chronicle as of January 2014. In particular, after
rescaling the Chronicle’s EPU index to match the mean and variance of the Times prior to 2014,
we use EPU values from the Chronicle instead of the Times from January 2014 onwards in
constructing our 10-paper monthly index. The full set of policy terms is regulation, deficit,
legislation, congress, white house, Federal Reserve, the Fed, regulations, regulatory, deficits,
congressional, legislative, and legislature. Section 3.1 in the main text explains how we selected
this term set.

Let Xit denote the scaled EPU frequency country for newspaper i=1, 2, … 10 in month t, and let
 Τ1 and Τ2 denote the time intervals used in the standardization and normalization calculations.
For the United States, both Τ1 and Τ2 cover the period from January 1985 to December 2009.
To aggregate over newspapers and construct our monthly US EPU index, we proceed in the
following steps: (1) Compute the times-series variance, σ i2 , in the interval Τ1 for each paper i.
(2) Standardize Xit by dividing through by the standard deviation σ i for all t. This operation
yields, for each paper, a series Yit with unit standard deviation in the interval Τ1 . (3) Compute
the mean over newspapers of Yit in each month t to obtain the series Zt . (4) Compute M, mean
value of Zt in the interval Τ2 . (5) Multiply Zt by ( (100 / M ) for all t to obtain the normalized
EPU time-series index. We use the same approach for the other EPU indices described below.

United States, Historical (1900-2014, monthly): We rely on archives for the LA Times, Chicago
Tribune, Boston Globe, Wall Street Journal, NY Times and Washington Post from 1900 to 1984
and all ten papers listed above from 1985 to 2010. In constructing the historical US index, we
expanded the economy term set to include “business”, “industry”, “commerce” and
“commercial” in addition to “economy” and “economic”. We expanded the policy term set to
include “war” and “tariff”, as discussed in Section 3.1. We splice the 6-paper and 10-paper series
based on their overlap from 1985 to 1994 as follows: First, we adjust the 10-paper modern series
multiplicatively to match the standard deviation of the historical series. Second, we additively
adjust the modern series to match the level of the historical series during the overlap period.

United States (1985-, daily): We search archives for all daily-circulation US newspapers
available through Access World News Newsbank service. The US daily EPU index uses the
same term sets as the modern US monthly index.




                                                                                                42
Canada (1985-, monthly): We search the Gazette (from 1985), Globe and Mail (1985), Canadian
Newswire (1999), Ottawa Citizen (1986), Toronto Star (1985), and Vancouver Sun (1987) using
Proquest newspaper archives. The policy term set is spending, policy, deficit, budget, tax,
regulation, and “central bank”.

China (1995-, monthly): We search the South China Morning Post using Proquest. In addition to
meeting E, P and U requirements, an article must meet a “C” requirement to contribute to our
EPU count: in particular, it must contain “China” or “Chinese”. To meet our P requirement for
China, an article must satisfy the following text filter: {{policy OR spending OR budget OR
political OR "interest rates" OR reform} AND {government OR Beijing OR authorities}} OR
tax OR regulation OR regulatory OR "central bank" OR "People's Bank of China" OR PBOC
OR deficit OR WTO. We use this compound filter, because it outperforms simpler alternatives in
the audit study that we performed on 500 randomly selected articles that meet the E, U and C
requirements.

France (1987-, monthly): We search Le Monde (from 1987) using Lexis Nexis and Le Figaro
(from 2002) using Factiva. Our term sets are (E) economie OR economique OR economiques;
(P) taxe OR taxes OR impot OR impots OR politique OR politiques OR regulation OR
regulations OR reglementation OR loi OR “lois reglementations” OR depense OR depenses OR
deficit OR deficits OR "banque centrale" OR "BCE" OR "Reserve Federale" OR budget OR
budgetaire; and (U) incertitude OR incertain OR incertitudes OR incertains. To splice the two
newspaper-level sources and construct the EPU index for France, we proceed as follows. First,
we standardize the raw Le Monde EPU series to have unit standard deviation from 1987 to 2009
and normalize to 100 over the same period. Second, using the resulting standardized and
normalized Le Monde EPU series, we compute its standard deviation and mean from 2002 to
2014. Third, we multiplicatively standardize the Le Figaro EPU series from 2002 to 2014 to
match the standard deviation of the standardized/normalized Le Monde series from 2002 to
2014. Then we additively normalize the resulting Le Figaro series from 2002 to 2014 to match
the mean of the standardized/normalized Le Monde series from 2002 to 2014. Finally, we use the
standardized/normalized Le Monde EPU from 1987 to 2001 and the simple mean of the two
standardized/normalized newspapers from 2002 onwards.

Germany (1993-, monthly): We search Handelsblatt and the Frankfurter Allgemeine Zeitung
using each newspaper’s own archives. Our term sets are (E) wirtschaft OR wirtschaftlich; (P)
steuer OR wirtschaftspolitik OR regulierung OR regulierungs OR ausgaben OR bundesbank OR
EZB OR zentralbank OR haushalt OR defizit OR haushaltsdefizit; and (U) unsicher OR
Unsicherheit.

India (2003-, monthly): We search the Economic Times (2003), Times of India (2003),
Hindustan Times (2004), The Hindu (2003), Financial Express (2003), Indian Express (2003),
and the Statesman (203) using Access World News. All are English-language newspapers. The P
term set, which we developed in conjunction with Sanjai Bhagat, Pulak Ghosh and Srinivasan
Rangan, is regulation, deficit, legislation, reform, “fiscal policy”, “monetary policy”, “central
bank”, “RBI”, “Reserve Bank”, parliament, “finance ministry”, policymakers, “finance
minister”, lawmakers, “planning commission”, “economic advisor”, “Prime Minister’s Office”,




                                                                                              43
“PM Office”, “PMEAC”, “PMO”, “Lok Sabha”, tax, taxes, taxation, “excise duties”, and
“customs duties”.

Italy (1997-, monthly): We search the Corriere Della Sera and La Repubblica using Factiva. Our
term sets are (E) economia OR economico OR economica OR economici OR economiche; (P)
tassa OR tasse OR politica OR regolamento OR regolamenti OR spesa OR spese OR spesa OR
deficit OR "Banca Centrale" OR "Banca d'Italia" OR budget OR bilancio; and (U) incerto OR
incerta OR incerti OR incerte OR incertezza.

Japan (1988-, monthly): We search Asahi and Yomiuri using each newspaper’s own archives.
Leading Japanese newspapers routinely translate some of their articles into English, a practice
that greatly facilitated our development of suitable Japanese-language E, P and U terms. We first
identified Japanese newspaper articles translated into English that meet our EPU criteria. We
(i.e., our Japanese research assistants) then reviewed the Japanese-language versions of the same
articles to identify the Japanese terms that correspond to the English-language terms of interest.
Using this approach, we developed the E, P and U term sets set forth in the following table:

                  Term Sets for Japan EPU Index, with Translations to English
Category    English                   Japanese                       In Chinese Characters
            uncertainty        OR
        U   uncertain                 futoumei OR fukakujitsu        不透明 OR 不確実性
        E   economic OR economy       Keizai                         経済
        P   Policy                    Seisaku                        政策
            Tax                       Zei                            税
            government spending       saishutsu OR kokyo-jigyohi     歳出 公共事業費
                                      OR kokyotoushi OR kokuhi       公共投資 国費
            Regulation                Kisei                          規制
            Bank of Japan OR BOJ      nihonginko OR nichigin         日本銀行 日銀
            budget                    Zaisei                         財政
            Deficit                   akaji OR fusai                 赤字 負債
            Federal Reserve           Renpou junbi OR rengin



Russia (1992-, monthly): We search Kommersant’s own online archive from October 1992. We
use Ekonomika (economy) for our E term set and “неопределённый” (uncertain) OR
“неопределённость” (uncertainty) for our U term set. Our P term set is “politika” (policy),
“nalog” (tax). For “spending”, there are several corresponding Russian words. For spending by
the government, we consider a set of three terms: “rashody byudzheta” (budget outflows),
“gosudarstvennye rashody” (government spending), and “rashodovanie” (spending). We
translate “Regulation” as “regulirovanie”; Central Bank of Russia or CBR as “Centralnyj Bank
Rossii” or “CBR”; and “Senate” as “Gosudarstvennaya Duma” (or “Gosduma” or “Duma”). The
Russian counterpart to “White House” is “Kreml”. For “bill”, we use “zakon” or
“zakonodatelnyj akt”, which is a synonym of “zakon” but used in more formal context. We
translate “legislation” as ‘zakonodatelstvo’; “monetary policy” as “denezhnaya-kreditno
politika”; trade policy as “torgovaya politika”; and “interest rate” as “procentnaya stavka”.




                                                                                               44
South Korea (1990-, monthly): We search Donga Ilbo, Kyunghyang, Maeil Economic (from
1995), Hankyoresh Hankook and Korea Economic Daily (from 1995) using the Mediagon
archives. Our term sets are (E) economy OR economic OR commerce; (P) government OR “Blue
House” OR congress OR authorities OR legislation OR tax OR regulation OR “Bank of Korea”
OR “central bank” OR deficit OR WTO OR law/bill OR “ministry of finance”; and (U)
uncertainty OR uncertain. To construct the South Korean EPU index, we first standardize each
paper’s raw EPU rate to have unit standard deviation from 1995-2014. Using these standardized
and normalized newspaper-level series, we average across papers by month to obtain the overall
South Korean EPU index from January 1990 to December 2014.

            Term Sets for South Korean EPU Index, with Translations to English
  Category English Terms            Korean Terms                In Korean Characters
         U uncertainty OR uncertain bulhwaksilsung        OR 불확실성 OR 불확실
                                       bulhwaksil
          E economic OR economy gyeongje OR gyeongjeui             경제 OR 경제의
             commerce                  sangup or muyeok            상업 OR 무역
          P government                 jeongbu                     정부
            “Blue House”               Chungwadae                  청와대
            congress                   gukhoe                      국회
            authorities                dangguk                     당국
            legislation                jejeong OR jejeongbub OR    제정 OR 제정법 OR 입법
                                       ibbub

             tax                       se                          세금 OR 세
             regulation                gyuje OR tongje OR          규제 OR 통제 OR 규정
                                       gyujeong

             “Bank of Korea”           Hankukeunheng   OR          한국은행 OR 한은
                                       Haneun
             “central bank”            jungangeunheng              중앙은행
             deficit                   jukja OR bujok              적자 OR 부족
             WTO                       WTO OR Segye muyeok         WTO OR 세계 무역 기구
                                       gigu

             law/bill                  bub OR buban                법 OR 법안
             “ministry of finance”     gihwaekjaejungbu OR         기획재정부 OR 기재부
                                       gijaebu


Spain (2001-, monthly): We search El Mundo and El Pais using Factiva. Our term sets are (E)
económica OR economía; (P) impuesto OR tarifa OR regulacion OR politica OR gastar OR gasta
OR gasto OR presupuesto OR deficit OR "banco central”; and (U) incierto OR incertidumbre.

United Kingdom (1997-, monthly): We search the Times of London and the Financial Times
using the Access World News Newsbank service. Our term sets are (E) economic OR economy;




                                                                                           45
(P) spending OR policy OR deficit OR budget OR tax OR regulation OR “Bank of England”;
and (U) uncertain OR uncertainty.

United Kingdom, Historical (1900-2010, monthly): We search the Times of London and the
Guardian using the Proquest Historical Newspaper Archive. Our term sets are (E) economic OR
economy OR business OR industry OR commerce OR commercial; (P) spending OR policy OR
deficit OR budget OR tax OR regulation OR "Bank of England” or war or tariff; and (U)
uncertain OR uncertainty.

    B. Category-Specific Policy Term Sets (Figure 3 and Table 1)
To create the category-specific EPU indices shown in Figure 3 and Table 1, we consider articles
that contain our triple of terms about the economy, policy and uncertainty. We then check
whether the article also contains one or more category-specific policy terms, as listed below.
• Taxes: taxes, tax, taxation, taxed
• Government Spending & Other: government spending, federal budget, budget battle,
    balanced budget, defense spending, military spending, entitlement spending, fiscal stimulus,
    budget deficit, federal debt, national debt, Gramm-Rudman, debt ceiling, fiscal footing,
    government deficits, balance the budget
• Fiscal Policy: Anything covered by Taxes or Government Spending & Other
• Monetary Policy: federal reserve, the fed, money supply, open market operations,
    quantitative easing, monetary policy, fed funds rate, overnight lending rate, the fed,
    Bernanke, Volker, Greenspan, central bank, interest rates, fed chairman, fed chair, lender of
    last resort, discount window, European Central Bank, ECB, Bank of England, Bank of Japan,
    BOJ, Bank of China, Bundesbank, Bank of France, Bank of Italy
• Healthcare: health care, Medicaid, Medicare, health insurance, malpractice tort reform,
    malpractice reform, prescription drugs, drug policy, food and drug administration, FDA,
    medical malpractice, prescription drug act, medical insurance reform, medical liability, part
    d, affordable care act, Obamacare
• National Security: national security, war, military conflict, terrorism, terror, 9/11, defense
    spending, military spending, police action, armed forces, base closure, military procurement,
    saber rattling, naval blockade, military embargo, no-fly zone, military invasion
• Financial Regulation: banking (or bank) supervision, glass-steagall, tarp, thrift supervision,
    dodd-frank, financial reform, commodity futures trading commission, cftc, house financial
    services committee, basel, capital requirement, Volcker rule, bank stress test, securities and
    exchange commission, sec, deposit insurance, fdic, fslic, ots, occ, firrea
• Regulation: Anything covered by Financial Regulation and truth in lending, union rights,
    card check, collective bargaining law, national labor relations board, nlrb, minimum wage,
    living wage, right to work, closed shop, wages and hours, workers compensation, advance
    notice requirement, affirmative action, at-will employment, overtime requirements, trade
    adjustment assistance, davis-bacon, equal employment opportunity, eeo, osha, antitrust,
    competition policy, merger policy, monopoly, patent, copyright, federal trade commission,
    ftc, unfair business practice, cartel, competition law, price fixing, class action, healthcare
    lawsuit, tort reform, tort policy, punitive damages, medical malpractice, energy policy,
    energy tax, carbon tax, cap and trade, cap and tax, drilling restrictions, offshore drilling,
    pollution controls, environmental restrictions, clean air act, clean water act, environmental
    protection agency, epa, immigration policy


                                                                                               46
•   Sovereign Debt and Currency Crises: sovereign debt, currency crisis, currency crash,
    currency devaluation, currency revaluation, currency manipulation, euro crisis, Eurozone
    crisis, european financial crisis, european debt, asian financial crisis, asian crisis, Russian
    financial crisis, Russian crisis, exchange rate
•   Entitlement Programs: entitlement program, entitlement spending, government
    entitlements, social security, Medicaid, medicare, government welfare, welfare reform,
    unemployment insurance, unemployment benefits, food stamps, afdc, tanf, wic program,
    disability insurance, part d, oasdi, Supplemental Nutrition Assistance Program, Earned
    Income Tax Credit, EITC, head start program, public assistance, government subsidized
    housing
•   Trade Policy: import tariffs, import duty, import barrier, government subsidies, government
    subsidy, wto, world trade organization, trade treaty, trade agreement, trade policy, trade act,
    doha round, uruguay round, gatt, dumping

    C. Constructing a Newspaper-Based Measure of Equity Market Uncertainty.
        Our newspaper-based measure of policy uncertainty raises a basic question: Can
frequency counts of newspaper articles serve to quantify economic uncertainty in a useful
manner? To shed light on this question, we create a separate newspaper-based index of equity
market uncertainty and compare it to the market-based VIX, a widely used measure of
uncertainty in equity returns that is firmly grounded in option pricing theory.
        To construct a newspaper-based measure of equity market uncertainty, we parallel the
approach in Section 3.3 above. Specifically, we use the same newspapers, scaling methods and
search criteria – except for dropping the policy-related term set and, instead, requiring an article
to contain ‘stock price’, ‘equity price’ or ‘stock market’. Figure C2 plots the resulting
newspaper-based index of equity market uncertainty and the monthly average of daily VIX
values from 1990 to 2012. The two series are highly correlated. While the newspaper-based
index is clearly noisier, it picks up every major move in the VIX during the sample period.

    D. Constructing Indicators Based on the FOMC Beige Books (Figure 7)
        We reviewed all Beige Books from July 1983 to January 2015, covering more than 250
issues. For each instance of “uncertain*” in the Beige Books, we read the surrounding passage to
assess whether it refers to policy-related matters as a source of the uncertainty. If so, we treat the
passage as being about policy uncertainty, at least in part. In these instances, we also classify the
reference to policy uncertainty into one or more categories, similar to the ones in Table 1.
        Outside the first few years, each Beige Book contains a statement along the lines of
“Prepared … based on information collected on or before” a specified date. This date is typically
7-12 days before the release date. For the early years, we imputed the specified date based on the
average lag between the specified date and the release date in later years. Since Federal Reserve
System staff gathers information over a period of time on or before the specified date, we
subtract 14 days from the specified date to obtain an “effective” date for the information covered
by each Beige Book. We assign Beige Books to calendar quarters using effective dates.
        Given our uncertainty and policy uncertainty counts, we average over Beige Books
within a calendar quarter to obtain our indicators. Figure C4 displays these raw counts. Figure 7
displays normalized counts that adjust for word count differences across Beige Books.

    E. Text Analysis of 10-K Filings to Quantify Policy Risk Exposure (Figure 7)


                                                                                                   47
         In 2005, the U.S. Securities and Exchange Commission (SEC) issued a regulation that
requires most publicly held firms to include a separate discussion of “Risk Factors” in Part 1a of
their annual 10-K filings. This discussion is intended to alert investors to risks specific to the
company and industry. See Campbell et al. (2014) for an extended discussion and analysis.
         Our text analysis of the Risk Factors section covers 10-K filings in calendar years 2006 to
2014 (fiscal years 2005 to 2013). The vast majority of 10-K filings occur in March, and most of
the rest occur in February or April. We obtained machine-readable 10-K filings from the
EDGAR database, using a Python script with the urllib2 package. We drop filings with an empty
Risk Factors section. When a firm has more than one 10-K filing in the same calendar year, we
retime the “early” (“late”) filing if the firm has no filing in the prior (next) calendar year.
         For each 10-K filing, we count the number of sentences in the Risk Factors section that
contains one or more of the following policy-relevant terms: government, political, legislative,
legislation, congress, white house, regulation(s), regulatory, tax(es), fiscal polic(y/ies), monetary
polic(y/ies), federal reserve, the fed, central bank, tariff(s), trade quota(s), antitrust, competition
polic(y/ies), war(s), national security, government spending, defense spending, defense
polic(y/ies), energy polic(y/ies), healthcare polic(y/ies), affordable care act, tort reform, import
restriction(s), export restriction(s), investment restriction(s), patent polic(y/ies), patent law,
trademark polic(y/ies), trademark law, copyright polic(y/ies), copyright law. Dividing this
sentence count by the total number of sentences in the Risk Factors section yields our firm-year
measure of exposure to policy-related risk factors. Averaging this ratio over firms by year yields
the “Policy Share of 10-K Risk Factors” in Figure 7. Averaging over years for a given firm
yields the 10-K policy risk exposure measure that we use in our firm-level panel regressions.
         The following table reports data on the number of firms for which we obtained the Risk
Factors section from 10-K filings on the Edgar Database. The second-to-last column shows the
number of firm-level observations per year used in Figure 7. The last column shows the number
of 10-K filings with a non-empty Risk Factors section that we match to Compustat using the CIK
identifier. Our match rate ranges from 70 to 76 percent across years.

             Number of 10-Ks Identified         Number with Risk Factors Section Extracted
   Filing       All    Less Same-Date                      All Non-    After      Matched to
   Year                   Duplicates              All       Empty    Retiming Compustat
   2006        8852         8821                 7161        5305      5319          4071
   2007        8574         8524                 6839        4995      4972          3770
   2008        8746         8641                 7154        5443      5443          4100
   2009        9839         9785                 7552        6242      6230          4356
   2010        9165         9095                 7442        6102      6109          4304
   2011        8840         8750                 8177        6731      6715          4751
   2012        8393         8333                 7908        6360      6369          4693
   2013        8105         7998                 7642        6096      6081          4597
   2014        8084         7955                 7591        6021      6049          4578


   F. Data on Federal Contracts and Government Healthcare Expenditures
      We obtain data on federal contracts from 1999 to 2013 at USAspending.gov, a website
mandated by the Federal Funding Accountability and Transparency Act of 2006. The site reports


                                                                                                    48
individual federal contracts and includes information about the originating agency, contract
recipient, contract amount, location of performance, and characteristics of the contract and
recipient. We use information about the contract recipient and its parent company, if applicable,
plus the date and contract amount. Unfortunately, most contract records do not include GV keys,
stock tickers, or other unique firm identifiers that allow easy matching to external sources of data
about the contract recipient. We match contracts to firms using DUNS numbers, when available;
otherwise, we match on standardized names for contract recipients and parent firms.
        To standardize firm names, we perform standard cleaning operations: removing
punctuation and abbreviations, deleting excess spacing, replacing common misspellings,
removing parentheticals, and other techniques to standardize firm names. We perform these
operations on the universe of federal contract recipients and on the universe of ORBIS firms. We
then match to ORBIS firm data by, in sequence, own DUNS number, parent DUNS number, own
firm name, and parent firm name. Next, we use stock ticker data from ORBIS to match to
quarterly Compustat data on publicly held firms. Using this procedure, we match about 45
percent of the contract awards and more than 65 percent of aggregate contract volume to
Compustat firms. Imperfect matching accounts for a portion of the residual, but contract awards
to independent privately held firms and public entities are the main reason we do not match all
contract recipients. Public universities, states, and cities are some of the largest recipients of
federal contract awards, and privately held firms account for a large share of private sector
activity in the United States (Davis et al., 2007).
        Using the matched dataset, we construct two sets of firm-level measures of federal
contract intensity (hereafter, ‘intensity’) to provide cross-sectional variance in exposure to one
aspect of policy uncertainty. The first is a measure at the three-digit SIC code level. Here we
simply take the overall sum of contracts and sum of revenue by three-digit SIC code by year and
take the ratio of the total contracts to total revenue, yielding an annual intensity measure. Finally,
we take the average of these values by three-digit SIC code over time and apply the long-run
average to that industry for all firms and years in the sample.
        The second method uses firm segment data from Compustat in order to distribute both
firm revenue and firm contracts to each of their component segments (defined by four-digit SIC
codes). For instance, if one segment of a firm produces 50% of its revenue, we assign that
segment 50% of contracts, as well. With this distribution completed, we sum contract dollars and
revenue across four-digit SIC codes by year, obtaining four-digit SIC code level intensity
measures, as in the three-digit SIC code approach. Using the four-digit SIC code intensities, we
reconstruct a firm’s intensity based on its segment composition (so a firm with 50% of its
revenue in one four-digit SIC code and 50% in another takes the simple average of the two SIC
codes’ intensity levels). This approach yields firm-level variation in cross-sectional intensity of
government contracting based on the four-digit SIC code makeup of each firm.
        We obtain data on government and total national health expenditures for the United
States from http://www.cms.gov/Research-Statistics-Data-and-Systems/Statistics-Trends-and-
Reports/NationalHealthExpendData/Downloads/NHE2013.zip. To obtain the government share,
we sum health expenditures under Medicare, Medicaid, the Department of Defense, the
Department of Veterans Affairs and the Children’s Health Insurance Program for 2010, then
divide by total national health expenditures for 2010. This yields a value of 43.75 percent, which
we assign to firms in SIC 800 (scaled by the firm’s share of revenues in SIC 800).




                                                                                                   49
Table A1: Effects on Firm-Level Implied Stock Price Volatility When Scaling EPU by its Components
Dep Var: Log(30-day implied vol)           (1)         (2)          (3)          (4)          (5)                     (6)          (7)
Log(EPU)×Intensity                      0.215***
                                         (0.069)
Log(EPU/E)×Intensity                                0.253***
                                                     (0.089)
Log(EPU/P)×Intensity                                             0.206***
                                                                  (0.069)
Log(EPU/U)×Intensity                                                          0.215**
                                                                               (0.104)
Log(EPU/EP)×Intensity                                                                      0.223**
                                                                                           (0.100)
Log(EPU/EU)×Intensity                                                                                                0.103
                                                                                                                    (0.175)
Log(EPU/PU)×Intensity                                                                                                            0.262**
                                                                                                                                 (0.110)
(Federal Purchases/GDP) ×Intensity          -29.449**     -26.932**     -29.171**      -28.825**      -25.747**    -24.629*     -28.50**
                                             (12.723)      (12.926)      (12.742)       (12.755)       (13.090)    (13.276)      (13.00)
F-test EPU coefficient=0.215                    n/a          0.673         0.902          0.998          0.936       0.524        0.669

Notes: The sample contains 136,742 observations on 5,624 firms from 1996 to 2012. The dependent variable is the 30-day implied
volatility for the firm, averaged over all days in the quarter. All regressions include a full set of firm and time fixed effects.
Log(EPU)×Intensity is the log of the EPU index, multiplied by the firm’s exposure to federal government purchases of goods and
services computed by the two-step method described in Section 4. Log(EPU/E)×Intensity is the same except that it scales the EPU
index by the newspaper-based index for the frequency of articles that satisfy our E (“Economy”) criteria. Likewise, other rows
consider analogs that scale the EPU index by newspaper-based indices that satisfy our P, U, EP, EU and PU criteria. F-test EPU
coefficient=0.215 tests whether the coefficient on the (scaled) EPU interaction is significantly different from the point estimate for the
baseline regression in column (1). All regressions weighted by the firm’s average sales during the sample period. Standard errors
based on clustering at the firm level.




                                                                                                                                         50
 Figure A1: EPU Index for Canada, January 1985 to January 2015
               400
                                                                            US Fiscal Policy Battles,
                                                                            Eurozone Crises

                                                                           Lehman Failure,
                                                                           Global Financial Crisis,
                                                                           General Elections
                       300




                                            Clinton
Policy Uncertainty Index




                                            Election     Quebec
                                                       Referendum
                                                                Commodity
                                                                  Price   9/11 Gulf
                                    Gulf
           200




                                                                  Slump        War II
                                    War I
100            0




                             1985   1990               1995          2000               2005                2010                2015
  Notes: Index reflects scaled monthly counts of articles containing ‘uncertain’ or ‘uncertainty’, ‘economic’ or ‘economy’, and one or
  more policy-relevant terms: ‘tax’, ‘policy’, ‘regulation’, ‘spending’, ‘deficit’, ‘budget’, or ‘central bank’. The series is normalized to
  mean 100 from 1985 to 2010 and based on the following newspapers: The Gazette, The Globe and Mail, Canadian Newswire,
  the Ottawa Citizen, Toronto Star, and the Vancouver Sun.
   Figure A2: EPU Index for China, January 1995 to January 2015
                           400
                                                                         Eurozone and                            Political
                                                                         Protectionism Fears                     Transition
                                                                                                                 and New
                                                                                                                 National
                                                                                     Inflation and               Congress
                                                 9/11                                Export Pressure
                           300




                                                                                                                          Growth
Policy Uncertainty Index




                                                        Deflation and
                                                                                                                          Slowdown
                                                        Deficit Concerns
                                                                                                                          Concerns
                           200




                                                                                China
                                                                Rising          Stimulus
                                                                Interest
                                                                Rates
                           100
                           0




                                 1996   1999     2002              2005              2008             2011              2014
Notes: Index reflects scaled monthly counts of articles containing ‘China’ or ‘Chinese’, ‘uncertain’ or ‘uncertainty’, ‘economic’ or
‘economy’ and satisfying the ‘policy’ text filter specified for China in Appendix A. The series is normalized to mean 100 from 1985 to
2011 and based on the South China Morning Post, the leading English-language newspaper in Hong Kong.
   Figure A3: EPU Index for France, January 1987 to July 2015                                                              Greek Crisis
                                                                                                                           Intensifies;
                           600                                                                                              Concerns
                                                                                     Bear Stearns,                         Mount over
                                                                                     Northern Rock,            Greek      French Banks
                                                                                     BNP Paribas               Crisis

                                                                         UMP Routed in
                                                                         Regional Elections,
Policy Uncertainty Index




                                                                         Sarkozy Becomes
                                                                                                         Lehman
                           400




                                                                         UMP Leader
                                                                                                         Failure

                                             European                           Gulf
                                             Currency                           War II
                                             Crisis, Franc
                                             Devaluation
                           200




                                          Gulf
                                          War I
                                                                           9/11                                      Eurozone Stresses



                                                                                          French and Dutch Voters
                           0




                                                                                         Reject European Constitution

                                 1987 1989 1991 1993 1995 1997 1999 2001 2003 2005 2007 2009 2011 2013
  Notes: Index reflects scaled monthly counts of articles containing ‘uncertain’ or ‘uncertainty’, ‘economic’ or ‘economy’, and one or
  more policy-relevant terms: ‘tax’, ‘policy’, ‘regulation’, ‘spending’, ‘deficit’, ‘budget’, or ‘central bank’. The series is normalized to
  mean 100 from 1997 to 2009 and based on the following newspapers: Le Monde and Le Figaro.
   Figure A4: EPU Index for Germany, January 1997 to January 2015
                                                                                                                  Italy                Papandreou
                           400

                                                                                                               Rating Cut                 calls for
                                                                                                                                       referendum;
                                                                                                    Lehman                             later resigns
                                                                                                     Failure
                                                                                                                                        Continuing
                           300




                                                                                       Northern Rock
                                                          9/11                                                                          Eurozone
Policy Uncertainty Index




                                                                                         Support/                 Greek                  Stresses
                                                                 Gulf                    Takeover                 Bailout
                                                                 War II                                          Request,
                                                                                 German
                                                                                                                  Rating
                                                                                 Elections
                                                                                                                   Cuts
                           200




                                        Russian
                                         Crisis
                           100
                           0




                                 1997         2000               2003                 2006                2009                2012                 2015

                    Notes: Index reflects scaled monthly counts of articles containing ‘uncertain’ or ‘uncertainty’, ‘economic’ or ‘economy’, and one
                    or more policy-relevant terms: ‘tax’, ‘policy’, ‘regulation’, ‘spending’, ‘deficit’, ‘budget’, or ‘central bank’. The series is normalized
                    to mean 100 from 1997 to 2009 and based on the following newspapers: Frankfurter Allgemeine Zeitung and Handelsblatt.
   Figure A5: EPU Index for India, January 2003 to January 2015
                           300                                                              US Debt Ceiling Debate,
                                                                                               Eurozone Crises

                                                                            Lehman
                                    Congress Party Wins                      Failure
                                     National Elections,  Congress-Led
                                      Regains Power                                                       Rupee Collapse
                                                         Coalition Survives
                                                                                                           and Exchange
                                                         Confidence Vote
Policy Uncertainty Index




                                                                                                          Rate Concerns
                           200




                                                                                       Inflation
                                                              Bear
                                                                                        Fears
                                                             Stearns
                                                             Failure
                                    Iraq
                                  Invasion
                           100
                           0




                                 2003           2005            2007           2009      2011            2013                2015

Notes: Index reflects scaled monthly counts of articles containing ‘uncertain’ or ‘uncertainty’ or ‘uncertainties’ or ‘uncertainties’,
‘economic’ or ‘economy’, and one or more of policy-relevant terms listed for India in Appendix A. The series is normalized to mean
100 from 2003 to 2010 and based on the following newspapers: The Economic Times, Times of India, Hindustan Times, The
Hindu, Financial Express, Indian Express, and the Statesman.
   Figure A6: EPU Index for Italy, January 1997 to July 2015                                                                   Election
                                                                                                                                yields
                                                                                     Berlusconi wins confidence vote
                                        Russian                                                                                political
                                                                                    (Oct) but resigns (Nov) amid Italian
                                         Crisis             Constitutional                                                    stalemate
                           250


                                                            Referendum               debt concerns; Monti’s austerity
                                                                                      package passes in parliament
                                                   9/11                                (Dec); Greek Crisis worsens
                                                  Attacks
                           200
Policy Uncertainty Index




                                                                    Iraq
                                                                  Invasion
                                                                                                       Greek
                                                                                                       Crisis
                           150




                                                                                            Lehman
                                                                                             Failure
                           100
                           50




                                                                                                                Eurozone Stresses

                                 1997     1999      2001        2003         2005   2007       2009       2011        2013         2015
  Notes: Index reflects scaled monthly counts of articles containing ‘uncertain’ or ‘uncertainty’, ‘economic’ or ‘economy’, and one or
  more policy-relevant terms: ‘tax’, ‘policy’, ‘regulation’, ‘spending’, ‘deficit’, ‘budget’, or ‘central bank’. The series is normalized to
  mean 100 from 1997 to 2009 and based on the following newspapers: La Stampa and Corriere Della Sera.
Figure A7: Index of Economic Policy Uncertainty for Japan
                                                                                                                                                                                              BOJ
                LDP wins fewer than half                                          New Prime                                   	  	  	  	                                                  monetary
                of seats in Japan's Diet                                          Minister Obuchi                                                                                             easing
 250
                                                         Collapse of                                                                        Prime Minister                                                               New Prime
                                                                                                                                            Mori announces                                                               Minister Noda
                                                         Yamaichi Securities                                                                intention to
           New Prime                                                                                                                        step down
           Minister                                                                                                                                                                                                                        Diet dissolves
                                                                                                                                                         Diet dissolves &                                                                  & general
           Kaifu;                                    LDP regains                                                                                         general election                                                                  election
           Structural                                Prime Ministership
 200
           impediments                                  Electoral
           initiative                                   Reform                                                                                            Gulf
                      Gulf                                                                                                                                War II
                      War I

 150                                                                                                                                                                    Prime
                                                                                                                                                                        Minister
                                                                                                                                                                        Fukuda
                                                                                                                                                                        Resigns;
                                                                                                                                                                        Lehman
                                                                                                                                                                        Brothers
                                                                                                                                                                        Failure
 100




  50




   0
       Jun-88
                 Jun-89
                          Jun-90
                                   Jun-91
                                            Jun-92
                                                      Jun-93
                                                               Jun-94
                                                                        Jun-95
                                                                                 Jun-96
                                                                                          Jun-97
                                                                                                   Jun-98
                                                                                                            Jun-99
                                                                                                                     Jun-00
                                                                                                                                    Jun-01
                                                                                                                                                 Jun-02
                                                                                                                                                          Jun-03
                                                                                                                                                                   Jun-04
                                                                                                                                                                            Jun-05
                                                                                                                                                                                     Jun-06
                                                                                                                                                                                              Jun-07
                                                                                                                                                                                                       Jun-08
                                                                                                                                                                                                                Jun-09
                                                                                                                                                                                                                         Jun-10
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  Jun-11
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            Jun-12
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     Jun-13
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              Jun-14
Notes: Index reflects scaled monthly counts of articles in Yomiuri and Asahi containing Japanese-language terms for ‘uncertain’ or
‘uncertainty’, ‘economic’ or ‘economy’, and one or more selected policy terms. The series is normalized to mean 100 from
1985-2009 and runs from June 1988 to January 2015.
   Figure A8: EPU Index for South Korea, January 1995 to December 2014
                           300
                                                                                                                 Lehman
                                                                                                                 Brothers       Eurozone Fears
                                                                         Daewoo Motors                           Failure,
                                                                         Bankruptcy,       Gulf War II
                                                       Real-Name                                                 Global
                                                                         Financial Fraud         Parliament
                                                       Financial                                                 Financial
                                        South                            and Accounting          Impeaches
                                                       Transactions                                              Crisis
                                        Korean                           Scandals                President Roh           North
                                                       Law Enacted                               Moo-hyun(March);        Korea
                                        Presidential
                                        Election                      Economic                   Constitutional          Renounces
                                                                      and Financial              Court Overturns
Policy Uncertainty Index




                                                                                                                         1953 Truce
                           200




                                                                      Restructuring              Move (May)

                                                       Death
                                        Soviet                   Asian
                                                       of Kim
                                        Union                    Financial            9/11
                                                       Il-Sung
                                        Collapse                 Crisis
                           100
                           0




                                 1990                   1995                  2000                 2005                 2010                 2015
Notes: Index reflects scaled monthly counts of articles in six South Korean newspapers containing ‘uncertain’ or ‘uncertainty’,
‘economic’ or ‘economy’ or ‘commerce’, and one or more of the policy terms specified for South Korea in Appendix A. The series is
normalized to mean 100 from 1995 to 2014.
   Figure A9: EPU Index for Spain, January 2001 to January 2015
                           400                 Gulf War II
                                                                                                                                   Protests Against
                                                                                                               Protests over
                                                                                                                                   Labor Reforms
                                                                                                               Economic
                                                                                                                                   And Government
                                                                                                               Conditions
                                                                                                                                   Spending Cuts,
                                                                                                               And Policies
                                                                                                                                   Spanish Bank Woes
                           300




                                   Protests,
Policy Uncertainty Index




                                                                                                   Greek
                                   Bombings,
                                                                                Problems at        Crisis,
                                   Moroccan
                                                                                BNP Paribas,      Spanish
                                   Conflict
                                                                                Sachsen           Bank and
                                        9/11                                    Landesbank,     Fiscal Woes,
                           200




                                                                                Northern Rock    Protests in
                                                                                          Lehman Catalonia
                                                                                              Failure
                           100
                           0




                                 2001           2003         2005              2007              2009              2011             2013              2015

                    Notes: Index reflects scaled monthly counts of articles containing ‘uncertain’ or ‘uncertainty’, ‘economic’ or ‘economy’, and one
                    or more policy-relevant terms: ‘tax’, ‘policy’, ‘regulation’, ‘spending’, ‘deficit’, ‘budget’, or ‘central bank’. The series is normalized
                    to mean 100 from 2001 to 2009 and based on queries in the following newspapers: El Pais and El Mundo
Figure	  A10:	  EPU	  Index	  for	  the	  United	  Kingdom,	  January	  2001	  to	  January	  2015
                                                                                                             Eurozone
                400                                                                                           Crises


                                                                                Lehman                                      Scottish
                                                                                Brothers                                 Independence
                                                      Treaty of                  Failure                                  Referendum
                       300




                                                                                            General
 Policy Uncertainty Index




                                                     Accession/
                                                                          Northern          Election
                                                     Gulf War II
                                                                           Rock &
                                                                           Global
                                                                          Financial
             200




                                                                            Crisis

                                  Russian     9/11
                                Crisis/LTCM
   100          0




                         1997          2000          2003           2006                2009                2012               2015
 Notes: The news-based EPU Index reflects scaled monthly counts of articles containing ‘uncertain’ or ‘uncertainty’, ‘economic’ or
 ‘economy’, and one or more policy-relevant terms: ‘tax’, ‘policy’, ‘regulation’, ‘spending’, ‘deficit’, ‘budget’, or ‘central bank’. The
 series is normalized to mean 100 from 1997 to 2009 and based on queries in the following newspapers: The Times of London
 and the Financial Times.
     Figure A11: UK Historical EPU Index, January 1900 to December 2008
                                     August 1914,    Paris Peace    Germany Invades
                                     WWI Begins      Conference     Norway & Denmark
                                                                            Feb-May 1946: Bank of England Nationalized; UK-
                            250

                                                                            Soviet Tensions; Withdrawal from Syria and Lebanon;
                                                    Germany Invades         Parliament Votes to Nationalize Coal Mines
                                                    Poland, Britain
                                                                               France Vetoes UK Entry to     Gulf Currency
                                                    Declares War                                                            Gulf
                                                                               European Common Market        War I Crisis
                            200




                                                                                                                            War II
 Policy Uncertainty Index




                                                                            Korean        Oil Shock, Miners’
                                                          Great             War           Strike, Recession
                                                          Slump
                                                                                                                                     Onset of
                            150




                                                                                                                                     Global
                                                                                                                                     Financial
                                                                                                                                     Crisis
                            100
                            50
                            0




                                  1900   1910   1920     1930      1940   1950    1960    1970       1980       1990        2000
Notes: Index reflects scaled monthly counts of articles containing ‘uncertain’ or ‘uncertainty’; ‘economic’, ‘economy’, ‘business’,
‘industry’, ‘commerce’, or commercial’; and one or more of ‘tax’, ‘policy’, ‘regulation’, ‘spending’, ‘deficit’, ‘budget’, ‘Bank of England’,
‘war’, or ‘tariff’. The series is normalized to mean 100 from 1900 to 2008 and based on The Times of London and The Guardian.
   Figure B1: The US EPU Index without ‘regulation’

                           300
                           250
  Policy Uncertainty Index
100      150       200     50




                                 1985   1990   1995               2000               2005                2010
Notes: We construct this version of the US EPU index in the same manner as Figure 1, except for dropping ‘regulation’ (and
‘regulations’ and ‘regulatory’) from the policy term set.




   Figure B2: US EPU Index without ‘deficit’
                           300
                           250
Policy Uncertainty Index
                           200
                           150
                           100
                           50




                                 1985   1990   1995               2000               2005                2010
Notes: We construct this version of the US EPU index in the same manner as Figure 1, except for dropping ‘deficit’ (and ‘deficits’)
from the policy term set.
   Figure B3: US EPU Index without ‘white house’

                           300
                           250
Policy Uncertainty Index
                           200
                           150
                           100
                           50




                                 1985   1990   1995             2000               2005               2010
Notes: We construct this version of the US EPU index in the same manner as Figure 1, except for dropping ‘white house’ from the
policy term set.




   Figure B4: US EPU Index without ‘Congress’
                           300
                           250
Policy Uncertainty Index
                           200
                           150
                           100
                           50




                                 1985   1990   1995              2000               2005               2010
Notes: We construct this version of the US EPU index in the same manner as Figure 1, except for dropping ‘Congress’ (and
‘Congressional’) from the policy term set.
   Figure B5: US EPU Index without ‘legislation’

                           300
                           250
Policy Uncertainty Index
                           200
                           150
                           100
                           50




                                 1985   1990   1995            2000              2005               2010
Notes: We construct this version of the US EPU index in the same manner as Figure 1, except for dropping ‘legislation’ (and
‘legislative’ and ‘legislature’) from the policy term set.




   Figure B6: US EPU Index without ‘Federal Reserve’
                           300
                          250
 Policy Uncertainty Index
100     150      200       50




                                 1985   1990   1995            2000               2005               2010
Notes: We construct this version of the US EPU index in the same manner as Figure 1, except for dropping ‘Federal
Reserve’ (and ‘the Fed’) from the policy term set.
         Figure B7: Historical Index of US EPU – ‘All’ Scaling
                                                                                                              Lehman                  Debt
                       400
                              Gold                                                                           and TARP                 Ceiling
                              Standard Act




                                                                                                                                          Fiscal Cliff
                                McKinley
                                Assassination                                                             9/11
                                                    Great                                    Gulf




                                                                                                                        Gulf War II
                                                  Depression,
                       300




                                                                                             War I
                                       Versailles New Deal                                              Asian Fin.
Policy Uncertainty Index




                                         conf.     and FDR Great                                          Crisis
                                                            Depression                         Black
                                                            Relapse                            Monday
                                                Immigration
                                                Act of 1924
                       200




                                       WW I                                              OPEC II
                                       Start
                                                                                    OPEC I
                                                                             Tet
                                                                             Offensive
                       100
                       0




                             1900   1910     1920       1930   1940   1950   1960    1970     1980      1990      2000                2010
         Notes: We construct this version of the US Historical EPU Index in the same manner as Figure 2, except we scale the raw
         newspaper-level EPU counts by the count of all articles in the same paper and month. In contrast, Figure 2 scales the raw EPU
         counts by the count of all articles in the same paper or month that contain one of the “economy” terms.
Figure C1: Human and Computer EPU Indices, 1900-2010, Annual




                                                           Correlation=0.93                 Computer

                   Human




Notes: Index comparison from 1900 to 2010 based on 11,841 articles (15,156 audits) in the Chicago Tribune, Dallas Morning News,
LA Times, Miami Herald, NY Times, San Francisco Chronicle, Washington Post and Wall Street Journal. Series plotted yearly to
reduce sampling variability, with an average of 107 articles per year. Each series normalized to 100 from 1900 to 2010.
Figure C2: News-based index of equity market uncertainty compared to
market-based VIX, January 1990 to December 2014
              Correlation=0.733
 600




                                                                                Monthly
                                                                              News-Based
                                                                                Index of
                                                                              Equity Market
                                                                               Uncertainty
 400




                 Monthly Average
                   of Daily VIX
 200




                      Values
 0




       1990                 1995                    2000                    2005                    2010                    2015
Notes: The news-based index of equity market uncertainty is based on the count of articles that reference ‘economy’ or ‘economic’,
                                                                                                     49 U.S. newspapers, scaled by the
and ‘uncertain’ or ‘uncertainty” and one of ‘stock price’, ‘equity price’, or ‘stock market’ in 10 major
number of articles in each month and paper. The news-based index and the VIX are normalized to a mean of 100 over the period.
400   Figure C3: Political slant plays little role in our news-based EPU index


        Reagan, Bush I                    Clinton                       Bush II                    Obama
300




                                      5 most Democrat
                                      papers
200




                                  5 most Republican
                                  papers
100
0




      1985          1990              1995              2000              2005              2010              2015
Source: Papers sorted into 5 most ‘Republican’ and 5 most ‘Democratic’ groups using the media slant measure from
Gentzkow and Shapiro (2010).
Figure C4: Raw Uncertainty and Policy Uncertainty Counts in the Fed’s Beige
Books and Policy Uncertainty Measure Based on Section 1A (Risk Factors) of
Firms’ 10-K Filings
40                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            13
                                                                                                                                                                                               Debt-                                        Fiscal
                    Beige Book Uncertainty Count                                                                                                                                               Ceiling                                      Cliff
35                                                                                                                                                          Gulf
                    Beige Book Policy Uncertainty Count                                                                                                                                        Fight
                                                                                                                                                            War II                                                                                                            12
30                                                                                                                                                                                           Tax Cut
                    Policy Share of 10-K Risk Factors




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       Govt. Shutdown
                                                                                                                                                                                             Expiration
25                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            11
                                                                                                                                                                                             Battle
                                                                                      Tax Reform Act
20                                                                                    and Healthcare                                                                                 Lehman
                                                                 Gulf                 Policy Initiative                                                                              Failure                                                                                  10
15
                                                                 War I
                                   Black                                                                                                             9/11
10
                                   Monday                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     9
5

0                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             8
     1983 Q2
               1984 Q3
                         1985 Q4
                                   1987 Q1
                                             1988 Q2
                                                       1989 Q3
                                                                 1990 Q4
                                                                           1992 Q1
                                                                                     1993 Q2
                                                                                               1994 Q3
                                                                                                         1995 Q4
                                                                                                                   1997 Q1
                                                                                                                             1998 Q2
                                                                                                                                       1999 Q3
                                                                                                                                                 2000 Q4
                                                                                                                                                           2002 Q1
                                                                                                                                                                     2003 Q2
                                                                                                                                                                               2004 Q3
                                                                                                                                                                                         2005 Q4
                                                                                                                                                                                                   2007 Q1
                                                                                                                                                                                                             2008 Q2
                                                                                                                                                                                                                       2009 Q3
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 2010 Q4
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           2012 Q1
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     2013 Q2
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    2014 Q3
 Notes: The left scale shows frequency counts per Beige Book of “uncertainty” and references to policy uncertainty. The right
 scale reports the percentage of sentences in Section 1A (Risk Factors) of annual 10-K filings that contain one or more of the
 policy terms listed in Appendix C. The correlation between the BB Policy Uncertainty Count and the EPU index is 0.54.
Figure C5: What triggers large daily stock market moves? 1900-2012


                                             Correlation of number of policy-          Non-Policy increases
                                             triggered jumps per year with EPU
                                             index is 0.78                             Policy increases
                                                                                       Policy decreases
                                                                                       Non-Policy decreases




                                            Based on human readings of next-day news articles
                                            About large S&P Index moves in the New York Times
                                            And the Wall Street Journal. Jump threshold: +/- 2.5%




Reproduced from “What Triggers Large Stock Market Jumps?” by Scott Baker, Nick Bloom & Steven Davis
Figure C6: GDP and Investment Responses to EPU Shock,
VAR Fit to Quarterly U.S. Data from Q1 1985 to Q4 2012
                0

                                                               Notes:             VAR-
   GDP Response, %



                                                               estimated impulse
              -.5



                                                               response functions
                                                               for GDP and Gross
                                                               Fixed investment to
    -1.5 -1




                                                               an EPU innovation
                                                               equal       to       the
                                                               increase in the EPU
                                                               index from its 2005-
                                                               2006 to its 2011-
                                                               2012 average value,
-2




                                                               with     90    percent
                                                               confidence bands.
                           0           6                  12   Identification based
                                                               on three lags and a
                       0




                                                               Cholesky
                                                               decomposition with
Investment Response, %




                                                               the           following
                  -2




                                                               ordering: EPU index,
                                                               log(S&P 500 index),
                                                               federal        reserve
             -4




                                                               funds rate, log gross
                                                               investment,          log
                                                               gross        domestic
        -6




                                                               product).
    -8




                           0           6                  12
                               Quarters after EPU shock
Figure C7: Adding the Michigan Consumer Sentiment Index to VARs Fit to
Monthly U.S. Data from January 1985 to December 2012
                      .5
   Industrial Production Response, %




                                                                                            Michigan First
               -.5          0




                                                                         Baseline


                                           Michigan Second
 -1




                                       0   6            12          18              24               30                36
                                                         Months after EPU shock
Notes: VAR-estimated impulse response functions for industrial production to an EPU innovation equal to the increase in the EPU
index from its 2005-2006 to its 2011-2012 average value. Identification based on three lags and a Cholesky decomposition. In the
baseline, the VAR has the following ordering: EPU index, log(S&P 500 index), federal reserve funds rate, log employment, log
industrial production. In the “Michigan First” specification the Michigan consumer sentiment index is added first, and in the
“Michigan Second” it is added after the EPU index.
Figure C8: Robustness of Twelve-Country Panel VAR Response Functions
                                     0
 Industrial Production Response, %




                                                                                                         Six months of lags
                                     -.5




                                                                                                         No weighting


                                                                                                                           Baseline (+ symbol)
                                                                           Adding stock volatility

                                                                                                      Reverse bivariate:
                                     -1




                                                                                                      log IP & EPU



                                                Dropping the stock index
                                                                                            Bivariate (EPU and                     No country
                                                                                            industrial production)                 fixed effects
                                     -1.5




                                            0               6              12              18               24                30                   36
                                                                Months after the policy uncertainty shock
Notes: The baseline case involves the same sample period, countries, VAR specification and identification as in Figure 10. The
other cases depart from the baseline as indicated. We place realized stock volatility after EPU in the ordering.
