NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

THE INTERNATIONAL MONETARY SYSTEM:
SHOULD IT BE REFORMED?

Jacob A. Frenkel

Working Paper No. 2163

NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
February 1987

Paper presented at the AEA meetings, December
29, 1986 in New
Orleans. The research reported here is part of the NBERs research
program in International Studies. Any
opinions expressed are those
of the author and not those of the National Bureau of Economic
Research.

NBER Working Paper #2163
February 1987
The International Monetary System:
Should It Be Reformed?

ABSTRACT

This paper addresses the

question of reform of the

monetary system. It starts by
with the performance of

identifying the sources of

the present regime of

and by Outlining the reasons for the lack of

floating exchange rates

central theme in the dis-

the monetary system Without a fundamental

change in macroeconomic policies

may be harmful. The analysis

by examining the broader issues and principles

of reform. The key

disenchantment

convergence of views about

the characteristics of the desired system. A

cussion is that a reform of

international

relevant for an evaluation

questions are: what should be

costs of reform and when should

proceeds

reformed, what are the

the reform occur. In this context special

attention is given to the

"target—zones" proposal for exchange rate
management. The paper concludes
with the observation that a reform of
the system should not be vIewed as an instrument for
crisis management
dominated by short—term
considerations, but rather should be
guided by
long—term perspective. It is argued that if the root cause of
the current
economic difficulties is fiscal imbalances In the world
economy, then a
drastic reform of the
international monetary system (if one is needed)

might better wait until nations

restore a more sustainable course of

fiscal management.

Jacob A. 'renkel
International Monetary Fund
700 19th Street, NW

Washington, DC 20431

A casual glance through the proceedings of past annual meetings of the

American Economic Association reveals that

in almost every year during the

past twenty years presidents of the AEA have devoted at least one session to

an examination of issues concerning the

international monetary system.

Prominent on the agenda has been the question of reform. How should the
international monetary system be reformed so as to function more effectively?
The premise underlying this question is that the international

has failed and that it must be reformed

monetary system

by an institutional change. In what

follows I present some skeptical notes on both the verdict on the failure of

the system and on some proposals for reform, especially the
target-zones
proposal.

To set the stage it is worth noting that one of the main sources of
disenchantments with the present monetary system has been the unpredictability

of exchange rates. There has been

the ex-post journalistic

nothing more confusing than reading through

explanations offered for the day-to-day changes in

the U.S. dollar. For example,

over the past few years we were told that "The

dollar fell because the money supply grew faster than expected -

thereby

generating inflationary expectations," but on another occasion we were told

that "The dollar rse because

the money supply grew faster than expected-

thereby generating expectations that the Fed is likely to tighten
up and raise
interest rates." On another date we were told that "The dollar fell since the

budget deficit exceeded previous forecasts

-

- thereby

generating inflationary

expectations on the belief that the Fed will have to monetize the deficit,"
but, on another occasion we were told that "The dollar rose since the
budget
deficit exceeded previous forecasts - - thereby
generating expectations that

government borrowing - needs will drive up interest rates since the
Fed is be

unlikely to give up its firm stance." On yet another day we were told that
"The dollar fell since oil prices fell - - thereby
hurting Mexico and other

2

debt-ridden oil-producing countries

whose bad fortune may bring about the

told that
collapse of important U.S. banks," but, on another occasion we were
helping the debt-ridden oilsince oil prices fell - - thereby
"The dollar

consuming countries whose improved fortune will help the vulnerable position

of important U.S. banks." More recently the dollar changed again, and this
time the explanation was a bit more sophisticated "The dollar changed because

the extent of the revision of the estimated GNP growth rate was smaller than
the expected revision of previous forecasts

but sympathize with the difficulties

of these estimates." One cannot

shared by newspaper reporters and

financial analysts who feel obligated to come up with daily explanations for

daily fluctuations of exchange rates,

and one can only imagine the deep

frustration that yielded the recent headline in the International Herald
Tribune according to which "The dollar rose on no news."

The dismal performance of short-term forecasting does not reflect a
lack of effort. Rather, it is an intrinsic characteristic of efficient asset
markets.

Difficulties in forecasting short-term indices of stock markets

(like the Dow-Jones index) do not call however, for a reform of the way stock

markets operate. For similar reasons one should not assess the performance of

the international monetary system on the basis of short-term forecastability

of exchange rates.

This does not imply of course that the present monetary

system is without faults or

that it should not be reformed. It implies,

however, that if a reform is warranted then it better be justified on different grounds.

A second noteworthy observation is that over the years both academics

and policy makers have made numerous proposals for reform while, at the same

time, the monetary system itself has been in a constant state of change. It
evolved from the gold standard to paper money, from the Bretton Woods system

3

to managed float.

We also had the Gold Commission but

stayed with floating

rates and now attention is focused on target zones, with soft or hard margins.
In spite of the ongoing debate there seems to be little convergence of

views about the characteristics of the desired system. This lack of conver-

gence in my view does not reflect lack of effort.

Rather, it reflects more

fundamental factors that are unlikely to vanish over time. Several
are
noteworthy. First, participants in the debate have not shared the presumption
concerning the relevant alternative to the

system they promote. Thus, extreme

promoters of fixed rates believe that the relevant choice is between a "good
fix" and a "bad flex"; on the other

hand, extreme promoters of flexible rates

believe that the relevant choice is between a "bad fix" and a "good flex." As

is obvious, if these are the alternative choices the outcomes are self-evident, for who would not prefer a "good fix" over a "bad flex?" And, by the
same token, who would not prefer a "good flex" over a "bad fix?" In reality,

however, the choices are much more complex and much less trivial since
they
may involve comparisons between a "good fix" and
a "good flex" or, even more
frequently, between a "bad fix" and a "bad flex." When these are the choices,

one may expect lack of unanimity. Reasonable

people may also differ in their

assessments of which "good" system is more likely to gravitate toward its
"bad" counterpart.

Furthermore, the likelihood that a given "good" system
would deteriorate and be transformed into its "bad" counterpart depends
on the
circumstances and, therefore, it is likely that some countries would be wise
to choose greater fixity of rates while other countries would be
equally wise
to choose greater flexibility.

Second, there are different concepts of the "equilibrium" exchange
rate and not all participants in the debate

share the same concept. A trivial

definition would identify the equilibrium rate as the one that is generated

by
the free operation of the market place. A more subtle definition
emphasizes

4

the sustainability of policies as the criterion for equilibrium. Accordingly,

if for example, the current exchange rate reflects unsustainable budget
it
deficits, then this rate is not viewed as an equilibrium rate even though

reflects equality between demand and supply in the market place. An even more

subjective view emphasizes the consequences
timate criterion.

of the exchange rate as the ul-

Accordingly, if the exchange rate yields undesirable

results in terms of growth, export, resource

allocation, unemployment and the

like, then this rate is not viewed as an equilibrium rate even though it
emerges from the market place and reflects sustainable policies.
Third, different countries face different shocks. On purely theoreti-

cal grounds it is clear that the appropriate exchange-rate regime depends on

the nature and origin of shocks. Are the shocks real or monetary? Are they
induced by the private sector or by the public sector is their origin domestic

or foreign? Are they permanent or

transitory? The list of questions is long

and circumstances vary across countries and over time.

Fourth, the cost of mistaken policies

and the ability to correct

errors differ across countries. They depend on the exchange-rate regime and
on the structural characteristics of the economy. Countries differ from each

other in the flexibility of their economic system (e.g., the degree of wage
jndexation, labor mobility, external and internal debt position) as well as in

the flexibility of the policy making process (e.g. the speed by which fiscal
and monetary policies can be assessed and modified).

Fifth, countries differ from each other according to the various
criteria governing the choice of optimal currency areas.

These criteria

include the degree of openness of the economy, the size of the economy, the

degree of commodity diversification,

the degree of inflation rates among

prospective members, the degree of capital
prevailing

forms

mobility, the degree of other

of integration (like custom unions), the degree

of

5

similarities of tax structures and

other fiscal characteristics and the

degree of similarities of external and domestic

monetary and real shocks.

Sixth, views differ about the functions of

and of market mechanisms in

exchange rates in general

particular. On the one hand there are those who

believe that exchange rates are just a nuisance, especially if
they move, and
anything that moves had better be stopped (one only wonders whether
proponents
of this view would also like to
see greater fixity of stock market indices?).
There are also those who, in

spite of the meager evidence, advocate the bubble

theory according to which exchange rates have "life of their own" unrelated to
"fundamentals."

On the other hand there are those who

view exchange rates as

an important gauge which provides valuable information about current as well

as prospective policies.

According to this view manipulating the

rate by intervention and blaming the

exchange

volatility, unpredictability and

misalignment on the monetary system makes as much sense as blaming the
messenger for conveying bad news.

Finally, there are also different views about
effectiveness of foreign-exchange

the advisability and

intervention. In spite of growing evidence

that the effectiveness of sterilized intervention in exchange-rate
management

is very limited (at least

as it operates through the portfolio-balance

mechanism), there are those who are still ready to rely on such intervention.

In principle, sterilized intervention
market the intent of policy makers.

can be effective by signalling to the

Since the credibility, and thereby the

effectiveness, of such signals, depend on the track record of past Policies,
circumstances differ across countries.

The foregoing arguments explain why views about the need for, and the
desired characteristics of a reform are likely to differ across countries
and
are not likely to converge with the passage of time.

6

Has the system failed? It is clear that during the past decade for-

eign exchange markets have gone

through great difficulties. In addition to

the volatility and the unpredictability
ception that real exchange rates

of exchange rates, there is the per-

have been misaligned, and that this misalign-

ment has been costly in terms of resource allocation and general economic
performance.

The relevant question is whether these faults reflect deficien-

cies of the international monetary system or of macroeconomic policies? I
believe that faulty policies, especially the

lack of synchronization of fiscal

policies in the U.S., West Germany and Japan, are at the root-cause of the
misalignments.

Reforming the monetary system without reforming the policies

will not do any good and may in fact do harm by diverting attention from the
root-cause of the problem to the monetary system.

There is also the view that the system has failed since it did not
yield current-account balance among

the major trading partners. Taken by

itself, however, this should be viewed as one of the achievements of the
monetary system.

The ability to rely on international capital markets to

smooth out consumption in spite of real shocks should not be viewed as a
failure.

We may also wish to ask whether the United States could have carried

out its highly successful disinflation policy of the early l980s while com-

mitted to fixed exchange rates?

I believe not! The key point that needs

emphasis is that the volatility and the misalignment of exchange rates may not

be the source of the difficulties but rather a manifestation of the prevailing

package of macroeconomic policies. Fixing or manipulating the rates without
introducing a significant change into the conduct of policies may not improve

matters at all. It may amount to breaking the thermometer of a patient suffering from high fever instead of providing him with proper medication. The

absence of the thermometer will only confuse matters and will reduce the

7

information essential for

are not allowed to be

Policymaking. If volatile events and macropoljcjes

reflected in the foreign

likely to be transferred

exchange market, they are

to, and reflected in, other

markets (such as labor
markets) where they cannot be dealt with in as efficient
a manner.

The preceding
teristics

of

argument ignores, however, one of the important charac-

the gold-dollar

Accordingly, it could be
follow a predetermined

system -

the imposition of discipline.

argued that the obligation to

intervention rule would alter

peg the rate or to

fundamentally the conduct

of policy by introducing discipline. This
view, however, is questionable for
two reasons.
First, it could equally be
argued that by being highly visible
flexible exchange rates also impose discipline
future policies

since current and (expected)

are immediately made transparent to both private and
public

sectors at home and abroad.

Indeed, the G-5 Plaza

agreement of September 1985
may be viewed as a manifestation of the disciplinary
capabilities of flexible
exchange rates.
Furthermore, it may be argued that national
governments are
unlikely to adjust the conduct of domestic policies
so as to be disciplined
by
the exchange rate regime. Rather, it is
more reasonable to assume that
the

exchange rate regime is

likely to adjust to whatever

governmen5 choose to have.

discipline national

It may be noted in passing that this is indeed

one of the more potent
arguments against the restoration

If governmen were willing to follow policies
of a gold standard, then

of the gold standard.

consistent with the maintenance

the gold standard itself would not be

however, governments

necessary; if,

were not willing to follow
such policies, then the
introduction of the gold
standard per se would not

restore stability since,

before long, the standard would have to be abandoned.
Webster's dictionary defines reform as an improvement
faults.

How can anyone be against reform? The key

iqj should be reformed, what

and a removal of

questions, however, are

are the os of the reform and when should such

8

for target zones is that there be agreement

reform be adopted. A prerequisite

on the approximate value of the equilibrium exchange rate,

on the boundaries

boundaries are
of the zones, and on the actions that must take place once the

reached. At the present such agreement

on the "equilibrium" exchange

is absent. Even if there is agreement

rates one needs to specify in detail what

to say "push them
happens if the boundaries are exceeded? It is not enough
back."

which policy will effect that move
tax?

should bear the burden of adjustment and

We must decide which country

Once this is recognized it

-

- monetary, fiscal, government spending,

becomes clear that the key difficulties may

not lie in the formal structure of the present international monetary system
but rather in the overall mix of macroeconomic policies.

Supporters of target zones say that it is just a matter of tactics
lens or
whether one examines the system by looking through the exchange rate

through the global lens and
lens.

I disagree.

fundamental.

that they prefer to focus on the exchange rate

I believe that the difference between the two

lenses

is

It is not a matter of tactics, but is the difference between

having a general framework and having a particular framework.

It is the

difference between patching up a hole here and forgetting that the dam
going to collapse there versus

having a consistent set of policies. In

principle the adoption of target zones

the entire array of macroeconomic
policies. At present the diverging

is

could be acceptable if they encompassed
policies, including in particular fiscal

international positions of fiscal policies

such a
suggest that it is entirely unlikely that international agreement on
fall
sweeping reform is feasible. Most of the burden, therefore, is likely to

on the instruments of monetary policy.

As long as fiscal policies are

misaligned, a "successful" targeting of the exchange rate by using monetary
policies may exacerbate

the departures from the optimal mix of fiscal and

9

monetary policies and may be

very costly in terms of the overall economic

system.

An argument favoring target zones is that the
very process of negotia-

tions is likely to enhance the degree of international
policy coordination.
It must be noted, however,

that successful coordination efforts have also

occurred during the past decade

November 1978, the Bonn

(e.g., the U.S. dollar support package of

economic summit of 1978 and

agreement of September 1985).
should not be complete, because

most recently the C-S

Further, it might be argued that coordination
the perception of independent

monetary policy

may be necessary for sustaining confidence that monetary
policy will not be
inflationary in the long run.
processs of negotiating

In addition, there is the danger that the
target zones could produce dangerous
frictions among

the negotiating parties

and could lead

ultimately to a reduced level of

coordination in this and other areas.

Every system must have a safety valve which allows some
flexibility
and prevents a crisis and collapse with
every conflict. With misaligned

fiscal Policies and with

monetary policies geared towards exchangerate

targeting, national goverrments

may be forced to exercise their

resorting to protectionistic trade Policies - -

has been the case under

sovereignty by

an even greater extent than

the present system of floating rates with independent

monetary policy. The growing frustration

fiscal deficit by

to

with the efforts to reduce the U.S.

conventional measures have

brought about new desperate

arguments for the adoption of

protectionist measures like import surcharges.
The danger with such recommendations is that they
might receive the political

support of two otherwise unrelated
port of the traditional advocates

groups. They are likely to gain the supof protectionism who claim to defend local

industry and workers from what they believe is foreign unfair
competition.
But, more dangerously,
they may gain the support of those whose exclusive

10

almost any policy that
concern with the budget deficit leads them to support

raises fiscal revenue.

Import surcharges, once in place (even those surmeasures") are hard to remove since, as

charges that are adopted as "temporary

George Stigler once

remarked "a sustained policy that has real effects has

many good friends."

At the present there are very few measures whose long-

term costs to the interdependent

world economy may be as high as protectionist

Taxes on trade will hurt exports,

measures.

and will restore inward looking

economic isolationism instead of outward looking economic
Protectionist measures will

coordination.

transmit the wrong signals to those developing

countries that are still attempting to resist domestically popular pressures
trade war. This

to default on their debt, and, further, they may ignite a

misalignargument should be considered against the claim that by preventing
With

ments of exchange rates target zones reduce the protectionist pressures.
effect of target zones for exchange rates,
misaligned fiscal policies the net
implemented through monetary policy,

are not clear cut.

The key point made by proponents

encompasses the best

of target zones is that such a system

of both worlds - -

flexible exchange-rate regime as

it posses the flexibility of the

well as the stability of the fixed exchange-

this hybrid
rate regime. The same logic could be used, however, to argue that
possess the instability of
the wors of both worlds system encompasses
of fixed rates. For in contrast with
flexible rates and the unsustainabil1tY

- it

fixed parities, the target zones are

moving. As they move, how do we escape

from the inherent difficulty of having the private sector speculate against
governments?

In the absence of an anchor what ensures credibility? How

exactly are conflicts resolved?

What ensures that the moving target zones do

reduce it?
not increase turbulence in the foreign exchange market rather than
monetary system must be a formal
A central feature of any operational

resolution of the so-called n-l problem.

We have n currencies and only n-l

11

independent exchange rates.
disposal must be explicitly

We thus have one degree of freedom and its

specified. It takes two to tango and it takes one

for intervention.

The original Bretton Woods system allocated the degree of
freedom to the United States
which obliged itself to peg the price of gold at

$35 an ounce; the other n-l countries then coimnitted themselves
to peg their
currencies to the U.S. dollar. A design of the international

monetary system
is not complete unless it provides an explicit resolution
to this n-l problem.

Therefore, it is essential to ask how the various

proposals, including those
for target zones, deal with the extra degree of freedom.

As a general rule,

a reform of the system should

instrument for crisis management. The considerations
management focus on .hort-term effectiveness.

appropriate for designing the

inz-term perspective
separate them.

not viewed as an

appropriate for crisis

In contrast the considerations

optimal monetary system should be governed by a

The two need not coincide

and it is sensible to

In the present context the short-term crisis
concerns the

fiscal imbalances in the

world economy rather than the monetary system. To be

sure, the existing international

monetary system is not perfect and it

might

benefit from a face lift or even from a more drastic
reform. But such a

reform should better wait until nations restore a
more sustainable course of
fiscal management.

A reform of the international
monetary system should be viewed as a
constitutional change that should not be taken lightly.

The success of a new

monetary arrangement depends on the adoption of a consistent set of
tools and on a reasonable
action.

understanding of the implications of each course of
In these matters the cost of
delaying the adoption of a new interna-

tional monetary

arrangement until its full implications

are understood is

likely to be small relative to the cost of a premature implementation
various

policy

proposals

for reform of the present international

The

monetary system have

12

many attractions.

But since they are novel, prudence is clearly called for.

More discussions and critical evaluations can

be highly desirable. In view of

this it may be a good place to conclude with a quote from John Maynard Keynes'

remarks in his closing speech at the original

over 40 years ago. Speaking on

Bretton Woods Conference held

the desirability of critical evaluations of

the proposed system Keynes said: "1 am greatly encouraged, I confess, by the
critical, sceptical and even carping spirit in which our proceedings have been

watched and welcomed in the outside world. How much better that our projects
should begin in disillusion than that they should

in

it!"

