                              NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




      CAN'T PAY OR WON'T PAY? UNEMPLOYMENT, NEGATIVE EQUITY, AND
                           STRATEGIC DEFAULT

                                      Kristopher Gerardi
                                      Kyle F. Herkenhoff
                                       Lee E. Ohanian
                                        Paul S. Willen

                                      Working Paper 21630
                              http://www.nber.org/papers/w21630


                    NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                             1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                               Cambridge, MA 02138
                                   October 2015




We are grateful for comments by Gene Amromin, Jan Brueckner, Satyajit Chatterjee, Morris
Davis, Andra Ghent, John Krainer, Edward Kung, Stuart Gabriel, Erwan Quintin, Joe Tracy, and
Rob Valetta as well as for comments from seminar participants at the 2014 FRBSF-Ziman Center
Housing Conference, 2014 HULM Conference at FRB Chicago, and 2015 AREUEA. Jaclene
Begley and Lara Lowenstein provided excellent research assistance. Herkenhoff thanks the
Ziman Center for Real Estate for support. The views expressed in this article are those of the
authors, and not those of the Federal Reserve Banks of Atlanta, Boston, Minneapolis, the Federal
Reserve System, or the National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.

© 2015 by Kristopher Gerardi, Kyle F. Herkenhoff, Lee E. Ohanian, and Paul S. Willen. All
rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without
explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
Can't Pay or Won't Pay? Unemployment, Negative Equity, and Strategic Default
Kristopher Gerardi, Kyle F. Herkenhoff, Lee E. Ohanian, and Paul S. Willen
NBER Working Paper No. 21630
October 2015, Revised January 2017
JEL No. G21,G33,R3,R51

                                         ABSTRACT

This paper exploits matched data from the PSID on borrower mortgages with income and
demographic data to quantify the relative importance of negative equity, versus lack of ability to
pay, as affecting default between 2009 and 2013. These data allow us to construct household
budgets sets that provide better measures of ability to pay. We use instrumental variables to
quantify the impact of ability to pay, including job loss and disability, versus negative equity.
Changes in ability to pay have the largest estimated effects. Job loss has an equivalent effect on
default likelihood as a 35 percent decline in equity.


Kristopher Gerardi                              Lee E. Ohanian
Federal Reserve Bank of Atlanta                 8283 Bunche Hall
1000 Peachtree St. NE                           UCLA, Department of Economics
Atlanta, GA 30309                               Box 951477
kristopher.gerardi@atl.frb.org                  Los Angeles, CA 90095
                                                and NBER
Kyle F. Herkenhoff                              ohanian@econ.ucla.edu
Department of Economics
University of Minnesota                         Paul S. Willen
kfh@umn.edu                                     Federal Reserve Bank of Boston
                                                Research Department
                                                600 Atlantic Avenue
                                                Boston, MA 02210-2204
                                                and NBER
                                                paul.willen@bos.frb.org
1. Introduction

A large literature has studied the determinants of residential mortgage default, with a focus

on the extent to which default occurs among borrowers who have the ability to pay their
mortgage, but who choose to default for what are called strategic reasons related to negative
equity, compared to default among borrowers who simply do not have the ability to pay

their mortgage. Understanding the relative importance of these determinants of default is
central for designing policies aimed at reducing the probability of a future wave of mortgage

defaults and foreclosures, and for designing loss mitigation policies that reduce the negative
economic impacts of future possible foreclosure crises on lenders and homeowners (see for

example, Chatterjee and Eyigungor (2009), Foote et al. (2010), Adelino et al. (2013)).
   Measuring a borrower’s ability to pay fundamentally requires detailed, household-level
data on borrowers’ economic attributes, including their income, their employment status,

and their balance sheet, as well as their mortgage characteristics and payment status. How-
ever, previous studies have lacked data on many of these variables, and have either omitted

variables from the analysis, or have used regional-level data to proxy for household-level
data.

   This paper makes two contributions to the literature. First, it uses new data from
the Panel Study of Income Dynamics (PSID) and the PSID supplemental housing survey,
which provide detailed data on borrower incomes, employment status, balance sheets, and

consumption, matched with household mortgage data. These data allow us to construct
household budget sets and thus, provide the most comprehensive measures of ability to pay

within the literature. This in turn enables us to analyze the relative importance of strategic
motives in mortgage default decisions, versus ability to pay, in considerably more detail than

the existing literature. In particular, the analysis provides the first estimates of how changes
in borrower ability to pay affects the likelihood of default. Moreover, we are able to address
the important question of how changes in ability to pay interact with changes in equity in

driving default decisions.

                                               2
   The second contribution of the paper is to systematically study not only defaulters, but

those who pay their mortgage. As we describe below, our findings for both those who default
and those who pay are critical for understanding the mortgage default process and designing

loss mitigation policies.
   We begin by classifying defaulting borrowers in terms of their ability to pay in order
to quantify the extent of strategic default in the PSID. Strategic default broadly refers to

defaulters who have the ability to pay, but who default because their home value has fallen
below their loan amount (Mian and Sufi (2009)). We develop a procedure to assess strategic

default by first forming household budget sets, and then identifying the defaulting house-
holds with negative equity positions who could continue making their mortgage payments

without having to reduce their consumption below a specific level. To assess the robustness
of this procedure, we use three definitions of this reference consumption level, ranging from
maintaining the same household consumption level as in the previous year, to the level of

subsistence consumption as defined by the Veteran’s Administration (VA). We compare these
reference minimum consumption levels to borrower residual income, which is the difference

between household resources and the mortgage payment.
   These budget set comparisons suggest that both strategic motives and the lack of ability

to pay are important in understanding household default decisions. We identify strategic
motives in about 38 percent of the defaulting households, as this group has the ability to
pay their mortgage without reducing their consumption from their pre-default level.

   However, we also show that almost 30 percent of defaulting households have such low
ability to pay that they would need to reduce consumption below subsistence levels to remain

current on their mortgages, and that the remaining 33 percent of defaulting households would
need to at least reduce consumption below their pre-default level to remain current.

   While strategic motives are quantitatively important among defaulting borrowers, the
budget set comparisons for all borrowers show that nearly 96 percent of low equity borrowers
with the ability to pay remain current. Moreover, we show that the vast majority of borrowers


                                             3
with very low ability to pay avoid default. Specifically, 80 percent of households that need

to cut their consumption to subsistence levels to make their mortgage payments (“cant pay”
borrowers) are current on their payments. This finding provides a simple explanation for

why lenders rarely negotiate pre-emptive mortgage modifications with even very high risk
borrowers, since most of these borrowers continue to pay (Foote et al. (2010), Adelino et al.
(2013)).

   Following this descriptive analysis, we quantify the relative importance of strategic mo-
tives versus ability to pay by analyzing how changes in home equity and in residual income

affect the probability of default in a multivariate setting. We first fit linear probability and
logit models of default on a rich set of covariates that allow us to control for a variety of

economic and demographic factors.
   To address some possible endogeneity issues, we next use the richness of the PSID to
construct instruments for residual income and housing equity. To instrument for equity, we

use the state-level house price appreciation since the purchase of the house. Instrumenting
for residual income is more challenging. We therefore use three sets of instruments, and

assess the robustness of the results across these specifications.
   We exploit the long time series dimension of the PSID to construct household-level un-

employment shocks to instrument for residual income. We focus on involuntary separations
and control for previous unemployment spells to account for potential endogeneity concerns.
The second and third instruments consist of two components that are motivated by previous

research. The first component is a health disability shock to instrument for residual income,
which follows Low and Pistaferri (2015). The third instrument is a Bartik-type state-level

employment shock that is based on aggregate employment flows and industry shares at the
state-level.

   All of our instruments are strong predictors of residual income, and deliver similarly
large estimates of the causal effect of residual income on mortgage default. Our IV estimates
indicate that a 10 percent decline in residual income raises the probability of default by


                                               4
between 1.1 and 2.5 percentage points.

   To compare the magnitudes of residual income loss and changes in equity on default, we
note that our reduced form estimates indicate that the effect of involuntary job loss on the

default probability is equivalent to a 37 percentage point drop in equity. More broadly, we
find that the estimated impact on the default probability of a one percent decline in residual
income is about equal to the estimated impact of a one percentage point decline in equity.

This means that a $100 change in residual income for a household with $1,000 available after
paying the mortgage has an equivalent effect on the default probability as a $500 change in

the value of a home for a homeowner with $50,000 of equity.
   Regarding the importance of strategic motives, while approximately 38 percent of de-

faulters do have the ability to pay, we find that the estimated likelihood of default among
low equity borrowers with the ability to pay is fairly low. Specifically, our IV estimates in-
dicate that an increase in LTV from 75 percent to 125 percent raises the default probability

of a high residual income borrower from about 3 percent to about 5 percent. However, we
find that an increase in LTV from 75 percent to 125 percent raises the default probability

for a low residual income borrower from 10 percent to 17 percent. This finding highlights
a quantitatively important interaction between ability to pay and borrower equity in the

pay/default decision.
   Taken together, these findings have implications for the design of policies. In particular,
they indicate that policies designed to reduce foreclosure by reducing monthly mortgage

payments can be very effective, because these policies raise residual income. This applies
to both low and high equity households, with the relative effect on the default probability

being larger for high equity (low loan-to-value ratio) households, but the absolute effect
being higher for the low equity (high loan-to-value ratio) households.

   The paper is organized as follows. Section 2 discusses the approach in this paper within
the context of some of key papers within the literature and describes in detail the PSID data
used in the empirical analysis. Section 3 uses the PSID data to construct alternative measures


                                              5
of residual income that we use to assess ability to pay, and provides cross-tabulations of ability

to pay with defaulting and current borrowers. Section 4 presents regression estimates with
a focus on quantifying the marginal contributions of residual income and homeowner equity.

Section 5 discusses the implications of the results for economic policy and future research.
Section 6 concludes.



2. Data

This section presents the data used in this analysis. The major data innovation in the

analysis is the use of matched data on mortgage characteristics and status with borrower
socio-economic and demographic variables. These matched data advance the literature in a

number of ways.
    One advance is on the measurement of household ability to pay. Measuring ability to

pay in the literature has been very limited, and consequently little is known about the
importance of this factor. On the one hand, anecdotal and limited survey results suggest
that major life events such as job loss, illness and divorce are associated with mortgage

default, (see Cutts and Merrill (2008) and Hurd and Rohwedder (2010)). However, previous
quantitative studies of default have provided only weak evidence on the importance of these

events due to the lack of household-level income, employment, and balance sheet data.1 This
lack of household-level data has led many researchers to use aggregate unemployment rate
data and divorce rate data as proxies for household-level income shocks (e.g. Deng et al.

(1996), Deng et al. (2000), Elul et al. (2010), and Bhutta et al. (2011)). These studies have
found only weak correlations between these aggregate measures and default. More recently,

Gyourko and Tracy (2014) analyze micro loan level data with county-level unemployment
rates as a control. However, they adjust regional unemployment rate controls for attenuation

bias, and this adjustment indicates a significant relationship between adjusted unemployment
   1
     To be clear, many administrative mortgage datasets do include some information on income and em-
ployment at the time a loan is originated, but to our knowledge, none of these datasets include information
on these variables after origination.


                                                    6
rates and default. This evidence more broadly suggests a stronger relationship between

income shocks and mortgage default than found in the earlier studies.
   As described below, the PSID data on borrower mortgage information with borrower

information on income, employment status, balance sheet data, and consumption enable us
to measure ability to pay, and analyze its importance in default, in considerably more detail
than in the previous literature.

   Our enhanced measures of ability to pay also have important implications for defining
and classifying strategic default. To see this, we note that the most prominent measures

of strategic default in the existing literature are based on survey respondents who report
whether or not they knew people who had the ability to pay their mortgage, but walked away

from their homes during the crisis (Guiso et al. (2013)). In Online Appendix A we provide
a comparison of our strategic default estimates to the literature, including comparisons of
samples and methodologies.2

   We use a very different approach to identifying strategic default by constructing household
budget sets to measure ability to pay. Note that this approach to defining strategic default

is considerably different from survey respondent subjective assessments of other’s ability to
pay. An important benefit of our approach is that it is scientifically reproducible across

researchers, and thus can provide significant discipline in analysis. We therefore view this
approach of classifying defaulters in terms of their ability to pay as an important advance
relative to other studies.


2.1. Sample Construction

The primary data used in this study come from the 2009, 2011, and 2013 PSID Supplements

on Housing, Mortgage Distress, and Wealth Data. We restrict the sample to mortgagor
heads between the ages of 24 and 65 who report being in the labor force or being disabled.
We also restrict the sample to households with LTV ratios below 250 percent that had not
   2
    In Online Appendix A we focus on three studies in particular: Experian and Oliver Wyman (2009),
Guiso et al. (2013), and Bradley et al. (2015).


                                                7
defaulted as of a prior survey.3 These sample restrictions leave us with 7,404 households.4


2.2. Variable Definitions and Representativeness of the PSID

The unit of analysis in this study is the household. The household includes both the “head”
and “spouse” as defined by the PSID, along with any children and other persons living in

the primary residence. The primary measure of income is total household income, which is
composed of the sum across household members of (1) wage and salary income; (2) transfer

income (including social security, alimony and child support); (3) business income; and (4)
interest and dividend income. This measure corresponds to the IRS definition of adjusted

gross income less realized capital gains.5
    Our measure of consumption includes expenditures on food, housing, clothing, health
care, entertainment, and education. In Online Appendix B we show how the PSID consump-

tion measures compare to the Consumer Expenditure Survey (CEX) measures as tabulated
by the Bureau of Economic Analysis (BEA) from 2009-2013. We find that in general, con-

sumption levels are quite similar across the two datasets, and for most expenditure categories,
the trends in consumption are also quite similar.

    The PSID provides information (i.e. interest rates and amounts) on all liens on the house-
hold’s principal residence (1st, 2nd, and 3rd mortgages). In addition, the survey includes
the respondent’s estimate of the current market value of the principal residence. Table 1

compares mortgage statistics from our PSID sample with data from the 2009, 2011, and
2013 National American Housing Survey (AHS).6 In general, mortgage characteristics are
   3
      The LTV requirement drops what appear to be misreported mortgage and home values (inclusion of
these observations does not materially change the main results). Dropping households that reported being
in default in a previous survey simply eliminates double counting.
    4
      In Online Appendix A, we compare the sample selection criteria with previous studies of mortgage
default. Relative to the existing literature, the sample is quite broad and, as we will show in the following
section, appears to be representative of the population of mortgagors. It includes both fixed-rate and
adjustable-rate mortgages, as well as older origination cohorts that have accumulated significant amounts of
equity in their homes.
    5
      In Online Appendix B we compare our PSID measure of average family income to what is reported by
the Census, and show that they are very similar.
    6
      The AHS is conducted biennially by the U.S. Census Bureau. It has a sample size of about 50,000


                                                     8
quite similar across the two datasets. The median outstanding principal balance is identi-

cal in both datasets in 2011 and within $15,000 in 2009 and 2013. The median monthly
mortgage payment is within $200 in 2009 and $100 in 2011 and 2013. The median mortgage

interest rates, remaining terms, and LTV ratios (calculated for first liens only) are also ex-
tremely close in both datasets. Finally, the fraction of households with second mortgages and
adjustable-rate mortgages (ARMs) is also similar across the two datasets, with slightly more

households in the PSID reporting that they have ARMs and second mortgages compared to
the AHS.

   Figure 2 displays the distribution of housing equity in our PSID sample compared with
the distribution in CoreLogic.7 According to CoreLogic, slightly more than 10 percent of

properties in 2009 had greater than 25 percent negative equity, while slightly less than
4 percent did so in the PSID. While there could be many reasons for the divergence in
equity estimates between the two databases, households tend to over-report house values

as compared to actual selling prices by 5 percent to 10 percent (see Benı́tez-Silva et al.
(2008)). While the PSID understates the amount of negative equity in the economy relative

to CoreLogic estimates, we do not view this as a significant drawback of our analysis. In
quantifying the role that negative equity plays in causing mortgage default, we believe that

self-reported equity is the most appropriate measure. In choosing whether or not to default,
households take into account their own perceived valuation of their home, which may or may
not be derived in part from a third-party estimate (such as CoreLogic or Zillow). To put it

another way, the value of using self-reported equity values is that only those households that
believe that they are in positions of negative equity are flagged as having negative equity,

and this is the group of households that we expect to be most sensitive to negative equity in
housing units and was designed to provide representative data on the U.S. housing and mortgage markets.
    7
      The bottom panel of Figure 2 comes from the August 13, 2009 report entitled “Sum-
mary of Second Quarter 2009 Negative Equity Data from First American CoreLogic”
http://www.loanperformance.com/infocenter/library/FACL%20Negative%20Equity_final_081309.pdf
CoreLogic uses a national database of property transactions that covers 43 states to calculate their equity
estimates, and thus their data should be quite representative of the U.S. population. CoreLogic uses
administrative data on outstanding mortgage balances and estimates of housing values to compute equity,
while we use reported mortgage balances and housing values in the PSID.


                                                   9
terms of default behavior.8 To further assess the performance of self-reported home values,

Online Appendix J demonstrates that our LTV point estimates are consistent with existing
results from proprietary loan level datasets.

    Information on mortgage performance in the PSID is available beginning in the 2009
survey.9 Households were asked how many months they were behind on their mortgage
payments at the time of the PSID interview. In the empirical analysis below we adopt

a default definition that corresponds to two or more payments behind (at least 60 days
delinquent), which is standard in the literature. Approximately 3.3 percent (248/7404) of our

sample reported being at least 60 days late on their mortgage payment (using weights, this
statistic falls to 2.7 percent).10 According to the National Delinquency Survey conducted by

the Mortgage Bankers Association (MBA), the 60+ day delinquency rate calculated across all
U.S. households with a mortgage in 2009 was 5.8 percent. When we include households that
report being at least two payments behind in multiple surveys, the corresponding number

in our PSID data is approximately 3.7 percent. One reason for this lower rate in the PSID
is that it does not take into account mortgage delinquency associated with properties that

are not primary residences (i.e. investment and vacation properties), whereas the MBA rate
includes all mortgaged properties.11

    Finally, we use information on unemployment spells in our empirical analysis below. The
PSID provides the employment status for both the head and the spouse over the previous
calendar year as well as at the time of the interview. We discuss our exact unemployment

variable definitions in detail in Section 4.1 where we present the results from our empirical
   8
      In addition, it is likely the case that many households have information about the condition of their
home and the state of their local housing market that is not captured in data-based estimates such as the
CoreLogic numbers, which use zip code-level or county-level house price indices to estimate property values.
    9
      There is some information on mortgage characteristics in PSID surveys prior to 2009, but there is no
information on mortgage performance.
   10
      Information on missed payments is only provided at the time of the interview making it impossible to
measure the exact timing of the first missed payment. This means that we cannot identify, for example,
borrowers who missed two or more payments at some point in the previous calendar year but cured by the
time of the interview.
   11
      Unfortunately, the PSID does not include information on mortgage delinquency for properties that are
not primary residences, so it is not possible to perform an apples-to-apples comparison.



                                                    10
models. Using the measure of employment status at the time of the survey yields an unem-

ployment rate of 5 percent in our sample of mortgagors. For the years in question (2009,
2011 and 2013), the average of the headline unemployment rate reported by the Bureau of

Labor Statistics was 8.5 percent.12


2.3. Summary Statistics

In Table 2, we provide summary statistics for our overall PSID sample as well as for the

subset of mortgagor households who have defaulted on their loans.
   Panel A of Table 2 reveals several key facts about the distributions of income and con-

sumption for defaulters versus the population as a whole. First, defaulters have much lower
levels of income than the population as a whole. The median income of defaulters ($60,000)

is 37 percent below the median of the full sample ($94,000). While the entire distribution
of income is lower for defaulters, the table shows that some defaulters do have considerable
income; 10 percent of defaulters have pre-tax income of at least $130,000. Households in

default are much more likely to report a decline in income, as the median defaulter reports a
seven percent fall in income over the two previous years compared to a six percent increase

in income for the median household in the full sample. In addition, 42 percent of defaulters
have experienced a drop in income exceeding 15 percent compared to only 19 percent for

the whole sample. Differences in consumption are much smaller than differences in income
($50,000 per year for defaulters compared to $56,000 for the full sample, on average).
   In Panel B we see that households in default are less educated and less likely to be

married than the typical mortgagor. College graduates account for 45 percent of the sample
but only 23 percent of defaults, while approximately 30 percent of household heads are not

married, but account for 45 percent of defaults. Panel B also shows that the age distribution
for defaulters and non-defaulters is quite similar.
   Panel C shows that the distribution of LTV ratios is significantly higher for defaulters,
  12
    It is well-known in the literature that homeowners are less likely to experience an unemployment spell
compared to renters, which likely explains a significant portion of this gap.


                                                   11
a fact that has been well-documented in the literature. In Panel D we can clearly see that

defaulters also have significantly less wealth. The median defaulter has only $518 in liquid
assets compared to the median household in the sample that has more than $6,000.13 The

gap in liquid wealth is especially large at the top of the distribution (90th percentiles of
$5,429 and $57,000 respectively).
    Finally, Panel E of Table 2 displays information on unemployment spells and disability

shocks. It is clear from the panel that households in default are much more likely to have
experienced a spell of unemployment. As of the survey date, 5 percent of the full sample of

households reports being unemployed compared to 20 percent of the sample of defaulters. A
similar pattern emerges for households that have experienced a disability. Only 1.5 percent

of households in the full sample report having suffered a severe disability since the previous
interview, compared to more than 6 percent of defaulters.14



3. Mortgage Affordability and Strategic Default

Since the mortgage foreclosure crisis that occurred in 2007 and the subsequent financial

crisis and recession, the concept of strategic default has become a popular topic in the
economics and finance literature. A major limitation of this literature however, is the lack

of an economic framework to help distinguish between borrowers who strategically default
and those who do not. As a result, there is significant disagreement about how to define
strategic default, which has predictably led to very different estimates of its importance in

the mortgage market.
    In this section we develop a definition of strategic default that is linked to the economic

concept of affordability. In the first part of the section, we establish a simple method for clas-
sifying mortgage payments into those that are “affordable” and those that are “unaffordable”
  13
       Liquid assets include checking and savings accounts, money market funds, certificates of deposit, gov-
ernment savings bonds, and Treasury bills. Illiquid assets include equity and bond holdings, the value of
automobiles, retirement accounts, and business income. Housing equity is not included in the measure of
illiquid assets.
    14
       A detailed description of how we construct disability shocks is provided in section 4.2 below.


                                                     12
and show that this classification yields significant differences in default rates across borrow-

ers. In the final part of the section we relate this classification to the notion of strategic
default, and use our PSID data to quantify its importance.


3.1. Identifying “Can Pay” and “Can’t Pay” Borrowers

We begin by proposing a classification system for mortgage defaults using a standard house-
hold budget constraint. Specifically, we define cutoffs for “unaffordable” and “affordable”

mortgage payments based on the amount of disposable income available for a household to
consume. Let c denote household spending on non-housing consumption in the year of de-

fault and h denote housing expenditures, which are financed with a mortgage with required
payment, m. Assuming, for now, that a household has no wealth and cannot borrow in
unsecured credit markets, the household budget constraint is given by:


                                                  c + h ≤ y.                                                  (1)

    The household is faced with a choice of either making the mortgage payment m or
defaulting, experiencing foreclosure, and subsequently paying rent r for a new home.15 Given
a choice of m or r, the household’s residual income, y − m or y − r, respectively defines its

consumption, meaning that the household is choosing between the combination of paying
the mortgage and consuming y − m versus defaulting and consuming y − r. We assume

that m > r so a borrower can always increase non-housing consumption by defaulting. Even
with perfect information about y, m and r, we cannot answer the question of whether a

borrower should default without information about preferences, for example, over renting
versus owning, or beliefs about the evolution of future house prices. But, even without such
information, one can ask about the effect on residual income of the decision to make the

mortgage payment and that is our focus in this section.
   15
      A foreclosure severely impacts an individual’s credit score for seven years in the U.S., making it extremely
difficult to obtain another mortgage to purchase a home during that period.



                                                       13
    First, we define a mortgage as being unaffordable if the payment m leads to residual

income that is below a subsistence level of consumption. We call this level cV A because we
use the Veteran’s Administration (VA) rules to measure subsistence. Formally:


                                   Unaffordability ⇔ y − m < cV A .

Intuitively, regardless of preferences, a mortgage payment is unaffordable if the household is

unable to meet its basic necessities with its residual income.
    Second, we define a mortgage as affordable if the household can maintain its level of

consumption from the previous year c−1 , where we are assuming that the household chose
not to default in the previous year.16 Formally:


                                     Affordability ⇔ y − m > c−1 .

The idea here is that the fact that the household can maintain exactly its consumption level
while paying the mortgage captures the popular notion of a borrower who “can afford his

mortgage.” It is important to note that our definitions are not exhaustive as a mortgage
could be neither unaffordable nor affordable if cV A < y − m < c−1 , meaning that the residual

income allows for consumption above subsistence levels but would require a reduction in
consumption versus the previous year.17

    While this is a simple framework to classify borrowers it is difficult to operationalize.
To do so requires detailed data on both household consumption and income, in addition
to mortgage debt, which previous studies on the topic have lacked. Fortunately, all of

these variables are available in the PSID data. Our measure of household income, y, is
the monthly average of after-tax income of the family unit, measured over the previous

calendar year.18 Our measure of m is the sum of all mortgage payments, property taxes,
  16
      Recall from our discussion above, that only first-time defaults are retained in the sample.
  17
      It is possible for consumption to be both affordable and unaffordable if cV A > c−1 but we show that
this is extremely rare in our data.
   18
      Ideally, we would like a measure of residual income at the time of the survey to be consistent with the


                                                     14
and insurance associated with the family unit’s primary residence. c(VA) is a subsistence

level of consumption defined by the VA that depends on the size and geographical location
of the household.19 Our measure of consumption, c−1 , is the average monthly expenditures

of the household, excluding mortgage related expenses, which is, as with income, measured
over the previous calendar year.
    Table 3 displays a set of simple cross tabulations using these definitions. In Panel A,

column (1), we see that about 70 percent of all households in our sample have mortgage
payments that are affordable based on our above classification. We refer to these households

as “can pay.” In contrast, approximately 7 percent have unaffordable mortgage payments
(i.e. their residual income is less than VA subsistence levels), and we refer to these as “can’t

pay” households (column (3)). In column (2), we see that approximately 23 percent of
households are in-between, meaning that they have enough income to pay their mortgages
and consume more than subsistence levels, but not enough to maintain their previous levels

of consumption. In Panels B and C of Table 3, we stratify the sample by LTV ratio. High
LTV households (LT V > 90) are slightly less likely to be “can pay” (66.4 percent compared

to 70.9 percent) and slightly more likely to be “can’t pay” (8.3 percent compared to 6.8
percent) than low LTV households (LT V < 90).

    The default rates in Table 3 show that the can pay/can’t pay distinction has power.
Focusing on Panel A, column (1) shows that out of more than 5,000 “can pay” households,
timing of our mortgage default variable. For this reason, we adjust income to account for the household’s
employment status at the time of the survey. Specifically, if the head of household is not employed as
of the survey date, we reduce y by the average monthly labor earnings of the head. If the spouse is not
employed as of the survey date or the head was recently divorced, we reduce y by the average monthly labor
earnings of the spouse. We do not make this adjustment in our regression analysis in section 4 since doing
so would introduce a mechanical correlation between our measure of residual income and the unemployment
instruments that we employ. We make no adjustment for households who are employed at the time of the
survey, so for these households residual income is measured with a lag relative to their default decision.
However, this timing discrepancy is unlikely to be a major issue as the vast majority of PSID interviews
(about 80 percent) take place within the first six months of the calendar year.
   19
      For more details see “Lenders Handbook - VA Pamphlet 26-7,” Ch.4 on underwriting loans which is
available online, http://www.benefits.va.gov/warms/pam26_7.asp. This includes the VA definition of
residual income as “ Residual income is the amount of net income remaining (after deduction of debts and
obligations and monthly shelter expenses) to cover family living expenses such as food, health care, clothing,
and gasoline” (p. 55).



                                                     15
only 1.4 percent (74) default. In contrast, of the 531 “can’t pay” households, 10.7 percent

(57) default, which implies that “can’t pay” borrowers are approximately 7 times more likely
to default than “can pay” borrowers. Dividing the sample into high and low LTV samples

yields even more dramatic differences. The least risky subsample, “can pay” households with
low LTV ratios, account for more than half the sample (4,056 of 7,404 or 55 percent), and
the table shows that only 0.7 percent of these borrowers default. In contrast, the most risky

subsample, “can’t pay” households with high LTV ratios have a default rate approaching 20
percent. In other words, based solely on the ability-to-pay variables and LTV dichotomy we

can identify groups with a 30-fold difference in default rates.
   Comparing differences in default rates also yields important insights. First, the likelihood

of default is very low for low LTV households – as column (4) shows, only 1.4 percent default
– but for the “can’t pay” subsample of low LTV households the default rate soars to 7.5
percent, which is more than 10 times the default rate of “can pay” low LTV households.

This is intuitive since the essence of “can’t pay” is that the borrower simply does not have
the cash flow necessary to make the mortgage payments and maintain a minimal level of

consumption. The fact that the household could enjoy a positive income shock or sell the
house in the future does not matter, whereas for the “can pay” household, there is little

point in defaulting as it has the cash flow necessary to make the payment without needing
to sacrifice a significant amount of consumption. As one would expect, for the high LTV
households, the effect of ability-to-pay on differences in default rates is smaller than for low

LTV households (a five-fold difference instead of ten-fold).
   While Table 3 is consistent with an important role for ability-to-pay, it also illustrates

the limits of the framework. As discussed above, the fact that we find a 30-fold difference in
default rates between “can’t pay” borrowers with high LTV ratios and “can pay” borrowers

with low LTV ratios illustrates the importance of ability-to-pay. However, the flip-side of the
fact that 20 percent of the “high-risk” households default is that 80 percent of them continue
to make their payments. Indeed, the use of the phrase “can’t pay” to describe a subsample


                                              16
of the population in which almost 90 percent (if we look at the whole sample including both

high- and low-LTV households) do pay is, in a sense, a contradiction in terms. The issue
is that while “ability-to-pay” is an easy concept to talk about it is not an easy concept to

formalize. Equation (1) seems intuitive, but, it is based on the assumption that households
must finance their current spending entirely out of current income. In reality, households can,
potentially, finance spending either by borrowing or by drawing down accumulated savings.

In other words, a more realistic version of equation (1) would look like:


                                           c+m<y+a+b                                                   (2)

where a is accumulated financial assets (i.e. wealth) and b is the maximum amount of
(unsecured) credit that a household can access. Moving to such a formulation is not easy,

especially in the context of strategic default. It seems reasonable to call a default strategic
if a household has free cash flow that exceeds the cost of the mortgage. However, would it

be equally appropriate to call a default strategic if the household could only “afford” the
mortgage payment by drawing down its retirement savings or borrowing on credit cards? In

other words, is default strategic unless the household has exhausted all of its savings and
borrowed up to the maximum amount available on all available credit lines?20
    While we cannot tell for certain, it seems reasonable that the “can’t pay” households

that do pay are using some combination of borrowing and drawing down savings, perhaps
augmented by resources from their extended family. In principle, one could answer this

question with data, but to assess the sources of funds for payments, one would need much
higher frequency wealth information than the biennial data from the PSID.21
  20
      Adding more nuance here, by expanding the budget constraint, one could argue that a “can pay”
household is diverting money from saving and, therefore, future consumption by making its monthly payment.
If along some future path, such a lack of saving results in destitution, then some “can pay” households, as
we have defined them, really cannot afford their mortgage payments.
   21
      In Online Appendix C we incorporate information on assets and liabilities in the PSID to create a
version of Table 3 that is based on equation (2). The results are broadly similar.




                                                    17
3.2. Quantifying Strategic Defaults

Our discussion above links the concept of affordability to mortgage default in a manner that
makes it a natural definition for what has been termed “strategic” or “ruthless” default in the

literature. The idea is that a household that chooses to default on its mortgage debt while
having the ability to make its mortgage payment and maintain its level of consumption, has
made a strategic decision. Such a definition is internally consistent with standard models

of defaultable debt, as well as the popular notion of “ruthless” default, whereby a borrower
defaults for purely investment considerations, as opposed to liquidity-related concerns. In

this section we use our classification of “affordable” and “unaffordable” mortgage payments
to quantify the extent of strategic default in the data.
   Column (1) of Panel A of Table 3 shows that of the 196 defaulters in our sample, 74

defaulters or 38 percent, have affordable mortgages, in the sense that they could make
their mortgage payment without reducing their consumption, implying that 38 percent of

defaults are strategic. Column (3), however, shows that only 29 percent of mortgages are
unaffordable in the sense that household consumption would drop below subsistence levels

if the household makes the payment. Thus, the number of strategic defaults depends on
exactly how one defines affordability. If one adopts the broad idea that a mortgage is only
affordable if making the mortgage payment requires no reduction in household consumption,

then the share of strategic defaults, 38 percent, is comparatively small. But using this
definition implies that all other consumption takes priority over the mortgage. For example,

if paying the mortgage requires that the household replace a luxury car with a more modest
alternative, this definition would say that the household cannot afford the mortgage. At the

other extreme, if one adopts the much stricter idea that a mortgage is unaffordable if making
the mortgage payment will lead to a level of consumption that is below subsistence, then a
comparatively large fraction of defaulters, 71 percent, are strategic.

   Panels B and C show that strategic default is somewhat more common, using either
definition, for high LTV borrowers and less common for low LTV borrowers. Whereas for


                                              18
the whole population, our strategic default estimates ranged from 38 to 71 percent, for the

high LTV sample, they range from 41 percent to 76 percent and for the low LTV sample
from 33 percent to 64 percent. The response to LTV is consistent with the idea that high

LTV ratios make households more likely to default even when they can afford their monthly
payments.
   In Online Appendix D, we consider an alternate definition of affordability based on the

Qualified Residential Mortgage (QRM) guidelines, and we find consistent estimates of strate-
gic default.



4. Default and Residual Income

The analysis in Section 3 above strongly suggests that many households default because they

do not have the financial resources to continue making their periodic mortgage payments.
For example, we found that approximately 29 percent of households in default do not have

enough residual income to meet their basic consumption needs, and an additional 33 percent
of defaulters do not have enough residual income to maintain their pre-default consumption
levels. While illustrative, that analysis was entirely descriptive in nature. In this section, we

attempt to measure the causal impact of residual income on mortgage default.
   We begin by showing that the correlation between low residual income and mortgage

default is very strong in the data, even after controlling for potentially confounding variables
including housing equity, a detailed set of mortgage characteristics, geographic factors, and a

detailed set of household demographic characteristics available in the PSID. We then use the
richness of the PSID data to construct instruments for residual income and housing equity to
directly address potential endogeneity bias. Our choice of instruments is based on the idea

that negative shocks to household-level income should result in low residual income levels.
We show that this is clearly the case in the data, as households in the bottom of the residual

income distribution are much more likely to have experienced a recent negative income shock



                                               19
compared to those in the top of the distribution. It then follows that any exogenous shock

that affects household income is a good candidate for an instrument for residual income. We
focus on two plausibly exogenous shocks: involuntary unemployment spells and disability.


4.1. OLS and Logit Results

We start our analysis by estimating OLS and logistic multivariate regressions of mortgage

default on residual income, where we condition on a detailed set of household demographic
characteristics, mortgage characteristics, as well as geographic controls (at the state-level).

We calculate residual income using gross (before tax) household income that excludes capital
gains, but includes all other sources of income including income from operating a business
(see Section 2 for more details) less total mortgage expenses, including the first and second

mortgage. We focus on the (natural) logarithm of residual income, in order to capture a
potential non-linear relationship due to the existence of subsistence consumption levels.22 A

minimum level of consumption that is required for survival, implies that the same increase in
residual income for a household with very low levels of income should have a larger impact on

its default decision compared to the decision of a household with very high levels of income.23
24


      Table 5 displays our baseline results. Columns (1) - (3) display OLS regression estimates

(i.e. linear probability models) of an indicator of mortgage default (at least 60-days delin-
quent) on residual income, and columns (4) - (6) repeat the exercise using logistic regressions.

In columns (1) and (4) we do not include any controls, while in the remaining columns we in-
     22
      There is a small issue in specifying the logarithm of residual income as a few households in our data
have negative values of residual income. To deal with this issue, we winsorize the residual income variable
choosing a threshold that corresponds to the first percentile of the residual income distribution $3,810. We
have experimented with alternative thresholds and find that the results reported below are not sensitive to
this particular choice.
   23
      By taking the log of residual income, we are assuming that the impact of residual income on default is
proportional. For example, the impact on default of an increase in residual income of $50 for a household
that starts with only $100 in residual income will be the same as an increase in residual income of $5,000
for a household that starts with $10,000 in residual income.
   24
      In Online Appendix E we consider alternate specifications which use the ratio of m to y (i.e. the debt-
to-income ratio), and we show that our baseline results are robust. Furthermore, in Online Appendix F, we
consider income changes, and we show that our baseline results are robust.


                                                     20
clude numerous demographic, state-level, and loan-level controls.25 In all columns we include

the household’s (self-reported) LTV ratio at the time of the survey, as the prior literature
has documented that home equity is a strong predictor of default.

    The OLS coefficients associated with the logarithm of residual income should be inter-
preted as semi-elasticities. Thus, according to column (1), a 10% decrease in residual income
is associated with a decrease in the likelihood of default of approximately 0.37 percentage

points. In column (2) we see that the magnitude of the semi-elasticity drops somewhat when
we include the control variables, but is still negative and statistically significant. In column

(3) we include an interaction between the household’s LTV ratio and residual income. This
specification is motivated by the double-trigger theory of mortgage default, which predicts

that the combination of liquidity shocks and declines in home values generates large increases
in mortgage defaults.26 The coefficient associated with the interaction term is negative and
statistically significant, which means that for higher LTV ratios (lower equity levels), de-

creases in residual income have more pronounced effects on default. For example, at an LTV
ratio of 1 (no equity), a 10 percent drop in residual income will increase the default rate

by 0.43 percentage points (=(-.1)*.012-.055*1*(-.1)), while at an LTV ratio of 1.5 (negative
equity), a 10 percent drop in residual income increases the default rate by 0.7 percentage

points (=(-.1)*.012-.055*1.5*(-.1)).
    Columns (4) - (6) in Table 5 display estimates from logitistic regressions that correspond
to the same specifications as columns (1) - (3). The logit coefficients are reported in the table

without parentheses, while the standard errors are reported just below the coefficients (round
  25
      The demographic controls include 1-digit industry, year, race, education, marital status, and gender
indicator variables as well as the age of the head of household and the number of children in the household.
The mortgage controls include the mortgage interest rate as well as dummy variables for origination years,
whether the mortgage is refinanced, the presence of a second mortgage, whether the term remaining is >15
years, whether or not the loan is refinanced. The state controls include indicator variables signifying if the
state has a judicial foreclosure process, if the state allows lender recourse, and if the state is one of the
“sand” states (Arizona, Florida, and Nevada) that experienced an especially dramatic housing boom and
bust during the 2000s. In addition, changes in state-level house prices and unemployment are included.
Online Appendix G includes a complete list and summary of the baseline set of controls.
   26
      Examples      include      Corbae and Quintin        (2009),     Garriga and Schlagenhauf       (2009),
Chatterjee and Eyigungor (2011), Campbell and Cocco (2011), Hedlund (2011), Schelkle (2011), and
Laufer (2012).


                                                     21
parentheses), and the average marginal effects (AME) are reported below the standard errors

(square parentheses). The average marginal effects in columns (4) and (5) have the same sign
and similar magnitudes to the OLS coefficients reported in columns (1) and (2). Column (6)

includes the interaction term between LTV and residual income. Due to the non-linearity
of the logit model, the AME associated with the interaction must be calculated at discrete
points in the state space. We find that the AME associated with the interaction term,

computed as the difference in the AME of LTV between the interquartile range of residual
income, is about half of the magnitude of the corresponding estimate in the linear probability

model. However, the magnitude of the interaction effect is sensitive to the points at which
it is calculated, and in many instances the interaction effect is larger than the LPM model.

As an additional check on the PSID data, in Online Appendix J, we compare our LTV point
estimates to several recent papers on mortgage default, and we find that our point estimates
are consistent with results from proprietary loan level datasets.

   While the results in Table 5 support the findings in Section 3 and strongly suggest that
residual income plays an important role in household-level mortgage default decisions, they

are still descriptive in nature. Income is not randomly assigned to households, but is instead
determined by decisions consciously made by the household as well as some outside, exoge-

nous forces. Therefore, in order to make any causal inferences about the effect of residual
income on default, we need valid instruments. As we mentioned above, our instrumental
variables approach exploits the fact that many households with low residual income suffered

major adverse shocks.
   Table 4 provides details on the incidence of adverse shocks by quintile of residual income.

The first row in the table shows that households in the bottom of the distribution are much
more likely to have experienced a significant (30 percent or higher) drop in income since

the previous interview compared to those in the top of the distribution. The next row in
the table shows that unemployment is an important shock that leads to residual income
differences as household heads in the bottom quintile of the distribution are more than three


                                             22
times as likely to report a recent unemployment spell compared to those in the top quintile.

There is also evidence in the table that disability shocks play a role in generating variation
in residual income across households. We exploit these patterns below to generate plausibly

exogenous instruments for household-level residual income.


4.2. IV Estimates based on Unemployment Shocks

Since unemployment spells are typically associated with significant income losses,27 even ac-

counting for unemployment insurance benefits, the literature has focused on unemployment
as a potentially important driver of mortgage default. However, due to data limitations,

previous studies have been forced to use aggregate unemployment (at the state, MSA, or
county aggregation level),28 and have found only weak correlations between unemployment
and mortgage default.29 The PSID asks detailed questions about employment and unem-

ployment spells, which allow us to construct household-level unemployment shocks.
   We define an unemployment shock as corresponding to a household head who reports

being unemployed at the time of the PSID survey or who reports a spell of unemployment
over the 12 months prior to the survey date. We also construct a spousal unemployment
shock using the same definition. However, there are potential concerns that these shocks

are not entirely exogenous to the household and more importantly to the decision of the
household to default on its mortgage. For example, some unemployment spells are voluntary

and initiated by the employee. If the same underlying factors (unobservable to us) that
drive households to leave their jobs also drive them to default on their loans, then we would

mistakenly attribute income loss from unemployment shocks to be driving increased mortgage
default.
   We address this potential endogeneity bias in a few different ways. First, we isolate job
  27
      See Saporta-Eksten (2014) and papers cited therein.
  28
      For example, Deng et al. (2000) include state-level unemployment rates in their mortgage default and
prepayment models, and Demyanyk and Van Hemert (2011) include county-level unemployment rates as
controls in their analysis of subprime mortgage defaults.
   29
      See Gyourko and Tracy (2014) for a detailed discussion of how using aggregate unemployment rates as
proxies for individual shocks could mask the true relationship between unemployment and mortgage default.


                                                   23
losses due to involuntary separations, which are defined in the PSID to be either plant clo-

sures, strikes/lockouts, or layoffs. Involuntary unemployment spells are less likely to suffer
from endogeneity bias since they are events that occur outside of the purview of the house-

hold. However, there could still be a concern that there is some unobserved heterogeneity
across households that drives both involuntary job separations and default decisions. For
example, perhaps impatient households who heavily discount the future might be more likely

to default on debt and may also be more likely to be fired due to poor work habits. If this
unobserved factor does not vary over time, then the panel dimension of the PSID allows us

to address the issue. To do so we construct indicator variables based on the number of prior
unemployment spells over the seven PSID surveys spanning 1994-2005, and include these

variables in our control set (“Job Loss FEs”). If there is a time-invariant factor that causes
both an increased propensity to experience job loss and an increased propensity to default,
this additional control should take care of the issue. In addition to these measures, we follow

the labor economics literature and construct a completely different employment-based in-
strument based on national-level industry employment flows and state-level industry shares,

which we discuss below in Section 4.3.
    In addition to the need to instrument for residual income, we also need to address the

potential endogeneity of the LTV variable. The LTV variable is the ratio of the self-reported
remaining mortgage balance to the self-reported value of the house, and thus, corresponds to
the household’s estimate of its current equity position in the property. The total size of the

mortgage and downpayment fraction at the time of origination are decisions made by the
household.30 These decisions may be correlated with some unobserved factors that are also

correlated with the default decision, resulting in endogeneity bias. The example of hetero-
geneity in impatience discussed above is also applicable here as more impatient households

are more likely to choose lower downpayments (i.e. higher LTV ratios at origination) and are
also more likely to default on their debts. To address this issue we construct an instrument
  30
     In addition, the decision on how much mortgage debt to pay down over time is also under the household’s
control.


                                                    24
for the LTV ratio that corresponds to the cumulative growth in the state-level housing price

index from the year of home purchase to the current interview year. The PSID provides the
state in which the household resides, and using the panel aspect of the PSID, we can iden-

tify the exact year when the household purchased its current home. Cumulative house price
appreciation at the state-level is plausibly exogenous to the household’s mortgage default
decision, but should be correlated with the LTV ratio variable.31

    Table 6 displays the results of our instrumental variables analysis. Column (1) in the
table corresponds to the simple OLS estimates, which are replicated from Table 5 (column

(2)) for ease of comparison. Column (2) in Table 6 displays the estimation results when we
use the head and spouse unemployment shocks to instrument for income loss and cumulative

house price appreciation to instrument for LTV ratios (all columns in the table use the same
instrument for LTV ratios). There is a sizeable increase in the magnitude of the coefficient
associated with residual income in the IV specification compared to the OLS regression.

Households that suffer a 10 percent loss in residual income that is caused by an unemployment
shock are approximately 1.5 percentage points more likely to default on their mortgages. This

effect is an order of magnitude larger than the OLS estimate displayed in column (1). The
effect of the contemporaneous level of home equity on default also increases significantly

when house price appreciation is used as an instrument, as the coefficient approximately
doubles (from 0.078 to 0.189).
    The increase in the estimated impact of residual income on mortgage default in the IV

specification is both plausible and consistent with economic theory. The permanent income
hypothesis predicts that permanent (or persistent) shocks to income have a significantly

larger effect on consumption decisions compared to more transitory income shocks.32 The
IV specification isolates losses in residual income due to unemployment shocks, which can be

significant life events and thus, are likely to have persistent effects. In other words, the IV
  31
      The assumption that is required for cumulative house price growth at the state-level to be a valid
instrument is that the timing of home purchase and the choice of state to reside in is exogenous with respect
to the mortgage default decision.
   32
      See Saporta-Eksten (2014) and Jarosch (2014) for job loss studies.


                                                     25
specification is likely isolating more permanent income shocks, which theory predicts should

lead to a much larger impact on the propensity to default. This is exactly what we find.
    The first stage results are reported in Table 7. The table shows the first stage results

for all of the IV specifications in Table 6 (the column numbers correspond to the column
numbers in Table 6). There are two first stage regressions since we are instrumenting for
two endogenous variables, LTV and residual income, respectively. Panel A displays the

estimates for the LTV ratio regression and Panel B shows the estimates for the residual
income regression. Column (2) of Panel A shows that cumulative (state-level) house price

appreciation is a very strong instrument for home equity, while Column (2) of Panel B
shows that unemployment is an extremely strong instrument for residual income. Job loss

experienced by the head of the household results in a 32 log point decline in residual income,
whereas spousal job loss is associated with a 23 log point decline.
    Column (3) in Table 6 displays results from the reduced form specification in which the

default indicator is regressed directly on unemployment. Unemployment spells experienced
by both the head of the household and the spouse are positively correlated with the incidence

of default. Unemployed heads are approximately 5 percentage points more likely to default
than employed heads, while households in which both the head and spouse experience an

unemployment spell are more than 8 percentage points more likely to default. Head of
household job loss has an equivalent effect on the likelihood of default as a 35 (.053/.15)
percent decline in home equity, and if both the head and spouse lose their job this has the

same impact on default as a 55 ((.053+.03)/.15) percent decline in home equity. These
results contradict many previous studies that have used aggregate data and found only a

weak correlation between default rates and unemployment rates, and confirms the claim
made by Gyourko and Tracy (2014) that using aggregate unemployment rates as a proxy for

individual unemployment shocks can result in a serious attenuation bias.33
    In column (4) of Table 6 we modify the instrument set by substituting the unemployment
  33
     In fact, in unreported results we substituted the individual-level unemployment variables for state-level
unemployment rates and found zero correlation between state-level unemployment and default.


                                                     26
variables with indicators of involuntary unemployment spells for both the head and spouse.

In addition, we include a set of indicator variables corresponding to the number of prior
involuntary unemployment spells to control for unobserved time invariant characteristics

that may link job loss propensity to default. The coefficient associated with residual income
remains negative and actually increases somewhat in magnitude compared to the coefficient
obtained using the overall unemployment shock IV reported in column (2). The estimate

is statistically significant at the 5 percent level, as we lose some power due to the smaller
number of involuntary employment spells compared to overall employment spells in the data.

Column (5) displays the reduced form estimates, which are very similar to those associated
with the overall unemployment variables reported in column (3). The fact that our IV

estimates remain quite similar when we focus on only involuntary unemployment spells and
control for previous such spells assuages many of our concerns about endogeneity bias.


4.3. IV Estimates based on Bartik and Disability Shocks

While using involuntary unemployment spells and including prior unemployment episodes
in the set of controls assuages many of our endogeneity concerns, it does not completely

alleviate them. In this section we construct an alternative set of instruments for residual
income, which we argue is less susceptible to endogeneity bias. Our alternative instrument
set has two primary components, which are both motivated by previous research.

   The first component in our instrument set is a disability shock that we construct based
on the work of Low and Pistaferri (2015) (hereafter referred to as LP). In the course of cali-

brating a life-cycle model with disability insurance, LP estimates the effect of having a health
disability that limits the ability to work on the decision to obtain employment and on the

level of offered wages (conditional on employment) using PSID data. LP finds that disabil-
ities significantly decrease the probability of working and also significantly decrease offered
wages for households that choose to work.34 These findings imply that health disabilities
  34
       Specifically, LP finds that a moderate disability decreases the likelihood of working by 27 percentage



                                                      27
result in significant declines in income. In addition, LP argues that health disabilities are

exogenous shifters of employment probabilities and wages (and thus income), citing several
studies to support such a position.35

    We largely follow the methods of Low and Pistaferri (2015) in identifying a household in
which the head or the spouse has suffered a disability. Specifically, we use information from
the following three PSID survey questions posed to both household heads and spouses: (i)

Do you have any physical or nervous condition that limits the type of work or the amount
of work you can do? If the respondent answers “Yes” the interviewer asks: (ii) Does this

condition keep you from doing some types of work? where the possible answers are: “Yes”,
“No”, or “Can do nothing”. Respondents that answer either “Yes” or “No” are then asked:

(iii) For work you can do, how much does it limit the amount of work you can do? where
the possible answers are given by: “A lot”, “Somewhat”, “Just a little”, or “Not at all”. If
the answer to question (i) is “No” or the answer to question (iii) is “Not at all” then we

assume that the respondent does not have a disability that limits her ability to work. We
assume that the respondent has a severe disability if her response to question (i) is “Yes”

and her response to question (ii) is “Can do nothing” or her response to question (iii) is “A
lot”. We assume that the remainder of respondents have a moderate disability (i.e. they

answer “Yes” to question (i) and either “Somewhat” or “Just a little” to question (iii)).
    Using these definitions, we then construct dummy variables to identify a change in either
the head’s or spouse’s disability status. The first set of dummy variables that we focus on

indicate whether the head or the spouse has suffered any disability (moderate or severe) since
the previous survey. The second set indicates whether the head or the spouse has suffered

a severe disability since the previous survey. Summary statistics for the disability variables
are displayed in Table 2.
points while a severe disability decreases the probability by 74 percentage points. Conditional on working,
LP finds that a moderate disability reduces wages by 6 percentage points while a severe disability reduces
wages by 18 percentage points.
   35
      These include (among others) Smith (2004) who found that income does not affect health status as long
as one controls for education (which we do in our analysis), and Adda et al. (2009) who found that income
innovations do not impact health status.


                                                    28
   In addition to the disability shocks, we construct an additional instrument that is meant

to isolate purely exogenous changes in employment status that influence residual income. The
instrument is based on aggregate sectoral employment flows at the national level and industry

shares at the state-level. Specifically, we use data from the Bureau of Labor Statistics (BLS)
to construct the following Bartik state-level employment shock:


                                          X
                             Bartikit =         shareempl
                                                     i,j,t−k ∗ ∆emplj,t−k,t                          (3)
                                            j

where i indexes the state, j indexes the 1-digit NAICs industry code, t indexes the current

survey year (2009, 2011, or 2013), and k indexes the number of years over which the growth
rates are computed. The Bartik shock is constructed by interacting national-level industry

growth in employment, ∆emplj,t−k,t , with the state-level initial composition of employment in
industry j, shareempl
                 i,j,t−k . Calculation of the national-level industry growth rates is performed

using data from all states excluding i. Bartik shocks are used frequently in the labor literature

to instrument for local aggregate demand shocks. The idea behind the Bartik shock is that
employment in all states in all industries is affected by national industry-level employment

movements, but movements in a given industry have a higher impact in a state where the
industry employs a greater share of the population. For example, the Bartik shock calculation

for Florida would place a lower weight on national employment changes in the financial
activities industries than the Bartik shock calculation for New York. In our context, the
Bartik variable is a natural choice for an instrument as state-level, labor demand shocks are

unlikely to be correlated with individual default decisions except through their impact on
the likelihood of job loss and, in turn, income loss.

   We construct the Bartik variable over a two-year horizon (i.e. k = 2)36 to maintain con-
sistency with the biennial frequency of the PSID. Our measures of employment by industry

and state are taken from the BLS. In particular, we use State and Area Employment, Hours,
   36
      We also estimated specifications using Bartik shocks constructed over a four-year horizon and found
similar results.



                                                    29
and Earnings from the CES.

    Column (6) in Table 6 displays the results when we instrument for income loss using
the disability shock and the Bartik employment shocks. The coefficient estimate is -0.109

(statistically significant at the 5 percent level), which is similar in magnitude to the estimates
we obtained using unemployment spells in columns (2) and (4). The first stage results
displayed in Table 7, (column (6) in Panel B) show that the disability indicators are strong

predictors of income loss, which is consistent with the findings in Low and Pistaferri (2015).
The reduced form specification results reported in column (7) of Table 6 show that spousal

disabilities have a similar impact on the default rate as unemployment, and head disabilities
have a positive, but insignificant impact, on default. In column (8) of the table we consider

only severe disability shocks in the instrument set, and find very similar estimates. There are
some notable differences in the first stage estimates, as the severe disability shock variables
are more strongly correlated with residual income.

    IV diagnostics are displayed in the bottom two rows of Table 6. The disability and Bartik
variables all exhibit strong first-stage results and easily pass weak IV tests. Since we have

multiple instruments, we can also conduct over identification tests (the premise of these tests
is to use each instrument one-at-a-time, and then check to see if the residuals are correlated

with the excluded instrument) and in every specification, the instruments pass.37
    In Online Appendix H we show the results from several robustness exercises. For ex-
ample, we consider the inclusion of state fixed effects in the IV specifications, we consider

some alternative ways of specifying the instrumental variables (including different timing
conventions for the Bartik shocks and alternative disability definitions), and we also substi-

tute the continuous LTV variable with a dummy variable for negative equity (LTV > 100).
The results are consistent across these permutations. Furthermore, in Online Appendix F,

we consider a similar set of IV specifications for negative income growth shocks rather than
   37
     There is of course no explicit way of testing the exclusion restriction. The over-identification tests come
the closest and are often portrayed as tests of the exclusion restriction, but they are not direct tests because
they assume that at least one of the instruments is valid.



                                                      30
residual income and show that the results are robust.



5. Implications for Research and Policy

The foregoing analysis leads to five significant findings that we believe are relevant for both

researchers and policy makers:


Finding 1: Households with low residual income default more than households with high
residual income.


   The cross tabs in Table 3 show that overall “can’t pay” borrowers are much more likely
to default than “can pay” borrowers – approximately 7 times for the sample as a whole. The

regression results in Section 4 confirm that this central finding still holds when we control
for LTV ratios, a host of demographic and mortgage characteristics, as well as potential

endogeneity bias. The top left panel of Figure 3 shows the predicted default probabilities
across different LTV ratios for two different households using the coefficients from Column
(6) in Table 5. The households are identical except that one has residual income of $500 per

month and the other has $5000. The top right panel shows that the ratio of predicted default
rates for low versus high residual income households ranges from above 8 for households with

low LTV ratios to about 3 for households with very high LTV ratios.


Finding 2: Households with high residual income are more sensitive to changes in LTV
ratios than households with low residual income. Households with low LTV ratios are more
sensitive to changes in residual income than households with high LTV ratios.


   The top left panel of Figure 3 shows the effect of LTV on the default hazard for high

versus low residual income borrowers. For high residual income borrowers, increases in LTV



                                              31
ratios have a much larger effect than for low residual income borrowers: an increase in the

LTV ratio from 50 percent to 150 percent only increases the default hazard for low residual
income borrowers by a factor of 3, whereas for high residual income borrowers, the default

hazard increases by a factor of more than 6. It is important to stress that this does not
mean that high residual income households default more, but rather reflects the fact that
high residual income borrowers with low LTV ratios almost never default. Intuitively, nega-

tive equity is the only reason why a high residual income household would default, whereas
for a low residual income household, negative equity only compounds an existing problem.

As the bottom right panel of the figure shows, similar logic applies to the effect of residual
income conditional on LTV ratios.


Finding 3: Most households that suffer a shock will not default.


   Figure 3 shows a striking fact mentioned earlier in the paper: most borrowers do not
default. Even for LTV ratios as high as 150 percent, the empirical estimates predict that

only 22 percent of households with low residual income default, meaning that 78 percent
continue making their mortgage payments.


Finding 4: Many households that default can afford their mortgage payments.


   Table 3 shows that almost 38 percent of defaulters could afford their mortgage payments
without any reduction in consumption relative to pre-default levels. As discussed above, this

fits with the popular idea that a significant fraction of defaults were “strategic” in the sense
that the household could continue to make payments without imminent sacrifice. We find

that another 33 percent of households would have to cut consumption but could still main-
tain a subsistence level. In other words, slightly less than 30 percent of borrowers appear to
default to avoid destitution.


                                              32
Finding 5: Very few households that can afford their mortgage payments default.


   Table 3 shows that the overwhelming majority of households that could afford to make
their mortgage payments did, in fact, make their payments. If we focus on households with
low equity who had enough income to make their mortgage payments without reducing

consumption below pre-default levels we find that almost 96 percent are not in default.
   Findings 4 and 5 at first blush appear to contradict each other. According to Fact 4,

strategic default appears to be relatively frequent, but according to Fact 5, it seems like
it is not a significant problem at all. The difference between the two findings has to do

with denominators. The numerator in both instances is identical: the number of “can
pay” defaulters. However the denominator corresponding to Fact 4 is the total number of
defaulters in the sample, which is a small number, whereas the denominator corresponding

to Fact 5 is the number of “can pay” households in general (both “can pay” defaulters and
non-defaulters), which is a much larger number (about an order of magnitude larger than the

number of defaulters). This difference between the number of defaulters versus the number
of “can pay” households reconciles the apparent contradiction between Facts 4 and 5.


5.1. Implications for Research

Dating all the way back to Herzog and Earley (1970), researchers have studied the deter-
minants of default using micro data. Although there is strong anecdotal evidence showing

that unemployment and income shocks are important (see Cutts and Merrill (2008), for ex-
ample), the evidence from micro-level data does not bear this out. As Gyourko and Tracy

(2014) write, “Empirical models of mortgage default typically find that the influence of
unemployment is negligible.” Gyourko and Tracy (2014) used simulation methods to argue
that the weak relationship between income and employment and default in the data resulted

from attenuation bias related to the use of aggregate (i.e. county-level and MSA-level)


                                            33
unemployment indicators. Finding 1 of this paper provides direct evidence of the role of

household-level income shocks in the default decision, and the analysis in Section 4 shows
that unemployment and disability shocks are important drivers of the income shocks that

generate mortgage defaults. Thus, our results confirm those of Gyourko and Tracy (2014)38
and also provide some support for the double trigger model of mortgage default described
in Foote et al. (2008) and elsewhere.39

    Our results also provide an explanation for recent empirical findings on the financial crisis,
which documented an increase, relative to the pre-crisis period, in the the share of defaults

from high-income households. Ferreira and Gyourko (2015) argue that the foreclosure crisis
started out in subprime areas but, “quickly morphed into a much bigger and broader event

dominated by prime borrowers losing their homes.” Adelino et al. (2016) find that, “for the
2003 mortgage cohort, the top quintile of the income distribution constituted only 13% of
mortgage dollars in delinquency three years later, whereas for the 2006 cohort, the top income

quintile made up 23% of the delinquencies three years out.” The link to the results in this
paper can be seen in Finding 2, which shows that the relative effect of residual income on

default weakens as LTV ratios rise. In other words, as house prices fall, defaults increase
more for households with high residual income than for households with low residual income.

Researchers going back as far as Mincer (1991) have shown that the hazard of job loss is much
higher for low education workers who would be concentrated in low income areas, meaning
that more households would have low residual income in low income areas in general.40 As

house prices fall, Finding 2 would imply that the default rate should therefore grow relatively
more in high income areas, consistent with Adelino et al. (2016) and Ferreira and Gyourko

(2015).
   38
      Indeed, consistent with previous findings in the literature, when we use aggregated unemployment
instead of household-level unemployment shocks, we find a very weak connection between unemployment
and default, which confirms the role of attenuation bias.
   39
      While our findings support one of the double-trigger model’s main predictions that household-level cash
flow shocks are an important driver of default, they are not consistent with the prediction that such shocks
are a necessary condition for default. Our findings on “can pay” defaulters show that a significant fraction
of defaults appear to be driven by strategic motivations.
   40
      See Elsby et al. (2010) for more recent evidence.


                                                     34
   As mentioned above, the question of the importance of strategic default has occupied

both researchers and policy makers. For example, Guiso et al. (2013) conduct a survey and
ask respondents, “Of the people you know who have defaulted on their mortgage, how many

do you think walked away even if they could afford to pay the monthly mortgage?” Based on
the answers, they conclude that in 2010, approximately 35 percent of defaults were strategic
in nature. Finding 4 of our paper is that almost 38 percent of households in default could

make their mortgage payments without reducing consumption. In that sense, our results
confirm the importance of strategic default. However, it is important to stress again that

according to Finding 5, just because strategic motivations appear to play an important role
among defaulters, does not mean that strategic default was extremely prevalent. Table

3 shows that even among borrowers with low equity, almost 96 percent of borrowers who
could afford their mortgage payments continued making them. Based on these findings, an
important question for researchers to ask in future surveys could be, “Of the people you

know who could afford to make their monthly mortgage payment, how many do you think
walked away?”

   Finally, one of the great puzzles in the mortgage literature is the low frequency of de-
faults in the data. In standard models, default is rampant at high LTV ratios. For example,

Kau et al. (1993) using a contigent claims approach to modeling mortgage default and pre-
payment, calculate in their baseline parametrization, that 100 percent of borrowers with LTV
ratios above 115 percent will default. Yet in the typical micro-level dataset, the share of

borrowers who default with LTV ratios of at least 115 is in the single digits (see, for example,
Deng et al. (2000)). The double-trigger theory proposed that once household financial stress

was taken into consideration, one could reconcile the data and theory. However, the evidence
is mixed. As already noted, Finding 1 shows that households with low residual income are

more likely to default. Table 3 shows that “can’t pay” households with low equity are 30
times more likely to default than “can pay” households with high equity. But, the actual
default rate, even for this high risk group is still only 20 percent or one-fifth of the default


                                              35
rate generated by the model of Kau et al. (1993).

    The open question for research is why many borrowers who face significant hardship
with few options choose to continue making their mortgage payments, while other borrowers

choose not to. One possibility along these lines is that many households have a strong moral
aversion to defaulting on debt, especially mortgage debt. For example, Guiso et al. (2013)
find evidence in survey data that many households consider strategic mortgage default to

be an immoral practice, and as a result, are much less likely to engage in such behavior.
Approximately 82 percent of the households in their survey report having a moral aversion

to mortgage default, so it is conceivable that a large majority of our “can’t pay” households
hold similar reservations against default.

    Another possibility is that many households have a strong attachment to their homes,
and thus, go to extreme measures to avoid default and foreclosure by drawing down their
illiquid assets such as vehicles and retirement accounts.41 Finally, optimistic expectations of

future house prices may play an important role. The theoretical literature tells us that house
price expectations are an important determinant in the decision to default. While it’s hard

to believe that optimistic expectations alone could explain why 80 percent of households
with virtually no income or assets continue to make payments, such an explanation is at

least consistent with the evidence on the sensitivity of default decisions to equity displayed
in Figure 3.


5.2. Implications for Policy

During the foreclosure wave that swept the country before, during, and after the Great
Recession, there were fierce debates among academics and policy makers about the best

policies to mitigate foreclosures and prevent a future crisis. In this section we discuss how
our empirical findings are relevant to this debate.
    First, the signature foreclosure relief policies of the Obama Administration, the Home
  41
     See Laufer (2012) and Schelkle (2011) for theoretical models which allow for strong attachment to homes
or aversion to renting.


                                                    36
Affordable Modification Program (HAMP) and the Home Affordable Refinance Program

(HARP), focused on reducing monthly mortgage payments. Finding 1 above shows that
such an emphasis was sensible. Our regression estimates from Section 4 show that residual

income has economically large effects on repayment behavior and that policies that increase
residual income should be effective in reducing defaults.42 Policy makers then extended
the logic of HAMP and HARP to new mortgage originations. For example, the Qualified

Residential Mortgage (QRM) and Qualified Mortgage (QM) definitions created by the Dodd-
Frank Act of 2010 emphasized that a borrower should only be allowed to obtain a mortgage

if he or she has the “ability-to-repay”, defined as a mortgage payment that cannot exceed
43 percent of monthly income. One might think that Finding 1 confirms that QM and

QRM should reduce defaults and foreclosures going forward. However, in Online Appendix
I, we show that residual income has strong predictive power contemporaneously but residual
income at origination has little power in predicting future defaults. The lack of predictive

power of income at origination is well known in the mortgage industry (see the discussion in
Foote et al. (2010)) and reflects the high volatility of household labor income. As discussed

above, borrowers with low residual income were very likely to have suffered a recent labor
income shock.

   Findings 3 and 4 both imply major challenges in implementing foreclosure prevention
policies and illustrate, at least partly, why the policies implemented during the crisis did
not achieve as much as hoped. The central goal of a HAMP modification was to reduce a

households’s monthly payment to an affordable level. Finding 4, however, shows that many
borrowers in delinquency already have affordable payments. In Figure 2 we show this more

clearly by calculating for each household in default the required mortgage payment reduction
(in percentage terms) that is necessary to make the payment “affordable.” We consider three

definitions of affordability in the figure. The first two correspond to the definitions in Table
3: the mortgage payment is affordable if the household can maintain its consumption level
  42
       Other research, including Fuster and Willen (2012) and Hsu et al. (2014) has made a similar point.



                                                     37
from the previous year, and the payment is affordable if the household can consume the

VA subsistence level, respectively. The third definition considered in Figure 2 is that the
mortgage payment must satisfy the QRM “ability-to-repay” standard. The left-most column

in the figure shows that the payment reduction required to achieve affordability is zero for a
large fraction of households in default. In other words, many delinquent households have too
much income to qualify for a loan modification. Indeed, for the two most realistic definitions

of affordability, QRM and VA subsistence, more than half of the delinquent borrowers already
have “affordable” mortgages. At the other extreme, the right-most column of Figure 2 shows

that many delinquent borrowers (between 15 and 40 percent depending on the affordability
definition) require a 100 percent reduction (or more) in their monthly payment to achieve

affordability. Complete payment reductions obviously present a problem for loss mitigation
policies since the logic behind them is that the lender will recover more than through a
foreclosure. Obviously, this would not hold if the borrower pays nothing. Figure 2 shows that

the inframarginal borrowers are skewed toward small payment reductions which, according
to our regression estimates, would only have small effects on their likelihood of repayment.

   One idea that has been popular during and since the foreclosure crisis is to preemptively
offer loan modifications to borrowers who are at increased risk of default. The logic is that

such modifications are “win-win” because in addition to the obvious benefit to the borrower,
the lender gains as the expected cost of reduced payments is believed to be less than the
expected losses from foreclosures. Finding 3 illustrates why preemptive payment reductions

were never popular with lenders, even when applied to borrowers at elevated risk of default. If
we look at Table 3, we can find a group of borrowers with highly elevated default probabilities:

“Can’t pay” borrowers with high LTV ratios are approximately 30 times more likely to default
than “can pay” borrowers with low LTVs ratios. Finding 3, however, is that 80 percent of

these high risk borrowers do not default. Thus, a loss mitigation plan that targeted only
these high risk borrowers, would see 80 cents of every dollar of payment reduction go to a
household that likely would have made its mortgage payment anyway. In addition, according


                                              38
to the table, if payment reduction takes the residual income of “can’t pay” borrowers above

the VA subsistence level (i.e. into column (2)), the default rate is approximately 9.5 percent.
In other words, if lenders give payment reductions to 100 borrowers, for 80 it is basically a

windfall as they likely would not have defaulted in the absence of the reduction, and only
10 defaults would actually be prevented. This suggests that the cost of a foreclosure must
be 8 times higher than the payment reduction to make it profitable to the lender.

   At the peak of the crisis, some commentators felt that policy makers needed to respond
to the problem of strategic default. Finding 4 shows that many defaulters could make

their mortgage payments but Finding 5 shows that at no point did it reach the epidemic
proportions that some feared: the overwhelming majority of borrowers who could make their

mortgage payments did make them as did many of those who, as far as we can tell, could
not afford their payments.



6. Conclusion

To design efficient foreclosure mitigation policies, it is necessary to understand the sources of
mortgage default. While there is broad agreement that a number of factors may potentially

contribute to default, including housing equity, employment, and liquidity, due to data
limitations, it has been impossible to directly test the relative importance of these factors.

Using new PSID data, which includes detailed information on mortgagors’ budget constraints
such as income and employment status, consumption expenditures, and assets, we measure

the importance of ability to pay for the mortgage default decision and assess the significance
of strategic default.
   In our empirical analysis, we find a significant role for both factors. Among households in

default, strategic motives appear to play an important role, as approximately 38 percent of
households in default appear to have the ability to pay their mortgage without reducing their

consumption below their pre-default levels. Furthermore, using an instrumental variables



                                               39
design, we find that housing equity is an important predictor of mortgage default, holding

residual income constant, which is also consistent with strategic motives playing an important
role. At the same time we find an important role played by household-level income shocks

including unemployment and disability shocks. Our IV estimates indicate that a 10 percent
decline in residual income raises the probability of default by between 1.1 and 2.5 percentage
points, depending on the particular instrument set.

   An additional contribution of this paper is in showing the reluctance of most mortgage
borrowers to default on their loans, even those borrowers who are experiencing significant

financial distress. We show that approximately 80 percent of households that need to cut
their consumption to subsistence levels in order to make their mortgage payments (“cant pay”

borrowers) continue to make their mortgage payments. Furthermore, we find that nearly 96
percent of low equity borrowers with the ability to pay remain current on their loans. These
findings provide a simple explanation for why lenders rarely renegotiate preemptively with

borrowers who have extremely limited resources to pay their mortgage, since the majority
of these borrowers will continue to pay.

   While the PSID data have allowed us to analyze strategic default and the importance
of income shocks for the mortgage default decision in more detail than prior studies in the

literature, a significant amount of work remains to be done. We leave it to future researchers
to develop higher-frequency asset, mortgage default, and consumption datasets, which will
ultimately allow the profession to better understand default behavior.




                                             40
References
Adda, J., H.-M. Gaudecker, and J. Banks (2009). The impact of income shocks on health:
 evidence from cohort data. Journal of the European Economic Association 7 (6), 1361–
 1399.

Adelino, M., K. Gerardi, and P. Willen (2013). Why don’t lenders renegotiate more
 home mortgages? redefaults, self-cures and securitization. Journal of Monetary Eco-
 nomics 60 (7), 835–853.

Adelino, M., A. Schoar, and F. Severino (2016). Loan originations and defaults in the
 mortgage crisis: The role of the middle class. Review of Financial Studies, hhw018.

Benı́tez-Silva, H., S. Eren, F. Heiland, and S. Jiménez-Martı́n (2008). How well do individuals
  predict the selling prices of their homes? Levy Economics Institute Working Paper.

Bhutta, N., J. Dokko, and H. Shan (2011). Consumer ruthlessness and strategic default
  during the 2007-2009 housing bust. Federal Reserve Board of Governors Working Paper.

Bradley, M. G., A. C. Cutts, and W. Liu (2015). Strategic mortgage default: The effect of
  neighborhood factors. Real Estate Economics 43 (2), 271–299.

Campbell, J. and J. Cocco (2011). A model of mortgage default. Technical report, National
  Bureau of Economic Research.

Chatterjee, S. and B. Eyigungor (2009). Foreclosures and House Price Dynamics: A Quan-
  titative Analysis of the Mortgage Crisis and the Foreclosure Prevention Policy. Federal
  Reserve Bank of Philadelphia.

Chatterjee, S. and B. Eyigungor (2011). A quantitative analysis of the us housing and
  mortgage markets and the foreclosure crisis. Federal Reserve Bank of Philadelphia Working
  Paper.

Corbae, D. and E. Quintin (2009). Mortgage innovation and the foreclosure boom. Unpub-
  lished paper, University of Texas at Austin.

Cutts, A. C. and W. Merrill (2008). Interventions in mortgage default: Policies and practices
  to prevent home loss and lower costs. Borrowing to live: Consumer and mortgage credit
  revisited , 203–254.

Demyanyk, Y. and O. Van Hemert (2011). Understanding the subprime mortgage crisis.
  Review of financial Studies 24 (6), 1848–1880.


                                              41
Demyanyk, Y. S., R. S. Koijen, and O. Van Hemert (2011). Determinants and consequences
  of mortgage default. Available at SSRN 1706844 .

Deng, Y., J. M. Quigley, and R. Order (2000). Mortgage terminations, heterogeneity and
  the exercise of mortgage options. Econometrica 68 (2), 275–307.

Deng, Y., J. M. Quigley, R. Van Order, and F. Mac (1996). Mortgage default and low down-
  payment loans: the costs of public subsidy. Regional Science and Urban Economics 26 (3),
  263–285.

Elsby, M. W., B. Hobijn, A. Sahin, L. F. Katz, and R. Shimer (2010). The labor market in
  the great recession/comments and discussion. Brookings Papers on Economic Activity, 1.

Elul, R., N. Souleles, S. Chomsisengphet, D. Glennon, and R. Hunt (2010). What’triggers’
  mortgage default? FRB of Philadelphia Working Paper No. 10-13.

Experian and Oliver Wyman (2009). Understanding strategic default in mortgages part i.
  Experian-Oliver Wyman Market Intelligence Report 2009 . Topical Report Series.

Ferreira, F. and J. Gyourko (2015, June). A new look at the u.s. foreclosure crisis: Panel
  data evidence of prime and subprime borrowers from 1997 to 2012. Working Paper 21261,
  National Bureau of Economic Research.

Foote, C., K. Gerardi, L. Goette, and P. Willen (2010). Reducing foreclosures: No easy
  answers. In NBER Macroeconomics Annual 2009, Volume 24, pp. 89–138. University of
  Chicago Press.

Foote, C. L., K. Gerardi, and P. S. Willen (2008). Negative equity and foreclosure: Theory
  and evidence. Journal of Urban Economics 64 (2), 234–245.

Fuster, A. and P. Willen (2012). Payment size, negative equity, and mortgage default. FRB
  of New York Staff Report (582).

Garriga, C. and D. Schlagenhauf (2009). Home equity, foreclosures, and bailouts. Manuscript,
 Federal Reserve Bank of St. Louis.

Guiso, L., P. Sapienza, and L. Zingales (2013). The determinants of attitudes toward strategic
 default on mortgages. The Journal of Finance 68 (4), 1473–1515.

Gyourko, J. and J. Tracy (2014). Reconciling theory and empirics on the role of unemploy-
 ment in mortgage default. Journal of Urban Economics 80, 87–96.

Hedlund, A. (2011). Illiquidity and foreclosures in a directed search model of the housing
  market. Available at SSRN 1932908.

                                             42
Herzog, J. P. and J. S. Earley (1970). Home Mortgage Delinquency and Foreclosure. Cam-
  bridge, MA: National Bureau of Economic Research.

Hsu, J. W., D. A. Matsa, and B. T. Melzer (2014, July). Positive externalities of social
  insurance: Unemployment insurance and consumer credit. Working Paper 20353, National
  Bureau of Economic Research.

Hurd, M. D. and S. Rohwedder (2010). Effects of the financial crisis and great recession on
 american households. Technical report, National Bureau of Economic Research.

Jarosch, G. (2014). Searching for job security and the consequences of job loss. V University
  of Chicago, Job Market Paper .

Kau, J. B., D. Keenan, and T. Kim (1993). Transaction costs, suboptimal termination and
 default probabilities. Real Estate Economics 21 (3), 247–263.

Laufer, S. (2012). Equity extraction and mortgage default. Technical report, Working Paper.
  New York University.

Low, H. and L. Pistaferri (2015). Disability insurance and the dynamics of the incentive
  insurance trade-off. American Economic Review 105, 2986–3029.

Mian, A. and A. Sufi (2009). The consequences of mortgage credit expansion: Evidence from
 the us mortgage default crisis. The Quarterly Journal of Economics 124 (4), 1449–1496.

Mincer, J. (1991, September). Education and unemployment. Working Paper 3838, National
 Bureau of Economic Research.

Saporta-Eksten, I. (2014). Job loss, consumption and unemployment insurance. Unpublished
  manuscript.

Schelkle, T. (2011). Mortgage default during the us mortgage crisis. Working paper, London
  School of Economics.

Smith, J. P. (2004). Unraveling the ses: health connection. Population and development
  review 30, 108–132.




                                             43
   Table 1: Comparing PSID and American Housing Survey Mortgage Data: 2009-2013

                                                2009                  2011                  2013
                                            PSID     AHS          PSID     AHS          PSID     AHS
                 Median:
    Principal Remaining                    120,000   106,909     120,000   120,000     130,000   121,324
    Monthly Mortgage Payment                1,100      878        1,100     1015        1,085      997
    Mortgage Interest Rate                     5         6           5       5.3           4       4.5
    Years Remaining on First Mortgage        24        23           22       22           21        21
    LTV Ratio (1st Mort.)                     65        63          68       71           69        70

             Fraction with:
    Second Mortgage                         0.21      0.21         0.18      0.13        0.15      0.10
    ARM                                     0.09      0.06         0.08      0.07        0.08      0.06
    Observations                            2,640    51,969       2,462     49,734      2,295     47,741

Notes: This table compares mortgage summary statistics in the PSID and AHS surveys. AHS 2009 National
Statistics are taken from Tables 3.13 and 3.15. AHS 2011 and 2013 National Statistics are taken from Table
C-14A-OO. The PSID sample consists of household heads who are mortgagors, aged 24–65, and labor force
participants (including those who are disabled) with combined loan to value ratios less than 250 percent in
the 2009, 2011, and 2013 surveys. Households that report they are in default in a given year are subsequently
dropped to avoid double counting.




                                                     44
                   Table 2: Sample Summary Statistics for PSID Household Heads.

                                                     All Mortgagor Households                      Households in Default
                                           Mean        10th Perc. Median 90th Perc.       Mean     10th Perc. Median 90th Perc.
 (A) Income and Consumption:
 Real Income                               120,000      40,000       94,000     210,000   71,000    21,000    60,000   130,000
 Real Income After Tax                      87,000      34,000       72,000     150,000   58,000    23,000    53,000   110,000
 Real Total Consumption                     65,000      29,000       56,000     110,000   58,000    27,000    50,000   100,000
 % Change in Income (2yr Period)                8        -31            6         59         -4       -55       -7        58
 15% Income Drop or more (d)                  0.19         0            0          1        0.42       0         0         1
 30% Income Drop or more (d)                 0.102         0            0          1       0.241       0         0         1
 Log Residual Income                         11.19      10.252       11.247      12.08     10.51     8.909     10.64    11.564
 Residual Income                           100,000      28,000       77,000     180,000   50,000     7,400    42,000   110,000

 (B) Demographics:
 Married (d)                                 0.70          0              1        1       0.55        0        1         1
 College Grad+ Education (d)                 0.45          0              0        1       0.23        0        0         1
 Less than High School (d)                   0.06          0              0        0       0.16        0        0         1
 Age                                        46.02         31             46       60      44.97       31       46        59

 (C) LTV and Delinquency:
 Loan to Value Ratio                        0.68         0.25            0.69     1        1.01      0.58      0.95     1.68
 Default (60+ Days Late) (d)                0.03           0               0      0        1.00        1         1        1
 Default (90+ Days Late) (d)                0.02           0               0      0        0.63        0         1        1

 (D) Wealth
 Liquid Assets                              26,000        0           6,214      57,000    4,630      0        518      5,429
 Illiquid Assets                           150,000      3,107        27,000     350,000   36,000      0       7,601    57,000

 (E) Employment and Disabilities:
 Unemployed Head Last Year (d)               0.07         0               0       0        0.22       0         0         1
 Unemployed Spouse Last Year (d)             0.04         0               0       0        0.10       0         0         1
 Unemployed Head or Spouse Last Year (d)     0.11         0               0       1       0.28        0         0         1
 Involuntary Unemployment, Head (d)         0.027         0               0       0       0.104       0         0         1
 Involuntary Unemployment, Spouse (d)       0.007         0               0       0       0.006       0         0         0
 Transition into Disability, Head (d)       0.040         0               0       0       0.060       0         0         0
 Transition into Disability, Sp. (d)        0.036         0               0       0       0.056       0         0         0

 Observations                                                    7,404                              248


Notes: This table displays summary statistics for the sample of PSID households surveyed in 2009, 2011,
and 2013. Default is defined as 60+ days late as of survey date (at least two missed payments). The sample
includes heads of household who are mortgagors, aged 24–65, and labor force participants (including those
who are disabled) with combined LTV ratios less than 250 percent. Households that report they are in
default in a given year are subsequently dropped to avoid double counting. All $ values are deflated by
the 2013 CPI. PSID weights are used to calculate all summary statistics unless otherwise noted. Dummy
variables are signified by (d).




                                                               45
Table 3: Measures of Strategic Default: How Many Defaulters Can Afford Their Payments?


                                      (1) “Can Pay”                   (2)               (3) “Can’t Pay”          (4)
                                        c<y−m                 c > y − m > c(V A)        y − m < c(V A)          Total
                                    #          share          #          share         #        share             #
                                    (i)    (ii)=(i)/(vii)    (iii) (iv)=(iii)/(vii)   (v) (vi)=(v)/(vii)        (vii)

 A. Total

   Default                           74        0.377           65       0.333          57      0.291             196
   Population                      5,173       0.699         1,704      0.230         531      0.072            7404

   Default Rate (# Def./# Pop.)            0.014                     0.038                  0.107               0.027

 B. LT V > 90

   Default                           47        0.409          41        0.352          28      0.239             115
   Population                      1,117       0.664         428        0.254         140      0.083            1684

   Default Rate                            0.042                     0.095                  0.197               0.069

 C. LT V < 90

   Default                           27        0.330           25       0.306          29      0.364             81
   Population                      4,056       0.709         1,277      0.223         391      0.068            5720

   Default Rate                            0.007                     0.019                  0.075               0.014



Notes: This table displays statistics on strategic default measures calculated from the PSID. Income, y, is
defined as average monthly after-tax family income. If the head of household is unemployed as of the survey
date, then the head’s labor earnings for that month are set to zero (likewise for the spouse). If the head is
recently divorced, then spousal labor earnings are set to zero. Consumption, c, is defined as average monthly
expenditures, and m is the monthly mortgage payment across all mortgages, plus associated property taxes
and insurance. The Back-End After-Tax DTI is defined as the ratio of combined mortgage payments to after-
tax family income less alimony, child care, and interest on other debts (imputed at a 12.73% per annum
rate). VA subsistence consumption is defined using the VA residual income based on the region, number of
children, and income of the mortgage as of the survey date.




                                                        46
                 Table 4: Adverse shock incidence by residual income quintile.
                                                                         Quintile of Residual Income
                                                                       (Gross Income-Mortgage Expenses)
                                                                        1       2     3       4      5
       30% Income Drop or more (d)                                    25.6% 12.2% 5.9%      4.7%    3.9%
       Unemployed Head Last Year (d)                                  13.9% 7.1% 4.9%       4.0%    4.2%
       Unemployed Spouse Last Year (d)                                 4.3% 6.1% 5.7%       3.2%    3.1%
       Transition into Disability, Head (d)                            6.0% 4.3% 3.7%       3.4%    2.7%
       Transition into Disability, Spouse (d)                          3.4% 3.9% 3.4%       3.6%    3.8%
       Any Shock (Unemployment, Disability, or 30% Income Drop) (d)   40.9% 28.5% 20.0%    16.8%   16.1%


Notes: This table displays the fraction unemployed, recently disabled, and with a 30% income drop or
more, split by quintile of residual income (defined as gross family income less mortgage expenses) for the
sample of PSID households surveyed in 2009, 2011, and 2013.




                                                      47
Table 5: Baseline Results: Linear Probability Model Cols (1) to (3), Logit Coefficients
Cols (4) to (6) (with AME in square brackets, interaction at interquartile range of residual
income), Dependent Variable is 60+ Days Late Indicator.


                                                (1)           (2)       (3)         (4)           (5)            (6)

 Loan to Value Ratio                         0.071***    0.078***    0.680***      1.798***      1.755***        -1.446
                                              (7.61)      (6.74)      (4.34)        (10.34)       (8.93)         (-0.77)
                                                                                  [0.054***]    [0.051***]     [0.051***]
 Log Residual Income                         -0.037***   -0.025***    0.012       -0.932***     -0.727***      -0.993***
                                               (-9.73)     (-5.74)    (1.32)       (-14.01)       (-8.19)        (-5.90)
                                                                                 [-0.028***]   [-0.021***]    [-0.021***]
 Log Residual Income x Loan to Value Ratio                           -0.055***                                   0.305*
                                                                       (-3.97)                                   (1.74)
                                                                                                             [-0.0194***]
 Constant                                    0.399***    0.190***    -0.218**     5.289***       1.105           3.852*
                                              (9.03)      (3.70)      (-2.06)      (7.12)        (0.73)          (1.82)

 Observations                                  7,404       7,404       7,404       7,404         7,404          7,404
 R-squared                                     0.046       0.077       0.084       0.134         0.189          0.190
 Demographic Controls?                           N           Y           Y           N             Y              Y
 Mortgage Controls?                              N           Y           Y           N             Y              Y
 State Controls?                                 N           Y           Y           N             Y              Y

Notes: This table displays OLS estimation results of regressions of default on LTV ratios and residual income
in Cols. (1) to (3). Cols (4) to (6) report logit coefficients, and the square bracketed terms are the average
marginal effects. To compute the interaction we compute the difference in the LTV AME bewteen the
interquartile range of residual income. Residual Income is defined as gross family income less mortgage
expenses. Default is defined as 60+ days late as of survey date (at least two missed payments). The sample
includes all household heads in the PSID who are mortgagors, aged 24–65, and labor force participants
(including those who are disabled) with combined LTV ratios less than 250 percent. Robust t-statistics
are reported in parentheses and dummy variables are signified by (d). Level of statistical significance:
∗∗∗
    p < 0.01, ∗∗ p < 0.05, ∗ p < 0.10.




                                                         48
                                                                                            Table 6: IV Results


                                                                 (1)               (2)               (3)               (4)                (5)             (6)              (7)                (8)                 (9)

       Loan to Value Ratio                                   0.078***          0.189***          0.150***           0.224***          0.154***         0.188***         0.149***           0.192***           0.150***
                                                               (6.74)            (3.63)           (3.16)             (3.45)            (3.25)           (3.65)           (3.14)             (3.73)             (3.15)
       Log Residual Income                                   -0.025***         -0.149***                            -0.240**                           -0.109**                            -0.116**
                                                               (-5.74)           (-4.47)                             (-2.35)                            (-1.97)                             (-1.97)
       Unemployed Head Last Year (d)                                                             0.053***
                                                                                                   (4.14)
       Unemployed Spouse Last Year (d)                                                            0.030**
                                                                                                   (2.33)
       Involuntary Unemployment, Head (d)                                                                                              0.055**
                                                                                                                                        (2.54)
       Involuntary Unemployment, Spouse (d)                                                                                             0.007
                                                                                                                                        (0.28)
       Bartik Instrument (2 Yr. Ch.)                                                                                                                                      -0.553                               -0.536
                                                                                                                                                                         (-0.86)                               (-0.83)
       Transition into Disability, Head (d)                                                                                                                               0.012
                                                                                                                                                                          (0.89)
       Transition into Disability, Spouse (d)                                                                                                                            0.033**
                                                                                                                                                                          (2.33)
       Transition into Major Disability (d)                                                                                                                                                                    0.058
49




                                                                                                                                                                                                               (1.36)
       Transition into Major Disability, Spouse (d)                                                                                                                                                            0.041
                                                                                                                                                                                                               (1.09)
       IV for LTV:                                                .          HPA Since          HPA Since   HPA Since                HPA Since HPA Since               HPA Since    HPA Since                HPA Since
                                                                  .           Purchase           Purchase    Purchase                 Purchase  Purchase                Purchase     Purchase                 Purchase
       IV for Income:                                             .           Job loss              .     Invol. Job Loss,               .      Disability,                .     Severe Disability,               .
                                                                  .        Head & Spouse            .     Head & Spouse                  .     Bartik Shock                .       Bartik Shock                   .
       Observations                                             7,404          7,404              7,404         7,404                  7,404      7,404                  7,404         7,404                   7,404
       Demographic Controls?                                      Y              Y                  Y             Y                      Y           Y                     Y             Y                       Y
       Mortgage Controls?                                         Y              Y                  Y             Y                      Y           Y                     Y             Y                       Y
       State Controls?                                            Y              Y                  Y             Y                      Y           Y                     Y             Y                       Y
       Job Loss FEs?                                              N              N                  N             Y                      Y           N                     N             N                       N
       Jtest Pval Null Valid                                      .            0.580                .           0.280                    .         0.182                   .           0.630                      .
       Weak ID Pval Null Weak                                     .              0                  0        0.000166                    0       4.51e-07                  0         1.18e-07                     0

     Notes: This table displays a set of estimation from regressions of default on LTV ratios and residual income. Default is defined as 60+ days late as of survey date (at least two missed payments). Residual

     Income is defined as gross family income less mortgage expenses. Col (1) repeats Col (2) from Table 5. Col (2) uses unemployment over prior year for head and spouse as IV for residual income and

     cumulative state HP growth as IV for LTV. Col (3) is the reduced form of Col (2). Col (4) uses involuntary job loss as of the survey date as the income IV, and Col (5) is the reduced form of Col (4).

     Col (6) uses general disability shocks and a 2 year Bartik instrument as the income IVs, and Col (7) is the reduced form of Col (6). Col (8) uses severe disability shocks as the income IV, and Col (9)

     is the reduced form of Col (8). The demographic controls include 1-digit industry, year, race, education, marital status, and sex dummies as well as age and number of children. The mortgage controls

     include dummies for origination years, whether the mortgage is refinanced, the presence of a second mortgage, whether the term remaining is >15 years, whether or not the loan is refinanced as well as

     the interest rate. The state controls include whether the state is judicial, recourse, or one of the sand states, as well as changes in state level house prices and unemployment. Job loss fixed effects are a

     set of dummies for the number of prior unemployment spells over the prior ten years to our study, from 1994-2005. Level of statistical significance: ∗∗∗ p < 0.01, ∗∗ p < 0.05, ∗ p < 0.10.
                                                                                        Table 7: IV Results, First Stages

                                         A. LTV                                             (1)      (2)         (3)         (4)         (5)         (6)         (7)         (8)         (9)
                                         Cumulative State HP Growth from Purchase Date       .    -0.081***   -0.081***   -0.081***   -0.081***   -0.081***   -0.081***   -0.081***   -0.081***
                                                                                             .     (-14.54)    (-14.54)    (-14.70)    (-14.70)    (-14.54)    (-14.54)    (-14.51)    (-14.51)
                                         Unemployed Head Last Year (d)                       .      0.020       0.020
                                                                                             .      (1.48)      (1.48)
                                         Unemployed Spouse Last Year (d)                     .      0.026       0.026
                                                                                             .      (1.51)      (1.51)
                                         Involuntary Unemployment, Head (d)                  .                             0.025       0.025
                                                                                             .                             (1.20)      (1.20)
                                         Involuntary Unemployment, Spouse (d)                .                             0.013       0.013
                                                                                             .                             (0.26)      (0.26)
                                         Bartik Instrument (2 Yr. Ch.)                       .                                                     0.438       0.438       0.489       0.489
                                                                                             .                                                     (0.51)      (0.51)      (0.57)      (0.57)
                                         Transition into Disability, Head (d)                .                                                     0.003       0.003
                                                                                             .                                                     (0.15)      (0.15)
                                         Transition into Disability, Spouse (d)              .                                                     0.015       0.015
                                                                                             .                                                     (0.80)      (0.80)
                                         Transition into Major Disability (d)                .                                                                              0.048      0.048
                                                                                             .                                                                              (1.43)     (1.43)
                                         Transition into Major Disability, Spouse (d)        .                                                                             0.128**    0.128**
                                                                                             .                                                                              (2.49)     (2.49)
                                         Observations                                        .      7,404       7,404       7,404       7,404       7,404       7,404       7,404      7,404
                                         R-squared                                           .      0.352       0.352       0.353       0.353       0.351       0.351       0.353      0.353
                                         Demographic Controls?                               .        Y           Y           Y           Y           Y           Y           Y          Y
                                         Mortgage Controls?                                  .        Y           Y           Y           Y           Y           Y           Y          Y
                                         State Controls?                                     .        Y           Y           Y           Y           Y           Y           Y          Y
                                         Job Loss FEs?                                       .        N           N           Y           Y           N           N           N          N

                                         B. Residual Income                                 (1)      (2)         (3)         (4)         (5)         (6)         (7)         (8)         (9)
                                         Cumulative State HP Growth from Purchase Date       .     -0.022*        .        -0.023*        .        -0.024*        .        -0.024*        .
50




                                                                                             .      (-1.70)       .        (-1.69)        .        (-1.83)        .        (-1.80)        .
                                         Unemployed Head Last Year (d)                       .    -0.325***       .                       .                       .                       .
                                                                                             .      (-8.76)       .                       .                       .                       .
                                         Unemployed Spouse Last Year (d)                     .    -0.239***       .                       .                       .                       .
                                                                                             .      (-6.44)       .                       .                       .                       .
                                         Involuntary Unemployment, Head (d)                  .                    .       -0.206***       .                       .                       .
                                                                                             .                    .         (-3.97)       .                       .                       .
                                         Involuntary Unemployment, Spouse (d)                .                    .          0.098        .                       .                       .
                                                                                             .                    .         (1.64)        .                       .                       .
                                         Bartik Instrument (2 Yr. Ch.)                       .                    .                       .       10.337***       .       10.118***       .
                                                                                             .                    .                       .         (4.61)        .         (4.50)        .
                                         Transition into Disability, Head (d)                .                    .                       .       -0.148***       .                       .
                                                                                             .                    .                       .         (-2.83)       .                       .
                                         Transition into Disability, Spouse (d)              .                    .                       .        -0.092**       .                       .
                                                                                             .                    .                       .         (-2.17)       .                       .
                                         Transition into Major Disability (d)                .                    .                       .                       .       -0.335***       .
                                                                                             .                    .                       .                       .         (-2.99)       .
                                         Transition into Major Disability, Spouse (d)        .                    .                       .                       .        -0.223**       .
                                                                                             .                    .                       .                       .         (-2.45)       .
                                         Observations                                        .      7,404         .         7,404         .         7,404         .          7,404        .
                                         R-squared                                           .      0.335         .         0.326         .         0.321         .          0.322        .
                                         Demographic Controls?                               .        Y           .           Y           .           Y           .            Y          .
                                         Mortgage Controls?                                  .        Y           .           Y           .           Y           .            Y          .
                                         State Controls?                                     .        Y           .           Y           .           Y           .            Y          .
                                         Job Loss FEs?                                       .        N           .           Y           .           N           .            N          .


     Notes: This table displays a set of estimation from regressions of default on LTV ratios and residual income. Default is defined as 60+ days late as of survey date (at least two missed payments). Residual

     Income is defined as gross family income less mortgage expenses. Col (1) repeats Col (2) from Table 5. Col (2) uses unemployment over prior year for head and spouse as IV for residual income and

     cumulative state HP growth as IV for LTV. Col (3) is the reduced form of Col (2). Col (4) uses involuntary job loss as of the survey date as the income IV, and Col (5) is the reduced form of Col (4).

     Col (6) uses general disability shocks and a 2 year Bartik instrument as the income IVs, and Col (7) is the reduced form of Col (6). Col (8) uses severe disability shocks as the income IV, and Col (9) is

     the reduced form of Col (8). Level of statistical significance: ∗∗∗ p < 0.01, ∗∗ p < 0.05, ∗ p < 0.10.
                                                      Figure 1. Comparing Equity Distribution in PSID and CoreLogic


                                           12%
                                                    PSID 2009
                                                    Corelogic 2009
                                           10%
                  Fraction of Mortgagors




                                           8%



                                           6%
51




                                           4%



                                           2%



                                           0%
                                                 0% to 5%   0% to -5%   -5% to -10% -10% to -15% -15% to -20% -20% to -25%   < -25%

                                                                           Home Equity Distribution

     Notes: This figure compares the distribution of negative equity in the 2009 PSID to the distribution reported by CoreLogic in the third quarter of
     2009. The PSID sample includes heads of household who are mortgagors, ages 24-65, labor force participants with combined loan to value ratios
     less than 250% in 2009. CoreLogic data taken as of 2009:Q3. “First American CoreLogic Releases Q3 Negative Equity Data,” available from
     http://www.recharts.com/reports/FACLNERQ32009/FACLNERQ32009.pdf
                Figure 2. Mortgage Affordability Measures Among Defaulters




Notes: Sample includes 60+ Days late defaulters from the PSID Main Sample, 2009-2013. Percent reduction
calculated using 1st and 2nd mortgage. Payment reduction calculated as min((mmax − m)/m, 0), where
mmax is the maximum payment a household can make and still have (i) the same consumption, (ii) VA
residual consumption, and (iii) meet the definition of QRM. VA residual income defined in the text. QRM
defined using 43% DTI after adjusting for insurance, taxes, other debt obligations, and alimony payments.




                                                   52
                                                                Figure 3. Predicted default rates based on Column (6) from Table 5

                                                            Predicted default rates                                                                            Relative default rates
                                                                                                                                               10
                                             20
                                                                                                                                               9




                                                                                                                      Ratio of default rates
                                                                                                                                               8
                                             15
                   P (Default) in %



                                                    Residual Income=$500/monthց
                                                                                                                                                7
                                                                                                                                                                          Ratio of default rates
                                             10                                                                                                                           ւlow v. high residual income
                                                                                                                                               6

                                                                                                                                                5
                                              5           Residual Income=$5000/monthց
                                                                                                                                                4

                                              0                                                                                                 3
                                                    0      25        50        75     100         125    150                                          0      25      50       75      100     125        150
                                                                              LTV
53




                                                  Relative Hazard, Different Residual Income                                                              Relative Hazard, Different LTVs

                                              6                                                                                                8

                                                                                                                                               7
                   Relative Default Hazard




                                                                                                               Relative Default Hazard
                                              5
                                                                                                                                               6
                                              4                                                                                                5
                                                   Residual Income=$5000/monthց

                                              3                                                                                                4                          LTV=70ց

                                                                                                                                               3
                                              2                                                                                                                                              տLTV=140
                                                                                                                                               2
                                                                          տResidual Income=$500/month
                                              1                                                                                                1
                                                     50         75            100           125         150                                        8000       4000           2000          1000           500
                                                                              LTV                                                                           Monthly Residual Income in $ (inverted)

     Notes: Sample includes 60+ Days late defaulters from the PSID Main Sample, 2009-2013. Percent reduction calculated using 1st and 2nd mortgage.
     Payment reduction calculated as min((mmax − m)/m, 0), where mmax is the maximum payment a household can make and still have (i) the same
     consumption, (ii) VA residual consumption, and (iii) meet the definition of QRM. VA residual income defined in the text. QRM defined using 43%
     DTI after adjusting for insurance, taxes, other debt obligations, and alimony payments.
       Supplementary Appendix
            “Can’t Pay or Won’t Pay?
Unemployment, Negative Equity, and Strategic Default”
                       2016
     Gerardi, Herkenhoff, Ohanian, and Willen




                         54
A. Existing Measures of Strategic Default
Table 8 compares our measures of strategic default to the existing literature’s definitions.
We find a somewhat larger share of strategic defaults, 38%, relative to other studies whose
estimates range from 19% to 35% depending on the year and method of measurement. What
makes our measure unique is that it is model based, i.e. it is based on a mortgagor’s budget
constraint, and we were able to measure each component of the budget constraint in the new
PSID.

                                        Table 8: Existing Measures of Strategic Default
 Study                     Experian/Oliver Wyman                      Bradley, Cutts, Liu                    Guiso, Sapienza, Zingales               Present Paper
 Sample                    Experian (Number of obs. undisclosed)      Equifax Merged w/ Payroll Data (EFX    Chicago Booth Kellogg School Finan-     PSID (N=7k)
                                                                      TWN) (N= 130k)                         cial Trust Index, Q4-2008 to Q3-2010,
                                                                                                             (N= 1k)
 Year                      2004-Q4 to 2009-Q2                         June 2008-June 2011                    Q4-2008 to Q3 2010                      2009 to 2013
 Definition of Strategic   “[b]orrowers who rolled straight from      Individuals with negative equity who   Of the people you know who have de-     Budget constraint def-
 Default                   60 dpd to 180+ dpd, while staying less     transition from Current to 180+ Days   faulted on their mortgage, how many     inition: ”What frac-
                           than 60 dpd on their auto loans and less   Late with No Income Loss of 20% or     do you think walked away even if they   tion of defaulters ‘can
                           than 90 dpd on their bank cards, retail    More                                   could afford to pay the monthly mort-   pay’, i.e. what frac-
                           cards, and other personal loans, for 6                                            gage?                                   tion satisfy c+m<y”
                           months after they first went 60 dpd on
                           their mortgage.”
 Fraction strategic        19% in 2009, 18% in 2008                   7% to 14.6%                            25% to 35%                              38%
 Page Ref.                 p. 4 and p.7                               p.17                                   p.1 and p. 34 Fig. 5                    Table 3




                                                                                    55
B. PSID Consumption Data and TAXSIM
In Table 9 we compare the entire PSID weighted sample of household heads (including renters
and mortgagors) to the Consumer Expenditure Survey (CEX) as tabulated by the BEA.43
The PSID data are treated as follows: each category is annualized, then aggregated to the
line items below, and then the top 1% of positive values is winsorized, and only observations
with annual food expenditure of at least $500 are counted. The numbers below are reported
at the family unit level in nominal terms. The main measures of food consumption align
almost perfectly in both levels and trends. The expenditure on housing is quite different
due to the fact that the PSID includes a category called ‘additions’ and this is a significant
expenditure by many households. Most other line-items line up and follow similar trends,
however healthcare was recoded in the 2013 PSID and falls significantly in 2013.

       Table 9: PSID vs. CEX Expenditures Data (Source: PSID 2009-2013 Weighted)
  Item                          2009 2011 2013 CEX                 2009 2011 2013 PSID Notes
                                CEX CEX CEX Notes                  PSID PSID PSID

  Avg. Annual Expenditures      49,067 49,705 51,100
  Avg. Annual Expenditures      41,873 42,560 43,738               41,768 41,319 41,176
  (Excluding     Pension/Cash
  Contributions)
  Food + Alcoholic Beveridges   6,807   6,914   7,047              6,647   6,909   7,190Food at home, away, deliv-
                                                                                        ered, and food stamps
  Housing                       16,895 16,803 17,148 Does not      19,593 18,619 18,259 Mortgage Payments, Rent,
                                                     include                            Additions,      Furnishings,
                                                     additions                          Property Taxes and Insur-
                                                     to home                            ance,Utilities
  Apparel and services          1,725 1,740 1,604                  1,307 1,153 1,144 Clothing Consumption
  Transportation                7,658 8,293 9,004                  7,032 7,503 7,555 Car repair, Gas, Park-
                                                                                        ing, Trains, Cabs, Other
                                                                                        Transp.      Expenses, Car
                                                                                        Insurance, Lease Outlays,
                                                                                        Down payments, Loan pay-
                                                                                        ments, Outright Car Pur-
                                                                                        chases
  Health care                   3,126   3,313   3,631              2,999 2,987 2,679 Health Insurance, Doctor,
                                                                                        Hospital, Prescriptions
  Entertainment                 2,693   2,572   2,482              2,411 2,307 2,402 Trips and Recreation
  Education                     1,068   1,051   1,138              1,372 1,442 1,440 School Expenses, and Other
                                                                                        School Exp.
  Other Non-Aligned      Con-   1,902   1,875   1,685   Reading,   407    399    507    Child Care, Alimony
  sumption                                              Tobacco,
                                                        Misc.



   For TAXSIM computations, we base our code on the NBER TAXSIM code provided by
Erick Zwick.44 Table 10 summarizes PSID income per family compared to the comparable
  43
      Our measures come from the ”Multi-year CEX Tables” entitled ‘Average annual expenditures and
characteristics of all consumer units, Consumer Expenditure Survey, 2006-2012’ as well as the 2013-2014
version of the table. See http://www.bls.gov/cex/tables.htm for more details on the CEX tabulations.
   44
      The spouses pension variables were added later in the sample. For consistency we only focus on the


                                                         56
measure from the Census. Our Census measure is mean family income, Table H-6.45 Table 10
shows that our measures of family income broadly align in levels with the Census measures,
and our average tax burden per family is about 22% over this time period.


Table 10: PSID vs. Census Family Income and After-Tax Family Income (Source: PSID
2009-2013 Weighted)
                         2009 Census   2011 Census      2013 Census   2009 PSID 2011 PSID 2013 PSID
 Average Family Income      67976         69677            72641        72660     69000        73580
 After TAXSIM Taxes           -             -                -          55700     54220        58020
 N                         117,538       121,084          122,952        9005      9235         9398




head’s pension variables.
   45
      ‘Table H-6.         Regions–All Races by Median and Mean Income:            1975    to   2014’
https://www.census.gov/hhes/www/income/data/historical/household/


                                                   57
C. Strategic Default with Assets
Table 11 computes measure of strategic default using asset information in the PSID. a is
computed as the net financial assets of a household: the sum of checking, saving, money
market accounts, government bonds, stocks, and other bonds, less an imputed 12.73% debt
burden on all other unsecured debt obligations. 12.73% is the average credit card interest
rate from 2009-2013 according to the Board of Governors. So in some cases, ability to pay
of households may fall if they have negative net financial assets.

                                 Table 11: Strategic Default with Assets
                             Can Pay                                       Can’t Pay
                           c<y−m+a            c > y − m + a > c(V A)   y − m + a < c(V A)   Total
                           #     share         #         share          #       share         #
                          (1) (2)=(1)/(7)     (3)     (4)=(3)/(7)      (5)   (6)=(5)/(7)     (7)
           A. All
               Default     95       0.485      40        0.205          61      0.309        196
            Population    6184      0.835     570        0.077         655      0.088       7404

           Default Rate     0.015                     0.071                  0.093          0.027
           B. LTV>90
                Default 61     0.525           24        0.210          31      0.265        115
            Population 1219    0.724          197        0.117         270      0.161       1684

           Default Rate     0.050                     0.123                  0.113          0.069
           C. LTV<90
                Default 35     0.429           16        0.199          30      0.372        81
            Population 4965    0.868          373        0.065         384      0.067       5720

           Default Rate          0.007                0.043                  0.078          0.014




                                                    58
D. QRM Definitions of Strategic Default
Table 12 computes default rates among those who meet the QRM definition of affordability,
and those who don’t. We use the QRM guidelines to adjust income for taxes, insurance,
alimony, and other debt obligations. If the ratio of combined mortgage payments to adjusted
income is below 43%, the mortgage is deemed affordable. Applying this definition to our
sample, Table 12 shows that there is a 5x difference in default propensity between those who
meet the QRM definition of affordability (1.6%), and those who don’t(9.2%). Among those
with high LTVs (>90), the default rate among those who do not meet QRM affordability
criteria is 17.9% relative to 4.0% for those who do. For those with positive equity, the level
of default drops significantly for both groups.

                   Table 12: QRM Based Definitions of Strategic Default
                                       Can Pay              Can’t Pay
                                 Debt to Income<43%    Debt to Income>43%    Total
                                  #         share       #         share        #
                                 (1)     (2)=(1)/(5)   (3)     (4)=(3)/(5)    (5)
                  A. All
                  Default         100      0.508        97       0.492        196
                  Population     6359      0.859       1045      0.141       7404

                  Default Rate          0.016                 0.092          0.027
                  B. LTV>90

                  Default         54       0.465        62       0.535        115
                  Population     1338      0.794       346       0.206       1684

                  Default Rate          0.040                 0.179          0.069
                  C. LTV<90

                  Default         46       0.571        35       0.429        81
                  Population     5021      0.878       699       0.122       5720

                  Default Rate          0.009                 0.050          0.014




                                                59
E. Baseline Regressions with DTI
Table 13 redoes Table 5 using the log of the debt to income ratio (i.e. log(m/y), the debt
to income ratio, DTI) as the main independent regressor. Columns 1 through 3 report
OLS coefficients, and Columns 4 through 6 report logit coefficients with average marginal
effects in square parentheses below. As in Table 5, the interaction term is computed at the
interquartile range for the logit specification. The coefficients can be interpreted as semi-
elasticities. For example, column 1’s point estimate implies that a 10% increase in DTI
increases the default rate by .39 percentage points.


Table 13: Debt to Income Ratio Results: Linear Probability Model Cols (1) to (3), Logit
Coefficients Cols (4) to (6) (with AME in square brackets, interaction at interquartile range
of residual income), Dependent Variable is 60+ Days Late Indicator.
                                    (1)        (2)         (3)         (4)          (5)          (6)

       Loan to Value Ratio        0.058***   0.071***   0.259***     1.568***     1.548***     2.341***
                                   (6.09)     (6.06)     (7.17)        (8.51)      (7.56)       (4.57)
                                                                    [0.047***]   [0.045***]   [0.043***]
       Log of DTI                 0.039***   0.030***   -0.034***    1.406***     1.110***     0.630**
                                   (8.47)     (6.64)      (-3.48)     (10.93)      (7.61)       (2.02)
                                                                    [0.043***]   [0.032***]   [0.033***]
       Log of DTI * LTV                                 0.103***                                0.563*
                                                         (6.39)                                 (1.71)
                                                                                              [0.029***]
       Constant                   0.066***   -0.019     -0.134***   -2.318***    -4.024***    -4.630***
                                   (5.30)    (-0.69)      (-3.88)     (-8.45)      (-3.28)      (-3.61)

       Observations                7,402      7,402       7,402       7,402        7,402        7,402
       R-squared                   0.036      0.077       0.093         -            -            -
       Demographic Controls?         N          Y           Y           N            Y            Y
       Mortgage Controls?            N          Y           Y           N            Y            Y
       State Controls?               N          Y           Y           N            Y            Y




                                                60
F. Income Changes and Non-Linearities
This section redoes our main analysis, but rather than use residual income, this table focuses
on income shocks. In particular, we consider 2-year changes in gross family income between
the PSID survey dates. Columns (1) through (4) of Table 14 show the non-linear impact
of varying degrees of income loss on default. In columns (1) and (2) we include a series
of indicator variables corresponding to various intervals in the income growth distribution:
(−∞,−30%], (−30%, −15%], (−15%, −5%], and (−5%, 0%], with the omitted interval
corresponding to any positive growth. The results reported in columns (1) and (2) show
that income declines of more than 5% are significantly associated with increased mortgage
default. Households that experienced negative income growth between 15% and 30% are 2 -
3 percentage points more likely to default compared to households that experienced flat or
positive income growth, while households that suffered at least a 30% decline in income are
more than 4 percentages more likely to default. Smaller declines in income (less than 5%)
are not statistically significant predictors of mortgage default.
    In column (3), and for the remainder of our analysis, we simplify the specification and
include a single indicator variable for households that experienced a negative income shock
of at least -15%.46 Borrowers that saw their incomes decline by more than 15% were about
3 percentage points more likely to default compared to those that did not.
    Table 15 illustrates the corresponding logit specifications which are comparable in sign,
significance, and magnitude to our OLS estimates.
    Table 16 displays the results of our IV analysis. Column (1) in the table corresponds
to the simple OLS estimates, which are replicated from Table 14 (column (3)) for ease
of comparison. Column (2) in the table displays the estimation results when we use the
unemployment shock and recent divorce shock to instrument for income loss and cumulative
house price appreciation to instrument for LTV ratios (all columns in the table use the
same instrument for LTV ratios). There is a sizeable increase in the magnitude of the
coefficient associated with income loss in the IV specification compared to the OLS regression.
Households that experience a significant income loss that is caused by unemployment or
divorce are approximately 26 percentage points more likely to default on their mortgages.
The huge increase in the estimated impact of income loss on mortgage default in the IV
specification is both plausible and consistent with economic theory. The permanent income
hypothesis predicts that permanent (or persistent) shocks to income have a significantly
larger effect on consumption decisions compared to more transitory income shocks. The
IV specification isolates income losses due to unemployment and divorce shocks, which are
  46
     We chose this threshold based on the estimates reported in columns (1) and (2), where it appears that
income growth becomes a significant predictor of mortgage default for declines between 5% and 15%. We
do report results for alternative income growth thresholds of -5% and -30% in our analysis below.


                                                   61
both significant life events and thus, are likely to have persistent effects. In other words, the
IV specification is isolating more permanent income shocks, which theory predicts should
lead to a much larger impact on the propensity to default. Column (3) shows the reduced
form of Column (2) where the default indicator is directly regressed on job loss and divorce
indicators. In Column (4) of Table 16 we modify the instrument set by substituting for the
unemployment variables with indicators of involuntary unemployment spells only (for both
the head and spouse). In addition, we include a set of indicator variables corresponding to
the number of prior unemployment spells as additional controls. The income loss coefficient
decreases slightly (from 0.26 to 0.20), but is still very large in magnitude and statistically
significant (at the 5 percent level). An income loss of at least 15% (between surveys) caused
by an involuntary unemployment spell or divorce is estimated to increase the likelihood of
default by 20 percentage points. Column (5) displays the reduced form regression results,
where the default indicator is regressed directly on the involuntary unemployment shocks.
The estimates are of comparable magnitudes with those in column (3).
    Column (6) in Table 16 displays the results when we instrument for income loss using
the disability shock and the Bartik employment shocks. We construct the Bartik variable
over a two-year horizon (i.e. k = 2)47 to maintain consistency with the biennial frequency
of the PSID and our other results. We interact the Bartik variable with indicator variables
corresponding to the industry in which the household head was employed at the beginning
of the horizon.48 In column (6) of Table 16, the coefficient estimate is 0.26 (statistically
significant at the 5% level), which is very similar in magnitude to the estimates we obtained
using unemployment spells and recent divorces as instruments (columns (2) and (4)). The
first stage results displayed in Table 17, (column (6) in Panel B) show that the disability
indicator is a strong predictor of severe income loss, which is consistent with the findings in
Low and Pistaferri (2015). For space considerations we report the first stage estimates for
the Bartik variables in the Appendix instead of Table 17.49 The reduced form specification
results reported in column (7) of Table 16 show that the disability variable has a slightly
smaller direct impact on mortgage default compared to the the unemployment and divorce
variables.
   47
      We also estimated specifications using Bartik shocks constructed over a four-year horizon and found
similar results.
   48
      Interacting the Bartik variable with industry indicators allows the sensitivity of income loss to the
exogenous, state-level, labor demand shocks to differ depending on the particular industry in which the
individual is employed. We include a full set of industry fixed effects among the control variables (not in the
instrument set).
   49
      Virtually all of the Bartik coefficients have the expected negative sign, so that positive state-level, labor
demand shocks (i.e. increases in employment) are associated with a lower likelihood of significant income loss,
however, they are not statistically significant, which suggests that they are not especially strong instruments
for income loss at the household-level. However, it is clear from the weak instrument test p-values reported
in Table 16 that the combination of the disability and Bartik variables constitute a strong set of instruments.



                                                        62
    In column (8) of Table 16 we substitute the severe disability shock into the instrument set.
Households that experience severe disability shocks are more likely to suffer more persistent
income losses compared to households that suffer more moderate disability shocks, and thus
we would expect the effect of income loss on default to increase as a result of this substitution.
This is exactly what we find as the point estimate of the effect of income loss on mortgage
default increases from 0.26 to 0.32.50 In addition, the first stage results show that households
that experience a severe disability shock are about twice as likely to experience an income
loss of at least 15%, and the reduced form estimates (column (9)) show that they are also
much more likely to default on their mortgage debt.




  50
       The difference between the two point estimates is not statistically significant however.


                                                       63
Table 14: Baseline Results: Linear Probability Model, Dependent Variable is 60+ Days Late
Indicator.

                                                              (1)         (2)         (3)        (4)
               Loan to Value Ratio                       0.082   ∗∗∗
                                                                       0.082∗∗∗
                                                                                   0.083∗∗∗
                                                                                               0.062∗∗∗
                                                          (8.60)        (7.06)      (7.10)      (5.38)

               Percent Income Change ∈ (−∞, −30] (d)     0.054∗∗∗      0.041∗∗∗
                                                          (5.49)        (4.39)

               Percent Income Change ∈ (−30, −15] (d)    0.026∗∗∗       0.020∗∗
                                                          (3.21)        (2.45)

               Percent Income Change ∈ (−15, −5] (d)     0.022∗∗∗       0.019∗∗
                                                          (2.82)        (2.46)

               Percent Income Change ∈ (−5, 0] (d)           0.007      0.004
                                                             (1.03)     (0.70)

               Percent Income Change <-15% (d)                                     0.029∗∗∗    -0.045∗∗
                                                                                    (4.47)      (-2.58)

               LTV * Percent Income Change <-15%                                               0.105∗∗∗
                                                                                                (3.79)
               Constant                                  -0.035***     -0.076***   -0.074***   -0.057**
                                                           (-5.42)       (-3.02)     (-2.92)    (-2.28)
               Observations                                  7,404       7,404       7,404      7,404
               R2                                            0.031       0.075       0.074      0.080
               Demographic Controls                            N           Y           Y          Y
               Mortgage Controls                               N           Y           Y          Y
               State Controls                                  N           Y           Y          Y

Notes: This table displays OLS estimation results of regressions of default on LTV ratios and income growth.
Income is defined as gross family income and growth in income is calculated between consecutive survey dates.
Default is defined as 60+ days late as of survey date (at least two missed payments). The sample includes
all household heads in the PSID who are mortgagors, aged 24–65, and labor force participants (including
those who are disabled) with combined LTV ratios less than 250 percent. Robust t-statistics are reported
in parentheses and dummy variables are signified by (d). Level of statistical significance: ∗∗∗ p < 0.01,
∗∗
   p < 0.05, ∗ p < 0.10.




                                                        64
Table 15: Baseline Results: Logit, Dependent Variable is 60+ Days Late Indicator. Average
Marginal Effects Reported.

                                                              (1)      (2)        (3)      (4)
                Percent Income Change ∈ (−∞, −30] (d)    0.063***    0.042***
                                                           (5.15)      (4.38)
                Percent Income Change ∈ (−30, −15] (d)   0.032***     0.020**
                                                           (3.05)      (2.37)
                Percent Income Change ∈ (−15, −5] (d)    0.028***    0.025***
                                                           (2.71)      (2.61)
                Percent Income Change ∈ (−5, 0] (d)        0.007       0.006
                                                           (0.79)      (0.66)
                Loan to Value Ratio                      0.062***    0.049***   0.050*** 0.050***
                                                          (10.38)      (8.33)    (8.36)   (8.34)
                Percent Income Change <-15% (d)                                 0.025*** 0.025***
                                                                                 (4.40)   (4.42)
                LTV * % Income Ch. <-15% (d)                                             0.051***
                                                                                          (3.48)
                Observations                                 7,404    7,404      7,404    7,404
                Demographic Controls                           N        Y          Y        Y
                Mortgage Controls                              N        Y          Y        Y
                State Controls                                 N        Y          Y        Y

Notes: This table displays average marginal effects from logit regressions of default on LTV ratios and income
growth. Income is defined as gross family income and growth in income is calculated between consecutive
survey dates. Default is defined as 60+ days late as of survey date (at least two missed payments). The
sample includes all household heads in the PSID who are mortgagors, aged 24–65, and labor force participants
(including those who are disabled) with combined LTV ratios less than 250 percent. Robust t-statistics
are reported in parentheses and dummy variables are signified by (d). Level of statistical significance:
∗∗∗
    p < 0.01, ∗∗ p < 0.05, ∗ p < 0.10.




                                                        65
     Table 16: IV Results: Dependent Variable is 60+ DL Indicator, 1st Endogenous Variable is 2-Year Income Change, 2nd
     Endogenous Variable is LTV. Col (1) is OLS, Cols (2) and (3) use unemployment and divorce as IVs for income. Cols (4) and
     (5) use invol. unemployment and divorce. Cols (6) and (7) use disability and Bartik shocks, and Cols (8) and (9) use severe
     disability and Bartik shocks. Cumulative HP growth is IV for LTV in all Columns.


      Dependent Variable:                                                                     60+ Days Delinquent
                                          (1)           (2)            (3)            (4)             (5)            (6)         (7)             (8)              (9)
      LTV Ratio                         0.083***      0.167***      0.147***       0.175***        0.146***      0.172***     0.150***        0.178***         0.149***
                                         (7.10)        (3.15)        (3.06)          (3.46)         (3.04)         (3.35)      (3.14)           (3.35)          (3.13)
      Percent Income Change <-15% (d)   0.029***      0.264***                      0.199**                       0.233**                      0.266**
                                         (4.47)        (4.26)                        (2.45)                        (2.27)                       (2.13)
      Unemployed Head Last Year (d)                                 0.053***
                                                                      (4.12)
      Unemployed Spouse Last Year (d)                                0.031**
                                                                      (2.36)
      Recent Divorce (d)                                              0.034                           0.034
                                                                      (1.40)                         (1.43)
66




      Involuntary Layoff (d)                                                                        0.035**
                                                                                                     (2.04)
      Involuntary Layoff, Spouse (d)                                                                 0.054*
                                                                                                     (1.88)
      Disability Shock (d)                                                                                                     0.018*
                                                                                                                               (1.80)
      Severe Disability Shock (d)                                                                                                                               0.051*
                                                                                                                                                                (1.75)
      IV for LTV Ratio:                    .         HPA Since      HPA Since     HPA Since        HPA Since    HPA Since     HPA Since      HPA Since         HPA Since
                                           .          Purchase       Purchase      Purchase         Purchase     Purchase      Purchase       Purchase          Purchase
      IV for Income:                       .         Job Loss,                  Invol. Job Loss,                Disability,               Severe Disability,
                                           .       Recent Divorce               Recent Divorce                 Bartik Shock                 Bartik Shock
      Observations                       7,404         7,404          7,404          7,404           7,404          7,404       7,404           7,404            7,404
      R2                                 0.074           .            0.069            .             0.067            .         0.061             .              0.062
      Demographic Controls                 Y             Y              Y              Y               Y              Y           Y               Y                Y
      Mortgage Controls                    Y             Y              Y              Y               Y              Y           Y               Y                Y
      State Controls                       Y             Y              Y              Y               Y              Y           Y               Y                Y
      Control for Prior Unempl Spells      N             N              N              Y               Y              N           N               N                N
      IV Diagnostics
      Over ID Pval, Null Valid             .           0.271            .            0.237             .          0.916           .             0.923              .
      Weak ID Pval, Null Weak              .             0              0          3.49e-10            0         0.00252          0            0.00317             0

     Notes: This table displays a set of estimation from regressions of default on LTV ratios and income loss. Default is defined as 60+ days late as of
     survey date (at least two missed payments). Income loss is defined as a drop in household income of at least 15% from the previous interview. The
     sample includes all household heads in the PSID who are mortgagors, aged 24–65, and labor force participants (including those who are disabled)
Table 17: First Stage IV Results: Col (1) is OLS, Cols (2) and (3) use unemployment and
divorce as IVs for income. Cols (4) and (5) use invol. unemployment and divorce. Cols
(6) and (7) use disability and Bartik shocks, and Cols (8) and (9) use severe disability and
Bartik shocks. Cumulative HP growth is IV for LTV in all Columns.


                                                 Panel A: LTV Ratio
 Table 5 Column:                     (2)         (3)           (4)         (5)         (6)         (7)         (8)         (9)
 Cumulative HPA (Since Purchase) -0.080***    -0.080***   -0.080***     -0.080***   -0.081***   -0.081***   -0.081***   -0.081***
                                  (-14.44)     (-14.44)    (-14.55)      (-14.55)    (-14.53)    (-14.53)    (-14.52)    (-14.52)
 Unemployed Head Last Year (d)     0.019
                                   (1.44)
 Unemployed Spouse Last Year (d)   0.026
                                   (1.54)
 Recent Divorce (d)               0.053**                    0.053**
                                   (2.26)                     (2.29)
 Involuntary Layoff (d)                                       0.007
                                                              (0.41)
 Involuntary Layoff, Spouse (d)                               0.062
                                                              (1.41)
 Disability Shock (d)                                                                0.012
                                                                                     (0.89)
 Severe Disability Shock (d)                                                                                0.091***
                                                                                                             (2.94)

                                                 Panel B: Income Loss
                                     (2)         (3)           (4)         (5)         (6)         (7)         (8)         (9)
 Cumulative HPA (Since Purchase)     0.009        .           0.008         .        0.007          .        0.007          .
                                    (1.09)        .           (0.94)        .        (0.82)         .        (0.80)         .
 Unemployed Head Last Year (d)     0.139***       .                         .                       .                       .
                                    (6.48)        .                         .                       .                       .
 Unemployed Spouse Last Year (d)   0.122***       .                         .                       .                       .
                                    (4.98)        .                         .                       .                       .
 Recent Divorce (d)                0.235***       .          0.235***       .                       .                       .
                                    (5.69)        .           (5.70)        .                       .                       .
 Involuntary Layoff (d)                           .          0.125***       .                       .                       .
                                                  .           (4.15)        .                       .                       .
 Involuntary Layoff, Spouse (d)                   .            0.042        .                       .                       .
                                                  .           (0.95)        .                       .                       .
 Disability Shock (d)                             .                         .       0.065***        .                       .
                                                  .                         .        (3.33)         .                       .
 Severe Disability Shock (d)                      .                         .                       .       0.149***        .
                                                  .                         .                       .        (3.37)         .
 Observations                       7,404       7,404         7,404       7,404       7,404       7,404       7,404       7,404
 Demographic Controls                 Y           Y             Y           Y           Y           Y           Y           Y
 Mortgage Controls                    Y           Y             Y           Y           Y           Y           Y           Y
 State Controls                       Y           Y             Y           Y           Y           Y           Y           Y


Notes: This table displays the first stage estimation results for IV specifications reported in columns (2) -
(9) in Table 6. The sample includes all household heads in the PSID who are mortgagors, aged 24–65, and
labor force participants (including those who are disabled) with combined LTV ratios less than 250 percent
in 2009, 2011, and 2013. Robust t-statistics are reported in parentheses and dummy variables are signified
by (d). Level of statistical significance: ∗∗∗ p < 0.01, ∗∗ p < 0.05, ∗ p < 0.10.

                                                        67
G. Controls
Table 18 lists the baseline set of controls that are included in all of the main tables in the
text.

                                                   Table 18: Controls
                                   Mean    Std.      Min       Max                                  Mean   Std.   Min   Max

        NAICS   Dummy   2          0.12    0.32       0          1       Second Mortgage Dummy      0.16   0.37    0     1
        NAICS   Dummy   3          0.17    0.37       0          1       Refi Dummy                 0.47   0.50    0     1
        NAICS   Dummy   4          0.17    0.37       0          1       Refi Missing Dummy         0.00   0.04    0     1
        NAICS   Dummy   5          0.20    0.40       0          1       ARM Dummy                  0.08   0.28    0     1
        NAICS   Dummy   6          0.15    0.36       0          1       ARM Missing Dummy          0.00   0.06    0     1
        NAICS   Dummy   7          0.04    0.19       0          1
        NAICS   Dummy   8          0.04    0.20       0          1       Mortgage Interest Rate     4.81   1.98    0    23
        NAICS   Dummy   9          0.10    0.30       0          1       Mortgage Interest Rate     0.05   0.21    0     1
                                                                         Missing
        Black                      0.21    0.41       0          1       15+ Year Remaining on      0.02   0.13    0     1
                                                                         Mortgage Term Missing
        American Indian             0.00    0.06       0          1      Origination Year 1992      0.00   0.06    0     1
        Asian                       0.01    0.12       0          1      Origination Year 1993      0.00   0.06    0     1
        Pacific Islander            0.00    0.02       0          1      Origination Year 1994      0.01   0.08    0     1
        Other                       0.03    0.16       0          1      Origination Year 1995      0.01   0.08    0     1
        Missing Race                0.01    0.08       0          1      Origination Year 1996      0.01   0.09    0     1
        Age                        44.00   10.50      24         65      Origination Year 1997      0.01   0.10    0     1
        Male Dummy                  0.85    0.36       0          1      Origination Year 1998      0.01   0.11    0     1
        Married Dummy               0.74    0.44       0          1      Origination Year 1999      0.01   0.12    0     1
        Less Than HS                0.25    0.43       0          1      Origination Year 2000      0.03   0.16    0     1
        HS                          0.27    0.45       0          1      Origination Year 2001      0.06   0.24    0     1
        Some College                0.40    0.49       0          1      Origination Year 2002      0.08   0.27    0     1
        College and More            0.01    0.10       0          1      Origination Year 2003      0.09   0.29    0     1
        Number of Children          1.01   1.17        0          9      Origination Year 2004      0.11   0.31    0     1
        2009 Dummy                  0.36    0.48       0          1      Origination Year 2005      0.06   0.24    0     1
        2011 Dummy                  0.33    0.47       0          1      Origination Year 2006      0.03   0.17    0     1
        2013 Dummy                  0.31    0.46       0          1      Recourse Dummy             0.24   0.42    0     1
        State House Price Growth   -0.02   0.08    -0.30523   0.22237    Judicial Dummy             0.40   0.49    0     1
        State Unemployment Rate     0.08    0.16   -0.21622   0.636364   Sand States (CA, FL, AZ,   0.14   0.34    0     1
        Change                                                           NV)
        Obs                        7404




                                                                 68
H. Robustness
Table 19 displays robustness results for our main specifications in Table 6. Columns 1 and
2 of Table 19 include state fixed effects. These specifications yield consistent, although
somewhat stronger, parameter estimates when compared to columns 4 and 6, respectively,
of Table 6. Columns 3 and 4 of Table 19 use Bartik shocks that are constructed with 4
year and 1 year CES employment changes by state and industry, respectively. Our estimates
are very close to Columns 6 and 8 in Table 6. Column 5 and Column 6 use a dummy for
negative equity instead of a continuous variable, and for low LTVs, the dummy on negative
equity implies a stronger effect of house price changes on default. An LTV of 1 in column 1
is associated with a 28% likelihood of default versus a 34% likelihood of default in Column
(5). On the other hand, for higher LTVs, the relationship is reversed: an LTV of 1.2 in
column 1 is associated with a 33% likelihood of default versus a 34% likelihood of default in
column 5. Column 7 and Column 8 combine the head and spouse disability shocks to obtain
more power, and again, we see similar results to the main table in the text. Additionally, in
every case, the model passes over-identification tests at the 1%, 5%, and 10% levels.
    Table 20 displays the first stages of the various regressions in Table 19, where each
specification has two first stages corresponding to LTV and residual income. Panel A shows
that cumulative house price growth is a strong instrument for LTV, and Panel B shows
that the alternate instruments for income yield strong first stage results. In every case, the
alternate sets of instruments pass weak identification tests.




                                             69
                                                               Table 19: Robustness Results for Table 6.


                                     (1)              (2)               (3)                  (4)                 (5)              (6)                (7)                        (8)

      Loan to Value Ratio         0.287***          0.255***         0.184***             0.190***                                                0.181***                   0.194***
                                   (3.65)             (3.67)           (3.64)               (3.62)                                                  (3.60)                     (3.77)
      Log Residual Income         -0.242**           -0.178*          -0.099*              -0.124*            -0.289**           -0.098*           -0.094*                    -0.116*
                                   (-2.30)           (-1.94)          (-1.91)              (-1.95)             (-2.53)           (-1.76)           (-1.85)                    (-1.96)
      LTV>100 (d)                                                                                             0.346***          0.297***
                                                                                                               (2.93)             (3.30)

      IV for LTV:                HPA Since         HPA Since        HPA Since            HPA Since            HPA Since        HPA Since         HPA Since                 HPA Since
                                  Purchase          Purchase          Purchase             Purchase            Purchase         Purchase          Purchase                  Purchase
      IV for Income:           Invol. Job Loss,    Disability,       Disability,          Disability,      Invol. Job Loss,    Disability,   Combined Disability,   Combined Severe Disability,
                               Head & Spouse      Bartik Shock   Bartik Shock (4yr)   Bartik Shock (1yr)   Head & Spouse      Bartik Shock      Bartik Shock              Bartik Shock
      Observations                   7,404           7,404              7,404                7,404               7,339            7,339             7,404                     7,404
      Demographic Controls?            Y               Y                  Y                    Y                   Y                Y                 Y                         Y
      Mortgage Controls?               Y               Y                  Y                    Y                   Y                Y                 Y                         Y
      State Controls?                  Y               Y                  Y                    Y                   Y                Y                 Y                         Y
      State FEs?                       Y               Y                  N                    N                   N                N                 N                         N
70




      Job Loss FEs?                    Y               N                  N                    N                   Y                N                 N                         N
      Jtest Pval Null Valid          0.305           0.329              0.155                0.214               0.313            0.107             0.420                     0.333
      Weak ID Pval Null Weak      0.000225          0.00415           1.22e-07             1.83e-05            0.000425         6.81e-07          4.66e-08                  2.90e-08


     Notes: See Table 6 for additional notes. Col. 1 and Col. 2 include state FEs. Col. 3 and Col. 4 construct Bartik shocks using 4 year and 1 year
     employment changes by state and industry, respectively. Col. 5 and Col. 6 use a dummy for negative equity instead of a continuous variable. Col. 7
     and Col. 8 combined the head and spouse disability shocks. Level of statistical significance: ∗∗∗ p < 0.01, ∗∗ p < 0.05, ∗ p < 0.10.
                                                 Table 20: First Stages of the Robustness Results for Table 6.

                               A. LTV First Stage                                        (1)         (2)         (3)         (4)         (5)         (6)         (7)         (8)

                               Cumulative State HP Growth from Purchase Date          -0.076***   -0.076***   -0.081***   -0.081***   -0.081***   -0.081***   -0.081***   -0.081***
                                                                                       (-13.59)    (-13.42)    (-14.46)    (-14.53)    (-14.53)    (-14.53)    (-14.53)    (-14.52)
                               Bartik Instrument (2 Yr. Ch.)                                         0.933                                                       0.424       0.470
                                                                                                    (0.74)                                                      (0.50)      (0.55)
                               Transition into Disability, Head (d)                                  0.004     0.003       0.003                   0.003
                                                                                                    (0.20)     (0.16)      (0.16)                  (0.16)
                               Transition into Disability, Spouse (d)                                0.012     0.014       0.014                   0.014
                                                                                                    (0.65)     (0.80)      (0.80)                  (0.80)
                               Involuntary Unemployment, Head (d)                      0.025
                                                                                       (1.21)
                               Involuntary Unemployment, Spouse (d)                    0.000
                                                                                       (0.00)
                               Bartik Instrument (4 Yr. Ch.)                                                   -0.070
                                                                                                               (-0.14)
                               Bartik Instrument (1 Yr. Ch.)                                                               0.164
                                                                                                                           (0.11)
                               Transition into Disability Head or Spouse (d)                                                                                   0.012
                                                                                                                                                               (0.89)
                               Transition into Severe Disability Head or Spouse (d)                                                                                       0.091***
                                                                                                                                                                           (2.96)

                               Observations                                             7,404       7,404       7,404       7,404       7,404       7,404       7,404       7,404
                               R-squared                                                0.372       0.370       0.351       0.351       0.351       0.351       0.351       0.352
                               Demographic Controls?                                      Y           Y           Y           Y           Y           Y           Y           Y
                               Mortgage Controls?                                         Y           Y           Y           Y           Y           Y           Y           Y
                               State Controls?                                            Y           Y           Y           Y           Y           Y           Y           Y
                               State FEs?                                                 Y           Y           N           N           N           N           N           N
                               Job Loss FEs?                                              Y           N           N           N           Y           N           N           N
71




                               B. Income First Stage                                     (1)         (2)         (3)         (4)         (5)         (6)         (7)         (8)

                               Cumulative State HP Growth from Purchase Date          -0.035***    -0.034**    -0.026*     -0.023*     -0.019       -0.022     -0.025*     -0.024*
                                                                                        (-2.65)     (-2.53)    (-1.92)     (-1.71)     (-1.46)      (-1.61)    (-1.83)     (-1.81)
                               Bartik Instrument (2 Yr. Ch.)                                        5.605*                                        10.463***   10.328***   10.092***
                                                                                                    (1.66)                                          (4.64)      (4.61)      (4.49)
                               Transition into Disability, Head (d)                               -0.134***   -0.145***   -0.146***               -0.151***
                                                                                                    (-2.58)     (-2.78)     (-2.81)                 (-2.88)
                               Transition into Disability, Spouse (d)                              -0.087**    -0.092**    -0.091**                -0.084**
                                                                                                    (-2.06)     (-2.17)     (-2.15)                 (-2.01)
                               Involuntary Unemployment, Head (d)                     -0.198***                                       -0.217***
                                                                                        (-3.85)                                         (-4.16)
                               Involuntary Unemployment, Spouse (d)                      0.094                                           0.081
                                                                                        (1.54)                                          (1.29)
                               Bartik Instrument (4 Yr. Ch.)                                                  6.240***
                                                                                                               (4.85)
                               Bartik Instrument (1 Yr. Ch.)                                                              14.649***
                                                                                                                            (3.66)
                               Transition into Disability Head or Spouse (d)                                                                                  -0.126***
                                                                                                                                                                (-3.69)
                               Transition into Severe Disability Head or Spouse (d)                                                                                       -0.281***
                                                                                                                                                                            (-3.83)

                               Observations                                             7,404       7,404       7,404       7,404       7,339       7,339       7,404       7,404
                               R-squared                                                0.347       0.339       0.321       0.320       0.325       0.319       0.321       0.321
                               Demographic Controls?                                      Y           Y           Y           Y           Y           Y           Y           Y
                               Mortgage Controls?                                         Y           Y           Y           Y           Y           Y           Y           Y
                               State Controls?                                            Y           Y           Y           Y           Y           Y           Y           Y
                               State FEs?                                                 Y           Y           N           N           N           N           N           N
                               Job Loss FEs?                                              Y           N           N           N           Y           N           N           N


     Notes: See Table 6 and Table 19 for additional notes.
I. Residual Income at Origination
Table 21 looks at the impact of residual income at origination on default propensities. Orig-
ination year is collected explicitly by the census. If the origination year is not a PSID survey
year, we use the next nearest year (t+1) to compute residual income. For 300 households,
we lack at least one piece of data to compute residual income at origination, and to maintain
consistency, we winsorize the top and bottom 1% of residual income at origination. Compar-
ing the coefficients in column (1) and column (2), residual income at origination is a much
weaker predictor of default. The impact of residual income at origination on default is 4x
less than contemporaneous residual income.


Table 21: Dependent variable is 60+ days late indicator. Col (1) repeats Col (2) from 5.
Col (2) uses residual income at origination.
                                                            (1)         (2)

                  Loan to Value Ratio                       0.077***    0.081***
                                                            (6.45)      (6.74)
                  Log Residual Income                       -0.026***
                                                            (-5.64)
                  Log Residual Income at Origination                    -0.006*
                                                                        (-1.67)

                  Observations                              7,104       7,104
                  R-squared                                 0.076       0.069
                  Demographic Controls?                     Y           Y
                  Mortgage Controls?                        Y           Y
                  State Controls?                           Y           Y




                                                       72
J. Comparison to Existing Loan Level Datasets
Table 22 compares our estimates of the impact of a 20% price drop, starting from an initial
LTV of 100, to the prior literature. Using the logit estimates from Column (2), to be
as comparable to the literature as possible, we find that a 20% price drop is associated
with a .86% (.2*.046) increase in the default propensity. Our estimates are smaller than
those obtained by focusing solely on subprime mortgages (e.g. Bhutta et al. (2011) and
Demyanyk et al. (2011)), but somewhat higher than focusing only on fixed rate mortgages
(e.g. Elul et al. (2010)). We find similar estimates to Gyourko and Tracy (2014) who use the
most comparable sample. Gyourko and Tracy (2014) find an increase in default propensity
of .89% for the same sized shock.

Table 22: Comparison of Samples and Comparison of Impact of LTV on Default Propensity

                           Current Paper             Bhutta et al. (2011)      Gyourko      &    Tracy   Elul et al. (2010)        Demyanyk       et    al.
                                                                               (2014)                                              (2011)
  Sample                   PSID 2009-2013, All       Subprime 2006 Origi- GNMA      Mortgages            Fixed Rate Mortgages      2004-2009 Subprime
                           Mortgages                 nations with CLTV>1 2005-2012                       Originated in 2005 or     LP Mortgages
                                                     in AZ, CA, FL, NV                                   2006
  Default     Measured 2009-2013                     2006-2009            2005-2012                      2006-2009                 2004-2009
  During
  Percentage Point Incr. 1.08%                       7.93%                     0.89%                     0.47%                     4.40%
  in Default Rate from
  20% Equity Drop,
  Starting from LTV of
  100
  Type of Regression     Logit AME                   Logit, Coeff.    Re-      LPM                       Logit, MEM                Probit, MEM
                                                     ported Only
  Table                    Table 5 Column (4)        Table 2, Column (1)       Table 1, Column (1)       Table 1, Column (3)       Table 4, Column (2)
Notes: Only a partial set of logit coefficients were reported in Bhutta et al (2011), so we can only compute the default propensity setting all other

dummies to zero.




                                                                        73
