                                NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                        THE ANATOMY OF PHYSICIAN PAYMENTS:
                        CONTRACTING SUBJECT TO COMPLEXITY

                                          Jeffrey Clemens
                                         Joshua D. Gottlieb
                                        Tímea Laura Molnár

                                        Working Paper 21642
                                http://www.nber.org/papers/w21642


                      NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                               1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                 Cambridge, MA 02138
                                     October 2015




We are extremely grateful to Luisa Franzini, Cecilia Ganduglia-Cazaban, Osama Mikhail, and the
UTSPH/BCBSTX Payment Systems and Policies Research Program at the University of Texas School
of Public Health for data access, and for their extensive assistance in navigating the BCBSTX claims
data. Clemens and Gottlieb thank the Stanford Institute for Economic Policy Research and the Federal
Reserve Bank of San Francisco for their hospitality while working on this paper. We thank SSHRC,
Jon Skinner and the Dartmouth Institute for support, and Victor Saldarriaga for excellent research
assistance. Finally, we thank Leila Agha, Jeff Emerson, R.B. Harris, David Laibson, Neale Mahoney,
and workshop participants at Stanford Health Policy, University of Pennsylvania–Leonard Davis Institute,
UBC, UC San Diego, USC, iHEA, the Junior Health Economics Summit, and the UBC Public Finance
Reading Group for helpful comments. The views expressed herein are those of the authors and do
not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.

© 2015 by Jeffrey Clemens, Joshua D. Gottlieb, and Tímea Laura Molnár. All rights reserved. Short
sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided
that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
The Anatomy of Physician Payments: Contracting Subject to Complexity
Jeffrey Clemens, Joshua D. Gottlieb, and Tímea Laura Molnár
NBER Working Paper No. 21642
October 2015, Revised February 2016
JEL No. H44,H51,H57,I11,I13,L98

                                              ABSTRACT

Why do private insurers closely link their physician payment rates to the Medicare fee schedule despite
its well-known limitations? We ask to what extent this relationship reflects the use of Medicare's relative
price menu as a benchmark, in order to reduce transaction costs in a complex pricing environment.
We analyze 91 million claims from a large private insurer, which represent $7.8 billion in spending
over four years. We estimate that 75 percent of services, accounting for 55 percent of spending, are
benchmarked to Medicare's relative prices. The Medicare-benchmarked share is higher for services
provided by small physician groups. It is lower for capital-intensive treatment categories, for which
Medicare's average-cost reimbursements deviate most from marginal cost. When the insurer deviates
from Medicare's relative prices, it adjusts towards the marginal costs of treatment. Our results suggest
that providers and private insurers coordinate around Medicare's menu of relative payments for simplicity,
but innovate when the value of doing so is likely highest.


Jeffrey Clemens                                      Tímea Laura Molnár
Department of Economics                              Vancouver School of Economics
University of California, San Diego                  University of British Columbia
9500 Gilman Drive #0508                              #997 - 1873 East Mall
La Jolla, CA 92093                                   Vancouver, BC V6T 1Z1
and NBER                                             Canada
jeffclemens@ucsd.edu                                 timea@nber.org

Joshua D. Gottlieb
Vancouver School of Economics
University of British Columbia
6000 Iona Drive
Vancouver, BC V6T 1L4
Canada
and NBER
joshua.gottlieb@ubc.ca
    In an exclusively public health care system, payment rates for medical providers are typ-
ically set through an administrative mechanism that applies to the entire market (Laugesen
and Glied, 2011). In a multi-payer system, physicians and private insurers must agree on
payments through private negotiations. This paper looks into the black box of the prices
embedded in physician-insurer contracts. We analyze how these private physician payments
are shaped by payment rates set by Medicare, the public health insurer for the elderly and
disabled. Our results suggest that providers and private insurers coordinate around Medi-
care’s menu of relative payments for simplicity, but innovate when the value of doing so is
highest.
    One of the U.S. health system’s most distinctive features is the prominent position of
private insurers. Despite the public sector’s substantial role, private insurers directly finance
roughly $1 trillion of medical spending, or one third of the total (OECD, 2015).1 High
system-wide spending, coupled with middling health outcomes, raises questions about the
costs and benefits of this multi-payer approach.
    The consequences of public and private care financing depend on many factors, one of
which is the design of the payment systems that intermediate between patients and their
health care providers. Payment systems can shape the health system’s efficiency by affecting
the composition of care offered (Gruber, Kim and Mayzlina, 1999; Jacobson, Earle, Price and
Newhouse, 2010; Clemens and Gottlieb, 2014). Because services may differ substantially in
their cost-benefit ratios (Chandra and Skinner, 2012), changes in these incentives can have
first order welfare importance. If the presence of private payers generates innovation in
payment system design, this innovation could be an important benefit of the multi-payer
system. On the other hand, the multi-payer approach’s fragmentation drives considerable
administrative expense (Cutler and Ly, 2011).

   1
     This represents almost half of health spending via traditional insurance plans, since it excludes out of
pocket costs (12 percent of total health expenditures), research and capital investments (6 percent), public
health (3 percent), as well as workers’ compensation and other specified health programs.

                                                     2
   In the U.S. public sector, the federal Medicare program compensates physicians and
outpatient providers through a system known as the Resource-Based Relative Value Scale
(RBRVS). The RBRVS has two key features. First, it is a remarkably detailed, fee-for-
service payment model, with 13,000 distinct service codes defined. Physicians submit bills
for each instance in which they provide one of these services. The RBRVS assigns each
service a certain number of “relative value units” (RVUs), which determine the payment for
that service. Second, these relative values are legislatively required to reflect variations in
average cost, without reference to medical value. This procurement model thus has little
capacity to steer care provision towards effective—let alone cost-effective—services. It has
particular difficulty managing the use of capital-intensive diagnostic imaging services, for
which average cost payments significantly exceed providers’ marginal costs—as they must
in order to facilitate entry. Nevertheless, practitioners and policy makers regularly observe
that private insurers’ payment models lean heavily on Medicare’s approach to paying for
care (Borges, 2003; Gesme and Wiseman, 2010).
   Our analysis has three major goals. First, we estimate the pervasiveness of links between
Medicare’s fee schedule and physician payments from a single large insurer. Second, we
analyze how the strength of these links varies across categories of health care services and
types of physician groups. Third, we measure the direction and magnitude of the private
insurer’s deviations from Medicare’s reimbursement rates. Our results yield insights into
both the extent of Medicare’s influence and the economic factors underlying the insurer’s
approach to contracting.
   We use insurance claims data from Blue Cross Blue Shield of Texas (BCBS). These data
have two key features for our purposes. First, they allow us to examine the service-level
payments associated with unique insurer-physician group pairings. Second, they allow us to
longitudinally track these payments at high frequency.2

   2
       Our data represent around $2 billion in annual spending, which is approximately 1 percent of national

                                                      3
    We develop two methods to estimate the pervasiveness of payments linked directly to
Medicare’s RVUs in the BCBS data. We first make a straightforward observation about
payments in the cross section. The payment for any service can be described as the product
of its Medicare-allotted number of RVUs and a scaling of dollars per RVU. We term this
scaling the “implied conversion factor” (ICF). When an ICF is shared across many services
within an insurer-physician pair, we infer that the common mark-up is specified in the
contract. As a baseline, we infer that every claim whose ICF accounts for at least 10 percent
of the provider’s BCBS payments is contractually linked to Medicare. Under this assumption,
around three quarters of BCBS’s claims, accounting for two thirds of spending, follow the
Medicare benchmark.
    Second, we measure the extent to which updates to Medicare’s fees pass through to
BCBS’s payments. The analysis exploits institutional detail about the precise dates on which
BCBS implements Medicare’s annual updates. This fine-grained timing allows us to infer the
share of BCBS’s payments linked to Medicare without having our estimates confounded by
long-run technological changes or active contract renegotiations. This method again implies
that around three quarters of BCBS’s payments are linked to Medicare.
    Why do private insurers rely on Medicare for most, but not all, relative payment rates?
We propose that physician contracts are written to manage the tension between gains from
fine-tuning payments and costs from making contracts complex. This proposition—that
BCBS draws on Medicare for the purpose of contract simplification, while strategically
adapting its contracts where the value of adaptations is highest—predicts heterogeneity
in the frequency of benchmarking across physician groups and service categories. First, the
benefits of fine-tuning payments will tend to be higher for contracts with relatively large
physician practices. Second, since Medicare’s average cost approach has greater difficulty
managing the payments for capital- than for labor-intensive services, the benefits of fine-

spending on physician and clinical services from private health insurers (CMS, 2011).

                                                    4
tuning payments will tend to be greater for the former than the latter.
   Using both the cross-sectional and update-based frameworks, we test these predictions.
Looking across physician groups, we find that payments to relatively large firms are less
tightly linked to Medicare than payments to small firms. Our estimates suggest that pay-
ments for nearly 90 percent of services provided by the smallest firms (representing 80 percent
of their spending) are linked to Medicare’s relative values. The same is true of 60 percent of
services from firms with total BCBS billing exceeding $1 million per year.
   Looking across service categories, we find that payments are more closely linked to Medi-
care’s relative values for labor-intensive services, like standard office visits, than for capital-
intensive services, like diagnostic imaging. Payments for roughly 85 percent of evaluation
and management services, but only 55 percent of imaging services, are directly linked to
Medicare’s menu.
   Within diagnostic imaging, Medicare distinguishes between two types of services: a
capital-intensive component for taking the image and a labor-intensive component for inter-
preting the image. Medicare explicitly amortizes the fixed cost of the imaging equipment
into the former. We find that BCBS payments for interpretation are far more tightly linked
to Medicare rates than are its payments for the image itself.
   We also show that BCBS’s adjustments work to narrow likely gaps between marginal
costs and Medicare’s average-cost payments. Specifically, we find that payments for labor-
intensive services tend to be adjusted up while payments for capital-intensive services tend
to be adjusted down. This supports the view that BCBS aims to improve on Medicare’s
average-cost reimbursements while managing the complexity of its payment system.
   When we conduct a comparable analysis on payments to out-of-network physicians we
find much weaker links to Medicare’s payments. The out-of-network payments, by definition,
are for providers who have not reached an agreement with the insurer on reimbursement rates.
This suggests that the stronger links for in-network prices reflect active efforts to negotiate


                                                5
around a simplified payment schedule.
   Finally, we use our estimates to draw inferences about the cost required to shift from
simple to complex contracts. Depending on the level of inefficiency that one assumes is
embedded in the Medicare fee schedule, we calibrate the negotiating costs that would ratio-
nalize the share of Medicare benchmarking we see. We find, for example, that if potential
efficiency gains for BCBS are 1 percent of a physician group’s billings, then contracting costs
of $3,000 per group would explain our results. A modest reduction in contracting costs could
generate $1 billion of efficiency gains nationally.
   Our findings connect to research on health care payment systems and to two more general
literatures. A growing literature demonstrates significant spillovers from Medicare payment
policies into the private sector. Duggan and Scott Morton (2006) and Alpert, Duggan and
Hellerstein (2013) show that pharmaceutical markets respond to public sector payment id-
iosyncrasies. White (2013) finds a sizable positive relationship between Medicare and private
hospital pricing, as do Clemens and Gottlieb (forthcoming) in the outpatient context. A key
limitation of the existing literature is that prior work has not been able to link negotiated
payment rates to specific physician-insurer pairs. By incoroprating such data, we make
two novel contributions here. First, we show that Medicare exerts influence over nomi-
nally independent private insurers directly through those insurers’ adoption of Medicare’s
rate structure. Second, we are able to investigate exactly when the parties deviate from
Medicare’s basic structure and exmaine their efforts to innovate towards efficiency.
   Second, we contribute to the literature documenting how boundedly rational agents navi-
gate complex environments. Work in behavioral economics (DellaVigna, 2009; Gabaix, 2014),
macroeconomics (Sims, 2003), public finance (Chetty, Looney and Kroft, 2009; Abeler and
Jäger, 2015), persuasion (Mullainathan, Schwartzstein and Shleifer, 2008), and beyond has
considered how bounded rationality and computational costs shape agents’ decision-making.
When firms interact with each other—in our case, insurers and physician groups—little is


                                                6
known about how they reduce the dimensionality of the complex environments they face.3
Benchmarking payments to Medicare’s relative rates is an intriguing way to simplify the
physician contracting problem. By calibrating the negotiation costs implied by our results,
we provide insight into the likely magnitude of the contracting frictions relevant to our
context.
   Third, nominal price rigidities are central to much analysis of business cycles and mon-
etary policy (Clarida, Galı́ and Gertler, 1999), and the specific form these rigidities take
has significant influence on resulting dynamics (Mankiw and Reis, 2002). Detailed studies
of price microdata have found that prices for services adjust less frequently than in other
sectors (Nakamura and Steinsson, 2008). This is particularly true in medical care, where Bils
and Klenow (2004) find that the average price persists for eleven months. Our analysis pro-
vides insight into why this is the case. With some exceptions, Medicare’s payment updates
occur annually. We find that private contracts incorporate Medicare’s changes by updating
with a similar frequency. Consistent with Anderson, Jaimovich and Simester’s (forthcom-
ing) evidence from retail, the complexity of physician contracting may explain both the long
duration of these prices and the public-private linkages we estimate. Given the health sec-
tor’s size, Medicare’s direct and indirect influences can meaningfully affect overall inflation
(Clemens, Gottlieb and Shapiro, 2014).
   This paper proceeds as follows. In section 1, we describe Medicare’s pricing institu-
tions. Section 2 presents an institutionally-informed model of physician-insurer contracting.
Section 3 introduces our claims data. Section 4 presents our first analysis, which inves-
tigates the cross-sectional relationship between private reimbursements and Medicare’s fee
schedule. In section 5, we derive the empirical specifications through which we estimate
the Medicare-benchmarked share of payments using updates to Medicare’s relative prices.


   3
    In a different health care context, Grennan and Swanson (2015) find that hospitals are more likely to
conduct active negotiations for the supplies on which they spend the most.

                                                   7
Section 6 presents our results from this analysis, including heterogeneity across physician
groups and service categories. In section 7 we examine the direction in which BCBS adjusts
its payments when they deviate from the benchmark. Section 8 examines supply responses
and calibrates the magnitude of contracting frictions. Section 9 concludes.



1        Medical Pricing Institutions

    Public and private payments for health care services are set through very different mech-
anisms. Medicare reimbursements are set to administratively determined measures of the
resource costs of providing care. For patients with private health insurance, providers’ reim-
bursements are determined through negotiations between the insurers and providers. Sec-
tion 1.1 discusses key features of Medicare’s administrative pricing mechanisms. Section 1.2
presents institutional details on contracting between providers and private insurers.


1.1        Medicare Price Determination4

    Since 1992, Medicare has paid physicians and other outpatient providers through a system
of centrally administered prices, based on a national fee schedule. This fee schedule, known as
the Resource-Based Relative Value Scale (RBRVS), assigns an allocation of Relative Value
Units (RVUs) to each of 13,000 distinct health care services. The RVUs associated with
service j are legislatively bound to measure the resources required to provide that service.
Medicare recognizes that goods and services have different production costs in different parts
of the country; Congress mandates price adjustments, called the Geographic Adjustment
Factor (GAF), to offset these differences in input costs. For service j, supplied by a provider




    4
        This section draws from Clemens and Gottlieb (2014).

                                                      8
in payment area i, the provider’s fee is approximately:


       Reimbursement Ratei,j,t = Conversion Factort × Geographic Adjustment Factori,t

                                       × Relative Value Unitsj,t .                                     (1)


The Reimbursement Rate, a term we use interchangeably with “price,” is the amount Medi-
care pays for this service. The Conversion Factor (CF) is a national scaling factor, usually
updated annually.
    Payments across services vary primarily according to their assigned number of Relative
Value Units (RVUs). RVUs are constant across areas while varying across services. The
RVUs associated with each service are updated on a rolling basis to account for technological
and regulatory changes that alter their resource intensity. We exploit these changes in one
of our empirical strategies, which we introduce in section 5.


1.2      Private Sector Price Setting

    U.S. private sector health care prices are set through negotiations between providers
and private insurers.5 The details of these negotiations are not transparent, and our limited
knowledge about private sector prices comes from claims data that reveal the reimbursements
paid once care is provided.6 A common feature of physician contracts, central to both our
theoretical and empirical analyses, is a form of benchmarking to Medicare.
    Practitioners regularly emphasize that Medicare’s administrative pricing menu features
prominently in private insurers’ contracts. Both industry-wide and BCBS-specific sources
provide institutional detail that illuminates the Medicare fee schedule’s role. Newsletters

   5
     Some exceptions apply to this statement. For instance, private insurers’ hospital payment rates in
Maryland are set by a state government board.
   6
     A growing literature finds that physician concentration significantly affects this bargaining process.
Payments are higher in markets where physicians are more concentrated (Dunn and Shapiro, 2014; Baker,
Bundorf, Royalty and Levin, 2014; Kleiner, White and Lyons, 2015; Clemens and Gottlieb, forthcoming).

                                                    9
that insurers distribute to participating providers, both in Texas and elsewhere, frequently
draw explicit links between Medicare’s maximum allowable charges and the insurer’s fee
schedule. Policies often take the form that reimbursement rates are linked to Medicare unless
the insurer’s contract specifies otherwise. Our empirical work examines when and why this
occurs. We measure how often exceptions apply, and whether BCBS’s exceptions occur
systematically in cases when we would expect the cost of the Medicare menu’s inefficiencies
to be particularly large.
    Importantly, the relative value scale itself does not determine an absolute price level. As
in Medicare, realized private reimbursements involve RVUs scaled by “conversion factors,”
which converts RVUs into dollars. These conversion factors are key subjects of negotiation.
    Practitioners describe two modes of negotiation between providers and private insurers.
Insurance carriers typically offer small provider groups contracts based on fixed fee schedules.
Whether the schedule is copied directly from Medicare or modified by the insurer, the parties
then negotiate a constant markup over these rates (Nandedkar, 2011; Gesme and Wiseman,
2010; Mertz, 2004). In contrast, insurers are said to negotiate in more detail with hospitals
and large provider groups. The model below examines when each bargaining approach would
be efficient and what each means for the welfare consequences of Medicare payment reforms.


2       Conceptual Framework

    We sketch a model of physician reimbursement rates that can be benchmarked to Medi-
care or unconstrained. Physicians and insurers can use Medicare’s payments as a default
relative price schedule, so that reimbursements are simply a markup over Medicare’s rates.7
Adopting this default has costs if Medicare’s relative payments are suboptimal, in a sense
developed below. It may nonetheless be efficient to rely on this default due to negotiation

    7
     Medicare’s position as the single-largest payer for health care services further reinforces its relevance as
a setter of default prices. Practitioners describe the offers made by insurers to sole practitioners, for example,
as being take-it-or-leave it, scalar mark-ups (or occasionally slight mark-downs) of Part B prices.

                                                       10
and coordination costs (Cutler and Ly, 2011).8
    Consider an insurer that purchases two types of medical services, indexed by j ∈ {1, 2},
for treating its enrollees. We abstract from the physician-insurer bargaining process and as-
sume that the insurer sets prices with full knowledge of the aggregate supply curve for each
type of care. Let rj denote the reimbursement rate that the insurer pays to physicians for
providing service j, and let rjM be the corresponding Medicare rate. For extreme analytical
simplicity, assume that the physician market supplies care to the insurer’s patients according
to the aggregate supply functions s1 (r1 ) = αr1 and s2 (r2 ) = βr2 , where rj is the reimburse-
ment rate for service j and α, β > 0. If the true price-setting process is not so simple—say,
if physicians are not price-takers—the model’s main ideas still hold. In that case, they strive
to reach a pricing agreement that maximizes joint surplus. We would simply view prices as
jointly determined and negotiating costs as those incurred by both parties.
    We assume that the insurer aims to minimize its medical expenses while keeping patients,
or their employers, satisfied with the insurance product. This latter constraint requires that
the insurer provide enough care to achieve the patient’s reservation value u. We assume the
patients have extremely simple preferences over medical care, captured by u(q1 , q2 ) = aq1 +bq2
where qj is the quantity of service j supplied to a representative patient.
    We will consider two methods of reimbursement rate determination, and then allow
the insurer to choose between them. In the first case, the insurer is constrained to set
reimbursements as scalar markups over Medicare rates. Let ϕ represent this markup, so the
benchmarked payment for service j would be ϕrjM . We then obtain the following result,
whose proof is in Appendix A.

Result 1 (Reimbursements Benchmarked to Medicare). When the insurer is constrained

   8
      Providers themselves may find deviating from Medicare’s menu costly due to increases in the non-trivial
administrative expenses associated with billing (Cutler and Ly, 2011). Regulations requiring insurers to pay
sufficiently to ensure access to “medically necessary” services may also contribute to such a role for public
players in these markets.

                                                     11
                                                                                u
to follow Medicare’s relative prices, the markup will be given by ϕ =                   . Total
                                                                        αar1M   + βbr2M
medical expenditures will be Ê ≡ ϕ2 [α(r1M )2 + β(r2M )2 ].

   In this case, the insurer only chooses one pricing parameter: the markup ϕ over Medicare.
Result 1 shows that this markup is increasing in our proxy for patients’ demand, their
reservation value u. As u increases, insurers must increase physician reimbursements in
order to induce the supply responses required to satisfy higher-u patients.
   Next consider the insurer’s behavior when relative prices are unconstrained. In this
situation, the insurer sets physician reimbursements separately for each service, again aiming
to minimize medical expenditures subject to the constraint that u(q1 , q2 ) ≥ u.

Result 2 (Reimbursements When Unconstrained). When the insurer is unconstrained, reim-
                        r∗    b                                     u2
bursement rates satisfy 2∗ = . Medical expenditures are E ∗ ≡              . These expenses
                        r1    a                                  αa2 + βb2
                                                                     rM      b
are weakly lower than Ê from Result 1, with equality occurring when 2M = . The discrep-
                                                                     r1      a
                                           M
                                         r      b
ancy between E ∗ and Ê is increasing in 2M − .
                                         r1     a
   This result shows that the insurer can reduce expenditures, while maintaining patient
satisfaction, whenever Medicare’s reimbursement ratio differs from the ratio the insurer would
prefer. Since the insurer’s optimal pricing accounts for patients’ relative preferences over
the two services, while Medicare’s reimbursements may not, relying on Medicare’s payment
ratio can push the insurer inefficiently far up the supply curve for one of the services. By
remedying this inefficiency, the unconstrained payments can save money while maintaining
patient satisfaction. The more Medicare’s payment ratio deviates from the efficient one, the
costlier this inefficiency is for the insurer.
                                                                                            r2M
   We now allow the insurer to choose between the two pricing regimes. Let θ =              r1M
                                                                                                  be
the ratio of Medicare payments for the two services. If the insurer adopts this ratio, as we
                                                                                      r2
assumed in Result 1, it incurs no additional cost. If it chooses a different ratio,   r1
                                                                                           6= θ, it
incurs a fixed cost c due to the added complexity or additional negotiations required.

                                                 12
Result 3 (Choice of Benchmarking). Let ξ denote the insurer’s savings from abandoning
Medicare’s payment ratio. The insurer will deviate from this ratio when ξ > c.
    These savings ξ are proportional to u2 , and are increasing in the difference between the
                                                                                  rM   b
efficient reimbursement ratio and that implied by Medicare’s payment rates, 2M − . Con-
                                                                                  r1   a
                      β
ditional on the ratio α , ξ is decreasing in the sensitivity of supply to reimbursement rates (α
or β). Conditional on the ratio ab , ξ is increasing in the amount of care required to achieve
utility level u (decreasing in a or b).

   This result shows that it is more worthwhile for the insurer to abandon Medicare’s relative
pricing, and pay the costs necessary to set prices independently, in two sets of scenarios. First,
the insurer is more prone to abandon benchmarking when Medicare’s default reimbursements
deviate more substantially from the insurer’s preferred relative prices. When the Medicare
relative prices are farther from the insurer’s unconditional optimum, the insurer has to spend
ever more to achieve the same patient satisfaction.
   Second, the insurer is more prone to abandon benchmarking when there is more money at
stake. This shows up in Result 3 in three ways. First, the insurer has to spend more—both
through higher prices and procuring more services—in order to provide a higher utility level u.
Second, when supply is less sensitive to reimbursement rates, higher payments are needed to
achieve u—and more so when Medicare-benchmarked prices increase the distortions. Third,
when the parameters a and b in the utility function are lower, holding constant u, it takes
more care to achieve the requisite patient utility. Again, this implies higher costs when the
insurer’s preferred relative payments differ from Medicare’s.
   In practice, this model implies that there may be welfare gains available if the insurer and
physician negotiate service- or bundle-specific reimbursement rates. Medicare’s fee schedule
may have its own inefficiencies, in terms of the care it encourages or division of resources
it induces. Consequently, the overall quality of the health insurance product, relative to its
costs, can potentially be increased by abandoning Medicare’s reimbursement ratio.

                                               13
3       Medical Pricing Data

    We analyze health care price setting in the context of claims processed by a single large
insurer, Blue Cross Blue Shield of Texas (BCBS). The claims database we analyze covers
the universe of BCBS’s payments for outpatient care in 2008–2011. For each claim, the
database provides information on the service provided, location, physician, physician group,
and BCBS’s payment to that group. Our analysis sample restricts this universe along several
dimensions. For example, the full 2010 dataset contains 57,613,494 claim lines and $4.29
billion in spending. We clean the data as described in Appendix B.1, which initially leaves
us with 44,055,829 service lines and $2.63 billion of spending. This initial cut eliminates
payments made to out-of-network physicians, who have not reached a negotiated agreement
with BCBS on reimbursement rates. We will subsequently examine this segment of the data
separately.
    In order for private insurers to benchmark prices to Medicare, at a minimum they would
need to use Medicare’s billing codes. We thus merge the remaining claims with Medicare
billing codes, which provides an upper bound on the potential benchmarking. This merge
only loses notable portions of one broad spending category, namely laboratory tests, for
which both Medicare and BCBS frequently base payments on non-standard codes. We
retain over 97 percent of claims for evaluation and management, diagnostic imaging, and
surgical services. The final analysis sample in 2009 includes 3,821 unique HCPCS codes,
which comprise 23,933,577 service lines and $2.05 billion of spending.9
    The claims data further allow us to describe the provider groups serving BCBS benefi-
ciaries, at least in terms of the care they provide to that sample. To enable our subsequent
investigation of heterogeneity in Medicare benchmarking, we measure the total value of the

    9
    Appendix Table B.1 shows the exact data loss resulting from each step of cleaning. The key conclusion
from this table is that, once we restrict ourselves to the relevant universe of data, additional losses from
merging in Medicare codes and eliminating infrequent codes are not substantial.

                                                    14
care each group provides to BCBS patients in a given year. Our final dataset includes
care provided by over 80,000 physician groups. Table 1 presents summary statistics on the
physician groups in our final sample.


4        Private Benchmarking to Medicare in the Cross-Section

4.1      Measuring Implied Conversion Factors in Claims Data

     Our first look at the relationship between private and Medicare pricing exploits a straight-
forward insight: when many payments to a given physician group share a common mark-up,
their payments are likely linked contractually to Medicare’s relative rates. As made clear
below, this claim’s strength depends on the precision with which markups are rounded.
Markups rounded to the nearest 2 cents per RVU, our baseline threshold, are unlikely to
coincide by chance.
     To flesh out our approach, we start by simplifying the Medicare payment formula from
equation (1). For any one physician group, the geographic adjustment is a constant and can
thus be thought of as part of the Conversion Factor.10 Letting Pc,j,t denote the reimbursement
rate for claim c for service j in year t, equation (1) simplifies to:


                               Pc,j,t = Conversion Factort × RV U j,t .                               (2)


Dividing the payment Pc,j,t by Medicare’s RVU allotment for service j, we obtain:

                                                         Pc,j,t
                                          ICFc,j,t =            .                                     (3)
                                                        RV Uj,t

This equation defines an “implied conversion factor” (ICF)—the conversion factor that would


    10
    Medicare’s geographic adjustments are actually slightly more complicated, but this is a close approxi-
mation. See Clemens and Gottlieb (2014) for more details.

                                                   15
rationalize a payment of Pc,j,t in a Medicare-benchmarked contract. Taking logs of equation
(2) reveals that this pricing scheme implies a 1 for 1 relationship between log RVUs and the
log of Pc,j,t . Since we observe Pc,j,t in the claims data and CMS publishes its RVU allocations,
investigating the prevalence of common ICFs is straightforward.
   Simply computing an ICF does not tell us whether claim c was actually priced according
to equation (2). To gauge the relevance of this pricing scheme, we ask how often a particular
group’s payments reflect the same ICF. Figure 1 provides concrete illustrations. Each panel
shows payment rates for the services provided regularly by a single physician group in the
2010 BCBS claims data.11 Each circle on the graph is a unique payment amount for a unique
service code. That is, if the group received two unique payment values for a standard office
visit (HCPCS code 99213), say $45 and $51, those two amounts would show up as separate
circles. The log Blue Cross payment amount is on the y-axis and the log of Medicare RVUs
for the service are on the x-axis. The solid lines in Panels A and B have slopes of 1 and are
drawn to coincide with each group’s most common ICFs.
   Panel A shows the data from a mid-sized group for which the relevance of a single ICF is
readily apparent. Nearly all of this group’s services share a single ICF, with a few deviations.
The most natural interpretation of this graph is that those services on the solid line are priced
according to Medicare RVUs with a common ICF, while the remaining services are priced
separately. Several of the circles below the solid line plausibly involve instances of a less
common, but still contractually specified, ICF for this group. A conservative estimate of the
Medicare-linked share would view these and other circles off the solid line as deviations from
Medicare-linked pricing.
   Panel B presents an equivalently constructed graph for a larger group that provides more

  11
     The figures exclude any code-by-payment combination that appears less than 10 times in the data
associated with the relevant physician group. The more systematic analysis presented below has no such
exclusion. Throughout this analysis, we restrict to data from the period before BCBS implemented each
year’s RVU updates (e.g. January 1—June 30, 2010). This way our calculations are not confounded by RVU
changes.

                                                 16
unique services at more distinct prices. This group again has one particularly common
ICF, though there is stronger evidence for the presence of a second, and possibly a third,
contractually specified ICF. Finally, Panel C presents payment data for a large group that
provides a substantial number of unique services. This large group has a range of ICFs,
none of which visually dominate the payment picture. The scatterplot indicates the use of
a remarkably complicated contract with BCBS.
    To develop a summary measure of a group’s links to Medicare, we make two approxi-
mations. First, we round the value of each ICFc,j,t to the nearest 20 cents, 10 cents, or 2
cents to explore sensitivity to allowances for rounding error. Second, we define “common
ICFs” (cICFs) as those that rationalize a sufficiently large share of the BCBS’s payments to
a single physician group. In Figure 1, for example, the red lines in Panels A and B should
undoubtedly qualify as cICFs. Other values may also qualify depending on the strictness of
the threshold we apply. We consider thresholds ranging from 5 to 20 percent of a group’s
services, then calculate the share of BCBS’s payments associated with any of a group’s
cICFs.


4.2      Frequency of Common Implied Conversion Factors

    Table 2 presents the share of services linked to Medicare in each year according to the
methodology of section 4.1. The shares are substantial in each year and are moderately
larger in 2010–11 than in 2008–09. The estimates range from 30 to 80 percent in 2008–09
and from 65 to 90 percent in 2010–11. The values increase marginally with the flexibility of
our rounding threshold and decrease substantially with the stringency of the definition for a
common ICF. Appendix Table B.2 shows that the results are qualitatively similar under a
variety of alternative definitions.12
  12
     If we only count the single most common ICF for each group, the estimates are very similar to those
reported in Table 2 when imposing a 20 percent threshold. Unfortunately, theory does not provide guidance
as to which threshold is most appropriate, and the choice of threshold substantially affects our estimate of

                                                    17
4.3     Heterogeneity in Share with Common ICFs

    Our model of physician-insurer contracting emphasizes that we should expect to see de-
viations from Medicare’s pricing schedule when the value of such deviations is high relative
to negotiation and adjustment costs. To test this framework, this section considers hetero-
geneity along dimensions likely to proxy for the value of deviations.
    The value of improving on Medicare’s menu is driven primarily by two factors. First,
the cost of maintaining inefficiencies embedded in Medicare’s menu will be high when con-
tracts cover large quantities of care. We thus anticipate relatively strong links when private
insurers contract with small physician groups, and less benchmarking when considering con-
tracts with large physician groups. Second, the value of improving on Medicare’s menu
depends on the severity of that menu’s inefficiencies. Because it is difficult to systematically
quantify Medicare’s inefficiencies across a large range of individual services, we focus on one
of the Medicare fee schedule’s more salient problems. Medicare rates are designed based
on average-cost reimbursement, so its reimbursements will hew closer to marginal costs for
labor-intensive services than for capital-intensive services. Standard optimal payment mod-
els suggest that the latter would be better reimbursed through combinations of up-front
financing of fixed costs and incremental reimbursements closer to marginal cost (Ellis and
McGuire, 1986). We can proxy for heterogeneity according to services’ capital and labor
intensity by comparing the frequency of benchmarking across broad categories of care, such
as labor-intensive evaluation and management services versus diagnostic imaging.
    To adapt our ICF method for this heterogeneity analysis, we compute the share of services
priced according to common Implied Conversion Factors (cICFs) at the physician group-by-
service code (j × g) level. We define fixed effects 1b(j) at the level of the 1-digit “Betos”
classification of Berenson and Holahan (1990). To measure the relationship between group

the linked share. To overcome this problem, section 5 introduces a separate estimation strategy that is not
sensitive to choices of this sort.

                                                    18
size and the Medicare-linked share, we categorize physician groups g according to vigintiles
of their aggregate BCBS billing in a year, using 1s(g) to denote vigintile fixed effects.
   Figure 2 shows the relationship between the share linked to Medicare and vigintiles of
group size. Looking first at the measure shown with hollow red squares, we observe a stark
negative relationship. Large groups’ services have more deviations from Medicare bench-
marking than small groups’ services. With this measure, the variation across the vigintiles is
around 20 percentage points. Appendix B presents regressions that summarize this fact. It
further explores the relationship between payments and physician market structure. Among
other things, we find that larger physician groups obtain higher ICFs.
   To check whether the relationship between benchmarking and group size is affected by
the composition of large and small groups’ services, we run the following regression at the
group-code level, separately by year:


                     Medicare-Linked Sharej,g = ηb 1b(j) + ζs 1s(g) + υj,g .                (4)


The orange diamonds in Figure 2 show the estimates of ζs , which can be interpreted as the
relationship between Medicare links and group size, adjusted for service composition. The
composition-adjusted relationship between group size and the Medicare-linked share remains
strongly negative.
   The remaining measures in Figure 2 show the Medicare-linked share in terms of dollars
spent, rather than number of services. The results are quite similar to the services-based
results. A stark negative relationship between firm size and the Medicare linked share is
apparent in all four measures.
   We next turn to differences across Betos categories, which are captured by estimates of
ηb from equation (4). Column 1 of Table 3 reports estimates of equation (4), from the same
regression using 2010 data that generated the group size coefficients shown in Figure 2B.


                                               19
Column 2 drops the group size controls, and thus reports raw differences in means across
Betos categories. The constant represents the mean benchmarking share for the omitted
category, namely Evaluation & Management services. We find that benchmarking is 30–50
percent less frequent for Imaging, Procedures, and Tests than for Evaluation & Management
services. Columns 3 and 4 report similar estimates when services are weighted according to
the spending they represent. Table 3 and Figure 2 show that firm size and service categories
independently predict variation in the prevalence of Medicare-benchmarked payments. These
are precisely the types of variation that theory predicts.


5     Empirical Model Using Medicare Payment Changes

    While our estimates of heterogeneity across groups and service types in the previous
section are quite robust, our overall estimate of the Medicare-linked share is sensitive to the
rounding and commonality thresholds chosen. Because theory provides no direct guidance
as to what thresholds are most appropriate, we develop a second approach for estimating
the pervasiveness of Medicare benchmarking. This empirical approach exploits updates to
Medicare’s allocation of RVUs.


5.1    Changes in Medicare’s Relative Values

    A committee of the American Medical Association, composed of representatives of various
physician specialties, recommends RVU updates to CMS (Government Accountability Office,
2015). Medicare updates come in two main forms: reassessments of the resources required to
provide a single service, and revisions to part of the underlying methodology. For example, a
revision to the method for computing physician effort can incrementally change the weights
assigned to many service codes. At least one broad update of this sort appears to occur
annually over the period we study, as do hundreds of larger service-specific reassessments.
    The vast majority of updates to Medicare payments go into effect on January 1 each year.

                                              20
But even when relying on these rates, private insurers have a choice about whether and when
to shift from one year’s relative value scale to the next year’s (Borges, 2003). BCBS informs
its providers of the date on which such updates go into effect through its provider newsletter,
the Blue Review. During our sample, the newsletter announced updates taking place on July
1, 2008, on August 15, 2009, on July 1, 2010, and on September 1, 2011 (BCBS 2008; 2009;
2010; 2011). In all four years, the standard deviations of RVU changes are around 7 percent,
so there is substantial pricing variation for us to exploit.
   Figure 3A shows one example of how these changes can impact pricing in our BCBS data.
This graph shows average log payments by day for the most commonly billed service code,
a standard office visit with an established patient (code 99213). The average log payment
jumps distinctively on July 1, 2010, the day on which BCBS implemented the 2010 relative
values. Medicare’s log RVUs for this service rose by 0.068 between the 2009 and 2010 fee
schedules. BCBS’s average log payment rose by just under 0.05. Appendix Figure B.1 shows
further examples. We next develop a method for using high frequency payment changes of
this sort to infer the share of payments linked to Medicare.


5.2    Analytical Foundation

   Our method exploits the institutional details we documented in section 1 about how
Medicare benchmarking works in practice. When a payment Pg,j,t is linked to Medicare’s
relative values, it takes the form of a scalar markup over Medicare RVUs, or


                                     Pg,j,t = θg,t · RV Uj,t ,                             (5)




                                                21
where g indexes physician groups, j indexes services, and t is a time period. Equation (5)
implies that the scalar markup θg,t on Medicare-linked payments is additive in logs, so


                                  ln(Pg,j,t ) = ln(θg,t ) + ln(RV Uj,t ).                     (6)


   Equation (6) describes a linear relationship between log private insurance payments and
log RVUs for a service, and in particular it predicts a regression coefficient of 1 on log RVUs.
If the markup θ is a constant, it will be reflected in the constant term. If it varies across
physician groups, then group fixed effects capture ln(θg ). If it changes over groups and across
time, then group-by-time fixed effects serve the same role.
   The institutional details, reflected in our model, suggested that payments may alterna-
tively be negotiated without reference to RVUs. In this case, we denote the payment by
Pg,j,t = ρg,j,t , or ln(Pg,j,t ) = ln(ρg,j,t )—with no necessary role for θg,t or RV Uj,t .
   When RVUs change, these equations provide stark guidance about how private reimburse-
ments will adjust. Consider two time periods, across which Medicare may update log RVUs
by ∆ ln(RV Uj,t ). Let εg,j,t = ∆ ln(ρg,j,t ) be any change in the alternative non-benchmarked
payment. We can now write both types of prices in terms of service fixed effects and changes
as follows. For Medicare-linked services, we have:


                 ln(Pg,j,t ) = φj 1j + φg 1g + φg,j 1g · 1j + ∆ ln(RV Uj,t ) · 1{t=post} .    (7)


For services not linked to Medicare, we have:


                      ln(Pg,j,t ) = φj 1j + φg 1g + φg,j 1g · 1j + εg,j,t · 1{t=post} .       (8)


In these equations, 1{t=post} is an indicator for the second time period. In both types of
price setting, the fixed effects capture baseline payments to group g for service j in the first


                                                     22
period, while the interaction with 1{t=post} captures the change between the two periods.
   The linearity of equations (7) and (8) implies a simple way to measure how many services
are linked to Medicare. Equation (7) says that a linear regression of log private payments
on changes in log Medicare RVUs, for services with prices linked to Medicare, should yield
a coefficient of 1 after controlling for appropriate fixed effects. Equation (8) shows that the
same regression should yield a coefficient of 0 for services not priced based on Medicare, as
long as the non-Medicare payment changes (εg,j,t ) are uncorrelated with RVU updates.
   More generally, suppose that both types of payments exist, and specifically that a con-
stant share σ of payments are benchmarked to Medicare prices, while 1 − σ are set indepen-
dently. (We will subsequently allow for heterogeneity.) The average of log reimbursements
is then given by a weighted average of equations (7) and (8), and the coefficient on log RVU
updates can reveal the linked share σ:


          ln(Pg,j,t ) = φj 1j + φg 1g + φg,j 1g · 1j + σ · ∆ ln(RV Uj,t ) · 1{t=post} + g,j,t ,      (9)


where we define g,j,t = (1 − σ) · εg,j,t · 1{t=post} . Equation (9) suggests that, in a linear
regression with appropriate fixed effects, we can infer the Medicare-linked share from the
coefficient on log RVU changes. This motivates our baseline specification for estimating σ.
We use data at the level of individual claims, indexed by c, to estimate:


 ln(Pc,g,j,t ) = β∆ ln(RV Uj ) · 1{t=post} + φt 1{t=post} + φj 1j + φg 1g + φg,j 1g · 1j + c,g,j,t . (10)


This is just a claims-level version of equation (9) that adds a time period fixed effect
1{t=post} in case private payments shift broadly across the two time periods. This para-
metric difference-in-differences specification also incorporates full sets of group (1g ), service
(1j ), and group-by-service (1g · 1j ) effects to account for all time-invariant group- and service-
specific terms. Thus the coefficient β̂, our estimate of the share of services linked to Medicare,

                                                   23
is identified only using changes in RVUs across the two time periods. The time effect further
limits the identifying variation exclusively to relative changes in RVUs across services. To
obtain the share of spending linked to Medicare, we will also estimate equation (10) weighted
by the average pre-update price of each service.
   For the estimate of β̂ in specification (10) to equal the true Medicare-linked share σ, we
must make several assumptions about active renegotiations of reimbursement rates. Since
group and group-by-service fixed effects are intended to capture the level of markup θ, any
changes in this markup over time may show up in the error term. In Appendix C.2, we
discuss the situations in which this challenges our ability to identify the parameter σ. We
emphasize there that the relatively high frequency at which we are able to estimate payment
changes makes our assumptions quite plausible.


5.3     Parametric Event Study

   To describe the timing with which BCBS incorporates Medicare updates into its reim-
bursements, we also present dynamic estimates from the following event study regression:


                               βt ∆ ln(RV Uj ) · 1t + φt 1t + φj 1j + φg 1g + φg,j 1g · 1j + c,g,j,t .
                        X
      ln(Pc,g,j,t ) =                                                                                     (11)
                        t6=0



When estimating equation (11), we normalize t such that t = 1 is the month in which BCBS
has announced that it will implement RVU updates. We thus expect to see β̂t = 0 for periods
preceding the updates’ incorporation, t < 0, while the β̂t for t > 0 are our estimates of how
often Medicare updates are incorporated into private payments. A flat profile of the post-
update β̂t estimates would suggest that all price changes correlated with RVU changes are
implemented instantaneously. An upward trend in these coefficients might suggest that our
baseline estimates are affected by ongoing renegotiations between BCBS and firms whose
bargaining positions are affected by RVU updates. We discuss this concern in detail in


                                                          24
Appendix C.



6        Results from RVU Update Analysis

6.1      Baseline Results

     Figure 3B presents event study estimates of the link between Medicare’s relative value
scale and BCBS reimbursements. It shows estimates of equation (11) for the RVU changes
implemented in 2010. BCBS’s provider newsletters say that updates to Medicare’s RVUs
took effect that year on July 1, 2010.
     The estimates reveal substantial links between RVU updates and the payments providers
receive from BCBS. The coefficients imply that σ̂ = 75 percent of services are linked to Medi-
care’s relative values. The dynamics in the figure are consistent with the view that this link
involves the manner in which Medicare’s relative values are embedded in BCBS’s contracts.
As in the raw data for standard office visits presented in Panel A, we see that payment
changes occur at precisely the time when BCBS implements these updates.13 Importantly,
the estimates of σ are both economically and statistically larger than 0 and smaller than 1,
implying that payments for a substantial share of services deviate from strict benchmarking
to Medicare’s relative values; sections 6.2 and 6.3 will investigate these deviations in detail.
The extremely tight standard errors prior to the update in each year suggest that our fixed
effects effectively capture the pre-update payments.
     Figure 3C shows the variation across services that drives these results in the form of
a binned scatterplot. This graph relates private reimbursement changes to Medicare fee
schedule changes across different services. It shows that our results reflect pricing changes
throughout the full distribution of Medicare changes.14
    13
     The estimate for August 2009 is half of that in September and subsequent months, likely because of the
mid-month RVU update date Blue Cross announced in that year (BCBS 2009).
  14
     Appendix Figures C.1 and C.2 shows similar results for data from the other years.

                                                    25
   Table 4 presents our baseline estimates of equation (10), which summarize our estimates
for 2010 updates in a single coefficient. It further probes the robustness of these estimates to
a variety of specification checks. Column 1 of each panel reports our baseline specification,
which includes a full set of group-by-HCPCS code fixed effects and controls for time effects
with a simple post-update indicator. Column 2 drops the group-by-HCPCS code fixed effects
in favor of a more parsimonious set of HCPCS code fixed effects. Column 3 augments the
baseline specification by controlling for a cubic trend in the day of the year, which we
interact with the size of each service’s RVU update. Column 4 allows the cubic trend in
day to differ between the periods preceding and following the fee schedule update, as in a
standard regression discontinuity design. The table shows that these specification changes
have essentially no effect on the estimated coefficient β̂. This reinforces the interpretation
that, among services billed using standard HCPCS codes, roughly three-quarters of BCBS’s
physician claims are linked to Medicare’s relative value scale.
   Panel B reports an equivalent set of specifications in which each service code is weighted
according to the average BCBS payment prior to the updates. On average, the estimates
imply that roughly 55 percent of BCBS’s physician spending is linked to Medicare’s relative
value scale. The difference in coefficients between Panels A and B implies that payments for
relatively expensive services are less likely to be benchmarked to Medicare than are payments
for low-cost services.15
   The estimates presented in Figure 3 and Table 4 may differ from the true Medicare
benchmarking parameter σ if changes in other terms of providers’ contracts covary with
the changes in RVUs. Indeed, payment changes that significantly alter physician groups’
average Medicare payment can move private payments in subsequent years, due in part to
the resulting changes to their bargaining positions (Clemens and Gottlieb, forthcoming). In
Appendix C.4, we thus draw on institutional detail and theoretically motivated specification

  15
       Appendix Tables C.1 and C.2 replicate Panels A and B, respectively, in other years’ data.

                                                     26
checks to explore how much our estimates might deviate from the true share of payments
benchmarked to Medicare’s relative values. We find no evidence that renegotiations confound
the relationship between BCBS’s and Medicare’s payments over the time horizons we analyze.
Appendix C.4 thus bolsters the case for interpreting our estimates of β̂ as measuring the
fraction of services tied directly to Medicare.


6.2       Which Servicse Are Benchmarked to Medicare?

   We next investigate heterogeneity in our RVU-update estimates to explore the economic
forces underlying the decision to benchmark to Medicare’s payment menu. We consider
heterogeneity along the same dimensions as in section 4.3, namely type of service and group
size. The consistency of our results across methodologies, which differ in their strengths
and weaknesses, strengthens the case for viewing the heterogeneity we uncover as reflecting
systematic features of BCBS’s physician contracts.
   Table 5 estimates equation (10)—the relationship between private prices and changes in
Medicare’s relative values—separately across broad categories of services. Just as in the ICF-
based results from Table 3, we observe a stronger relationship between private payments and
Medicare updates for Evaluation & Management services than for Imaging. The estimates
imply that nearly 30 percent more of the payments for Evaluation & Management services
are linked directly to Medicare’s relative values than for Imaging services.16
   Second, we divide Imaging codes into subcomponents with high capital and high labor
content. Providers often bill separately for taking an image (the “Technical Component”)
and interpreting it (the “Professional Component”). The Professional Component is labor-
intensive while the Technical Component, into which the billing codes amortize the imag-
ing equipment’s fixed cost, is capital-intensive. When the same group supplies both the
Professional and Technical Components, it submits the bill as a “Global” service. The re-
  16
       Appendix Table C.4 replicates this analysis in other years’ data.

                                                      27
sults in columns 5 through 7 show that payments for the Professional Component are more
tightly linked to Medicare’s relative values than are the payments for the Technical Compo-
nent. These patterns support the hypothesis that physicians and insurers are more likely to
contract away from Medicare’s menu for capital intensive services than for labor intensive
services.

6.3       Deviations from Benchmarking Across Physician Groups

   We next consider how the strength of the link between private payments and Medicare’s
relative values vary across physician groups. In Figure 3D we allow our estimates of the
strength of public-private payment benchmarking to vary with group size. The figure shows
a binned scatterplot, analogous to Panel C, but with observations split into those coming
from the largest and the smallest firms. We can see that the slope is steeper for the smaller
physician groups, indicating that benchmarking is more common for their payments.
   Table 6 quantifies this difference. The first column reports the baseline, service-weighted
regression from Table 4. The second column introduces interactions between the RVU up-
dates and indicators for services provided by firms of various sizes. We define mid-sized
firms as those with $200,000 to $1,000,000 in annual billings with BCBS, and large firms
as those with more than $1,000,000 in annual billings. The estimates imply that nearly 90
percent of services provided by firms with less than $200,000 in billings are benchmarked to
Medicare, while roughly 60 percent of services provided by firms with more than $1,000,000
in billings are benchmarked. Columns 3 and 4 present similar, but dollar-weighted, esti-
mates. The results in column 4 suggest that 77 percent of payments to firms with billings
less than $200,000 are benchmarked to Medicare, while one-third of payments to firms with
more than $1,000,000 in billings are benchmarked.17 As with the estimates of heterogeneity
across services, the heterogeneity by firm size is thus quite consistent between the ICF and

  17
       Appendix Table C.5 shows similar results in data from other years.

                                                     28
RVU-update methods.

6.4    Out-of-Network Payments

    Our analysis thus far only includes in-network payments—those made to physician groups
that have agreed with BCBS on mutually acceptable payment rates. In Appendix D we
show comparable results for out-of-network payments, which arise when providers have not
reached any such agreement. When a BCBS-insured patient sees an out-of-network provider,
the ultimate payment reflects a complex interaction of the provider’s charge, after-the-fact
negotiations (as in Mahoney, 2015), and the insurance plan’s coverage. So out-of-network
payments are less likely to depend on a convenient benchmark such as the Medicare fee
schedule.
    Appendix Tables D.1 through D.3 show much weaker—if any—Medicare benchmarking
in out-of-network payments. Estimates based on RVU changes, in Tables D.1 and D.2, find
zero Medicare links in 2009 and 2011, and a small positive estimate in 2010. The estimates
based on cICFs are higher, though still below the in-network estimates from section 4. The
difference between these results and our in-network estimates suggests that the in-network
prices reflect active efforts to negotiate around a simplified payment schedule.


7     How Do Private Payments Deviate from Medicare?

    Thus far we have explored the frequency of deviations from strictly Medicare-linked
contracts. In both the RVU-update and Implied Conversion Factor analyses, we presented
evidence on how the frequency of such deviations varies across services and groups. In
this section, we analyze the direction of BCBS’s adjustments when it deviates from strictly
Medicare-linked contracts. That is, we investigate what services BCBS rewards through
upward adjustments and discourages through downward adjustments.
    To measure these adjustments, we begin by estimating the following equation on claims


                                             29
from the pre-RVU-update period of each year—i.e. the initial months over which Medicare’s
relative values are constant:


                                 ln(Pg,j ) = ψ ln(RV Uj ) + δg + eg,j .                              (12)


If all payments were mechanically linked to Medicare’s relative values, with a uniform con-
tract for each group and no payment reporting error, ψ ln(RV Uj )+δg would perfectly predict
private payments. The group-specific δg estimates would account for heterogeneity in groups’
markups over Medicare, and we would expect to find ψ̂ = 1. Conditional on a service’s RVU
allocation and group-specific markups, the prediction errors eg,j thus contain information
about the direction of deviations from Medicare’s relative values.
   To understand which service categories tend to receive higher or lower payments than
Medicare-benchmarking predicts we average eg,j by Betos category. Table 7 presents the
resulting means, namely êg,j = N1b j∈b êg,j for each Betos group b, comprising Nb claims
                                   P

for all services j ∈ b in that Betos group. The table shows that payments for Evaluation
& Management and Testing services generally have positive residuals while payments for
services in Imaging and Procedures have negative residuals.
   Figure 4A plots the cumulative distributions of these residuals by Betos category. The
distribution for Imaging shows far more density of negative residuals than those for other
services. Testing has more positive residuals, although that is largely driven by one outlier
code.18 Compared to the relative payments implied by Medicare’s relative values, BCBS
systematically adjusts its contracts to discourage imaging services. This coincides with the
conventional wisdom that Medicare’s relative values “underpay” for labor-intensive services
relative to other services, and suggests that BCBS aims to partly rectify that mispricing.


  18
     In the Testing category the vast majority of residuals are negative, with the exception of one of the
more common tests, which has a large and positive average residual. Recall from section 3, however, that
Testing is the one category with significant missing data problems.

                                                   30
    Differences in BCBS’s adjustments for labor- and capital-intensive services are partic-
ularly sharp across the subcategories of diagnostic imaging. Payment adjustments for the
labor-intensive Professional Component of these services are substantially positive, at around
7 log points. Payment adjustments for the capital-intensive Technical Component of these
services are substantially negative, averaging −12 log points. Figure 4B shows that this
pattern holds throughout the distribution. While it is clear that BCBS reimbursements
lean heavily on Medicare’s relative values for their basic payments structure, these results
provide evidence that BCBS adjusts its contracts to increase the generosity of payments for
labor-intensive services and decrease its payments for capital-intensive services.


8     Benchmarking and Payment System Efficiency

    Thus far we have documented when, and how often, private contracts rely on Medicare’s
fee schedule and when they deviate. We now use these results to shed light on the negotiation
costs and Medicare inefficiencies that can explain the benchmarking we see. For the RVU
changes we study to have efficiency implications, they must generate meaningful changes
in treatment. Section 8.1 provides evidence that service supply responds to price changes
of the sorts we consider. In section 8.2 we then quantify the negotiation costs that would
rationalize the level of benchmarking we observe.


8.1    Supply Responses

    To determine whether the Medicare benchmarking we document alters the way physi-
cians practice, we estimate how supply responds to relative price changes across services.
The estimates use the same RVU changes as the foregoing analysis, which means that our
estimates have three economically salient features. First, they involve short-run responses
within a calendar year. Second, they involve responses to changes in the profitability of some
services relative to others rather than to across-the-board changes in reimbursement rates.

                                              31
Finally, they involve private payment changes that result from contractual links to changes
in Medicare’s relative rates.19
   To measure supply responses, we estimate an analogue of the changes regression shown
in Figure 3C in which the dependent variable is now the change in log quantity of care. We
again split each calendar year into two time periods: the period before BCBS implemented
the year’s RVU updates, and period after it did so. The change in the log number of instances
that a given physician group provided a particular service across these two time periods is
our dependent variable.
   Figure 5 shows the results of this estimation for 2010, along with binned scatterplots of
the underlying data.20 Note that this is a reduced-form estimate; it relates the Medicare
price change to the supply responses for privately insured patients. In Appendix F, we use
an IV setup to estimate the BCBS own-price supply elasticities. We estimate elasticities
of 0.05, 0.15, 0.66, and 0.37 for the individual years, three of which are significant at the
p < 0.05 level. These positive supply elasticities imply that the pricing decisions we examine
have meaningful implications for how physicians provide treatment. If Medicare sets prices
inefficiently, then copying Medicare’s relative prices leads to inefficient care. When BCBS
deviates from Medicare rates, these positive supply responses suggest that physicians respond
to payment innovation as BCBS presumably intends.


8.2     The Costs of Complex Contracting

   The benchmarking that we have documented implies that Medicare’s pricing decisions
spill over into private insurers’ payments. At the same time, private insurers limit these

  19
      This final characteristic distinguishes the private payment changes we analyze from changes driven
by active contract renegotiations. Price changes due to active renegotiations may be better characterized
as a product of the cross-price response of private care provision to Medicare payment changes. That is,
a Medicare payment increase may lead physicians to shift supply from private to public patients absent
increases in the payments negotiated with private insurers.
   20
      Appendix Figure F.1 shows the analogues for other years.

                                                   32
spillovers in contracts with large provider groups and for services with particularly large
deviations between average and marginal costs. We now consider what levels of negotiating
costs, and inefficiencies in Medicare payment rates, can explain these decisions.
   Recall from section 6 that 55 percent of spending is linked to Medicare rates, and that
this share is larger for small physician groups. The potential efficiency gains from deviating
away from the Medicare benchmark are increasing in the scale of the group’s business with
BCBS; in particular, we assume that these potential gains are a fraction x of the group’s
billings, bi . Thus it makes sense to deviate from the Medicare fee schedule whenever the
costs of doing so are less than xbi . We now consider what combinations of x and negotiation
costs rationalize the decision to deviate 55 percent of the time.
   To do so, we rank physician groups according to the scale of their billings bi to BCBS, from
smallest to largest. We then consider a range of potential efficiency gains, from x = 0.1%
to x = 10%. We also consider a range of contract complexity costs c, from c = $500 to c =
$8,000 per group. For each x and c, we ask what share of spending comes from groups whose
potential efficiency gains are below these contracting costs, or in other words have xbi < c.
We aggregate the BCBS billings for all such groups and report their share of overall BCBS
billings in Table 8. The entries in this table indicate the share of spending that we would
expect to be linked to Medicare, under various assumptions for x and c.
   To understand the calculations in Table 8, we have to be careful about what the potential
efficiency gains x mean. These gains are the potential values of improvements in the care
provided by a physician group in response to a potential deviation from the Medicare fee
schedule—or potential savings while providing the same value. Just as in the model from
section 2, and our subsequent empirical analysis, these deviations involve changes in relative
prices for the services this group provides. These are not efficiency gains from a switch from
fee-for-service medicine to a value-based payment system. They are also not the gains from
reimbursement changes that shift the aggregate composition of specialists or affect technology


                                              33
diffusion. Just as in the supply responses from section 8.1, these should be interpreted as
changes in treatments from relative price changes over a modest time horizon.
    Second, our calculations only make sense if x describes efficiency gains captured by the
same parties that incur the negotiation costs c, namely BCBS or the relevant physician
group. For a given payment system improvement’s overall welfare gain, the health insurance
market’s opacity may limit the insurer and physician’s ability to capture its incidence.21 We
term the gains split between BCBS and the physician group the “captured efficiency gain.”
    Table 8 highlights in bold the entries that correspond most closely to the overall Medicare-
linked share we estimate, namely 55 percent. That share can be rationalized by a complexity
cost on the order of $4,000 per physician group combined with captured efficiency gains of
1 percent, or with a cost of $2,000 and a captured efficiency gain of 0.5 percent.
    The table also allows us to infer how much improvements in Medicare’s fee schedule can
change administrative costs in medicine. Suppose that a Medicare payment reform reduced
inefficiency in half, thereby also halving the potential gains from fine tuning payments (x).
Table 8 implies that the fraction of spending covered by complex contracts falls by around 14
percentage points.22 Specifically, they would simplify the contracts with 1,057 firms whose
average billings of nearly $300,000 place them in the middle of the spending distribution.
This simplification could save these physician groups and BCBS around $2.1 million in ad-
ministrative costs. An extrapolation to the national market suggests that these hypothetical
improvements in Medicare’s payments would, in addition to increasing the efficiency of care
provision, save over $200 million in contracting and payment processing costs.23



  21
      The fact that physicians’ contracts are considered proprietary, for example, makes it difficult for con-
sumers to recognize differences in the efficiency of different insurers’ payments systems.
   22
      Looking at column 3, we are supposing a move from x = 1% to x = 0.5%. This means that firms
between the 40th and the 54th percentiles of the spending distribution (when ranked by firm size) stop
deviating from the Medicare benchmark. There are 1,057 such firms.
   23
      This reflects that fact that BCBS accounts for roughly 1/100th of the private market for outpatient
services.

                                                     34
9     Conclusion

    This paper uses physician payments from a large private insurer, Blue Cross Blue Shield
of Texas (BCBS), as a window into how private firms contract for services in complex en-
vironments. Using two empirical strategies, we show that BCBS benchmarks to Medicare’s
schedule of relative prices to significantly simplify this problem. We estimate that roughly
three quarters of services and 55 percent of BCBS’s payments are directly linked to Medicare.
    We find evidence that the one quarter of services and nearly half of payments that deviate
from Medicare’s relative rate structure involve an effort to improve the payment structure.
BCBS tends to deviate when the value of doing so appears to be highest. Deviations occur
disproportionately in contracts with large physician groups, where significant mutual gains
can be on the line. BCBS significantly reduces its payments for diagnostic imaging services,
a category of care for which many academics and policy makers believe marginal benefits are
low relative to costs (Winter and Ray, 2008; MedPAC, 2011). BCBS hews closely to Medi-
care in payments for services where average-cost reimbursements will be most aligned with
marginal costs, such as labor-intensive primary care services. When it deviates, the direction
of BCBS’s payment adjustments would tend to to encourage the provision of primary care
and discourage care for which over-utilization is a more widespread concern.
    The use of Medicare as a pricing backstop implies that many inefficiencies in Medicare’s
reimbursements spill over into private fee schedules. By extension, the value of improvements
to public payment systems may ripple through private contracts in addition to improving the
performance of Medicare itself. At the same time, we find that BCBS adjusts its payments
to curb what policy analysts regard as Medicare’s greatest inefficiencies. Both public and
private players thus appear to have important roles in the process of fee schedule innovation
and reform.




                                              35
References
Abeler, Johannes and Simon Jäger, “Complex Tax Incentives,” American Economic
 Journal: Economic Policy, August 2015, 7 (3), 1–28.

Alpert, Abby, Mark Duggan, and Judith K. Hellerstein, “Perverse reverse price
 competition: Average wholesale prices and Medicaid pharmaceutical spending,” Journal
 of Public Economics, 2013, 103, 44–62.

Anderson, Eric, Nir Jaimovich, and Duncan Simester, “Price Stickiness: Empirical
 Evidence of the Menu Cost Channel,” Review of Economics and Statistics, forthcoming.

Baker, Laurence C., M. Kate Bundorf, Anne B. Royalty, and Zachary Levin,
 “Physician Practice Competition and Prices Paid by Private Insurers for Office Visits,”
 Journal of the American Medical Association, 2014, 312 (16), 1653–1662.

Berenson, Robert and John Holahan, “Using A New Type-of-Service Classification
 System to Examine the Growth in Medicare Physician Expenditures, 1985–1988,” NTIS
 Publication PB91-188599, Urban Institute Health Policy Center December 1990.

Bils, Mark and Peter J. Klenow, “Some Evidence on the Importance of Sticky Prices,”
  Journal of Political Economy, October 2004, 112 (5), 947–985.

Blue Cross Blue Shield of Texas, “Fee schedule update,” Blue Review, 2008, (1), 8.

  , “Fee schedule updates effective in August,” Blue Review, 2009, (2), 5.

  , “Fee schedule updates,” Blue Review, 2010, (3), 15.

  , “Fee schedule update,” Blue Review, 2011, (6), 10.

Borges, Walt, “Mo’ Better Blues,” Texas Medicine, April 2003, 99 (4).

Brekke, Kurt R., Tor Helge Holmås, Karin Monstad, and Odd Rune Straume,
 “Do Treatment Decisions Depend on Physicians’ Financial Incentives?,” Working Ppaer
 No. 07/2015, NIPE July 2015. Available online at http://www.nipe.eeg.uminho.pt/
 Uploads/WP_2015/NIPE_WP_07_2015.pdf (accessed December 9, 2015).

Cameron, A. Colin, Jonah B. Gelbach, and Douglas L. Miller, “Robust Inference
 With Multiway Clustering,” Journal of Business & Economic Statistics, 2011, 29 (2),
 238–249.

Centers for Medicare and Medicaid Services, “National Health Ex-
 penditure  Accounts,”   2011.       Available  at  http://www.cms.hhs.gov/
 Research-Statistics-Data-and-Systems/Statistics-Trends-and-Reports/
 NationalHealthExpendData/Downloads/tables.pdf.


                                            36
Chandra, Amitabh and Jonathan S. Skinner, “Technology Growth and Expenditure
 Growth in Health Care,” Technical Report 3 September 2012.
Chetty, Raj, Adam Looney, and Kory Kroft, “Salience and Taxation: Theory and
 Evidence,” American Economic Review, September 2009, 99 (4), 1145–1177.
Clarida, Richard, Jordi Galı́, and Mark Gertler, “The science of monetary policy:
  Evidence and some theoryj,” Journal of Economic Literature, December 1999, 37 (4),
  1661–1707.
Clemens, Jeffrey and Joshua D. Gottlieb, “In the Shadow of a Giant: Medicare’s
  Influence on Private Payment Systems,” Working Paper No. 19503, National Bureau of
  Economic Research October 2013.
   and     , “Do Physicians’ Financial Incentives Affect Medical Treatment and Patient
  Health?,” American Economic Review, April 2014, 104 (4), 1320–1349.
   and , “In the Shadow of a Giant: Medicare’s Influence on Private Payment Systems,”
  Journal of Political Economy, forthcoming.
  , , and Adam Hale Shapiro, “How Much Do Medicare Payment Cuts Reduce Infla-
  tion?,” FRBSF Economic Letter, September 22 2014, 2014-28.
Cutler, David M. and Dan P. Ly, “The (Paper)Work of Medicine: Understanding
 International Medical Costs,” Journal of Economic Perspectives, 2011, 25 (2), 3–25.
DellaVigna, Stefano, “Psychology and Economics: Evidence from the Field,” Journal of
 Economic Literature, June 2009, 47 (2), 315–372.
Duggan, Mark and Fiona Scott Morton, “The Distortionary Effects of Government
 Procurement: Evidence for Medicaid Prescription Drug Purchasing,” Quarterly Journal
 of Economics, February 2006, 121, 1–30.
Dunn, Abe and Adam Hale Shapiro, “Do Physicians Possess Market Power?,” Technical
 Report 1 February 2014.
   and , “Physician Payments Under Health Care Reform,” Journal of Health Economics,
  2015, 39, 89–105.
Ellis, Randall P. and Thomas G. McGuire, “Provider Behavior Under Prospective
  Reimbursement: Cost Sharing and Supply,” Journal of Health Economics, June 1986, 5
  (2), 129–152.
Gabaix, Xavier, “A Sparsity-Based Model of Bounded Rationality,” Quarterly Journal of
 Economics, November 2014, 129 (4), 1661–1710.
Gesme, Dean H. and Marian Wiseman, “How to Negotiate With Health Care Plans,”
 Journal of Oncology Practice, July 2010, 6 (4), 220–222.

                                         37
Government Accountability Office, “Medicare Physician Payment Rates: Better Data
 and Greater Transparency Could Improve Accuracy,” Report GAO-15-434, GAO May
 2015.

Grennan, Matthew and Ashley Swanson, “Transparency and Negotiated Prices: The
 Value of Information in Hospital-Supplier Bargaining,” February 2015. University of Penn-
 sylvania, mimeo.

Gruber, Jon, John Kim, and Dina Mayzlina, “Physician Fees and Procedure Intensity:
 the Case of Cesarean Delivery,” Journal of Health Economics, August 1999, 18 (4), 473–
 490.

Jacobson, Mireille, Craig C. Earle, Mary Price, and Joseph P. Newhouse, “How
  Medicare’s Payment Cuts For Cancer Chemotherapy Drugs Changed Patterns Of Treat-
  ment,” Health Affairs, July 2010, 29, 1391–1399.

Kleiner, Samuel A., William D. White, and Sean Lyons, “Market power and provider
 consolidation in physician markets,” International Journal of Health Economics and Man-
 agement, March 2015, 15 (1), 99–126.

Laugesen, Miriam J. and Sherry A. Glied, “Higher Fees Paid To US Physicians Drive
  Higher Spending For Physician Services Compared To Other Countries,” Health Affairs,
  2011, 30 (9), 1647–1656.

Mahoney, Neale, “Bankruptcy as Implicit Health Insurance,” American Economic Review,
 February 2015, 105 (2), 710–746.

Mankiw, N. Gregory and Ricardo Reis, “Sticky Information versus Sticky Prices: A
 Proposal to Replace the New Keynesian Phillips Curve,” Quarterly Journal of Economics,
 2002, 117 (4), 1295–1328.

MedPAC, “Report to the Congress: Medicare and the Health Care Delivery System,”
 Technical Report, Medicare Payment Advisory Commission June 2011. Available at http:
 //www.medpac.gov/documents/reports/Jun11_EntireReport.pdf (accessed October 7,
 2015).

Mertz, Gregory J., “Can You Negotiate Better Reimbursement?,” Family Practice Man-
 agement, October 2004, 11 (9), 31–34.

Mullainathan, Sendhil, Joshua Schwartzstein, and Andrei Shleifer, “Coarse Think-
 ing and Persuasion,” Quarterly Journal of Economics, May 2008, 123 (2), 577–619.

Nakamura, Emi and Jón Steinsson, “Five Facts About Prices: A Reevaluation of Menu
 Cost Models,” The Quarterly Journal of Economics, November 2008, 123 (4), 1415–1464.




                                           38
Nandedkar,    Maithily,     “Key principles for negotiating with insurers,
 deciding whether to opt in or out of Medicare,”             September 2011.
 Available      at          http://www.aad.org/dw/monthly/2011/september/key-
 principles-for-negotiating-with-insurers-deciding-whether-to-opt-in-
 or-out-of-medicare (accessed August 21, 2013).

OECD, “OECD.Stat Web Browser,” 2015. Available at http://stats.oecd.org/ (ac-
 cessed March 21, 2015).

Olea, José Luis Montiel and Carolin Pflueger, “A Robust Test for Weak Instruments,”
 Journal of Business and Economic Statistics, July 2013, 31 (3), 358–369.

Sims, Christopher A., Journal of Monetary Economics, April 2003, 50 (3), 665–690.

White, Chapin, “Contrary To Cost-Shift Theory, Lower Medicare Hospital Payment Rates
 For Inpatient Care Lead to Lower Private Payment Rates,” Health Affairs, May 2013, 32
 (5), 935–943.

Winter, Ariel and Nancy Ray, “Paying Accurately For Imaging Services In Medicare,”
 Health Affairs, 2008, 27 (6), 1479–1490.




                                         39
                                                                      Figure 1: Raw Payments For Illustrative Physician Groups, 2009

                                                                             Panel A                                                                                                  Panel B
                                                            Early 2010 Payment Data for a Mid-Size Group                                                              Early 2010 Payment Data for a Large Group

                                                10000




                                                                                                                                                          10000
            BCBS Payment (Dollars on log scale)




                                                                                                                      BCBS Payment (Dollars on log scale)
                                                                                                                                                1000
                                     1000




                                                                                                                                    100
                          100




                                                                                                                          10
                10




                                                                                                                                            1
                                  1




                                                        1           10             100                 1000   10000                                               1          10             100                 1000   10000
                                                                    Medicare Payment (Dollars on log scale)                                                                  Medicare Payment (Dollars on log scale)
40




                                                                             Panel C
                                                             Early 2010 Payment Data for a Large Group
                                                10000
            BCBS Payment (Dollars on log scale)
                10        100     1  1000




                                                        1           10             100                 1000   10000
                                                                    Medicare Payment (Dollars on log scale)

     Note: The figure presents the raw data on BCBS reimbursement rates, and associated Medicare reimbursement, for 3 different physician groups
     in 2010. Each observation is a unique reimbursement paid for a particular service to the group. The lines have a slope of 1 (in logs) and
     represent the groups’ most common Implied Conversion Factors. Sources: Authors’ calculations using claims data from BCBS.
                                                      Figure 2: Frequency of Benchmarking and Physician Group Size




                                             1
               Share linked to Medicare ICFs
                   .4        .6      .8
41




                             .2




                                                 0                   5                   10                15                      20
                                                                 vigintile, based on total spending (group-level)

                                                     Share of spend based on Medicare-linked ICFs (adj. for service comp.)
                                                     Share of services based on Medicare-linked ICFs (adj. for service comp.)
                                                     Share of spend based on Medicare-linked ICFs (weighted)
                                                     Share of services based on Medicare-linked ICFs (weighted)
     This graph shows the share of services priced according to common Implied Conversion Factors (cICFs), as defined in section 4.1, against the
     amount of BCBS spending on care provided by the physician group (grouped into 20 vigintiles). We interpret this as measuring the relationship
     between a group’s Medicare-linked service share and group size. The green dots and orange diamonds show estimates of ζb from equation
     (4), which adjust for the composition of each group’s services. The blue ×’s and red squares are unadjusted, but weighted to measure the
     Medicare-linked share of spending in dollar terms as opposed to the share of services. All data are from 2010. Sources: Authors’ calculations
     using claims data from BCBS.
                                                                      Figure 3: Benchmarking Estimates Based on Price Changes
                                                                         Panel A                                    Panel B
                                                               One Service Example: Office Visit 99213                                                                       2010 RVU Updates (Service Weighted)
                                                                    (0.068 Change in Log RVU)




                                                                                                                                                  1
                                   4.4




                                                                                                                                                  0.75
                                                                                                                               Share Linked To RVUs
                                     4.3




                                                                                                                                            0.5
                  Ln(Allowed Charge)




                                                                                                                                    0.25
                          4.2




                                                                                                                              0
                                   4.1




                                                                                                                                                  -0.25
                                                                                                                                                                       0        3                 6                              9   12
                                                                                                                                                                                                Month
                                   4




                                                                                                                                                                                         Linkage to RVU Update
                                  01jan2010                     01apr2010        01jul2010         01oct2010   01jan2011                                                                 95% CI Lower Bound/95% CI Upper Bound
                                                                            Date Charge Incurred



                                                                            Panel C                                                                                                    Panel D
42




                                  .1




                                                                                                                                                                  .1
                                                                                                                             Change in Log BCBS Payment for Service
                Change in Log BCBS Payment for Service




                                                                                                                                                      .05
                                            .05




                                                                                                                                              0
                                  0




                                                                                                                                     -.05
                      -.05




                                                                                                                           -.1

                                                                                                                                                                       -.2     -.1              0                 .1                 .2
                                                                                                                                                                              Change in Log Medicare RVUs for Service
                                  -.1




                                                                                                                                                                                             Firm Size:
                                                         -.2           -.1                    0                 .1
                                                                  Change in Log Medicare RVUs for Service                                                                                 Large            Small


     Note: All data are from calendar year 2010. BCBS implemented its update from the 2009 to 2010 relative value scales on July 1, 2010, as
     indicated by the vertical dashed line in Panels A and B. Panel A presents daily averages of BCBS’s log payment for a standard office visit.
     Panel B reports estimates of the βp from estimates of equation (11). In Panels C and D, price changes are computed between observations
     before and after July 1, 2010. The regressions are run at the underlying service level, but observations are grouped into twenty bins for each
     year, based on vigintiles of the Medicare log RVU change. Panel C reports the relationships described by equation (C.1) for RVU updates
     in each year, and estimates of that equation. Panel D is similar, but splits the data into services provided by the largest physician groups
     (those with at least $1,000,000 in annual billings) and the smallest groups (under $200,000). Sources: Authors’ calculations using updates to
     Medicare’s RBRVS as reported in the Federal Register and claims data from BCBS.
       Figure 4: Deviations from Medicare Benchmark by Service Category
                                                     Panel A
                                              Betos Categories: 2010


                        1
                        .8
                   Distribution
                    .4  .2
                        0    .6




                                  -.4   -.2                0                 .2      .4
                                                      Log Residual

                                                 Evaluation              Imaging
                                                 Procedures              Testing


                                                     Panel B
                                        Imaging Sub-Categories: 2010
                        1
                        .8
                   Distribution
                    .4  .2
                        0    .6




                                  -.4          -.2                   0               .2
                                                      Log Residual

                                                Global               Technical
                                                Professional




Note: The figure presents residuals g,j from estimates of equation (12). The distribution of residuals is
shown within either broad Betos categories (Panel A), or within the subcategories of Imaging (Panel B).
The distributions are smoothed using a local linear regression, with an Epanechnikov kernel and a bandwidth
of 0.01. Sources: Authors’ calculations using claims data from BCBS.



                                                       43
                                                               Figure 5: Short-Run Supply Responses to Medicare Price Changes


                                                                      Service-Firm Level Supply Responses: 2010

                                                          .2
               Change in Log Quantity of Service Provided
                                 .1           .15
44




                      .05            0




                                                               -.15          -.1         -.05         0             .05         .1
                                                                            Change in Log Medicare RVUs for Service
     Note: The figure reports estimates of physicians’ supply responses to Medicare price changes that BCBS implemented in 2010. Quantities,
     the dependent variable, are computed at the service-by-firm level. The figure shows estimates of changes in these quantities, measured as
     log differences between the period before BCBS implemented the Medicare RVU updates (on July 1, 2010) and the period after this update.
     Sources: Authors’ calculations using updates to Medicare’s RBRVS as reported in the Federal Register and claims data from BCBS.
                   Table 1: Summary Statistics by Physician Group

                            Panel A: All      Groups (N =81,741)
                               Mean           Median Std. Dev. Min.                Max.
    Number of unique services 12.01           3         36.19    1                 ∼2,100
    Number of patients         102.2          2         2,247.25 1                 ∼394,000
    Number of doctors          1.71           1         7.84     1                 ∼1,100
    Number of claims           231            3         4,390    1                 ∼740,000
    Mean allowed amount        102.78         71.70     211.87   ∼5                ∼34,800
    Total BCBS revenues        24,044         350       336,259  ∼5                ∼55,000,000
                  Panel B: Groups with       Billings > $10, 000 (N =15,235)
                              Mean            Median Std. Dev. Min.                Max.
    Number of unique services 47.08           30         73.25        1            ∼2,100
    Number of patients        527.26          157        5,184.05     1            ∼394,000
    Number of doctors         4.19            2          17.90        1            ∼1,000
    Number of claims          1,195           391        10,112       1            ∼740,000
    Mean allowed amount       103.67          69         371.67       ∼6           ∼34,800
    Total BCBS revenues       125,096         39,400     770,798      10,000       ∼55,000,000


Note: Table shows summary statistics for data by physician group. Source: Authors’ calculations using
claims data from BCBS.




                                                 45
  Table 2: Services Priced According to Common Implied Conversion Factors

                                          Panel A: 2008
                                                 Frequency Threshold:
                                                 5% 10% 20%
                            Rounding for ICFs:
                                         $0.02 67% 53% 34%
                                         $0.10 72% 59% 40%
                                         $0.20 77% 65% 48%
                                          Panel A: 2009
                                                 Frequency Threshold:
                                                 5% 10% 20%
                            Rounding for ICFs:
                                         $0.02 67% 52% 33%
                                         $0.10 73% 59% 39%
                                         $0.20 77% 65% 47%
                                          Panel B: 2010
                                                 Frequency Threshold:
                                                 5% 10% 20%
                            Rounding for ICFs:
                                         $0.02 87% 81% 70%
                                         $0.10 89% 84% 75%
                                         $0.20 89% 85% 75%
                                          Panel C: 2011
                                                 Frequency Threshold:
                                                 5% 10% 20%
                            Rounding for ICFs:
                                         $0.02 86% 78% 66%
                                         $0.10 88% 82% 72%
                                         $0.20 88% 82% 72%
Note: Each cell shows the share of services for which payments are associated with a common Implied
Conversion Factor (cICF), as defined in the main text. We restrict to data from the period before BCBS
implemented each year’s RVU updates (e.g. January 1—June 30, 2010). This way our calculations are not
confounded by RVU changes that occur later in the calendar year. The cells within each panel show how
this share varies as we apply different thresholds for the frequency required to quality as a cICF. The column
labeled “Rounding” indicates the rounding applied to each estimated ICF. An ICF is defined as “common”
for the payments to a physician group if it accounts for at least the fraction of services associated with the
specified Frequency Threshold. Source: Authors’ calculations using claims data from BCBS.




                                                     46
                  Table 3: Medicare Benchmarking by Betos Category

                                             (1)         (2)        (3)        (4)
             Dependent variable:         Payments with Common Conversion Factors
                                             Service Share         Spending Share
             Imaging                      -0.380**    -0.419**   -0.458**   -0.488**
                                           (0.033)     (0.026)    (0.050)    (0.044)
             Procedures                   -0.382**    -0.416**   -0.324**   -0.351**
                                           (0.060)     (0.055)    (0.033)    (0.029)
             Tests                        -0.297**    -0.323**   -0.389**   -0.410**
                                           (0.064)     (0.062)    (0.053)    (0.051)
             Constant                      0.838**     0.788**    0.830**    0.783**
                                           (0.023)     (0.019)    (0.016)    (0.017)
             N                             542,207     542,207    542,207    542,207
             Omitted Category                      Evaluation & Management
             Additional Controls         Group Size     None    Group Size    None
Note: **, *, and + indicate statistical significance at the 0.01, 0.05, and 0.10 levels respectively. This table
shows estimates of the ηb coefficients in equation (4), namely the relationship between Betos category and the
Medicare-linked share of services (columns 1 and 2) or spending (columns 3 and 4) at the group-service code
level. Medicare links are measured using the common Implied Conversion Factors (cICFs) defined in section
4.1, using data from January 1 through June 30, 2010. Columns 1 and 3 show estimates after controlling
for vigintile of group size, as measured with BCBS spending, and columns 2 and 4 show estimates without
group size controls. Standard errors are two-way clustered (Cameron, Gelbach and Miller, 2011) by Betos
category and physician group. Sources: Authors’ calculations using claims data from BCBS.




                                                      47
         Table 4: Estimating Medicare Benchmarking Using RVU Changes

                                                (1)          (2)         (3)          (4)
      Dependent variable:                            Log private reimbursement rate
                                                          Panel A: Unweighted
      Log RVU Change × Post                  0.750**      0.748**      0.765**     0.749**
                                              (0.038)     (0.038)      (0.043)      (0.038)
      N                                     23,933,577 23,933,577 23,933,577 23,933,577
      No. of Clusters                          3,681       3,681        3,681        3,681

                                                      Panel B: Weighted by Price
      Log RVU Change × Post                  0.539**     0.544**     0.568**     0.538**
                                              (0.061)    (0.061)     (0.060)     (0.061)
      N                                     23,933,577 23,933,577 23,933,577 23,933,577
      No. of Clusters                          3,681      3,681       3,681       3,681

      Group-by-Code Effects                     Yes            No              Yes            Yes
      Code Effects                              No             Yes             No             No
      Cubic Time × RVU Change                   No             No              Yes            No
      Cubic Time × Post                         No             No              No             Yes
Note: **, *, and + indicate statistical significance at the 0.01, 0.05, and 0.10 levels respectively. The table
shows the results of OLS specifications of the forms described in section 5.2. Each column in each panel
reports an estimate of β̂ from equation (10). Observations are at the claim-line level and are equally weighted
(Panel A), or weighted according to each service’s average payment during the baseline period (Panel B).
Data are from 2010. Standard errors are calculated allowing for arbitrary correlation among the errors
associated with each HCPCS service code (including modifiers for the professional and technical components
of diagnostic imaging services). Additional features of each specification are described within the table.
The construction of all variables is further described in the main text. Sources: Authors’ calculations using
updates to Medicare’s RBRVS as reported in the Federal Register and claims data from BCBS.




                                                      48
                                 Table 5: Public-Private Payment Links Across Service Categories

                                             (1)             (2)      (3)          (4)       (5)        (6)         (7)
            Dependent variable:                                     Log private reimbursement rate
                                        Evaluation        Imaging Procedures      Tests        Imaging Sub-Categories:
                                                                                           Global   Technical Professional
            Log RVU Change                0.841**         0.564**   0.720**     1.066**   0.545**     0.387*     0.982**
                × Post-Update              (0.036)         (0.084)  (0.081)      (0.066)   (0.109)   (0.152)     (0.066)
            N                            12,259,186      3,630,019 4,750,313 1,542,254 1,826,666 209,178        1,594,175
49




            No. of Clusters                  221            1,085    1,936         408       408       244         433
     Note: **, *, and + indicate statistical significance at the 0.01, 0.05, and 0.10 levels respectively. The table shows the results of OLS specifications
     of the forms described in section 5.2. The cells in each panel report estimates of β̂ from equation (10), with samples selected to contain the
     HCPCS codes falling into individual broad service categories. The name of the relevant service category accompanies each point estimate. Data
     are from 2010. Standard errors are calculated allowing for arbitrary correlation among the errors associated with each HCPCS service code
     (including modifiers for the professional and technical components of diagnostic imaging services). Additional features of each specification
     are described within the table. The construction of all variables is further described in the main text. Sources: Authors’ calculations using
     updates to Medicare’s RBRVS as reported in the Federal Register and claims data from BCBS.
                      Table 6: Medicare Benchmarking by Firm Size

                                                  (1)        (2)         (3)          (4)
     Dependent variable:                             Log private reimbursement rate
     Log RVU Change                           0.750**     0.882**      0.539**      0.775**
         × Post-Update                        (0.038)     (0.073)      (0.061)      (0.094)
     Log RVU Change                                        -0.074                   -0.140*
         × Post-Update × Midsize                          (0.098)                   (0.069)
     Log RVU Change                                       -0.293*                  -0.448**
         × Post-Update × Large                            (0.117)                   (0.102)
     N                                       23,933,577 23,933,577 23,933,577 23,933,577
     Weighting:                               Service     Service       Dollar       Dollar
Note: **, *, and + indicate statistical significance at the 0.01, 0.05, and 0.10 levels respectively. Columns
1 and 3 report the baseline estimates from Table 4 Panels A and B respectively. In columns 2 and 4 we
augment these specifications to include interactions between firm size indicators variables and both the “Post”
indicator and the interaction between the “Log RVU Change” and “Post” indicator. The omitted category
is small firms, defined as those with less than $200,000 in billings. Mid-sized firms are those with billings
between $200,000 and $1 million, and large firms are those with billings exceeding $1 million. Data are from
2010. Standard errors are calculated allowing for arbitrary correlation among the errors associated with
each HCPCS service code (including modifiers for the professional and technical components of diagnostic
imaging services). Sources: Authors’ calculations using updates to Medicare’s RBRVS as reported in the
Federal Register and claims data from BCBS.




                                                        50
          Table 7: In What Direction Does BCBS Adjust Its Payments for the Various Service Categories?

                                          (1)        (2)          (3)                (4)       (5)        (6)        (7)
                                                Distributions of Payment          Residuals by Betos Categories
                                    Evaluation & Imaging Procedures                 Tests        Imaging Sub-Categories:
                                    Management                                               Global Technical Professional
                Residual Mean          0.0211     -0.0398       -0.0237            0.0759    -0.124     -0.125     0.0698
51




                Residaul SD           (0.200)     (0.274)       (0.251)            (0.349) (0.282)     (0.295)    (0.216)
                N                    6,010,826   1,743,011 2,312,734              751,726 883,419 102,465         757,127
     Note: The table presents means and standard deviations of residuals from estimates of equation (12) in data from 2010. That is, we regress
     the log of BCBS’s payments on a set of physician-group fixed effects and the log of each HCPCS code’s number of relative value units. We
     restrict the sample to the pre-update period (January 1 through June 30, 2010) so that the relative value units are constant for each service
     throughout the sample.
Table 8: How Much Benchmarking is Expected Depending on Assumed Ineffi-
ciency and Contracting Costs?

                                                       (1)     (2)     (3)     (4)       (5)
                                                           Cost of adding complexity (c)
     Potential captured efficiency gains             $1,000 $2,000 $3,000 $5,000 $10,000
          as share of group billings (x)
                                  0.1%                58%        70%       78%        84%        89%
                                   0.25                40         54        66         76         83
                                    0.5                26         40        54         66         76
                                      1                14         26        40         54         66
                                      2                 7         14        26         40         54
                                      5                 3          6        11         22         35
                                     10                 2          3         6         11         22
Note: Each cell reports the estimated percent of BCBS spending for which the value of shifting from a
simple (Medicare-linked) contract to a complex contract would be exceeded by the assumed cost of adding
complexity. The different assumptions for additional costs (c) are listed at the top of each column. For
any one physician group, the value of deviating from the simple Medicare-linked contract is the magnitude
of that firm’s BCBS billings (bi ) times the efficiency gains (x) from switching to a more complex contract.
These efficiency gains x are the overall efficiency gain times the fraction of that value that the insurer and
physician can capture. For each cell defined by x and c, we aggregate the BCBS billings for all firms small
enough that xbi < c; that is, for all firms where it would be inefficient for the parties to deviate from the
Medicare benchmark. The P numbers reported in each cell are the share of total BCBS spending accounted
                          i;bi <c/x bi
for by these firms, or     P           . The bolded entries along the diagonal indicate the combinations of
                               i bi
assumed complexity costs c and efficiency gains x for which the implied fraction of spending covered by
Medicare-linked contracts comes closest to matching the fraction estimated in the claims data.




                                                     52
Appendix For Online Publication Only

A     Proofs
Proof of Result 1. When relative prices are fixed, the insurer can only adjust the overall
markup over Medicare, ϕ. Hence reimbursements are r1 = ϕr1M and r2 = ϕr2M . Patient
utility is

                   u(q1 , q2 ) = u s1 (ϕr1M ), s2 (ϕr2M ) = ϕ αar1M + βbr2M .
                                                                          
                                                                                    (A.1)

                                                                                     u
The insurer must achieve utility level u for the patients, and ϕ =                           is the
                                                                             αar1M   + βbr2M
minimum markup that can do so.
   Expenditures are simply

             Ê = s1 ϕr1M ϕr1M + s2 ϕr2M ϕr2M = αϕ2 (r1M )2 + βϕ2 (r2M )2 .
                                       
                                                                                             (A.2)



Proof of Result 2. The insurer’s problem is to choose reimbursement rates r1 and r2 to solve:

                  min s1 (r1 )r1 + s2 (r2 ) subject to u(s1 (r1 ), s2 (r2 )) ≥ u.            (A.3)

Given the functional form assumptions, we can write the minimization problem as:

                        L (r1 , r2 ) = αr12 + βr22 − λ(αar1 + βbr2 − u)                      (A.4)

where λ is the multiplier on the patient utility constraint. The first-order conditions are:
                                            λa
                                       r1∗ =                                                 (A.5)
                                             2
                                        ∗   λb
                                       r2 =                                                  (A.6)
                                             2
                                        u = αar1∗ + βbr2∗                                    (A.7)

    r2∗ b                                  au
Thus ∗ = . We can then solve for r1∗ =          . Hence medical expenditures are
    r1  a                              αa + βb2
                                         2


                                                  u2
                                        E∗ =             .                                   (A.8)
                                               αa2 + βb2
                                                                                     rM
   To compare these expenses with those from Result 1, first define ω = r2M as the ratio
                                                                         1
of Medicare payments for the two services. We can then write the insurer’s markup over


                                                53
Medicare in the benchmarking case as
                                                u
                                     ϕ=                                                  (A.9)
                                          (αa + βbω)r1M

and the expenditures in that case as

                                   Ê = α + βω 2 ϕ2 (r1M )2
                                                 

                                        u2 (α + βω 2 )
                                      =                                                 (A.10)
                                        (αa + βbω)2

   It is convenient to work with the ratio of constrained to unconstrained expenditures:

                                  Ê   (α + βω 2 ) (αa2 + βb2 )
                             ψ=      =                          .                       (A.11)
                                  E∗       (αa + βbω)2

                      b
Note first that if ω = , then this simplifies to ψ = 1, as asserted in the Result. To determine
                      a
what happens as ω varies, we compute the derivative:

        dψ   2βω (αa + βbω)2 (αa2 + βb2 ) − 2βb (α + βω 2 ) (αa2 + βb2 ) (αa + βbω)
           =
        dω                               (αa + βbω)4
                      2αβ (αa2 + βb2 )
           = (ωa − b)                  .                                            (A.12)
                        (αa + βbω)3

All of the terms in the fraction at the end of equation (A.12) are positive. The term in
                                        b                               b
front, ωa − b, is positive whenever ω > and negative whenever ω < . Thus the ratio of
                                        a                               a
expenses is increasing in ω when ω is above the privately efficient reimbursement ratio, and
                                                                                           b
decreasing in ω whenever ω is below the efficient ratio. This proves that any ratio ω 6=
                                                                                           a
                                               b
leads to higher medical expenditures than ω = , as the Result asserts.
                                               a
Proof of Result 3. The insurer’s expenses when benchmarking to Medicare are given by equa-
tion (A.10), and those when unconstrained are given by equation (A.8). The difference
between these values is
                            u2 (α + βω 2 )        u2
                        ξ=                  −
                            (αa + βbω)2       αa2 + βb2
                               (α + βω 2 ) (αa2 + βb2 ) − (αa + βbω)2
                          = u2
                                     (αa2 + βb2 ) (αa + βbω)2
                                     a2 ω 2 + b2 − 2abω
                          = u2 αβ                           .                           (A.13)
                                  (αa2 + βb2 ) (αa + βbω)2



                                              54
                                                    b
Note that equation (A.13) is equal to zero when ω = . Otherwise it is positive, since it has
                                                    a
                   b
a minimum at ω = .
                   a
   The remainder of the Result simply requires taking derivatives of ξ:

         dξ             a2 ω 2 + b2 − 2abω
            = 2uαβ                              >0                                     (A.14)
         du         (αa2 + βb2 ) (αa + βbω)2
         dξ         (2a2 ω − 2ab)(αa + βbω)2 − 2βb(a2 ω 2 + b2 − 2abω)(αa + βbω)
            = u2 αβ
         dω                             (αa2 + βb2 ) (αa + βbω)4
                     a(aω − b)(αa + βbω) − βb(a2 ω 2 + b2 − 2abω)
            = 2u2 αβ
                                 (αa2 + βb2 ) (αa + βbω)3
                       (αa2 + βb2 )(ωa − b)
            = 2u2 αβ
                     (αa2 + βb2 ) (αa + βbω)3
                           2u2 αβ
            = (ωa − b)               .                                                 (A.15)
                       (αa + βbω)3

Inequality (A.14) shows that ξ is increasing in u, which measures the generosity of insurance,
or the quantity of services provided (since utility is assumed to be increasing in quantity).
                                                               b
Equation (A.15) shows that ξ is increasing in ω when ω > , and decreasing in ω when
                                                               a
       b
ω < . Thus ξ is increasing in the magnitude of Medicare’s deviations from the insurer’s
       a
efficient pricing.




                                             55
B      Additional Detail on Implied Conversion Factors
B.1      Data Cleaning
    This section describes our process for cleaning and merging the BCBS claims data. Table
B.1 shows the data lost as we progress from the raw claims data to the final analysis sample.
    For concreteness, consider the 2009 claims data. The data for this year start with
54,724,994 claim lines and $4.01 billion in spending (row A). To reduce heterogeneity along
several administrative margins, we analyze claim lines for which the payment is non-missing,
the service quantity is 1, and the observation is an “original” claim line rather than an ad-
justment to a past payment.24 This eliminates 5,090,024 claim lines and leaves us with $3.24
billion in spending (row B). Next, we want to ensure that our analysis focuses on reimburse-
ments for services that are administratively equivalent from a payments perspective, and
whose payments have been agreed upon through ex ante negotiations. We thus retain only
observations that are explicitly coded as being “outpatient” and “in network.” These criteria
eliminate a total of 8,302,709 claim lines and leave us with $2.45 billion in spending (row
C). Next we drop relatively rare service codes for which we have fewer than 10 observations
prior to the RVU updates in a given year. In the 2009 data, this eliminates 149,269 claims
and leaves us with $2.44 billion in spending (row D). The resulting sample of 41,182,992
service lines and $2.44 billion in spending constitutes the administratively comparable and
sufficiently common billing codes we aim to understand.
    In order for private insurers to benchmark prices to Medicare, at a minimum they would
need to use Medicare’s billing codes. On row (E), we thus merge the remaining claims with
Medicare billing codes, which provides an upper bound on the potential benchmarking. The
final analysis sample in 2009 includes 3,807 unique HCPCS codes, which comprise 21,941,227
service lines and $1.89 billion of spending. The key conclusion from row (E) is that, once
we restrict ourselves to the relevant universe of data, additional losses from merging in
Medicare codes and eliminating infrequent codes are not substantial. More specifically, this
merge only loses notable portions of one broad spending category, namely laboratory tests,
for which both Medicare and BCBS frequently base payments on non-standard codes. We
retain over 97 percent of claims for evaluation and management, diagnostic imaging, and
surgical services.

B.2      Heterogeneity by Market Structure
    We now consider the distinction between a group’s own size and the market structure
in which it operates. To begin, we estimate a variant of equation (4) that replaces vigintile
fixed effects with a continuous measure of firm size:

               Medicare-Linked Sharej,g = ηb 1b(j) + ςLog Group Billings + υj,g .                  (B.1)

  24
    Both Medicare and private sector payment policies generate nonlinear payments in certain circumstances
when multiple instances of the same service are provided per claim.

                                                   56
This regression summarizes the evidence from Figure 2 in the main text. Column 1 of
Appendix Table B.4 shows the estimates of ς. A 10 percent increase in firm size is associated
with a 2.5 to 7 percentage point decline in the share of payments benchmarked to Medicare
rates.
    We next consider heterogeneity in market structure by adding area characteristics to
equation (B.1). In column 2 of Table B.4, we first replace the Betos category fixed effects
with geographic fixed effects. Specifically, we include indicators for each hospital refer-
ral region (HRR), of which Texas has 22. Changing the fixed effects has little impact on
the relationship between Medicare benchmarking and individual firm size, suggesting that
this relationship was not driven by omitted geographic differences. If anything, the size-
benchmarking relationship strengthens slightly in column 2.
    We next consider the level of competition among local physician groups. Specifically, we
estimate the local Herfinadhl-Hirschman Index (HHI) for each specialty, in each HRR, based
on the level of BCBS revenue each group receives in our data. We then add this HHI to the
regression from column 2, or in other words we estimate:

      Medicare-Linked Sharej,g = ηLog Group Billingsg + ζb 1b(j) + γHHIj,g + υj,g .    (B.2)

Column 3 shows a small, insignificant negative relationship between HHI and benchmarking.
    Column 4 adds an interaction between individual firm size and the specialty-area HHI
measure from column 3. That is, it asks whether firm size is more or less important for
benchmarking in more concentrated markets. This column shows a much stronger negative
estimate on the direct effect of HHI than we observed in column 3; more concentrated markets
now seem to have less Medicare benchmarking—at least for the smaller physician groups.
The positive interaction term implies that the relationship with group size diminishes as
HHI increases, or the relationship with HHI diminshes as group size increases. Although
Medicare benchmarking is smaller for larger physician groups, and for those in concentrated
markets, each of these effects diminishes as the counterpart increases.

B.3     Levels of ICFs and Group Characteristics
    We next examine the levels of the common ICFs (cICFs) that we identify. Figure B.2
shows the distributions of cICFs by year. Table B.5 shows how these values relate to firm
size. To avoid a mechanical relationship between the ICF levels and our firm size measure,
we measure physician group size as the log number of services provided, rather than the
value of billings for those services. Specifically, we estimate:

                           ln ICFg = λ Log Group Servicesg + vg ..                     (B.3)

The six columns show two regressions in each year, one that includes all of a firm’s cICFs
and one that limits the sample to the most common ICF for each firm. The former regression
includes standard errors clustered by physician group. All columns show a consistent positive
relationship between group size and ICF. A group providing ten percent more services obtains


                                             57
3 to 5 percent higher ICFs. Table B.6 runs similar regressions, but changes the dependent
variable to the level of the ICF rather than its log.
   In Table B.7 we consider the relationship between the level of the ICF and the frequency
with which it is used. We run regressions of the form:

              ln ICFg,i = γ5% Linked5%               10%              20%
                                    g,i + γ10% Linkedg,i + γ20% Linkedg,i + vg,i         (B.4)

at the level of group g× unique ICF i. In equation (B.4), Linkedx%
                                                                g,i is an indicator for whether
ICF i from group g represents at least x percent of group g’s billings. In some regressions,
we also control for the group size. Table B.7 does not reveal any particularly clear pattern
to this relationship.




                                              58
                                                                                           Appendix Figure B.1


                                                 Examples of Updates to Individual Services
                                                                Panel A                                                                              Panel B
                                                           Office Visit 99213                                                           Chest X-Ray 71020 Tech Component
                                                      (0.068 Change in Log RVU)                                                            (-0.072 Change in Log RVU)




                            4.4
                                                                                                                      3.1




                                  4.3
                                                                                                                             3.05




                         4.2
                                                                                                                    3.0




                 Ln(Allowed Charge)
                                                                                                            Log Allowed Charge




               4.1
                                                                                                         2.95




                            4
                                                                                                                      2.9
                           01jan2010          01apr2010         01jul2010          01oct2010     01jan2011                          0     3              6              9   12
                                                           Date Charge Incurred                                                                 Month Charge Incurred

                                                           Panel C




59
                                              Chest X-Ray 71020 Prof. Component
                                                   (0.0 Change in Log RVU)




                            2.9
                          2.8      2.85
                  Log Allowed Charge
               2.75         2.7
                                          0       3                 6                  9            12
                                                           Month Charge Incurred




     Note: The figure presents monthly averages of BCBS’s log payment for the service named in each panel’s title. All data are from calendar year
     2010. BCBS implemented its update from the 2009 to 2010 relative value scales on July 1, 2010, as indicated by the vertical dashed line each
     panel.
                                                              Appendix Figure B.2: Distribution of ICFs by Firm Size

                                                       Panel A: 2008                                                                                 Panel B: 2009
                                              Large                                    Medium                                               Large                                    Medium


                      .3




                                                                                                                    .3
                      .2




                                                                                                                    .2
                      .1




                                                                                                                    .1
            Density




                                                                                                          Density
                      0




                                                                                                                    0
                                              Small                                     Total                                               Small                                     Total
                      .3




                                                                                                                    .3
                      .2




                                                                                                                    .2
                      .1




                                                                                                                    .1
                      0




                                                                                                                    0
                           20            40            60           80 20         40            60   80                  20            40            60           80 20         40            60   80
                                                            CF rounded to $0.10                                                                           CF rounded to $0.10
                      Graphs by scale of firm's BCBSTX billings                                                     Graphs by scale of firm's BCBSTX billings
60




                                                       Panel C: 2010                                                                                 Panel D: 2011
                                              Large                                    Medium                                               Large                                    Medium




                                                                                                                    .3
                      .3




                                                                                                                    .2
                      .2




                                                                                                                    .1
                      .1
            Density




                                                                                                          Density
                      0




                                                                                                                    0
                                              Small                                     Total                                               Small                                     Total
                                                                                                                    .3
                      .3




                                                                                                                    .2
                      .2




                                                                                                                    .1
                      .1
                      0




                                                                                                                    0




                           20            40            60           80 20         40            60   80                  20            40            60           80 20         40            60   80
                                                            CF rounded to $0.10                                                                           CF rounded to $0.10
                      Graphs by scale of firm's BCBSTX billings                                                     Graphs by scale of firm's BCBSTX billings


     Note: The figure reports the distributions of common Implied Conversion Factors that we compute in each year. Each year’s distributions are
     split according to the sizes of the physician groups, measured as the dollar value of the group’s BCBS billings.
                                                     Appendix Table B.1: Data Cleaning

                                               (1)          (2)         (3)         (4)          (5)         (6)         (7)         (8)
           Year:                           2008                                2009                    2010                     2011
           Measure:                  Claims Spending                  Claims     Spending     Claims     Spending      Claims     Spending
           (A) Initial dataset       45.5m    $3.49b                  54.7m       $4.09b      57.6m       $4.29b       61.7m       $4.64b
           (B) Basic cleaning        90.0%    80.2%                   90.7%       80.8%       90.0%       80.0%        90.3%       80.4%
           (C) In-network outpatient 74.0%    59.6%                   75.5%       61.1%       76.5%       61.5%        77.3%       62.3%
           (D) Exclude rare codes    73.9%    59.3%                   75.3%       60.8%       76.5%       61.3%        77.3%       62.1%
           (E) Medicare code merge   41.3%    47.3%                   40.3%       47.1%       41.7%       47.8%        41.3%       47.8%
61




     Note: This table quantifies the data lost at each step of our data cleaning and merge process. We show calculations for each of the four years
     of BCBS claims data. For each year, row (A) shows the raw number of claims (odd-numbered columns) and money spent (even-numbered
     columns) in that year’s claims data. All subsequent rows show the share of claims on row (A) that remain after each set of cleaning steps. Row
     (B) shows the share of data remaining when we keep only claim lines for which the payment is non-missing, the service quantity is 1, and the
     observation is an “original” claim line rather than an adjustment to a past payment. These basic cleaning steps eliminate about ten percent
     of claims and twenty percent of spending. Row (C) further restricts our sample to the universe we consider, namely outpatient in-network
     claims. This eliminates approximately 15 percent more claims, and twenty percent more spending per year. Row (D) drops those relatively
     rare service codes for which we have fewer than 10 observations prior to the RVU updates in a given year; this has minimal effect on the sample
     sizes. Finally, row (E) drops claims that don’t merge with Medicare’s RBRVS codes. This loses 12–15 percent of observations per year. Source:
     Authors’ calculations using claims data from BCBS.
Appendix Table B.2: Alternative Measures of Pricing According to Common
Implicit Conversion Factors

                                  Panel A: 2008
           Benchmarking Measure: Services Dollars                 Services Q1      Dollars Q1
           Rounding for ICFs:
           $0.02                   67%     60%                         68%             62%
           $0.10                   73%     66%                         74%             67%
           $0.20                   77%     71%                         78%             72%
                                            Panel B: 2009
           Benchmarking Measure:           Services Dollars       Services Q1      Dollars Q1
           Rounding for ICFs:
           $0.02                             67%          60%          68%             62%
           $0.10                             73%          66%          74%             67%
           $0.20                             77%          70%          78%             71%
                                            Panel C: 2010
           Benchmarking Measure:           Services Dollars       Services Q1      Dollars Q1
           Rounding for ICFs:
           $0.02                             87%          83%          88%             84%
           $0.10                             89%          86%          89%             86%
           $0.20                             89%          87%          90%             87%
                                            Panel D: 2011
           Benchmarking Measure:           Services Dollars       Services Q1      Dollars Q1
           Rounding for ICFs:
           $0.02                             86%          81%          86%             82%
           $0.10                             87%          85%          88%             85%
           $0.20                             88%          85%          88%             85%
Note: Each cell shows the share of services for which payments are associated with a common Implied
Conversion Factor (cICF), as defined in the main text. The different cells within a panel show this statistic
according to slightly different measures and using different rounding thresholds to define cICFs. The column
labeled “Rounding” indicates the rounding applied to each estimated ICF. We then declare an ICF to be
“common” for the payments to a physician group if it accounts for at least 5 percent of the group’s services
in a given year. The first column shows the share of services priced using cICFs, just as in Table 2. The
column labeled “Dollars” shows a dollar-weighted measure. The dollar-weighted estimates are lower than the
service-weighted measure because lower-value services are more likely to be priced using common ICFs. The
remaining columns report equivalent measures for which the claims data are restricted to the first quarter
of a given year. Source: Authors’ calculations using claims data from BCBS.




                                                     62
         Appendix Table B.3: Medicare Benchmarking by Betos Category

                                             (1)         (2)        (3)         (4)
             Dependent variable:         Payments with Common Conversion Factors
                                             Service Share         Spending Share
                                                 Panel A: 2008 (N =593,779)
             Imaging                      -0.155**    -0.243**   -0.174**    -0.258**
                                           (0.052)     (0.052)    (0.048)     (0.047)
             Procedures                   -0.183**    -0.282**   -0.191**    -0.287**
                                           (0.054)     (0.055)    (0.043)     (0.042)
             Tests                        -0.150**    -0.218**   -0.200**    -0.266**
                                           (0.054)     (0.057)    (0.044)     (0.045)
             Constant                      0.603**     0.355**    0.605**    0.365**
                                           (0.037)     (0.051)    (0.032)     (0.040)
                                                  Panel B: 2009 (N =593,779)
             Imaging                      -0.155**    -0.243**   -0.174**    -0.258**
                                           (0.052)     (0.052)    (0.048)     (0.047)
             Procedures                   -0.183**    -0.282**   -0.191**    -0.287**
                                           (0.054)     (0.055)    (0.043)     (0.042)
             Tests                        -0.150**    -0.218**   -0.200**    -0.266**
                                           (0.054)     (0.057)    (0.044)     (0.045)
             Constant                      0.603**     0.355**    0.605**    0.365**
                                           (0.037)     (0.051)    (0.032)     (0.040)
                                                  Panel C: 2011 (N =651,901)
             Imaging                      -0.317**    -0.357**   -0.420**    -0.454**
                                           (0.032)     (0.026)    (0.053)     (0.046)
             Procedures                   -0.431**    -0.470**   -0.361**    -0.395**
                                           (0.059)     (0.052)    (0.030)     (0.026)
             Tests                        -0.334**    -0.362**   -0.422**    -0.446**
                                           (0.046)     (0.042)    (0.037)     (0.033)
             Constant                      0.808**     0.764**    0.799**    0.760**
                                           (0.023)     (0.020)    (0.014)     (0.016)
             Omitted Category                      Evaluation & Management
             Additional Controls         Group Size     None    Group Size     None
Note: **, *, and + indicate statistical significance at the 0.01, 0.05, and 0.10 levels respectively. This table
shows estimates of the ηb coefficients in equation (4), namely the relationship between Betos category and
the Medicare-linked share of services (columns 1 and 2) or spending (columns 3 and 4) at the group-service
code level. Medicare links are measured using the common Implied Conversion Factors (cICFs) defined in
section 4.1. Columns 1 and 3 show estimates after controlling for vigintile of group size, as measured with
BCBS spending, and columns 2 and 4 show estimates without group size controls. Standard errors are
two-way clustered (Cameron, Gelbach and Miller, 2011) by Betos category and physician group. Sources:
Authors’ calculations using claims data from BCBS.

                                                      63
       Appendix Table B.4: Medicare Benchmarking by Firm Size and HHI

                                         (1)         (2)         (3)            (4)
        Dependent variable:         Share of Payments with Common Conversion Factors
                                                Panel A: 2009 (N =438,673)
        Log firm size                -0.071***   -0.052***   -0.049***      -0.060***
                                      (0.007)     (0.010)     (0.010)         (0.012)
        Specialty HHI                                          -0.072        -0.715**
                                                              (0.069)         (0.231)
        Log firm size × HHI                                                   0.053**
                                                                              (0.016)
                                                Panel B: 2010 (N =430,509)
        Log firm size                -0.024***   -0.058***   -0.052***      -0.064***
                                      (0.004)     (0.007)     (0.005)         (0.005)
        Specialty HHI                                          -0.171       -0.927***
                                                              (0.141)         (0.207)
        Log firm size × HHI                                                  0.062***
                                                                              (0.010)
                                                Panel C: 2011 (N =513,590)
        Log firm size                -0.025***   -0.061***   -0.056***      -0.067***
                                      (0.005)     (0.007)     (0.006)         (0.006)
        Specialty HHI                                          -0.154       -0.850***
                                                              (0.136)         (0.199)
        Log firm size × HHI                                                  0.056***
                                                                              (0.010)
        Fixed Effects               Betos Cat.     HRR          HRR            HRR
        Sample                      In-network In-network In-network       In-network
Note: **, *, and + indicate statistical significance at the 0.01, 0.05, and 0.10 levels respectively. This table
shows estimates of equation (B.1), namely the relationship between the Medicare-linked share of services
and firm size (columns 1 and 2) and/or market structure (columns 3 and 4) at the group-service code
level. Medicare links are measured using the common Implied Conversion Factors (cICFs) defined in section
4.1. Columns 1 and 3 show estimates after controlling for vigintile of group size, as measured with BCBS
spending, and columns 2 and 4 show estimates without group size controls. Standard errors are two-way
clustered (Cameron, Gelbach and Miller, 2011) by Betos category and physician group. Sources: Authors’
calculations using claims data from BCBS.




                                                      64
                                       Appendix Table B.5: Log Implicit Conversion Factors

                                           (1)           (2)         (3)        (4)        (5)         (6)     (7)      (8)
      Dependent variable:                                               Log Implicit Conversion Factor
      Log total services by firm         0.022**      0.017**       0.028** 0.022**       0.044** 0.033**     0.048** 0.038**
                                         (0.003)      (0.004)       (0.003)   (0.004)     (0.004)    (0.003)  (0.005) (0.004)
      Constant                           3.511**      3.543**       3.454** 3.498**       3.347** 3.412**     3.281** 3.345**
                                         (0.021)      (0.026)       (0.019)   (0.023)     (0.027)    (0.020)  (0.034) (0.027)
65




      N                                  151,965       44,432       173,356    52,390     317,409     50,963  386,220  65,390
      Year                                  2008         2008          2009      2009        2010       2010     2011    2011
      ICFs Included                     All ICFs     Top ICF       All ICFs Top ICF All ICFs Top ICF All ICFs Top ICF
      Standard Errors                  Clustered      Robust      Clustered   Robust Clustered       Robust Clustered Robust
      Number of Clusters                  49,591                     58,253                53,848              69,489
     Note: **, *, and + indicate statistical significance at the 0.01, 0.05, and 0.10 levels respectively. Each column shows an estimate of equation
     (B.3), for different years and different samples of ICFs. In columns 1, 3, and 5, standard errors are clustered by physician group.
                                    Appendix Table B.6: Levels of Implicit Conversion Factors

                                           (1)           (2)          (3)         (4)        (5)         (6)     (7)      (8)
      Dependent variable:                                              Level of Implicit Conversion Factor
      Log total services by firm          0.927** 0.703**            1.168** 0.889**        1.880** 1.297**     2.040** 1.528**
                                          (0.162)  (0.197)           (0.146)     (0.173)    (0.215)    (0.160)  (0.256) (0.211)
      Constant                           33.103** 34.424**          30.922** 32.795** 26.424** 29.805** 23.794** 27.048**
                                          (0.989)  (1.195)           (0.935)     (1.104)    (1.394)    (0.995)  (1.744) (1.377)
      N                                   151,965   44,432           173,356      52,390    317,409     50,963  386,220  65,390
66




      Year                                   2008     2008              2009        2009       2010       2010     2011    2011
      ICFs Included                      All ICFs Top ICF           All ICFs Top ICF All ICFs Top ICF All ICFs Top ICF
      Standard Errors                   Clustered  Robust          Clustered     Robust Clustered      Robust Clustered Robust
      Number of Clusters                   49,591                     58,253                 53,848              69,489
     Note: **, *, and + indicate statistical significance at the 0.01, 0.05, and 0.10 levels respectively. Each column shows an estimate of equation
     (B.3) but with the dependent variable changed to the level of the Implicit Conversion Factor, for different years and different samples of ICFs.
     In columns 1, 3, and 5, standard errors are clustered by physician group.
                            Appendix Table B.7: Implicit Conversion Factors and their Frequency

                                              (1)           (2)           (3)           (4)       (5)         (6)     (7)      (8)
      Dependent variable:                                                    Log   Implicit Conversion Factor
      ICF represents at least 5%            -0.014*          0.004      -0.017*          0.000     0.026     0.051**   -0.021    0.001
          of group’s claims                 (0.007)       (0.005)       (0.007)        (0.006)   (0.017)     (0.013) (0.020)  (0.016)
      ICF represents at least 10%          -0.035**      -0.027**      -0.018**        -0.013*   0.060**     0.066**  0.043*  0.043**
          of group’s claims                 (0.006)       (0.005)       (0.006)        (0.005)   (0.014)     (0.011) (0.020)  (0.016)
      ICF represents at least 20%             0.006       0.008+       -0.019**       -0.009+   -0.062**    -0.055** -0.049*    -0.024
          of group’s claims                 (0.005)       (0.005)       (0.006)        (0.005)   (0.012)     (0.009) (0.024)  (0.017)
      Log total services by firm                          0.029**                     0.033**                0.042**          0.044**
67




                                                          (0.003)                      (0.003)               (0.004)          (0.004)
      Constant                              3.709**       3.483**   3.706**           3.436**    3.645**     3.296** 3.673**  3.288**
                                            (0.008)       (0.023)   (0.008)            (0.023)   (0.017)     (0.029) (0.017)  (0.035)
      N                                     626,974       626,974   730,196           730,196    613,586     613,586 790,056  790,056
      Year                                     2008           2008     2009               2009      2010        2010     2011     2011
      ICFs Included                        All ICFs      All ICFs All ICFs           All ICFs All ICFs All ICFs All ICFs All ICFs
      Standard Errors                     Clustered     Clustered Clustered         Clustered Clustered Clustered Clustered Clustered
      Number of Clusters                     50,367        50,367    59,137             59,137    54,258      54,258  70,090   70,090
     Note: **, *, and + indicate statistical significance at the 0.01, 0.05, and 0.10 levels respectively. Each column shows an estimate of equation
     (B.4), for one of the years in our sample. Standard errors are clustered by physician group.
C        Estimation in Changes and Threats to Identification
   This appendix justifies our measure of Medicare benchmarking based on estimation in
simple differences, in section C.1. Appendix C.2 then discusses potential bias from active
renegotiations of physician-insurer contracts contemporaneously with the implementation of
Medicar RVU updates. Finally, Appendix C.3 computes the bias that would result in such
a case.

C.1        Estimation in Changes
    We simplify our main estimating equations to two time periods in order to see the
Medicare-private price relationships as transparently as possible. This approach will also
clearly highlight the assumptions necessary for our estimate of β̂ to equal the true Medicare-
linked share σ. Averaging equation (10) within each time period, and then taking the
difference across the two, yields:

                            ∆ln(Pg,j ) = α + β∆ ln(RV Uj ) + (1 − σ)εg,j .                      (C.1)

In the context of price changes for one service, this equation shows how we can directly
interpret the evidence from Figure 3C. This graph showed BCBS average log payments for
a standard office visit increasing by 70 percent of the Medicare log RVU change. Hence
the implied estimate of σ, in the absence of contemporaneous active negotiations, is also 70
percent.

C.2        Threats to Identification From Active Renegotiations
    This interpretation is threatened by the possibility of actively negotiated changes in ln(θg )
and ln(ρg,j,p ), which would show up in the error term. If they also covary with the updates
to Medicare’s relative values, then our estimate of β̂ would be biased relative to the true
parameter σ. (We compute the bias in Appendix C.3 below.) This might arise endogenously
because changes in Medicare’s relative values could alter groups’ bargaining positions, and
perhaps do so differentially across services. We quantify the potential influence of these
changes on our estimates of Medicare’s bencmarking in two ways.
    First, note that when we estimate β on the full sample of physician groups, it could be
biased away from σ by active renegotiations of both ln(ρg,j,t ) and ln(θg,t ). If we estimate β
on the data for a single firm, however, ∆ ln(θg ) is a constant. In the levels specification of
equation (10), we can similarly account for changes in each group’s average log payment by
allowing for a full set of group-by-period effects. If estimates of β change little as a result
of adding firm-by-period effects to such a specification, we can rule out the possibility that
changes in the overall level of each firm’s payments are biasing our attempt to recover σ.
    Second, the channel through which active renegotiations might bias our attempt to re-
cover σ involves changes in bargaining power induced by the RVU changes.25 The threat to
  25
       Actively negotiated payment changes that are driven by the RVU updates themselves may plausibly

                                                   68
our estimation takes the following form: BCBS may pursue renegotiations with firms whose
average Medicare payment has fallen, with these negotiations resulting in declines in their
payments. Similarly, physician groups whose average Medicare payment has increased may
pursue renegotiations with BCBS, with these negotiations resulting in increases in their pay-
ments. This pattern would imply a positive bias to our estimates of σ. To investigate the
potential relevance of this source of bias, we first construct the average change in the RVUs
for the specific services provided by each firm. This allows us to gauge the extent to which
each firm is affected. We then investigate whether we obtain larger estimates β̂ on a sample
of firms that were significantly affected compared with firms that experienced little change
in their average RVUs.

C.3      Deriving the Bias in our Medicare Link Estimate
   The biased coefficient β̂ we would estimate from equation (C.1) in the presence of simul-
taneous updates to non-benchmarked prices or group-specific markups is:

             Cov[∆ln(Pg,j ), ∆ ln(RV Uj )]
      β̂ =
                 Var[∆ ln(RV Uj )]
             Cov[σ∆ln(φg ) + σ∆ ln(RV Uj ) + (1 − σ)∆ln(ρg,j ) + ∆g,j,p , ∆ ln(RV Uj )]
         =
                                      Var[∆ ln(RV Uj )]
              Cov[∆ ln(RV Uj ), ∆ ln(RV Uj )]    Cov[∆ln(φg ), ∆ ln(RV Uj )]
         =σ                                   +σ
                    Var[∆ ln(RV Uj )]                Var[∆ ln(RV Uj )]
                      Cov[∆ln(ρg,j )]    Cov[∆g,j,p , ∆ ln(RV Uj )]
         + (1 − σ)                     +
                     Var[∆ ln(RV Uj )]      Var[∆ ln(RV Uj )]
                   Cov[∆ln(φg ), ∆ ln(RV Uj )]           Cov[∆ln(ρg,j ), ∆ ln(RV Uj )]
         =σ+σ                                  + (1 − σ)                               ,              (C.2)
                       Var[∆ ln(RV Uj )]                     Var[∆ ln(RV Uj )]

where the third equality follows from the properties of covariances and the fourth from the
          Cov[∆ ln(RV Uj,t ),∆ ln(RV Uj )]         Cov[∆g,j,t ,∆ ln(RV UjM )]
fact that        Var[∆ ln(RV Uj )]
                                           = 1 and     Var[∆ ln(RV Uj )]
                                                                               = 0.
    One separate source of bias in the estimate of β̂ could arise if the linked share σ varies
across firms and services. This would imply additional terms in equation (C.2) describing our
regression estimates, involving covariances between the RVU updates used for identification
and the service-by-group linked shares σj,g . Recovering σ also requires us to assume that these
covariance terms are 0, which will be true if updates to Medicare’s rates are uncorrelated
with the σj,g . In section 6.2, we will allow for heterogeneity across various dimensions in the
linked shares.



covary with these changes. There is no a priori reason to suspect that changes renegotiated for other reasons
would covary with the RVU updates and bias our estimates.

                                                     69
C.4     Checks for the Relevance of Active Contract Renegotiation
    The estimates presented in Figure 3 and Table 4 may differ from the true Medicare
benchmarking parameter σ if changes in other terms of providers’ contracts covary with
the changes in RVUs. Indeed, payment changes that significantly alter physician groups’
average Medicare payment can move private payments in subsequent years, due in part to
the resulting changes to their bargaining positions (Clemens and Gottlieb, forthcoming). We
thus draw on institutional detail and theoretically motivated specification checks to explore
how much our estimates might deviate from the true share of payments benchmarked to
Medicare’s relative values.
    The most relevant institutional detail is the relatively short time horizon of our event
studies. Dunn and Shapiro (2015) report that physician contracts tend to remain in force
for around 3 years. Within each of our single-year event studies, we thus anticipate that
roughly one-third of the groups in our sample engage in active contract re-negotiations, which
could affect our estimates. Unlike the payment changes analyzed by Clemens and Gottlieb
(forthcoming), which significantly shifted certain specialties’ average Medicare payments,
those we consider here are relatively diffused across specialties, so unlikely to affect groups’
overall outside options.
    Nevertheless, we investigate the potential relevance of active contract renegotiation with
two analyses. First, we consider the potential effect of scheduled RVU changes on a firm’s
bargaining position. We construct a variable that, for each firm, reports the average change
in RVUs for the services it provides. Firms experiencing a negative average change have
seen their bargaining positions deterioriate. Firms experiencing an average RVU increase
have seen their bargaining positions improve. Using the average RVU change to which each
firm was exposed, we construct an indicator for groups whose bargaining positions were
significantly affected.
    Second, we investigate the potential relevance of changes in groups’ average log reim-
bursement by adding full sets of group-by-period fixed effects to our specification. For this
regression, we restrict our sample to the 100 largest firms in each year, primarily for compu-
tational ease. Note, however, that large firms are precisely those for which we would expect
active renegotiations to be most frequent.
    Table C.3 presents these results. Column 1 reports our baseline specification, unchanged
from Table 4. Column 2 allows our coefficient of interest to vary with an indicator for
whether a firm’s average Medicare reimbursement rate was significantly affected by a year’s
RVU updates. The point estimate on this interaction varies across years, but is negative
in each case. This is the opposite of what we would expect if significant RVU updates
were driving active contract renegotiations. Column 3 limits the baseline specification to the
services provided by the 100 largest physician groups. A comparison of column 3 with column
1 reveals that, on average across the years we analyze, the largest firms have contracts that
are less linked to Medicare than are contracts in the full sample, a result that we explore
further in section 6.3. Most relevant for our current purposes, however, column 4 reveals that
adding group-by-period effects to the previous specification has essentially no impact on our
coefficient of interest. These results provide evidence against the concern that that active

                                              70
contract renegotiations confound the relationship between BCBS’s and Medicare’s payments
over the intervals we analyze. Thus they bolster the case for interpreting our estimates of β̂
as unbiased estimates of the fraction of services tied directly to Medicare.




                                             71
                                            Appendix Figure C.1: Strength of Public Private Payment Relationships

                                                       Panel A                                                                    Panel B
                                             2008 RVU Updates (Service Weighted)                                        2009 RVU Updates (Service Weighted)

                        1




                                                                                                    1
                                 0.75




                                                                                                             0.75
            Share Linked To RVUs




                                                                                        Share Linked To RVUs
                          0.5




                                                                                                      0.5
                0.25




                                                                                            0.25
                        0




                                                                                                    0
                        -0.25




                                                                                                    -0.25
                                        0       3             6             9      12                               0      3             6             9      12
                                                            Month                                                                      Month
72




                                                      Panel C                                                                    Panel D
                                             2010 RVU Updates (Service Weighted)                                        2011 RVU Updates (Service Weighted)
                        1




                                                                                                    1
                                 0.75




                                                                                                             0.75
            Share Linked To RVUs




                                                                                        Share Linked To RVUs
                          0.5




                                                                                                      0.5
                0.25




                                                                                            0.25
                        0




                                                                                                    0
                        -0.25




                                                                                                    -0.25




                                        0       3             6             9      12                               0      3             6             9      12
                                                            Month                                                                      Month

     Note: The figure reports estimates of the βp from estimates of equation (11). The vertical dashed line in each panel corresponds with the
     month during each year in which BCBS implemented its update from the prior year’s relative value scale. These updates occurred on July 1,
     2008, August 15, 2009, July 1, 2010, and September 1, 2011.
                                                 Appendix Figure C.2: Benchmarking Estimates Based on Price Changes Across Services

                                                                Panel A: 2008                                                                                           Panel B: 2009




                                                                                                                              .1
                              .1
            Change in Log BCBS Payment for Service




                                                                                                          Change in Log BCBS Payment for Service
                                       .05




                                                                                                                                  0
                             0




                                                                                                                    -.1
                 -.05         -.1




                                                                                                                              -.2
                                                     -.2   -.1              0               .1       .2                                                      -.2      -.1              0                .1   .2
                                                           Change in Log Medicare RVUs for Service                                                                 Change in Log Medicare RVUs for Service
73




                                                                Panel C: 2010                                                                                           Panel D: 2011
                              .1




                                                                                                                              .1
            Change in Log BCBS Payment for Service




                                                                                                              Change in Log BCBS Payment for Service
                                                                                                                                             .05
                                        .05




                                                                                                                                    0
                              0




                                                                                                                            -.05
                  -.05




                                                                                                          -.15     -.1
                              -.1




                                                     -.2        -.1                    0             .1                                                -.1          0                .1                .2    .3
                                                           Change in Log Medicare RVUs for Service                                                                 Change in Log Medicare RVUs for Service

     Note: The figure reports the relationships described by equation (C.1) for RVU updates in each year, and estimates of that equation. Each
     panel shows a separate year’s estimates, measured as log differences between the period before BCBS implemented the Medicare RVU updates
     and the period after this update. The years are split at July 1, 2008, August 15, 2009; July 1, 2010; and September 1, 2011. The regressions
     are run at the underlying service level, but observations are grouped into twenty bins for each year, based on vigintiles of the Medicare log
     RVU change.
Appendix Table C.1: Other Years’ Estimates of Benchmarking Using RVU
Changes

                                                (1)         (2)          (3)         (4)
       Dependent variable:                          Log private reimbursement rate
                                               Panel A: All Services: 2008 RVU Updates
       Log RVU Change × Post                0.602**      0.597**       0.539**    0.602**
                                             (0.061)     (0.061)       (0.060)     (0.061)
       N                                   19,552,096 19,552,096 19,552,096 19,552,096
       No. of Clusters                        3,505       3,505         3,505       3,505

                                               Panel B: All Services: 2009 RVU Updates
       Log RVU Change × Post                0.778**      0.778**       0.792**   0.778**
                                             (0.081)     (0.078)       (0.070)   (0.081)
       N                                   21,941,227 21,941,227 21,941,227 21,941,227
       No. of Clusters                        3,807       3,807         3,807     3,807

                                               Panel C: All Services: 2011 RVU Updates
       Log RVU Change × Post                0.704**      0.689**       0.679**   0.704**
                                             (0.046)     (0.052)       (0.048)   (0.046)
       N                                   25,404,007 25,404,007 25,404,007 25,404,007
       No. of Clusters                        4,091       4,091         4,091     4,091

       Group-by-Code Effects                   Yes             No             Yes             Yes
       Code Effects                            No              Yes            No              No
       Cubic Time x RVU Change                 No              No             Yes             No
       Cubic Time x Post                       No              No             No              Yes
       Weighting                             Service         Service        Service         Service
Note: **, *, and + indicate statistical significance at the 0.01, 0.05, and 0.10 levels respectively. The table
shows the results of OLS specifications of the forms described in section 5.2. Each column in each panel
reports an estimate of β̂ from equation (10). Panel A shows estimates using RBRVS updates and BCBS
claims data for 2008, Panel B for 2009, and Panel C for 2011. Observations are at the claim-line level and
are equally weighted. Standard errors are calculated allowing for arbitrary correlation among the errors
associated with each HCPCS service code (including modifiers for the professional and technical components
of diagnostic imaging services). Additional features of each specification are described within the table.
The construction of all variables is further described in the main text. Sources: Authors’ calculations using
updates to Medicare’s RBRVS as reported in the Federal Register and claims data from BCBS.




                                                      74
Appendix Table C.2: Dollar-Weighted Estimates of Benchmarking Using RVU
Changes

                                                (1)         (2)          (3)         (4)
      Dependent variable:                           Log private reimbursement rate
                                               Panel A: All Services: 2008 RVU Updates
      Log RVU Change × Post                 0.421**      0.413**       0.359**    0.420**
                                             (0.075)     (0.075)       (0.071)     (0.075)
      N                                    19,552,096 19,552,096 19,552,096 19,552,096
      No. of Clusters                         3,505       3,505         3,505       3,505

                                               Panel B: All Services: 2009 RVU Updates
      Log RVU Change × Post                 0.618**      0.627**       0.669**   0.618**
                                             (0.046)     (0.045)       (0.052)   (0.046)
      N                                    21,941,227 21,941,227 21,941,227 21,941,227
      No. of Clusters                         3,807       3,807         3,807     3,807

                                               Panel C: All Services: 2011 RVU Updates
      Log RVU Change × Post                 0.749**      0.739**       0.738**   0.749**
                                             (0.044)     (0.043)       (0.047)   (0.044)
      N                                    25,404,007 25,404,007 25,404,007 25,404,007
      No. of Clusters                         4,091       4,091         4,091     4,091

      Group-by-Code Effects                   Yes             No             Yes            Yes
      Code Effects                            No              Yes            No             No
      Cubic Time × RVU Change                 No              No             Yes            No
      Cubic Time × Post                       No              No             No             Yes
      Weighting                              Dollars         Dollars        Dollars        Dollars
Note: **, *, and + indicate statistical significance at the 0.01, 0.05, and 0.10 levels respectively. The
table shows the results of OLS specifications of the forms described in section 5.2. Each column in each
panel reports an estimate of β̂ from equation (10). Panel A shows estimates using RBRVS updates and
BCBS claims data for 2008, Panel B for 2009, and Panel C for 2011. Observations are at the claim-line
level and are weighted according to each service’s average payment during the baseline period. Standard
errors are calculated allowing for arbitrary correlation among the errors associated with each HCPCS service
code (including modifiers for the professional and technical components of diagnostic imaging services).
Additional features of each specification are described within the table. The construction of all variables is
further described in the main text. Sources: Authors’ calculations using updates to Medicare’s RBRVS as
reported in the Federal Register and claims data from BCBS.




                                                      75
Appendix Table C.3: Checks for the Relevance of Active Contract Negotiations

                                              (1)         (2)           (3)            (4)
 Dependent variable:                                 Log private reimbursement rate
                                                Panel A: All Services: 2009 RVU Updates
 Log RVU Change × Post                    0.778**      0.847**        0.696**        0.666**
                                           (0.081)     (0.085)        (0.093)        (0.081)
 Log RVU Change × Post                                  -0.077
     × Update Impact                                   (0.114)
 N                                       21,941,227 21,941,227       4,097,283      4,097,283
 No. of Clusters                            3,807       3,807          3,496          3,496
                                                Panel B: All Services: 2010 RVU Updates
 Log RVU Change × Post                    0.750**      0.992**        0.740**      0.747**
                                           (0.038)     (0.076)        (0.048)      (0.052)
 Log RVU Change × Post                                -0.393**
     × Update Impact                                   (0.099)
 N                                       23,933,577 23,933,577       4,708,213    4,708,213
 No. of Clusters                            3,681       3,681          3,450        3,450
                                                Panel C: All Services: 2011 RVU Updates
 Log RVU Change × Post                    0.704**      0.804**        0.544**      0.523**
                                           (0.046)     (0.084)        (0.051)      (0.067)
 Log RVU Change × Post                                  -0.162
     × Update Impact                                   (0.106)
 N                                       25,404,007 25,404,007       5,069,260    5,069,260
 No. of Clusters                            4,091       4,091          3,825        3,825
 Group × Post-Update Effects                 No           No            No           Yes
 Sample                                      Full        Full     Largest Firms Largest Firms
Note: **, *, and + indicate statistical significance at the 0.01, 0.05, and 0.10 levels respectively. The table
shows the results of OLS specifications of the forms described in section 5.2. Column 1 replicates the baseline
specification from column 1 of Table 4. Column 2 augments the baseline specification with interaction terms
allowing the effect of RVU updates to vary with the extent of the average impact of each year’s RVU updates
on a physician group’s average Medicare reimbursement rate. In columns 3 and 4 the sample is restricted to
each year’s 100 largest physician groups, as sorted by total bills submitted. The specification in column 3 is
the baseline specification, while the specification in column 4 includes a full set of post-by-group interactions.
Panel A shows estimates using RBRVS updates and BCBS claims data for 2009, Panel B for 2010, and Panel
C for 2011. Observations are at the claim-line level and are equally weighted. Standard errors are calculated
allowing for arbitrary correlation among the errors associated with each HCPCS service code (including
modifiers for the professional and technical components of diagnostic imaging services). Additional features
of each specification are described within the table. The construction of all variables is further described
in the main text. Sources: Authors’ calculations using updates to Medicare’s RBRVS as reported in the
Federal Register and claims data from BCBS.


                                                       76
                        Appendix Table C.4: Public-Private Payment Links Across Service Categories

                                             (1)             (2)         (3)           (4)      (5)       (6)          (7)
            Dependent variable:                                        Log private reimbursement rate
                                                               Panel A: 2008 RVU Updates by Betos Categories
                                        Evaluation        Imaging Procedures          Tests       Imaging Sub-Categories:
                                                                                              Global   Technical Professional
            Log RVU Change               0.541***        0.644***     0.495***     0.786*** 0.665*** 0.494***      0.945***
                × Post-Update             (0.115)          (0.092)     (0.116)      (0.055)   (0.103)   (0.112)     (0.228)
            N                            9,851,995       3,221,634 3,851,609 1,292,912 1,688,102 192,569           1,340,963
            No. of Clusters                 207             1,069       1,817          385      400       235         434
                                                               Panel B: 2009 RVU Updates by Betos Categories
                                        Evaluation        Imaging Procedures          Tests       Imaging Sub-Categories:
                                                                                              Global   Technical Professional
            Log RVU Change                0.857**         0.775**      0.399**      0.933**  0.702**    0.769**     0.680**
77




                × Post-Update              (0.209)         (0.066)     (0.064)      (0.052)   (0.072)   (0.068)     (0.184)
            N                            11,498,770      3,524,642 3,861,539 1,449,803 1,769,522 222,026           1,533,094
            No. of Clusters                  219            1,133       2,036          388      422       262         449
                                                               Panel C: 2011 RVU Updates by Betos Categories
                                        Evaluation        Imaging Procedures          Tests       Imaging Sub-Categories:
                                                                                              Global   Technical Professional
            Log RVU Change                0.794**         0.616**      0.900**       0.439*  0.816**    0.692**     0.709**
                × Post-Update              (0.065)         (0.100)     (0.075)      (0.221)   (0.048)   (0.067)     (0.058)
            N                            13,116,657      3,696,733 5,233,336 1,659,485 1,929,095 193,577           1,574,061
            No. of Clusters                  238            1,143       2,246          436      424       264         455
     Note: **, *, and + indicate statistical significance at the 0.01, 0.05, and 0.10 levels respectively. The table shows the results of OLS specifications
     of the forms described in section 5.2. The cells in each panel report estimates of β̂ from equation (10), with samples selected to contain the
     HCPCS codes falling into individual broad service categories. The name of the relevant service category accompanies each point estimate.
     Panel A shows estimates using RBRVS updates and BCBS claims data for 2008, Panel B for 2009, and Panel C for 2011. Standard errors
     are calculated allowing for arbitrary correlation among the errors associated with each HCPCS service code (including modifiers for the
     professional and technical components of diagnostic imaging services). Additional features of each specification are described within the table.
     The construction of all variables is further described in the main text. Sources: Authors’ calculations using updates to Medicare’s RBRVS as
     reported in the Federal Register and claims data from BCBS.
             Appendix Table C.5: Medicare Benchmarking by Firm Size

                                           (1)        (2)      (3)       (4)
         Dependent variable:                Log private reimbursement rate
                     Panel A: 2008 RVU Updates (N = 19,552,096)
         Log RVU Change                  0.602** 0.560** 0.421** 0.418**
             × Post-Update               (0.061) (0.074) (0.075) (0.089)
         Log RVU Change                             0.130*             -0.059
             × Post-Update × Midsize               (0.065)            (0.072)
         Log RVU Change                             -0.000             0.064
             × Post-Update × Large                 (0.101)            (0.085)

                     Panel B: 2009 RVU Updates (N                 = 21,941,227)
         Log RVU Change                  0.778**                  0.755** 0.618**          0.756**
             × Post-Update               (0.081)                  (0.090) (0.046)          (0.070)
         Log RVU Change                                            0.078                    -0.110
             × Post-Update × Midsize                              (0.059)                  (0.071)
         Log RVU Change                                            -0.035                  -0.271*
             × Post-Update × Large                                (0.094)                  (0.109)

                      Panel C: 2011 RVU Updates (N                = 25,404,007)
         Log RVU Change                   0.704**                 0.812** 0.749**          0.774**
             × Post-Update                (0.046)                  (0.063) (0.044)         (0.052)
         Log RVU Change                                           -0.140+                   -0.036
             × Post-Update × Midsize                              (0.075)                  (0.100)
         Log RVU Change                                           -0.183*                   -0.023
             × Post-Update × Large                                (0.075)                  (0.116)
         Firm Size × Post-Update Controls   No                       Yes      No             Yes
         Weighting                        Services                Services Dollars         Dollars
Note: **, *, and + indicate statistical significance at the 0.01, 0.05, and 0.10 levels respectively. Columns
1 and 3 report the baseline estimates from Table 4 Panels A and B respectively. In columns 2 and 4 we
augment these specifications to include interactions between firm size indicators variables and both the “Post”
indicator and the interaction between the “Log RVU Change” and “Post” indicator. The omitted category
is small firms, defined as those with less than $200,000 in billings. Mid-sized firms are those with billings
between $200,000 and $1 million, and large firms are those with billings exceeding $1 million. Standard errors
are calculated allowing for arbitrary correlation among the errors associated with each HCPCS service code
(including modifiers for the professional and technical components of diagnostic imaging services). Sources:
Authors’ calculations using updates to Medicare’s RBRVS as reported in the Federal Register and claims
data from BCBS.




                                                      78
D     Results for Out-of-Network Payments
    This appendix presents analogues of our baseline estimates, but for payments to out-of-
network physicians. This analysis allows us to determine whether the benchmarking that
we document reflects active decisions as opposed to a purely mechanical force. Table D.1
replicates Table 4 in the main text, but for out-of-network payments. Table D.2 is a dollar-
weighted version of the same regressions. In both cases, we obtain small and precisely
estimated coefficients. This means that out-of-network payments—which don’t represent
the outcome of the ex ante negotiations we described in section 1.2—are not priced in the
same way.
    Table D.3 complicates the analysis somewhat. It reveals that around half of out-of-
network services appear to be priced according to cICFs. This share is much larger than
the results from Tables D.1 and D.2 would suggest, though still far below the in-network
results from Table 2 in the main text. The difference with the in-network results is especially
pronounced in 2010 and 2011, and when using a more stringent cICF threshold (20 percent).
In these cases, only 30 percent of out-of-network prices appear to be benchmarked to Medi-
care, compared with 70 percent of in-network payments. Nevertheless, the ambiguity over
the correct definition again demonstrates the advantage of the update-based benchmarking
measure in Tables D.1 and D.2.




                                              79
Appendix Table D.1: Estimating Medicare Benchmarking for Out-of-Network
Payments Using RVU Changes

                                                   (1)       (2)          (3)       (4)
         Dependent variable:                         Log private reimbursement rate
                                                Panel A: All Services: 2009 RVU Updates
         Log RVU Change × Post                   0.018      0.007       0.084*    0.018
                                                (0.043)    (0.047)     (0.037)   (0.043)
         N                                     2,585,681 2,585,681 2,585,681 2,585,681
         No. of Clusters                         2,456      2,456       2,456     2,456

                                                Panel B: All Services: 2010 RVU Updates
         Log RVU Change × Post                  0.302**   0.351**      0.170**  0.302**
                                                (0.073)    (0.074)     (0.044)  (0.073)
         N                                     2,386,575 2,386,575 2,386,575 2,386,575
         No. of Clusters                         2,051      2,051       2,051    2,051

                                                Panel C: All Services: 2011 RVU Updates
         Log RVU Change × Post                  0.106*     0.094+       0.047    0.105*
                                                (0.047)    (0.054)     (0.037)  (0.047)
         N                                     2,626,264 2,626,264 2,626,264 2,626,264
         No. of Clusters                         2,473      2,473       2,473     2,473

         Group-by-Code Effects                    Yes           No             Yes           Yes
         Code Effects                             No            Yes            No            No
         Cubic Time × RVU Change                  No            No             Yes           No
         Cubic Time × Post                        No            No             No            Yes
         Weighting                              Service       Service        Service       Service
Note: **, *, and + indicate statistical significance at the 0.01, 0.05, and 0.10 levels respectively. The table
shows the results of OLS specifications of the forms described in section 5.2, except using data from out-of-
network payments. Each column in each panel reports an estimate of β̂ from equation (10). Panel A shows
estimates using RBRVS updates and BCBS claims data for 2009, Panel B for 2010, and Panel C for 2011.
Observations are at the claim-line level and are equally weighted. Standard errors are calculated allowing
for arbitrary correlation among the errors associated with each HCPCS service code (including modifiers
for the professional and technical components of diagnostic imaging services). Additional features of each
specification are described within the table. The construction of all variables is further described in the main
text. Sources: Authors’ calculations using updates to Medicare’s RBRVS as reported in the Federal Register
and claims data from BCBS.




                                                      80
Appendix Table D.2: Dollar-Weighted Estimates of Medicare Benchmarking for
Out-of-Network Payments Using RVU Changes

                                                   (1)       (2)          (3)       (4)
         Dependent variable:                         Log private reimbursement rate
                                                Panel A: All Services: 2009 RVU Updates
         Log RVU Change × Post                   0.036      0.004       -0.043    0.036
                                                (0.048)    (0.055)     (0.079)   (0.048)
         N                                     2,585,681 2,585,681 2,585,681 2,585,681
         No. of Clusters                         2,456      2,456        2,456    2,456

                                                Panel B: All Services: 2010 RVU Updates
         Log RVU Change × Post                  0.244**   0.315**       0.203*  0.242**
                                                (0.063)    (0.066)     (0.082)  (0.063)
         N                                     2,386,575 2,386,575 2,386,575 2,386,575
         No. of Clusters                         2,051      2,051        2,051   2,051

                                                Panel C: All Services: 2011 RVU Updates
         Log RVU Change × Post                   -0.016     -0.045      0.053    -0.016
                                                (0.068)    (0.075)     (0.066)  (0.067)
         N                                     2,626,264 2,626,264 2,626,264 2,626,264
         No. of Clusters                          2,473      2,473      2,473     2,473

         Group-by-Code Effects                   Yes           No             Yes           Yes
         Code Effects                            No            Yes            No            No
         Cubic Time × RVU Change                 No            No             Yes           No
         Cubic Time × Post                       No            No             No            Yes
         Weighting                              Dollars       Dollars        Dollars       Dollars
Note: **, *, and + indicate statistical significance at the 0.01, 0.05, and 0.10 levels respectively. The table
shows the results of OLS specifications of the forms described in section 5.2, except using data from out-of-
network payments. Each column in each panel reports an estimate of β̂ from equation (10). Panel A shows
estimates using RBRVS updates and BCBS claims data for 2009, Panel B for 2010, and Panel C for 2011.
Observations are at the claim-line level and are equally weighted. Standard errors are calculated allowing
for arbitrary correlation among the errors associated with each HCPCS service code (including modifiers
for the professional and technical components of diagnostic imaging services). Additional features of each
specification are described within the table. The construction of all variables is further described in the main
text. Sources: Authors’ calculations using updates to Medicare’s RBRVS as reported in the Federal Register
and claims data from BCBS.




                                                      81
Appendix Table D.3: Out-of-Network Services Priced According to Common
Implied Conversion Factors

                                          Panel A: 2009
                                                 Frequency Threshold:
                                                 5% 10% 20%
                            Rounding for ICFs:
                                         $0.02 54% 42% 26%
                                         $0.10 60% 46% 30%
                                         $0.20 64% 52% 35%
                                          Panel B: 2010
                                                 Frequency Threshold:
                                                 5% 10% 20%
                            Rounding for ICFs:
                                         $0.02 57% 45% 32%
                                         $0.10 61% 48% 34%
                                         $0.20 65% 52% 37%
                                          Panel C: 2011
                                                 Frequency Threshold:
                                                 5% 10% 20%
                            Rounding for ICFs:
                                         $0.02 57% 43% 29%
                                         $0.10 61% 47% 32%
                                         $0.20 66% 51% 35%
Note: Each cell shows the share of out-of-network services for which payments are associated with a common
Implied Conversion Factor (cICF), as defined in the main text. The cells within each panel show how this
share varies as we apply different thresholds for the frequency required to quality as a cICF. The column
labeled “Rounding” indicates the rounding applied to each estimated ICF. An ICF is defined as “common”
for the payments to a physician group if it accounts for at least the fraction of services associated with the
specified Frequency Threshold. Source: Authors’ calculations using claims data from BCBS.




                                                     82
E     Cross-Sectional vs. RVU-Update Approaches
    This appendix motivates and presents the results of an analysis that allows us to compare
the Medicare price links we estimate using our cross-sectional and update-based approaches.
We begin by developing a cross-sectional metric for deviations from Medicare’s pricing menu.
We then combine this metric with our changes-based approach to examine whether the
services that appear to receive Medicare-benchmarked payments in the cross-section also
follow Medicare’s RVU updates.

E.1     Testing Consistency of Medicare Links
     Section 7 presented an estimate of cross-sectional relationships between Medicare and pri-
vate payments, and focused on the directions of the residuals from equation (12). Aside from
the directions, these prediction errors across services and groups also contain information
about the frequency and magnitude of deviations from Medicare’s relative values.
     Figure E.1 illustrates these errors. The three colors of dots illustrate the different mag-
nitudes of this regression’s prediction errors, allowing us to investigate how services in these
different categories respond to RVU updates.
     We use these categories to test whether the cross-sectional errors êg,j are consistently
related to BCBS’s benchmarking to Medicare payments. We construct a variable that, for
each service j, contains the average of the absolute value of the prediction errors êg,j . That
                                         P
is, for each service we estimate |êj | = g |êg,j | /Nj where Nj is the number of times service j
occurs in the sample. We then estimate our baseline specification on sub-samples split based
on these average prediction errors. We also estimate a full-sample specification in which we
allow for an interaction between |êj | and changes in Medicare’s relative values. That is, we
estimate

    ln(Pc,g,j,t ) = ψ∆ ln(RV Uj ) · 1{t=post} + ξ∆ ln(RV Uj ) · 1{t=post} · |êj | + γ 1{t=post} · |êj |
                  + φt 1t + φj 1j + φg 1g + φg,j 1g · 1j + c,g,j,t .                                 (E.1)

If services that are farther from the Medicare prediction line in the cross section are unlinked
from RVU updates, then we would expect to estimate ξˆ < 0. If the apparent cross-sectional
links are unrelated to whether a service follows Medicare updates, we would estimate ξˆ = 0.

E.2     Consistency With Cross-Sectional Links to Medicare Pay-
        ments
    Table E.1 presents estimates generated using the approach discussed above. In column
1, we restrict the sample to services with below-median (absolute value of) average cross-
sectional prediction errors. That is, we restrict the samples to the services for which relative
payments appear to hew closely to Medicare’s relative values in the cross-section. Column
2 restricts the sample to services falling between the 50th and 90th percentiles of the distri-


                                                   83
bution of prediction errors, while column 3 contains services in the top decile. Figure E.2
illustrates this difference graphically, with a binned scatterplot that splits the sample at the
median absolute prediction error. Column 4 presents the full sample specification, equation
(E.1), with the interaction term.
    The results generally reveal a strong relationship between the average magnitude of the
cross-sectional prediction errors and the private payment response to changes in Medicare’s
relative values. This relationship is particularly strong in the data for 2009 and 2010. In
these years, the results in column 1 suggest that nearly all of the payments made for services
with small cross-sectional residuals were linked to Medicare’s relative values. The share is
substantially smaller for the services analyzed in column 2, and smaller still for those analyzed
in column 3. In the 2010 sample, the estimates suggest that around half of payments are
linked directly to Medicare’s relative values. The relationship between the cross-sectional
residuals and the strength of the links between private payments and changes in Medicare’s
relative values appears much weaker in the 2011 sample. The cross-sectional prediction errors
have fairly strong power for predicting heterogeneity in our estimates of the link between
private payments and changes in Medicare’s relative values.




                                               84
                                                                            Appendix Figure E.1


                                                 Medicare and Private Price Across Services, 2009

                                    $1500
               Average BCBS Price: Levels
                      $50 $200
85




               $8          $2




                                            $2               $8                $50          $200                             $1500
                                                                        Average Medicare Price: Levels
                                            Note: Circle sizes are proportional to the number of claims a service appeared in the data.
                                            Colors indicate magnitudes of residuals
                                            Regression Line: Log BCBS Price = 0.963 (0.003) x Log Medicare Price + 0.23. R^2: 0.96.



     Note: The figure presents the cross-sectional correlation between Medicare and BCBS reimbursement rates in 2009. Medicare reimbursement
     rates are calculated using each HCPCS code’s 2009 allocation of relative value units, multiplied by the 2009 national conversion factor. BCBS
     payments are calculated as HCPCS code average across all service lines in our analysis sample.
                                                                                     Appendix Figure E.2


                                                      Price Changes after RVU updates, 2009, Service-level
                Average BCBS Price: Log Difference
                        -.1  -.05      0      .05
86




                 -.15




                                                     -.3                        -.2                   -.1                                      0
                                                                            Average Medicare Price: Log Difference

                                                           Cross-sectional resids. < median                Cross-sectional resids. > median
                                                     Note: Circle sizes are proportional to the number of services provided by the provider.
                                                     Estimated Coefficient: 0.771 (0.011), R-squared: 0.55, Estimated Constant: 0.036.



     Note: The figure reports the relationship described by equation (C.1) for RVU updates in 2009, split into two sample based on the median
     prediction error from Figure E.1. (The blue dots in Figure E.1 correspond to the blue circles in this graph, while the yellow and red observations
     from Figure E.1 correspond to the red squares in this graph.) The regressions are run at the underlying service level, but observations are
     grouped into twenty bins for this graph, based on vigintiles of the Medicare log RVU change.
Appendix Table E.1: Relationship between the Medicare Benchmarking Esti-
mated in Changes and Observed in the Cross Section

                                                    (1)
                                                   (2)        (3)        (4)
                                             Panel A: 2009 RVU Updates
      Sample (Residual Size):         Small     Medium       Large       All
      Log RVU Change                1.173***    0.870*** 0.546***     1.085***
          × Post-Update              (0.070)     (0.052)    (0.034)    (0.076)
      Log RVU Change                                                 -1.192***
          × Post-Update × Residual                                     (0.215)
      N                            11,444,161 8,319,559 2,177,507 21,941,227
      No. of Clusters                  268        1,598      1,941      3,807
                                             Panel B: 2010 RVU Updates
      Sample (Residual Size):         Small     Medium       Large       All
      Log RVU Change                0.876***    0.580*** 0.464***     0.956***
          × Post-Update              (0.020)     (0.058)    (0.107)    (0.061)
      Log RVU Change                                                 -1.536***
          × Post-Update × Residual                                     (0.422)
      N                            11,993,795 9,567,049 2,372,733 23,933,577
      No. of Clusters                  398        1,347      1,936      3,681
                                             Panel C: 2011 RVU Updates
      Sample (Residual Size):         Small     Medium       Large        All
      Log RVU Change                0.712***    0.657*** 0.719***    0.755***
          × Post-Update              (0.097)     (0.085)    (0.067)    (0.102)
      Log RVU Change                                                    -0.299
          × Post-Update × Residual                                     (0.423)
      N                            13,059,796 9,817,494 2,526,717 25,404,007
      No. of Clusters                  385        1,390      2,316      4,091
Note: **, *, and + indicate statistical significance at the 0.01, 0.05, and 0.10 levels respectively. Columns
1 through 3 of the table show the results of OLS specifications of the parameter β̂ from equation (10) in
section 5.2. In column 1, we restrict the sample to the HCPCS codes in the bottom half of the distribution
of the average cross-sectional prediction errors generated by estimating equation (C). Column 2 restricts the
sample to services falling between the 50th and 90th percentiles of the distribution of prediction errors, while
column 3 contains services in the top decile. Column 4 presents estimates of β̂ and γ̂ from equation (E.1)
in section E.1. Panel A shows estimates using RBRVS updates and BCBS claims data for 2009, Panel B
for 2010, and Panel C for 2011. Observations are at the claim-line level and are equally weighted. Standard
errors are calculated allowing for arbitrary correlation among the errors associated with each HCPCS service
code (including modifiers for the professional and technical components of diagnostic imaging services).
Additional features of each specification are described within the table. The construction of all variables is
further described in the note to Table 1 and in the main text. Sources: Authors’ calculations using updates
to Medicare’s RBRVS as reported in the Federal Register and claims data from BCBS.

                                                      87
F          Supply Elasticities Implied from Private Prices that
           Follow Medicare’s
   We use the following IV framework to estimate the own-price supply responses for physi-
cians treating BCBS patients, in responses to reimbursement changes that follow from Medi-
care’s RVU updates:

                                   ∆ln(Pg,j ) = α + β∆ ln(RV Uj ) + εg,j                (F.1)
                                                       \ )+ .
                                   ∆ln(Qg,j ) = γ + δ ∆ln(P                             (F.2)
                                                           g,j g,j


The first stage, equation (F.1), is taken from equation (C.1) in the text. This estimates
the share of private prices that respond to the Medicare RVU updates. This generates a
predicted price change, which we use in the second stage equation (F.2).
    The coefficient δ that we estimate in equation (F.2) is close to providing an estimate
of the physicians’ supply elasticity for BCBS patients, in response to BCBS prices. It is
somewhat confounded, however, by the fact that the BCBS prices are changing at the same
time as the prices of physicains’ outside option—treating Medicare patients.26 This would
tend to bias the estimates down relative to a pure own-price supply estimate.
    Table F.1 shows the results. The IV estimates scale up the reduced form estimates
substantially, and range from 0.15 to 0.66. The median estimate of 0.37 occurs in 2011. For
comparison, the conceptually most similar estimates in the literature are those of Brekke,
Holmås, Monstad and Straume (2015). Brekke et al. (2015) estimate physicians’ supply
responses to a reimbursement change for one particuar service, which is also the type of
price change we consider here. These are different types of elasticities than those of Clemens
and Gottlieb (2014), who consider market-wide changes, or the relative price changes of
Gruber et al. (1999) and Jacobson et al. (2010).




    26
         Clemens and Gottlieb (2013, Appendix B) model these forces.

                                                      88
                                                                             Appendix Figure F.1: Short-Run Supply Responses to Medicare Price Changes
                                                                                             Panel A                                                                                                              Panel B
                                                                             Service-Firm Level Supply Responses: 2008                                                                            Service-Firm Level Supply Responses: 2009


                                                          .16




                                                                                                                                                                                 -.3
               Change in Log Quantity of Service Provided




                                                                                                                                      Change in Log Quantity of Service Provided
                                                                                                                                                                       -.32
                                                .14




                                                                                                                                                             -.34
                                       .12




                                                                                                                                                    -.36
                              .1




                                                                                                                                          -.38
            .06     .08




                                                                                                                                                            -.4
                                                                -.2                 -.1              0                 .1        .2                                                         -.2              -.1                   0              .1
                                                                                   Change in Log Medicare RVUs for Service                                                                              Change in Log Medicare RVUs for Service
89




                                                                                            Panel C                                                                                                               Panel D
                                                                             Service-Firm Level Supply Responses: 2010                                                                            Service-Firm Level Supply Responses: 2011




                                                                                                                                                                                     -.45
                                                       .2
            Change in Log Quantity of Service Provided




                                                                                                                                           Change in Log Quantity of Service Provided
                                           .15




                                                                                                                                                                      -.5
                              .1




                                                                                                                                                      -.55
                   .05




                                                                                                                                                                  -.6
                                    0




                                                                      -.15          -.1         -.05         0             .05   .1                                                         -.1          0                .1                .2         .3
                                                                                   Change in Log Medicare RVUs for Service                                                                              Change in Log Medicare RVUs for Service
     Note: The figure reports estimates of physicians’ supply responses to Medicare price changes that BCBS implemented in a given year.
     Quantities, the dependent variable, are computed at the service-by-firm level. Each panel shows a separate year’s estimates, measured as log
     differences between the period before BCBS implemented the Medicare RVU updates and the period after this update. The years are split
     at July 1, 2008, August 15, 2009; July 1, 2010; and September 1, 2011. The estimates have very different intercepts across the three panels
     because of the differences in the share of the year’s data that are included in the periods before vs. after each year’s update.
                    Appendix Table F.1: Supply Elasticity Estimates

                                                         (1)      (2)       (3)        (4)
      Year:                                             2008     2009      2010       2011
      Dependent variable:                                  Change in log service quantity
                                                         Panel A: Reduced Form
      Log RVU change for service                        0.027   0.095* 0.339*** 0.252***
                                                       (0.047) (0.047) (0.050)       (0.038)
                                                         Panel B: IV Estimates
      Log BCBS payment change for service               0.052   0.152* 0.658***           0.365***
                                                       (0.090) (0.076) (0.102)             (0.055)
      N                                                   63,526   71,354      81,294       89,936
      First Stage F -Statistic                            358.9     776.2       483.9       1843.0
Note: **, *, and + indicate statistical significance at the 0.01, 0.05, and 0.10 levels respectively. Panel A
estimates the reduced form relationships shown in Figure 5 in the main text. Panel B shows the second stage
estimates from the IV framework in equation (F.2). The robust first-stage F-statistics all easily satisfy the
weak instruments test of Olea and Pflueger (2013). Source: Authors’ calculations using claims data from
BCBS.




                                                     90
