NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

RETAKING IN HIGH STAKES EXAMS:
IS LESS MORE?
Kala Krishna
Sergey Lychagin
Verónica Frisancho Robles
Working Paper 21640
http://www.nber.org/papers/w21640
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
October 2015

We thank Pelin Akyol, Peter Kondor and Cemile Yavas for insightful discussions, as well as seminar
participants at the Cardiff University, Central European University, University of Exeter, Pompeu
Fabra University, University of St. Gallen, Stockholm University and the University of Warwick. Krishna
is grateful to the Department of Economics at New York University for support in 2013-14 as a Visiting
Professor. The views expressed herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views
of the National Bureau of Economic Research.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peerreviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.
© 2015 by Kala Krishna, Sergey Lychagin, and Verónica Frisancho Robles. All rights reserved. Short
sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided
that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.

Retaking in High Stakes Exams: Is Less More?
Kala Krishna, Sergey Lychagin, and Verónica Frisancho Robles
NBER Working Paper No. 21640
October 2015
JEL No. C35,I23
ABSTRACT
Placement, both in university and in the civil service, according to performance in competitive exams
is the norm in much of the world. Repeat taking of such exams is common despite the private and
social costs it imposes. We develop and estimate a structural model of exam retaking using data from
Turkey's university placement exam. We find that limiting retaking, though individually harmful given
the equilibrium, actually increases expected welfare across the board. This result comes from a general
equilibrium effect: retakers crowd the market and impose negative spillovers on others by raising acceptance
cutoffs.
Kala Krishna
Department of Economics
523 Kern Graduate Building
The Pennsylvania State University
University Park, PA 16802
and NBER
kmk4@psu.edu
Sergey Lychagin
Department of Economics
Central European University
Nador u. 9
Budapest 1051
Hungary
lychagins@ceu.hu

Verónica Frisancho Robles
Research Department
Inter-American Development Bank (IADB)
1300 New York Ave. NW
Washington, DC 20577
vfrisancho@iadb.org

Retaking in High Stakes Exams: Is Less More?
Kala Krishna
The Pennsylvania State University, CES-Ifo and NBER
Sergey Lychagin

Veronica Frisancho Robles

Central European University

IADB

6th October 2015

Abstract
Placement, both in university and in the civil service, according to performance in
competitive exams is the norm in much of the world. Repeat taking of such exams is
common despite the private and social costs it imposes. We develop and estimate a
structural model of exam retaking using data from Turkey’s university placement exam.
We …nd that limiting retaking, though individually harmful given the equilibrium,
actually increases expected welfare across the board. This result comes from a general
equilibrium e¤ect: retakers crowd the market and impose negative spillovers on others
by raising acceptance cuto¤s.

In much of the world, both now and in the past, competitive exams have been used to
select the best and brightest. The imperial examination required to be chosen as a civil
servant in Imperial China is a classic example. Civil service exams remain common in
many countries including China, Japan, India, the UK and the US. Admission to university
in many countries is also similarly structured and is …ercely competitive. Students often
Frisancho: Inter-American Development Bank, Research Department, 1300 New York Ave. NW, Washington, DC 20577 (e-mail: vfrisancho@iadb.org). Krishna: Kern Graduate Building, Room 523, The
Pennsylvania State University, University Park, PA, 16802, USA, (e-mail:kmk4@psu.edu). Lychagin: Central European University, Nador u. 9, Budapest 1051, Hungary (e-mail: lychagins@ceu.hu). We thank Pelin
Akyol, Peter Kondor and Cemile Yavas for insightful discussions, as well as seminar participants at the
Cardi¤ University, Central European University, University of Exeter, Pompeu Fabra University, University
of St. Gallen, Stockholm University and the University of Warwick. Krishna is grateful to the Department
of Economics at New York University for support in 2013-14 as a Visiting Professor.

1

retake these exams multiple times; they spend enormous amounts of time, money and e¤ort
trying to improve their performance and get a better placement. In Korea, for example,
almost 18 billion dollars were spent in 2013 in prep schools by those taking the college
entry examination. Students spend so much time studying (15 hour days are the norm)
that the government had to order prep schools to close by 10 in the evening. Suicides
have been reported among students who learn the right answer for a question they missed.
Despite such extreme duress, twenty percent retake in hopes of doing better.1 In China, the
infamous “gaokao” taken to enter university creates extreme stress. Shocking pictures of
students hooked up to intravenous drips or taking oxygen while studying made the rounds.2
Similar stories abound in other countries and settings.
Retaking has both positive and negative elements: on the plus side, retaking reduces
the impact of bad luck on outcomes as it allows for second chances and so insures against
downside risk. Those students who do poorly at the exam relative to what they expect would
select into retaking, which could reduce the extent of student-college mismatch. Retaking
may also help level the playing …eld if disadvantaged students learn more upon retaking. On
the minus side, retaking tends to be excessive as the bene…ts an individual gains from moving
up in the rankings necessarily comes at the cost of others.3 Moreover, admission tends to
have rents associated with it as higher education is subsidized in much of the world. These
rents are dissipated through excessive e¤ort and retaking. Retakers increase competition for
a given number of slots which has general equilibrium consequences: admission standards
rise with more students competing for seats.
In the US, SAT exams nowadays are studied for quite intensely, and taken multiple times
by students, especially by better o¤ students. Moreover, private coaching for the SATs
has also become the norm, especially among the well o¤. Our results suggest that this
unrestricted opportunity to retake could have adverse consequences. Retaking is also related
to the issue of “red-shirting4 ” in the US. In the US, children, especially boys, often start
school a year late in the hope that this will allow them to do better then their peers. Deming
and Dynarski (2008) provide a lucid summary of work on this topic.
Given the prevalence of retaking it is surprising that, at least to our knowledge, there
1

See the article entitled “Trading Delayed as 650,000 South Koreans Take College Test”. Bloomberg
News, November 6, 2013. Also see the article “South Korea’s dreaded college entrance exam is the stu¤ of
high school nightmares, but is it producing "robots"?”. CBS News, November 7, 2013.
2
http://www.hu¢ ngtonpost.com/2012/07/02/china-test_n_1644306.html
3
Due to this externality, retaking is likely to be excessive. In other words, such a contest has a zero sum
nature as in Akerlof’s (1976) rat race. One might think that studying is good and, in fact, much of the
contest literature tries to elicit more e¤ort on the part of agents. However, the negative spillovers suggest
that when e¤ort is exerted only to improve standing, it is socially costly.
4
This refers to holding an athlete back till he is stronger and more able to compete.

2

is no systematic analysis of its costs and bene…ts in a general equilibrium setting. The
only previous work on the topic, Vigdor and Clotfelter (2003) restricts attention to partial
equilibrium which assumes away the key externality at work. This paper addresses this de…cit
and builds and estimates a structural dynamic model of retaking the exam where students
choose whether or not to retake. Students are forward looking and weigh the expected
bene…ts in terms of their future score with the costs of retaking. Intuitively, students who
do worse than they should are the ones who retake. The model lets us answer the following
questions that are key for policy: if retaking was limited, or even eliminated, what would be
the consequences? Who would gain and who would lose? What is the e¤ect on mismatch?
Is it possible to change the system so that most people gain from the change in steady state?
We rely on 2002 data on the Turkish college admission exam. Only about a third of the
exam takers in Turkey were taking the placement exam for the …rst time, while roughly 10%
of them were at least in their 4th attempt. Though there are roughly as many seats as there
are high school graduates, the large fraction of retakers creates an overhang. An increase in
the number of seats, which may appear as an obvious way of clearing this overhang, will not
solve the problem as retaking is an equilibrium phenomenon.5 The Turkish case is the ideal
setting for our purposes due to several features: high-stakes admission exams; relatively clear
rules; and stability of the system in the years prior to 2002, both in terms of the number of
high school graduates and exam takers and the number of seats available.
We are able to estimate the structural parameters of the dynamic model: retaking costs,
utility of placement, and learning between attempts. We allow all parameters to vary across
income groups since their costs and bene…ts from retaking are likely to be di¤erent. As we
only have cross sectional data on …rst-time and repeat takers, we cannot rely on standard
methods of estimating dynamic models. In particular, identifying selection into retaking and
improvement in scores between attempts is especially non-trivial in our case. To separate
selection from learning we use the fact that High School GPA is una¤ected by learning.
Therefore, the distribution of HS GPA of retakers re‡ects only selection. On the other
hand, exam performance of retakers has both selection and learning. By looking at the joint
distribution of the two across attempts we can tease out learning from selection. We …nd
that, on average, low ability students have a higher probability of retaking, which moves the
score distribution of retakers to the left relative to that of …rst time takers. As a result, not
controlling for selection tends to under estimate learning.
We …nd that more advantaged students tend to have lower costs of retaking. Utility
di¤ers only for the best placements where the poor seem to value better schools far more
than the rich. Learning gains are between 0.2 and 0.5 standard deviations of the placement
5

See Hatakenaka (2006) for more on the challenges for the Turkish higher education system.

3

score and are highest in the middle income group and lowest among the rich.
An advantage of modelling equilibrium and estimating the structural parameters of the
model as done here is that we can perform counterfactual experiments with the aim to guide
policy. In steady state, we …nd that if retaking is prevented, most students tend to gain.
Though each student is worse o¤ by not being allowed to retake for given cuto¤ scores,
banning retaking makes cuto¤ scores fall as competition for placement is less …erce. This
occurs both because fewer students compete for placement at any time, and because there is
none of the learning that can occur with retaking. In our simulations, this general equilibrium
e¤ect dominates, so that everyone is ex-ante better o¤ by restricting retaking. Nevertheless,
if students are naive and cannot anticipate general equilibrium e¤ects of such reforms, they
will resist the restrictions.6
While our model captures the essence of the issues we choose to focus on, several limitations need to be pointed out at this stage. First, one of the bene…ts of retaking would be
that a better match is obtained when second chances are given to students. In this paper,
we do not postulate any gains from assortative matching since we have no way to identify
them in our data. We do, however, attempt to capture part of this by looking at the extent
to which students are under placed without retaking. Second, our estimated model accounts
for endogenous e¤ort but in a limited way. We model e¤ort and costs incurred in high school
by allowing students to choose between three high school types and to pay for extra tutoring. Our data do not allow us, however, to say much about e¤ort between exam attempts
captured by the …xed costs of retaking. We estimate these …xed costs and allow them to vary
by income group and number of attempts and interpret them as including any e¤ort costs
as well as psychic costs or time forgone. This is not a problem as far as the estimates go,
but is a potential problem for conducting counterfactuals as these retaking cost estimates
that capture e¤ort expended between attempts are subject to the Lucas Critique. Third,
though we …nd that students learn between retaking attempts, we do not include any bene…ts of learning (such as higher wages later on in life) per se other than those that operate
via placement. We do this because we have no data on the extent of such bene…ts. Fourth,
in our estimation we assume that preferences are purely vertical, though they can di¤er by
income class. While this assumption captures what seems to be a clear hierarchy between
schools, it assumes away idiosyncratic preferences across majors within the science track and
in terms of geographic location, for example.
As mentioned above, there are only a handful of papers that look at the issue of retaking.
Vigdor and Clotfelter (2003) look at retaking the SATs in the US. They calibrate a partial
equilibrium model and show that the practice of using the best SAT score serves to discrim6

This is another example of the fallacy of composition at work.

4

inate in favor of more advantaged groups as these have lower costs of retaking, retake more
often, and so get higher maximum scores across attempts. However, as they do not model
the equilibrium in their paper, they are forced to assume that schools do not change their
admission rules in their counterfactuals. We show that these general equilibrium e¤ects are
critical; had we made the same assumption as them, we would have mistakenly found that
banning retaking was unambiguously bad.
Another paper that looks at retaking and learning is Tornkvist and Henriksson (2004).
It uses data on SweSAT, the Swedish version of the SAT, and documents patterns in it. Like
in the US, the SweSAT is one of many criteria that universities use in granting admission. It
is o¤ered biannually and taken multiple times as the best score obtained is used. Their work
is more descriptive than analytical. Using panel data on four consecutive rounds of the exam
they follow students and so are able to pin down learning and how it varies across groups.
They also …nd learning gains, especially in the second attempt. They …nd some evidence of
di¤erential learning gains across income groups, but these are not robust. They document
that richer and higher ability students have higher retaking rates. To our knowledge, ours
is the …rst paper that estimates a structural model of retaking.
Methodologically, we build upon the estimator developed by Hotz and Miller (1993).
Their approach relies on having data on agent actions and state transitions. We extend
this approach to use in a cross-sectional dataset such as ours in which state transitions are
not observed. Our work is tangentially related to the literature on contests. However, in
contrast to our model, this literature is explicitly strategic and focuses on small numbers
interactions. Much of it asks how to elicit more e¤ort from agents as e¤ort is what the
principal cares about.7 Our paper models the contest as an anonymous game where e¤ort is
not per se desirable and students take cuto¤s to be admitted as given. This is analogous to
monopolistic competition where …rms take the price index as given.8
In what follows, we …rst lay out the data and a simple model that captures the essential
aspects of the Turkish system. In Section 3 we discuss the intuition behind the model’s
identi…cation and our estimation procedure. We report the estimation results in Section 4.
Section 5 contains the counterfactual exercises. Section 6 concludes.
7

For instance, see Fu (2007) and Fain (2009).
In fact, retaking being excessive in our model is analogous to the result of Mankiw and Whinston (1986)
on excessive entry with homogeneous …rms and monopolistic competition. Just like each …rm does not
internalize the e¤ect of its entry on the pro…ts of existing …rms and this pro…t stealing e¤ect results in
excessive entry, students who retake do not internalize the e¤ect of their retaking on the placement of other
students.
8

5

1

The Data

Turkey has a highly centralized college admission procedure. All potential college applicants
in a given year have to take the ÖSS, Student Selection Exam, which is used for college
placement and simultaneously administered all over the country once a year by OSYM
(Student Selection and Placement Center). This exam attracts a great deal of attention and
is considered a rite of passage for fresh high school graduates, irrespective of their plans to
pursue a college education.
The exam is composed of multiple choice questions with negative marking for incorrect
answers. Students’performance is evaluated in four subjects: Mathematics, Turkish, Science,
and Social Studies. These subject scores together with the normalized high school GPA are
used to construct the placement score. As students are encouraged to stay in their chosen
tracks, those from the non science track applying to science programs are penalized in this
process. Depending on the college program chosen by the student, di¤erent weights are
applied to the four subjects tested in the exam resulting in placement scores that vary by
program for a given student. However, over 82% of the students placed in 4 year programs
from the Science track are placed using the score called ÖSS-SAY.9 For this reason, we focus
on this score below.
After taking the placement exam and learning the results, the students submit their
college preferences.10 In addition to their scores, students receive a booklet with previous
year’s cut-o¤ scores for each program (i.e. the score of the last student admitted). Cut-o¤
scores in the most popular programs are very stable across years. Placement is merit based:
a student is placed in his most preferred program, conditional on the availability of seats
after all the applicants with higher scores are placed.
Students fail to be placed if they are not eligible to put down preferences (i.e., their score
is too low) or if all the choices they put down on their list are unavailable to them (i.e., they
are …lled up by better students). These students have the option of retaking the exam with
no penalties but their current (not highest) score is used for placement. Students who are
placed are also allowed to retake, but their placement score is penalized if they retake the
following year. Given that competition for seats in good colleges is very intense, even a small
penalty is enough to hurt their placement a lot. Only 6 percent of the current placements
are from students already in 4 year colleges. In what follows, we remove enrolled applicants
from the data and assume that one cannot apply to other programs after being placed.11
Our data covers a random sample of about 42,731 students who took the ÖSS in 2002 and
9

For more on how these scores di¤er from each other see Frisancho et. al (2013).
Only those students who obtain more than a certain score are eligible to submit preferences.
11
Had we not assumed placement was terminal, we would have complicated the model a lot.
10

6

who were in the science track. ÖSYM data comes from three sources: students’application
forms, a survey given in 2002, and administrative data on high school GPA and scores in
each part of the exam. After cleaning the data, dealing with some minor inconsistencies
(4%) across di¤erent data sources, and dropping those who retake while already enrolled in
a university program (13%), as well as those with missing data (8%) we lose roughly 25% of
the observations. We restrict attention to the 31,554 from the science track that remain.
For each student, our database contains information on high school characteristics (type
of school), high school GPA, standing at the time of the exam (high school senior, repeat
taker), individual and background characteristics (gender, household income, parents’education and occupation, family size, time and money spent on private tutoring, and number of
previous attempts), and performance outcomes (raw scores, weighted scores, and placement
outcomes). Since we want to measure high school performance across schools, we construct
quality normalized GPAs (normalizing GPAs by school performance in the university entrance exam) to control for quality heterogeneity and grade in‡ation across high schools (see
the Appendix for details).12

1.1

Preliminary Evidence on Retaking

Despite the fact that retaking requires a year of waiting and preparation, this phenomenon
is highly prevalent in Turkey. In 2002, more than 50% of the science track applicants were
repeat takers.13 According to our data, approximately 80% of retakers are not employed at
the time of the exam.
High retaking rates could arise from three sources: a low cost of retaking, a high value of
a better placement, and a probable improvement in scores due to learning and uncertainty
in test results. If costs of retaking are low, one would expect more retaking to occur. If there
is randomness in the test results, and payo¤s in terms of placements are convex, then it may
well be worthwhile to retake as doing a bit better moves the student to a much more valued
school.
How prevalent is retaking in di¤erent socioeconomic groups? Frisancho et. al (2013) suggests that the disadvantaged have greater learning gains than the advantaged. Consequently,
we would expect them to retake more often. On the other hand, if the disadvantaged have
higher costs of retaking, then they will be less likely to retake.
12

It is worth noting that very few papers have explored the Turkish data set. Tansel (2005) studies
the determinants of attendance at private tutoring centers and its e¤ects on performance. Saygin (2011)
looks at the gender gap in college. Moreover, Caner and Okten (2010) looks at career choice using data on
preferences, while Caner and Okten (2013) examines how the bene…ts of publicly subsidized higher education
are distributed among students with di¤erent socioeconomic backgrounds.
13
These numbers are much higher in the social studies track. Overall, about 67 percent are retakers.

7

8

Medium
4,305
4,702
1,014
1,958
906
8,656
2,921
307
285
716
299
8,474
3,085
1,027
23
1,456
355
11,051
1,603
395
5,211
2,936
776
1,964

Low
6,567
2,538
136
245
710
8,658
1,009
26
32
471
42
3,847
3,506
2,801
4
304
534
9,354
2,350
410
3,790
906
219
2,521

423
245
2,137
2,790
2,203
675

104
3,249
331
4,789

847
5,569
1,705
352

2,702
2,756
973
1,615
427

1,320
2,392
812
3,463
486

High

Income
Funds for college
Family/rental inc/scholarship
Work
Loan
Other
High school city population
<10k
10-50k
50-250k
250-1000k
>1million
Missing
Family size
1-2 children
>3 children
Gender
Female
Male
High school category
Public
Private
Anatolian/Science
Other
Access to internet
Yes, at home
Yes, not at home
No
Missing
296
2,733
6,792
375

1,316
4,455
6,681
433

7,262
2,480
2,696
447

5,761
7,124

4,185
6,011
6,951
1,447
1,301
497

8,446
4,439

971
1,793
2,913
2,284
4,192
732

1,345
1,754
2,487
1,637
2,289
684
4,504
5,692

5,164
2,937
4,127
657

Medium

3,044
2,633
3,837
682

Low

2,698
2,911
2,666
198

3,326
2,028
2,973
146

3,921
4,552

6,999
1,474

263
766
1,602
1,374
4,108
360

4,096
1,894
2,002
481

High

Table 1: Demographic Composition of Exam Takers from the Science Track

Notes: Each cell reports the number of students who share the respective characteristic. Family income: low (< 250 YTL
monthly; approx. USD 375), medium (250–500 YTL), high (> 500 YTL).

Income
Father’s education
Primary or less
Middle/High school
2-year higher education
College/Master/Phd
Missing
Mother’s education
Primary or less
Middle/High school
2-year higher education
College/Master/Phd
Missing
Father’s occupation
Employer
Works for wages/salary
Self-employed
Unemployed/not in LF
Mother’s occupation
Employer
Works for wages/salary
Self-employed
Unemployed/not in LF
Expenditures on prep. schools
No prep school
Scholarship
Less than 1b
1-2 b
More than 2b
Missing

The value of retaking will also depend on the marginal return from obtaining a higher
score, for all socioeconomic backgrounds: if the value of doing better rises sharply at a
particular score level, then students whose scores are close to that level would gain more
from retaking and so retake more often. For example, if being placed at the worst school
is much better than not being placed, students just below this school’s cut-o¤ score should
tend to retake more often.
Table 2 shows the number of students in low, middle and high income groups for each
retaking attempt.14 The data suggests that the poor are more present among the multiple
time takers, and more so for later attempts. This is consistent with higher learning gains,
lower costs of retaking, or, to the extent that the poor also tend to be more present at lower
scores, that the value of a better school increases a lot at lower scores. In either case, this
preliminary evidence suggests that eliminating or restricting retaking may a¤ect the poor
more adversely than other groups.
Income
Low Medium High
# of students, by attempt
1
4,454
6,388
4,757
2
2,635
3,221
2,043
3
1,547
1,681
917
4
861
929
401
5+
699
666
355
Mean …rst-time score
126
132
140
Std.dev. of …rst-time score
23
23
23
Table 2: Number of Exam Takers by Attempt and Income

1.2

Learning and Selection into Retaking

In Section 3, we show how students’ability a¤ect retaking rates and how much scores improve
between attempts using the distributions of high school GPA and exam scores. Before we
do so, we take a look at the raw data on both performance measures.
Figure 1a shows the distribution of high school GPA across the number of attempts. As
is evident, the distribution moves to the left suggesting that weaker students face greater
14

Our de…nition of income groups splits the population into three roughly equal parts. Students in the
low income group report monthly household income of less than 250 Turkish lira (YTL). Households earning
more than 500 YTL are classi…ed as high-income ones. Those in between 250 YTL and 500 YTL are middleincome households. The socioeconomic data is relatively coarse (interval data is reported) and there is an
incentive to under report incomes as scholarship levels are related to income. We expect the order to be
more correct than the level reported and this is why we use this coarse grouping.

9

gains/lower costs of retaking and thus tend to retake more often. Figure 1b plots the empirical distributions of exam scores by number of attempts. The distribution of scores shifts
to the left as well, consistent with worse students selecting into retaking (movement of the
distribution to the left) dominating learning (movement of the distribution to the right).
Figure 1: Distributions of exam scores and high school GPA by attempt

0

20
1st

40
60
GPA by attempt

80

100

2nd

4th

5+

3rd

80

100
1st

(a) High school GPA

120
140
160
Exam score by attempt
2nd

3rd

4th

180
5+

(b) Exam scores

The numbers by themselves say little about the desirability of allowing unlimited retaking
or the gains from restricting it. To say anything in this context, we need to develop a model
of retaking that clearly lays out the costs and bene…ts involved. We need to estimate this
model’s parameters and use it to predict changes in student welfare in response to restrictions
on retaking. This is what we turn to next.

2

Modelling the Turkish System

We model retaking decisions in an optimal stopping rule framework. We make the following
key assumptions: i) students know their own ability though this is unobserved by the econometrician, ii) repeat takers may improve their score by taking a draw from a distribution
that is allowed to vary with observables, and iii) performance in high school and at the
entrance exam is partly determinate, coming from observables and unobserved ability, and
partly random. We take a factor approach where the factors are the random performance
shocks and the unobserved ability. In our model, ability will drive the correlation between
high school grade point average (GPA) and raw verbal and quantitative exam scores, once
the e¤ect of observables is netted out.
After setting up our baseline model of retaking, we add on a prior stage that incorporates
the choice of high school type and private tutoring. In this manner, we can incorporate the

10

e¤ects of banning retaking on e¤ort prior to taking the exam for the …rst time as banning
retaking could intensify the rat race in high school.

2.1

Modelling Performance

There is a mass of in…nitesimally small students. Each student has a high school GPA. As
these may re‡ect di¤erential grading practices across schools, GPAs are normalized to be
comparable using the school’s performance in the university entrance exam. Details on how
this is done are in the Appendix. We will postulate that the normalized high school GPA
for a given student15 is given by
g = X0

g

+

0

g

(1)

+ "0 :

where X is a vector of individual characteristics (laid out in Table 1) that do not vary in time
and are potentially correlated with the student’s ability. The remaining terms, 0 g + "0 ,
constitute the residual; = [ q ; v ]0 represents the unobserved part of quantitative and verbal
ability which a¤ects the student’s performance in all settings. The components of this ability
vector, q and v , are allowed to be correlated. If more able students are likely to do better
in both verbal and quantitative tasks, this correlation will be positive. is observed by the
student, but unobserved by the econometrician. The shock, "0 ; captures the randomness
associated with the GPA. The distributions of and "0 could depend on X; but are required
to be independent from each other conditional on X.
The subject scores on the tth attempt are
sjt = X

0

j

+

0

j

+

t
X

j

+ "jt

(2)

=2

where "jt is the corresponding error term for the student’s score in subject j (social studies,
science, Turkish and math) and attempt t.16 We assume that the "jt ’s are i.i.d. conditional
on X: j denotes the student’s draw of the learning shock. The learning shocks are assumed
to be independent over time though their distribution is allowed to depend on X and to vary
across attempts. Moreover, conditional on X; the ’s, ’s and "’s are independent from each
other. Note that learning shocks on the …rst attempt are by assumption zero as the exam is
taken for the …rst time at the end of high school.
Factor loadings, g and j , do not vary across students in a group or attempts. They do
15

We dispense with individual subscripts for ease of notation.
Note that and "jt di¤er in that the draw of is the same for a given student for the GPA as well as
exam scores, while the draws of the "0 and "jt ’s varies across them.
16

11

vary across income groups. The loadings in the math and Turkish equations are represented
by m = [1; 0]0 and T = [0; 1]0 respectively: in other words, quantitative ability a¤ects the
math score but not the Turkish score and vice versa for verbal ability.17
The placement score in the tth attempt, st , is a weighted sum of subject scores in that
same attempt and the high school GPA using weights w that are publicly observed.
st = wg g +

X

wj sjt

j

= wg g + X

0

X

wj

j

+

j

= wg g + X 0 +

0

X

wj

j

j

0

+

t
X

+

t
XX
j

=2

wj

j

+

X

wj "jt

j

(3)

+ "t

=2

where the aggregate transitory shock to the tth placement score is denoted as "t and
the (permanent) learning shocks in the tth attempt.18 We will abbreviate this to

t

captures

st = st + "t
where st is the permanent component of the placement score at attempt t:
We assume that before taking the exam for the …rst time a student knows his X, , and
"0 . Since the exam is taken for the …rst time at the end of high school and almost all high
school graduates take it, we assume that there are no costs of taking the exam for the …rst
time. Upon receiving his exam score, the student learns his "1 . Students put down their
preferences only after knowing their score in the exam. Knowing his X, , "0 and "1 ; the
student decides whether or not to retake the exam. If the student does not retake, he accepts
his most preferred outcome, which could be the option of not being placed. A student who
decides not to retake cannot change his decision later.
There is a retaking cost which is incurred upon deciding to retake. This captures the fact
that the exam is given only once a year and that preparation is costly. Second time takers
study for the exam and so learn their 2 : Upon learning their score in the second attempt,
they observe their "2 : A similar time line occurs for later attempts. The future is discounted
at a common rate of by all students.
17

This normalization is without loss of generality. See the Appendix for details.
In what follows, we assume that the variance of "t is una¤ected by t. However, note that the variance
of "t and "0 can di¤er. This makes sense: the GPA is accumulated over the year so it may have a smaller
transitory shock than the exam score.
18

12

2.2

Preferences and Utility Maximization

Admission decisions in Turkey are based on the placement score, st . As a result, those with
better scores will have more options available to them, which yields them higher utility.
The utility of accepting a placement with score s is denoted by u(s; X). As scores de…ne
allocations in equilibrium, the utility derived from a given s comes from being allocated to
the best seat that score allows. We let the utility vary by income group: for example, rich
students may value the best schools only a little bit more than the next tier as their future is
less dependent on the school they go to than that of a middle class student. As a result, some
social groups may be more determined to compete for seats in top programs than others.
More formally, let U (r; X) be the utility of having rank r: A higher rank is associated
with a higher score and a better placement.19 We assume there is a continuum of seats and
students so that there are no strategic elements involved. We assume that preferences are
identical across all agents and purely vertical. That is, all students agree on which is the best
school.20 Though this is a strong assumption, it may be less objectionable in the Turkish
context as there seems to a clear hierarchy of schools, at least within tiers. The top tier
includes the best public universities and private schools while bottom tier schools are those
o¤ering only two year programs and distance education. These assumptions provide us with
a natural setting to get started as modelling preferences as well as dynamics will complicate
things substantially.21
Though we assume all students have the same ordinal utility, the cardinal valuations,
U (r; X); are allowed to vary across students with di¤erent characteristics, X, i.e., income
levels. Given U (r; X) and the distribution of scores of non-retakers, G(s), one can derive
u(s; X) as22 :
u(s; X) = U (G(s); X):

(4)

Note that the worst student has a rank of 0 while the best one has a rank of 1.23 We
normalize the utilities obtained by the worst and best students to be zero (U (0; X) = 0)
and unity (U (1; X) = 1), respectively.
The distribution of scores, G(s), is an equilibrium outcome. A change in the rules of
19
Note that even in more general settings were preferences are not strictly vertical, the indirect utility is
increasing in r as a higher rank allows for more options.
20
We choose not to specify a richer structure with preference heterogeneity and placement into di¤erent
programs since our focus here is on retaking.
21
For example, is students retake based on both preference and performance shocks, retaking choices would
be much harder to estimate.
22
The mass of students who are placed is normalized to one in the steady state.
23
Being placed to the seat of the lowest rank may be interpreted as dropping out.

13

retaking will a¤ect G(s) and thus u(s; X). If, for example, we are in the current system with
unlimited, albeit costly, retaking and there are many students taking the exam at a given
point of time, then a score of s may get one a middling rank and a mid level placement.
However, if retaking is banned, then the number of students taking the exam will be much
lower and score improvements through learning will be ruled out. In this case, the same
score s may yield a far better rank and seat than the one obtained under the current system.
From equations (3), and (4) and the assumptions made above, the student’s well-being
in any attempt is entirely determined by the permanent component of the score, st , and the
corresponding transitory shock, "t . The student maximizes his utility by solving a dynamic
optimization problem. Let Vt (st ; "t ; X) be the value function for attempt t and V Ct (st ; X)
be the continuation payo¤. As usual:
(5)

Vt (st ; "t ; X) = maxfu(st + "t ; X); V Ct (st ; X)g
where
V Ct (st ; X) = E"t+1 ;

t+1jX

[Vt+1 (st +

t+1 ; "t+1 ; X)]

t (X):

denotes retaking costs, which may vary with observables (such as income group as
in our main econometric speci…cation) and the subscript in E"t+1 ; t+1jX emphasizes that the
distributions of " and can vary with X.
As de…ned above, st is the permanent component of the exam score. As the student’s
utility is non-decreasing in his score, he is better o¤ retaking when "t is below a threshold.
Thus, a student’s decision follows a simple rule: retake after the tth attempt if
t (X)

"t < et (st ; X)

(6)

That is, if the student’s score is well below his predictions (based on innate ability and
accumulated learning), he perceives his result as driven by bad luck and is likely to retake,
expecting to do better next time.
In our estimation, we obtain u(s; X), the utility function of being placed with score s
in the existing equilibrium. Score s places the student in a seat with rank r, which is the
best available seat after all students with a score above s are placed. Thus, r = G(s).
Consequently, the utility of obtaining a score s, u(s; X), is identical to the utility of being
placed in seat r, denoted by U (r; X). Since we know the distribution of scores of those
placed, G(s), we can back out U (r; X) from u(s; X).
At this point, it is worth laying out the de…nition of the equilibrium. This is a Nash
equilibrium in an anonymous game. Students have a common utility function U (r; X). Each

14

student makes retaking decisions rationally (i.e. equation (5) holds) taking as given the level
of competition as captured by G(s), the distribution of scores of those placed. In turn, G(s)
is the equilibrium outcome consistent with such behavior. The system is in steady state
if G(s) does not change over time since the number of students exiting has to be equal to
the number of students entering the system. Thus, the number of people graduating from
high school (all of whom take the exam) must equal the sum of those who are placed in a
university and those who choose to quit (take a seat at the bottom of the ranking). Out of
steady state, equilibrium consists of a path for G(s) and mass of agents over time, which is
what agents expect when they are making their decisions. In its turn, this path is generated
by the students’ behavior. Note that U (r; X) is the primitive utility, while u(s; X) is an
equilibrium outcome.

2.3

Schooling Choices Prior to the First Attempt

If retaking is restricted, the students may turn to other costly ways of competing in their
exam scores. For instance, students who used to go to public schools under the unlimited
retaking policy, may enrol into fee-paying high schools and pay for private tutoring after
retaking is banned. To explore this possibility, we augment our model with a stage that
describes the choice of high school type and additional tutoring.
Every student chooses between three broad categories of high schools: public, private and
Anatolian/science. The student also makes a decision whether to get private tutoring for
the entrance exam. In total, each student faces six options: public school with no tutoring,
public school with tutoring, private school with no tutoring, and so on.
Schooling choices are associated with costs, which capture the fees and e¤ort of keeping up with a more demanding curriculum. If the student chooses high school category
h (h = public; private; A=S) and prep school tutoring p (p = 0; 1), he faces the cost of
chp = chp (m; I) + cp + ch ! hp . The mean cost, chp (m; I), depends on the middle-school
GPA m, which takes three values in the data, and income group, I. Student-speci…c shocks
associated with school types and tutoring, cp and ch , are assumed to be jointly normal with
an unknown covariance matrix . Public school with no tutoring is set as the baseline option
so that cpub;0 = c0 = cpub = 0. Idiosyncratic shocks ! hp are independently drawn from the
type-1 Gumbel distribution.
Choosing a more expensive school type can a¤ect performance in the college exam as each
schooling option in‡uences the student’s expected score. The returns from schooling are also
allowed to depend on the student’s income. We assume that after conditioning on income,
the expected improvement does not vary across students. Thus, from the perspective of the

15

Baseline V ar["]
E(attempts) 1:19
1:48
E(utility)
0:32
0:29

4 V ar[ ]
1:57
0:29

4

2 U (r) =
1:03
1:03
0:33
0:66

p

r

+10% top seats
1:21
0:41

Table 3: Simulated Comparative Statics
student in middle school deciding on e¤ort, the 1st-time choice-speci…c placement score (for
a given income group) is
s1;hp = X00 0 + h;p hp dhp + " 1
(7)
where dhp is the set of dummies for the six schooling options and X0i are the controls observed
by the student in the middle school (family size, own gender, parent education, etc. but not
high school type). The shock " 1 re‡ects the uncertainty about the future score; its variance
is allowed to depend on student’s income and middle-school GPA.
Scores are valued by the students in so much as they improve chances of admission to
selective colleges. By de…nition, the permanent component of the score at the …rst attempt,
s1 = s1;hp "1 : Hence, at the end of middle school, the student maximizes the following
objective function
max a(I)E"
h;p

1 "1 jX0 ;m;I

[V1 (s1;hp

"1 ; "1 )]

chp (m; I)

cp

ch + ! hp

(8)

with respect to h and p, where V1 is the attempt 1 value function de…ned in equation (5).
Parameter a depends on income and captures the importance of expected placement payo¤s
relative to the costs incurred in high school.

2.4

Some Comparative Statics

In this section, we simulate a simpli…ed version of the model to develop some intuition. We
assume that initial ability (i.e. noise-free placement score in the …rst attempt, s1 ) is drawn
from a normal distribution, N [130; 25]; with the mean and the standard deviation close
to those of the actual ÖSS-SAY score used to place students in the science track. In the
baseline speci…cation, we let = 0:9; = 0:05; the structural utility function take a constant
relative risk aversion (CRRA) form, U (r) = r2 . The learning shocks are also normal with
E[ ] = 0 and V ar[ ] = 150 in attempts 2 through 4, and with no further learning in later
attempts. We set the variance of noise in the score equation to be the same in all attempts
and V ar["] = 25:
In columns 3 and 4 of Table 3, we quadruple the variance of " and of respectively. We
see that as this happens, the expected number of attempts rises, but expected utility falls.
16

The former makes sense as an increase in randomness makes people who fare badly in a given
attempt more likely to retake. However, the negative externality retakers in‡ict on others
makes expected utility fall when retaking rises. In column 5, we double retaking costs and
this reduces retaking while raising expected utility. This suggests that policies that reduce
retaking costs, such as more frequent exams, may be a bad idea. In column 6, we make
agents risk averse rather than risk loving. As expected, this reduces the number of retakes.
In column 7, we increase the number of seats at the top school by 10%. This increases the
expected number of retakes as the prize from retaking becomes more accessible, and raises
the expected utility. Note that the seemingly reasonable response of increasing seats as a
response to a backlog of students might actually increase the backlog.
Can banning retaking reduce welfare under certain circumstances? Are the negative
spillovers associated with retaking enough so as to have banning retaking raise expected
welfare or welfare of most agents? If agents are homogeneous, then it can be shown (see
Krishna, Lychagin, and Tarasov, 2015) that banning retaking must raise welfare. But when
agents are heterogeneous in terms of their initial ability, this result no longer holds. The
simulations suggest that risk loving agents will tend to want to retake. Banning retaking
should result in losses for them, but gains for the more risk averse agents who do not
want to retake and bear the burden of the negative externality in‡icted by retakers. In
our baseline case, most students gain from banning retaking as in Figure 2a below. In
an alternative speci…cation that reduces retaking costs and makes agents more risk loving,
= 0:01, U (r) = r8 ; retaking is even more attractive. In this case, banning retaking results
in the three highest score deciles gaining, but the majority loses as shown in Figure 2b. The
direct e¤ect of banning retaking is negative and more so for those who tend to retake more
often. There is also a general equilibrium e¤ect of banning retaking which is positive as
competitive pressures are reduced. The probability of retaking falls with ability. Banning
retaking insulates top students from competitive pressures and raises their welfare while
reducing welfare for lower ability students, who were more likely to retake. This illustrates
the redistributional aspects of such a reform: the majority may in fact prefer unlimited
retaking though the losses of the majority are less than the gains of the minority.24
24

If, in addition to heterogeneity in agents and schools, there are gains from matching better agents to
better schools, retaking may help improve the match. In this environment, banning retaking can reduce
aggregate welfare.

17

Figure 2: Preventing Retaking: Welfare Consequences

Gain in the expected payoff

Gain in the expected payoff

0.04

0.02

0.06
0.04
0.02
0
−0.02

0
1

2

3

4
5
6
7
8
Score decile at attempt 1

9

10

1

(a) Baseline Case

3

2

3

4
5
6
7
8
Score decile at attempt 1

9

10

(b) Risk Loving Agents

Identi…cation

Our goal is to estimate the key structural parameters of the model by income group. We
estimate the model from the viewpoint of someone taking the exam for the …rst time. There
are three steps. In step 1, we use standard techniques from the literature on factor models
to obtain the distributions of shocks to the high school GPA and to the scores as well as
the distribution of unobserved innate abilities (denoted by f"0 , f"t , and f , respectively). In
this stage, we also obtain factor loadings and the coe¢ cients on X in the GPA and score
equations given by (1) and (3). For simplicity, we assume that f , f"0 , and f"t 8t are normal
which makes their estimation straightforward.25 In step 2, we estimate the selection cuto¤s
de…ned in equation (6) and the distributions of the learning shocks, t : Step 3 deals with
the dynamic component; in this step, we estimate the costs of retaking, ; and the utility
function de…ned in equation (4). We discuss the intuition behind each step below.26
Step 1:
As practically every high school senior takes the university entrance exam, the sub-sample
of …rst time takers is free of selection. By imposing normality on the distributions of "0 ; "t
8t, and , we can easily estimate the distributions of "0 ,"t 8t, and as well as g ; j 8j, g ;
and j 8j from the …ve-equation system de…ned by (1) and (2) as outlined below.
As 0 g + "0 is de…ned as the residual uncorrelated with observables, g comes from
estimating equation (1) as a linear model in the sub sample of …rst time takers. Similarly,
0
j + "j1 are the residuals from the subject score equations for …rst time takers as there
25

In principle, the densities f , f"0 , and f"t could be non parametrically identi…ed together with the factor
loadings as in Bonhomme and Robin (2009) or Freyberger (2013).
26
Technical details can be found in the online appendix.

18

is no learning among them. Note that the correlation between error terms across the …ve
performance equations is driven only by students’unobservables. The variance covariance
matrix for these residuals is estimated by using the sample analogues. These then give a
system of equations that let us estimate the factor loadings, (the 0 s), the variances of "0 ; "j1
8t, and the variance-covariance matrix of the ’s.
Step 2:
Disentangling selection from learning is impossible relying only cross sectional data: we
cannot compare the exam score distributions of …rst time takers to those of repeat takers
and allocate the di¤erence to learning and selection. If we had panel data these limitations
would not apply.
Given our data constraints, we use a novel approach that relies on the fact that GPA
is not a¤ected by retaking, which implies that the GPA distribution of repeat takers di¤ers
from that of …rst time takers only because of selection. The distribution of exam scores of
repeat takers, in contrast, is a¤ected by both selection and learning. Thus, by comparing
the distributions of scores and GPAs across attempts, we are able to distinguish learning
from selection. We assume steady state so that second time takers in a given year can be
thought of as identical to retakers from today’s cohort of …rst time takers and so on.
Below we heuristically depict how selection and learning operate. In Figure 3a, we have
the high school GPA and the permanent component of the placement score on the two axes
for students with given observables, X. The contour curves of the joint density function are
plotted for the population of …rst time takers as the dotted curves. The marginal distributions
are depicted at the top and on the sides of the box again by dotted curves. The probability
of retaking as a function of the permanent component of the placement score is given by the
decision rule, i.e., Pr("1 < e1 (s1 ; X)) = F"1 (e1 (s1 ; X)):
Assume for illustrative purposes only, that the above decision rule takes a very special
form: all those with s1
s1 retake, while those above s1 do not. This is shown below by
truncating the joint distribution and the marginal densities as depicted by the solid curves
in Figure 3a. Again, for illustrative purposes only, suppose that there is no selection and
learning is positive and homogeneous for all agents who retake. Then learning just moves
scores to the right as depicted by the solid lines in Figure 3b. Putting the two e¤ects together
in Figure 3c shows how both learning and selection operate under these special assumptions.
Note that learning shifts the distribution of scores to the right but does not a¤ect the high
school GPA, while retaking cuts part of the distribution o¤.
In contrast to the examples above, we …nd that, in the data, the probability of retaking
does not decline sharply and that learning is not homogeneous. This complicates the picture
as the density functions would shift to the left while the movement to the right due to
19

High school GPA

High school GPA

Figure 3: Identifying learning and selection from scores and GPA

Placement score, permanent part

Placement score, permanent part

(b) Learning, no selection

High school GPA

(a) Selection, no learning

Placement score, permanent part

(c) Learning and selection
learning would be far from uniform. Nevertheless, we can use the change in the distribution
of g across attempts to get a handle on the selection rule. Once we have the selection rule,
we can project it on to the score distributions and obtain learning as the unaccounted part
of the movement in the distribution of scores. A similar argument applies to third versus
second time takers, and so on. The initiated reader will notice that what we are doing is
equivalent to the …rst step of Hotz-Miller (1993)’s approach. In particular, we directly infer
the strategies that generated the data without solving the dynamic optimization problem
itself.
The retaking threshold, et (:); and the distribution of learning shocks, f ; are estimated
via semi parametric GMM by matching the number of retakers predicted by the model
to data for subsets of the GPA, placement scores, and income groups. For each income
group and number of attempts, the retaking threshold is approximated by piecewise linear
functions of s on a three point grid which is speci…c to each group. Among the group of poor
students in their second attempt for example, the three points in the grid are the 20th and
20

the 80th percentiles of s within that group as well as the mean of those two scores so that
the grid is regular. Similar grids are constructed for each income and number of attempts
combination. Since the distributions of learning shocks are assumed to be normal, we adjust
the inherited distribution of GPAs and scores according to the parameterized selection rule
and parameterized distributions of the learning shocks within each relevant group.
We de…ne cells = I
g
s , where I denotes income, which can be low, middle, or
high. GPAs and scores are broken down into three groups as well, leaving us with 27 cells
in total. For each student who takes the exam t times, we use the retaking threshold and
distribution of learning shocks hypothesized to …nd the probability that he ends up in cell
2
in attempt t + 1, sum this probability over all t time takers, and match this to the
actual number of (t + 1) takers who happen to be in in the data. We do so for all cells and
all attempts which gives us (27 4) = 108 moments to match. We choose the parameters
that give us the best match for these moments using unitary weights.
For example, looking at the GPA and score distributions of tth time takers in the low
income group, we choose the vector eLt (s1 ); eLt (s2 ); eLt (s3 ); t+1 ; 2 t+1 that moves the distributions so as to best match the data on the GPA and score distributions of t + 1 time
takers. In our estimation, we assume there is no learning after attempt 4. As a result,
everything is stationary after then and thus the decision rule remains the same from then
on.
Step 3:
The utility function is parameterized in a ‡exible manner as:
u(s; X) =

X
j

s
j

sj
h

;

j

0;

X

j

=1

j

The parameters (the 0 s) of the utility function are allowed to di¤er by income group.
P
The normalization of j j = 1 ensures that the utility at s = 1 is unity. As (:) is
increasing in s; constraining j
0 ensures that u(s) non decreasing. The larger is h the
smoother is the function. We set h = 15 and the number of grid points to 10.
Given a parameter vector, ( ; ); and the estimate of the selection threshold obtained in
step 2, we calculate the continuation values for every s; X; and number of attempts, t which
was denoted by V Ct (st ; X). Knowing the retaking threshold fet (s; X)g4t=1 and the joint
distribution of shocks ; and f"t g1
t=0 , one can …nd the continuation value V Ct (s; X; ) for
any values of , retaking costs ; discount factor ; s and X.27 This could be done by either
simulating these continuation values or by integrating over the future shocks numerically
and thus obtaining them. We choose to use the latter method. Once the continuation values
27

This approach is based on the insights in Hotz and Miller (1993).

21

are known, one can estimate ( , ) by matching the predicted probabilities of retaking with
the actual probabilities implied by the decision rule.
Recall that the agent chooses to retake when he is better o¤ doing so. That is
Vt (st ; "t ; X) = maxfu(st + "t ; X); V Ct (st ; X)g:
Thus, the probability of retaking is the same as the probability of u(st + "t ; X) <
V Ct (st ; X): This gives us the threshold for "t ; e~t (st ; X), under which a student chooses
to retake. We use this threshold e~t (st ; X) in exactly the same manner as we used e(:) in
the second stage, except that it is slightly more complicated as now e(:) is a function of
structural parameters, not a completely ‡exible unknown.
For each student who takes the exam t times, we use the model to …nd the probability
that he ends up in cell 2 in attempt t + 1, sum this probability over all t time takers
and match this to the actual number of (t + 1) takers who happen to be in in the data.
We estimate the vector ( , ) using the same 108 moments to match, giving them all the
same weight.
The economics behind the identi…cation of the utility is as follows: if the marginal utility
of a higher score increases sharply at s; then students close to s will be risk loving and hence
tend to want to retake the exam more than students with s where utility of the score is less
convex. Thus, the observed retaking rates pins down the curvature of the utility function.
Note that the utility level cannot be interpreted as a dollar value or compared across income
groups as it gives the utility of a particular score relative to the utility of the very best seat.
We allow to vary by income and retaking costs to vary by number of attempts and income.
As retaking costs are invariant across agents in a particular attempt and income group, they
pin down a common e¤ect. Di¤erences in the probabilities of retaking across attempts help
to pin down how retaking costs vary by attempt. We do not attempt to estimate as it is
well known that it is hard to identify in such settings (see Magnac and Thesmar, 2002) and
we set it at 0:9.

4
4.1

Estimation Results
Results From Step 1

In step 1, we estimate how observables are correlated with performance measures such as
the GPA and the four subject exam scores in the ÖSS. We also estimate the variance of the
transient shocks to these scores ("’s), the factor loadings ( 0 ), and the variance covariance
matrix of unobserved ability ( ). We obtain theses estimates for each income group and
22

Income
Low
Middle
High

Observables, X
49%
47%
43%

Unobserved ability,
45%
47%
51%

Noise, "1
6%
6%
6%

Table 4: Contribution of Observables and Shocks
report them in Tables 5 and 6 below.
The key features of the estimates are the following. First, the estimates make sense
overall. Recall that we have normalized scores so that the loading on quantitative (verbal)
ability is zero (one) for the Turkish score. Similarly, quantitative (verbal) ability has a unity
(zero) weight in the Math score equation. Our results indicate that the loading on the
quantitative portion of ability for the science score, for example, is higher than for the social
studies and vice versa for verbal ability. We also …nd that the variance covariance matrix
for has more variance in q than in v. The covariance between q and v is positive and
signi…cant implying that students who are good at Math also tend to be good at Turkish.
It is worth noting that while factors such as parents’occupation, income, and education
do seem to positively correlate with performance measures, the size of the coe¢ cients tends
to be small. In general, they explain about 10% of a standard deviation.28 In contrast, the
coe¢ cients on prep school expenditure and school type are much higher.
The student’s gender also seems to be associated with performance: women do better
while in high school but men catch up and surpass them in all subjects but Turkish in the
entrance exam. In Turkish, women score higher and this e¤ect is quite large, roughly 1/3
of a standard deviation. These results are stable across income groups: when we split the
sample by income and run the regressions separately for each income group, we …nd the
same patterns.
Table 4 summarizes the explained variance that comes from observables, unobserved
ability, and noise. These numbers are relatively stable across income groups with noise
contributing only about 6% and observables and unobserved ability being roughly equally
important. The low contribution of noise suggests that retaking in response to these shocks
plays a limited role.

28
This suggests that the raw correlation between income and performance often seen in the data is being
captured by our other controls.

23

24

GPA

M

Low
S
1.08
1.06
1.16

SS

-1.32
-1.17
-1.02
0.27
0.69
0.98
0.26

0.23
1.65
2.34
-1.36

1.11
1.08
0.87

GPA

-0.22
-2.74
-1.57

0.25
0.35
0.14

T

0.63
1.65
2.04
0.79

-4.38
-4.06
-3.66

2.02
2.20
1.96

M

0.41
1.21
2.17
0.56

-2.59
-1.64
-1.81

2.14
1.93
1.94

Middle
S

0.13
0.15
1.24
0.54

-4.05
-3.02
-3.07

0.92
0.10
0.55

SS

-0.21
0.43
1.46
-0.83

1.09
0.54
1.56

-0.48
-0.97
-0.87

T

-0.45
0.25
0.61
-0.60

1.46
1.96
1.92

0.80
0.29
0.20

GPA

-0.80
0.02
-0.30
0.39
-0.70
-0.68
-1.58
-1.83
-0.79
– 1%. Standard errors

-0.21
1.70
1.94
1.01

0.39
1.42
2.18
-0.08

2.33
1.40
3.00

1.09
1.42
0.91

T

-1.06
0.78
-0.13
* – 5%, **

0.37
0.98
2.05
0.91

-0.67
0.06
1.22
-0.65

1.92
1.06
1.89

1.74
1.64
2.90

SS

-0.99
0.50
1.13
1.66

-0.11
1.21
2.04
-1.38

1.94
2.84
1.94

1.65
1.08
0.78

High
S

-0.56
0.88
1.03
2.55

-1.06
0.10
0.99
-2.74

2.31
3.81
2.72

1.20
0.23
-0.25

M

Table 5: Estimates of the GPA and the Score Equations (Continued on the Next Page)

are obtained by bootstrapping (15,000 bootstrap samples used).

Middle/High school
-0.37
-0.12
-0.47
-0.15
0.82
-0.36
-0.88
-0.51
-0.38
0.32
-0.44
2-year higher education
-1.32
0.26
-3.54
0.27
3.36
0.13
-0.14
0.50
0.67
2.18
0.60
College/Master/Phd
-2.08
-3.87
-1.00
-0.79
0.21
-0.14
-1.31
-0.49
0.40
0.40
0.81
Missing
0.53
0.68
-0.38
1.17
1.68
-0.47
-0.94
-0.43
-1.33
1.06
0.68
Likely source of income in college (base category – family, rental income or scholarship)
Work
-0.55
-1.34
-1.25
-0.64
-0.96
-0.47
-0.43
-0.96
-0.78
-0.88
-0.69
Loan
-0.03
0.36
0.20
-0.02
-0.01
0.18
0.69
0.32
-0.77
-0.51
0.11
Other
-0.60
-0.51
-0.39
0.08
-0.54
-0.75
-0.64
-1.38
-0.67
-0.59
-0.77
Column titles: GPA – high school GPA, M – math score, S – science score, SS – social sciences score, T – Turkish score. Signi…cance levels:

Works for wages/salary
3.88
0.73
2.53
1.53
Self-employed
2.47
-1.19
0.57
0.24
Unemployed/not in LF
3.11
0.26
1.55
0.56
Father’s education (base category – primary school or lower level)
Middle/High school
-0.11
0.09
0.02
0.49
2-year higher education
-0.15
0.25
1.11
0.82
College/Master/Phd
0.88
1.85
2.06
2.83
Missing
-0.37
-0.72
-0.09
-1.32
Mother’s education (base category – primary school or lower level)

Father’s occupation (base category – employer)
Works for wages/salary
-0.55
0.10
0.51
Self-employed
-0.58
0.30
0.50
Unemployed/not in LF
-0.74
0.16
0.52
Mother’s occupation (base category – employer)

Income
Outcome variable

25

0.56
0.86
0.15

1.60
2.14
1.48

Low

0.49
0.26
-0.53

S
-0.26
-1.59
-2.63

SS
0.38
-0.56
-1.63

T
0.06
0.48
0.28

GPA
-0.02
0.64
-0.39

M

1.00
0.00

4.54
-0.58

7.22
13.0
-1.20

0.70
0.34

3.85
-0.20

6.40
12.9
-0.83

-0.14
1.48

1.90
-0.64

2.63
7.99
1.18

0.00
1.00

-4.85
-0.77

4.59
9.25
0.52

0.32
0.18

-1.39
-0.03

2.47
6.20
0.51

1.00
0.00

3.02
-0.16

6.88
13.6
1.50

0.75
0.35

2.91
-0.31

-0.28
1.79

2.24
-0.54

3.04
9.90
3.07

11.6
1.77
0.79
1.65
0.39

16.2
6.84
6.16
6.68
0.97
5.24
13.1
1.32

0.05
2.36
2.25
3.62
1.52

-0.63
-1.28
-1.24

SS

0.97
3.19
2.91
3.68
1.58

0.49
0.47
0.07

Middle
S

0.00
1.00

-4.88
-1.03

5.30
10.9
3.72

11.1
3.15
2.58
3.06
0.05

0.23
1.93
2.61
3.94
1.43

-0.33
-0.45
-1.50

T

0.32
0.19

-1.82
-0.33

3.18
6.75
0.79

6.32
1.74
0.41
0.68
-0.48

-0.40
0.15
0.08
0.80
-0.07

-0.40
-0.58
-1.90

GPA

1.00
0.00

2.18
-0.59

6.46
13.8
1.68

14.0
6.89
4.70
5.62
-1.13

0.33
2.02
2.37
3.80
2.14

-0.74
-1.31
-3.74

M

High

0.80
0.37

2.15
-0.31

5.30
13.6
1.91

16.3
5.95
3.49
3.98
-0.43

0.25
1.62
1.93
3.51
1.10

-0.71
-1.67
-3.53

S

-0.48
2.24

2.49
-0.48

3.90
9.85
4.51

12.9
0.44
-1.65
-1.14
-0.72

-1.29
0.58
0.82
3.61
1.07

-0.94
-2.00
-2.73

SS

0.00
1.00

-4.19
-1.20

6.02
10.5
5.31

11.1
2.43
1.09
2.14
-0.08

-0.92
1.14
1.36
3.24
1.30

-0.88
-1.75
-3.45

T

Table 6: Estimates of the GPA and the Score Equations.

are obtained by bootstrapping (15,000 bootstrap samples used).

11.3
10.6
25.5
20.2
50.9
10.2
12.5
25.3
19.5
55.0
9.10
12.3
24.0
16.6
53.8
Column titles: GPA – high school GPA, M – math score, S – science score, SS – social sciences score, T – Turkish score. Signi…cance levels: * – 5%, ** – 1%. Standard errors

on 1 (quant. ability)
on 2 (verbal ability)
2

Factor loadings

0.31
0.19

-0.68
0.02

Male

>3 kids in the family

2.77
5.64
-0.29

Private
Anatolian/Science
Other

Population in the city where the high school is located (base category – less than 10,000)
10-50k
-0.69
0.20
-0.70
-1.00
-0.60
-0.76
1.77
50-250k
-0.52
1.67
0.91
1.06
1.76
-0.23
4.16
250-1000k
-0.35
2.08
1.19
1.04
1.28
-0.18
3.85
>1 million
-0.19
3.15
1.81
2.32
2.36
0.31
5.01
Missing
-0.99
0.37
-0.54
-0.49
-0.34
-1.04
1.91
Prep. school expenditures (base – did not attend prep. schools)
Scholarship
5.27
12.2
12.2
7.81
7.46
6.77
15.2
Less than 1b
2.15
7.75
6.27
1.64
3.09
2.27
7.73
1-2 b
2.14
8.13
5.89
1.45
3.47
1.87
7.77
More than 2b
1.10
5.46
5.59
1.60
4.01
1.71
7.48
Missing
-0.37
-0.05
0.25
0.90
0.31
0.04
0.77
High school type (base – public school)

Yes, not at home
No
Missing

Income
Outcome variable
GPA
M
Internet access (base category – at home)

Figure 4: Expected Cumulative Learning Shocks
Expected cumulative score improvement, points

16
14
12
10
8
6
4
2
0
1

4.2

Low-income
Middle
High

1.5

2

2.5
Attempt

3

3.5

4

Results in Step 2

In step 2, we estimate the distribution of learning shocks. The mean learning estimates are
reported in Figure 4; dashed lines depict 95% con…dence bounds obtained by bootstrapping.
Students from the high-income families lose ground to the other two groups; students in
the middle income group improve the most. This is roughly in line with Frisancho et. al
(2013) which used a di¤erent approach to deal with selection. Marginal learning (of about 8
points) is largest in the second attempt. It is quite large in magnitude as it is roughly a third
of a standard deviation of the score. Marginal learning falls to 1.58 and 1.05 in the third and
fourth attempt. To place these numbers into context, we can compare them to the di¤erence
in average scores in private schools versus public schools. Cumulative learning after three
retakes is roughly of the same magnitude as the e¤ect of graduating from a private school.
Di¤erences in learning gains across income groups suggests that a ban on retaking would
have distributional consequences; as the rich learn less when retaking, they are the ones who
lose the least from the ban.
We also …nd that there is considerable variance in the learning shocks, which suggests
that students are prone to retake as learning becomes a lottery. Students who are close
to getting into a prestigious college may thus retake on the o¤ chance of getting in. The
standard deviation of learning shocks is about 15, roughly three times the standard deviation
of the transitory shock in the placement score.

26

Figure 5: Retaking Costs by Attempt

Costs of retaking, relative to the max payoff

0.06
Low-income
Middle
High

0.04

0.02

0

-0.02

-0.04

-0.06

-0.08

1

2

3

4

Attempt

4.3

Results in Step 3

Finally, in step 3 we estimate the utility function and the retaking costs. Recall that the
best placement is normalized to unity and the worst to zero. Retaking costs, depicted in
Figure 5, are larger for the …rst retaking attempt than for later ones, where they are not
statistically di¤erent from zero on average. Retaking costs in the …rst retaking attempt
correspond to roughly 7.5% of the utility of an average placement. Surprisingly, retaking
costs are not signi…cantly di¤erent across income groups. Note that retaking costs could be
monetary and/or psychic. For example, these costs could be higher on the …rst retake due
to a stigma attached to retaking in itself.
The utility function (depicted in Figure 6) is increasing in the placement. Note that,
at the top, the marginal bene…t of a higher score is low for the rich, but high for the less
well-o¤. This makes the poor more risk loving in this region. This could be explained by the
rich caring less about getting into the best schools. Since their future success depends less
on their exam performance due to better outside options (e.g. starting a business or joining
the family …rm) when compared to the poor, students who are better-o¤ bene…t little from
moving from an already highly-ranked placement to a marginally better one.

4.4

Schooling Choices

We estimate parameters associated with schooling choices independently for the three income
groups. We obtain the returns from schooling hp from equation (7) via OLS. As common in
27

Figure 6: Estimated Utility by Income Group
1
0.9

Utility from placement

0.8
0.7
0.6
0.5
0.4
0.3
0.2
Low-income
Middle
High

0.1
0
0

0.2

0.4
0.6
Quality of the seat

0.8

1

such models, omitted ability bias may be a¤ecting our results: for example, if better students
choose prep schools, the estimates of returns from extra tutoring will be upward-biased.
However, controlling for the middle school GPA should address the problem, to the extent
that the GPA captures the unobserved ability. Returns from attending Anatolian/science
schools may still be biased as these schools use entrance exams to select students with highest
ability.
Table 7 reports the estimates of schooling returns, hp ; in equation (7), relative to those
from going to public school and taking no extra tutoring. The estimates are almost always
signi…cantly di¤erent from zero and their ranking makes sense. Students from Anatolian
and science schools outperform private school students, who in turn get higher scores than
public school graduates. Extra tutoring in prep schools is also associated with higher 1st
time scores, irrespective of initial ability and high school choice. This is in line with anecdotal
evidence that prep schools target knowledge speci…c to the entrance exam as even students
going to selective Anatolian/Science schools seem to gain from prep schools.
Estimates of the cost are obtained by using equation (8). Given our distributional assumptions, this model of choice boils down to a random intercept logit (see Train (2009)).
We substitute the estimates of the value function, V1 , obtained in step 3, and estimate the
cost parameters using simulated maximum likelihood. Relative costs of various schooling
options are reported in Table 7. The estimates are noisy, but the general pattern is clear:
schooling options that involve more e¤ort tend to be associated with higher gains and tend

28

Income
Low
Middle
High
Middle school GPA A
B
C
A
B
C
A
B
C
Gains in score
Anatolian
28.9
27.5
22.9
27.8
35.5
34.2
47.4
30.8
16.4
(no prep)
(2.9)
(2.7)
(4.6)
(3.4)
(3.5)
(9.4)
(5.4)
(8.8)
(6.5)
Anatolian
42.6
43.7
38.7
44.1
43.7
40
45.9
42.5
38.9
(prep)
(1.3)
(1.5)
(4.1)
(1.4)
(1.2)
(3.0)
(3.4)
(2.0)
(3.7)
Private,
11
12.1
21.3
5.21
15.8
30.8
16.9
10.6
16.9
(no prep)
(2.0)
(2.8)
(10.0) (2.2)
(2.3)
(11.2) (5.4)
(3.5)
(10.7)
Private,
25.2
27
34.3
23.3
24.8
16.3
25.6
25.4
26.1
(prep)
(1.4)
(1.8)
(6.5)
(1.5)
(1.3)
(6.6)
(3.5)
(2.1)
(4.1)
Public,
18
14.1
13.3
18.2
13.9
13.6
19.7
11.7
12.3
(prep)
(1.5)
(1.1)
(1.8)
(1.6)
(1.0)
(2.1)
(3.7)
(1.9)
(3.5)
Costs (signi…cant at the 1% level — in bold)
Anatolian
0.287 0.292 0.361 0.229 0.298
0.292
0.387 0.262 0.177
(no prep)
(2.07) (3.01) (5.50) (0.08) (0.17) (0.22) (0.18) (1.09) (1.92)
Anatolian
0.27
0.331 0.351 0.296 0.306 0.281 0.291 0.272 0.248
(prep)
(0.49) (1.09) (2.63) (0.09) (0.02) (0.04) (1.77) (1.11) (0.65)
Private,
0.121 0.197 0.316 0.050
0.143
0.267
0.133 0.088 0.146
(no prep)
(1.23) (2.83) (4.38) (0.06) (0.11) (0.30) (0.20) (0.57) (0.91)
Private,
0.159 0.234 0.382 0.144
0.173 0.148
0.138 0.143 0.151
(prep)
(0.21) (1.58) (4.69) (0.07) (0.03) (0.16) (1.37) (0.77) (0.42)
Public,
0.112 0.085 0.085 0.115 0.076
0.075 0.112 0.039 0.043
(prep)
(0.13) (0.24) (0.62) (0.04) (0.04) (0.02) (0.80) (0.87) (0.73)
Bootstrapped standard errors are in parentheses. Cost parameters signi…cant at the 1% level are bolded.
All gains and costs are relative to the baseline option: public school with no tutoring. Costs are rescaled to
be in the same units as the placement payo¤. Middle school GPA controls for the student’s initial ability:
A is the highest, C is the lowest.

Table 7: Schooling Choices: Gains and Costs.

29

to be more costly. Given that, by its de…nition, the placement payo¤ is between zero and
one, these schooling costs are very high. This is, again, in line with anecdotal evidence that
high school students in Turkey who compete for seats in top colleges are under enormous
pressure. Overall, choices made during the high school period have a much higher impact
on placement scores and the costs incurred in the process than retaking decisions.

5

Counterfactuals

We conduct a number of counterfactuals below, all aimed at reducing retaking. Our objective
is to predict the consequences of various reforms so as to understand the trade-o¤s involved
and the distributional e¤ects that each of them may entail. In this part we do not incorporate
e¤ort choices. Later on, in Section 5.2, we use the extended model that allows for e¤ort to
be put in before the …rst attempt in the form of schooling choices and consider only a ban
on retaking. Note, this is the only counterfactual we can consider that is not subject to the
Lucas critique. As shown, our extended model delivers very similar results as the base one.
We compare the no-retaking scenario (labeled as 1 attempt in Table 8) and the scenario
where a maximum of two attempts is allowed to the current system. We also look at the
consequences of penalizing retakers by reducing their scores by 5% (labeled as 5% penalty).
Finally, we experiment with doubling the weight on GPA (column x2 GPA) in the placement
process. We look at the trade-o¤ between under placement and costs of retaking. On the one
hand, discouraging retaking may result in students being mismatched with schools in terms
of their ability. In settings where there are social bene…ts from matching better students
with better schools, discouraging retaking may have signi…cant costs. On the other hand,
retaking is costly both in terms of direct costs incurred by students, as well as in terms of
their e¤ect in equilibrium. Recall that the private bene…t from retaking exceeds the social
bene…t so that retaking is excessive. As more people retake, cuto¤ scores for admission are
bound to be higher, both because of the larger numbers involved and because of learning
between attempts.
Payo¤s are de…ned as the expected utility of placement less costs of retaking. Table 8
shows that under the current system payo¤s are increasing in income. This comes from
higher-income students tending to have higher scores and therefore better placements. In
addition, they tend to retake less often which reduces their costs. As we look across policies,
it becomes apparent that preventing retaking results in higher welfare than any other policy
for each income group. The reason for this is that retaking is excessive.
We also look at how limiting retaking a¤ects the ability of the system to match students
with seats. One way to look at mismatch is to focus at the fraction of underplaced students
30

Income
Current 1 attempt 2 attempts 5% penalty x2 GPA
Payo¤
low
0.27
0.31
0.29
0.30
0.28
Payo¤
medium 0.38
0.42
0.40
0.41
0.39
Payo¤
high
0.55
0.59
0.57
0.59
0.56
# of attempts low
2.28
1.00
1.40
1.52
1.97
# of attempts medium 1.94
1.00
1.35
1.38
1.69
# of attempts high
1.88
1.00
1.30
1.37
1.65
Ability before attempt 1
% underplaced low
32.82
15.55
23.18
21.45
26.13
% underplaced middle
35.10
16.92
25.61
22.16
28.63
% underplaced high
41.94
16.74
29.83
21.75
32.71
Ability at placement
% underplaced low
8.44
15.55
12.65
13.65
6.03
% underplaced middle
10.24
16.92
12.81
16.34
8.03
% underplaced high
12.61
16.74
13.19
15.78
9.92
Policies: current –unlimited retaking, 1 attempt max, 2 attempts max, 5% penalty after attempt 1, the
weight on GPA is doubled. We use endogenous admission cuto¤s in all counterfactuals.

Table 8: Policy Experiments.
as it is the underplaced who tend to retake. We de…ne underplacement by comparing the
quality of seat to initial ability as well as ability at placement. Initial ability and ability
at placement are proxied by the permanent component of the placement score in the …rst
attempt and at the time of placement, respectively.
Rows 8-10 present the fraction of underplaced students (where underplacement is de…ned
as being placed 5% below initial ability)29 . Table 8 shows that, irrespective of income,
limiting retaking reduces underplacement in all the policy experiments we look at. This
is counter to what intuition would suggest: in the absence of learning the underplaced
would retake until they get seats comparable to their ability ranking. However, learning
shocks distort the initial ranking and these distortions accumulate over time. Consequently,
retaking raises mismatch relative to initial ability.
To take learning into account, we consider another de…nition of underplacement. In
rows 11-13 we de…ne it relative to ability at placement rather than initial ability. With this
de…nition, limiting retaking raises underplacement as expected.
29

Changing this number to 20% or 1% results in the same pattern: there is minimum mismatch in column
2, followed by column 4, followed by 3 and 5, followed by 1.

31

Figure 7: Gains From Banning Retaking: Partial Equilibrium

Expected gains (relative to the max payoff)

0.01
0
-0.01
-0.02
-0.03
-0.04
-0.05
-0.06
-0.07

-0.09

5.1

Low-income
Middle
High

-0.08
1

2

3
4
5
6
7
8
9
Noise-free score decile in attempt 1

10

Limiting Retaking: Winners and Losers

We have shown so far that limiting, or eliminating retaking improved expected welfare for
each of the three income groups. Of course, there is considerable heterogeneity within each
income group. Next, we look at how these welfare gains vary by ability as captured by their
initial score decile.
A naive agent would assume that the admission cuto¤s are …xed. Under this assumption,
we look at the expected payo¤ gains/losses from preventing retaking. As shown in Figure 7,
students in low initial score deciles lose more. This should be expected as retaking tends to
decrease in score among …rst time takers in our data. Thus, low initial score students lose the
most when retaking is banned. However, as pointed out earlier, the fallacy of composition
is at work. For each student, it is better to be allowed to retake than not, given the cuto¤
scores. However, if all students are prevented from retaking, then the cuto¤ scores fall. This
general equilibrium e¤ect reverses the welfare e¤ects of banning retaking. Again, this makes
sense as there is excessive retaking due to the externality identi…ed earlier.
The general equilibrium e¤ects are illustrated in Figure 8. Each student’s placement
under the no-retaking rules is plotted against his placement in the current system. Retakers
have a lighter color than non-retakers, with serial retakers being progressively lighter colored.
It is apparent from Figure 8 that lighter colors are more prevalent towards the origin, consistent with lower-ability students retaking more often. The darker curve in the …gure associates
the placement of students who are placed at the …rst attempt under the current system with
what their placement would have been in equilibrium had retaking been banned. This curve
32

Figure 8: Placement with and without Retaking

is above the 45 degree line showing that the cuto¤s fall (quality of placements rise for the
same score) when retaking is banned. Moreover, the fall in the cuto¤s is greatest for those
with mid-range placements.
In sum, the partial equilibrium consequences of preventing retaking are to reduce welfare
for everyone, and more so for those with low scores. Nevertheless, the general equilibrium
consequences raise welfare, and more so for those in the middle score deciles. The second
e¤ect dominates resulting in inverse U-shape gains in Figure 9. Though most agents gain
ex-post, about 20% of them lose.30 Some idea of this can be gleaned from Figure 8 as a
signi…cant number of students are below the 45 degree line, which means their placement is
worse with no retaking. However, the …gure does not capture welfare changes fully as the
lower expenditures on retaking are not accounted for. Taking these costs into account will
reduce the number of losers ex-post.
Redistributional e¤ects across income groups seem to arise mostly through di¤erences
in initial performance. Figure 9 shows that di¤erences in gains across income groups are
not signi…cant after controlling for the initial score decile. This is somewhat unexpected as
income groups do have di¤erent learning e¤ects upon retaking as well as di¤erent retaking
costs.
30

By ex-post we mean that we keep the shocks faced by agents constant across policy scenarios.

33

Figure 9: Gains from Banning Retaking: General Equilibrium, Exogenous E¤ort
Expected gains (relative to the max payoff)

0.08

0.06

0.04

0.02

0

-0.02

-0.06

5.2

Low-income
Middle
High

-0.04

1

2

3
4
5
6
7
8
Noise-free score decile in attempt 1

9

10

Endogenous E¤ort

In the above counterfactual experiments, we assumed that the policy changes do not a¤ect
students’level of e¤ort before attempt 1 or afterwards. It is natural to look at the extent
to which this a¤ects our results. If restrictions on retaking result in a huge increase in e¤ort
while in high school, the only e¤ect of such a ban might be to move e¤ort expended to a
prior stage. Students may increasingly choose costly private schools over public ones and
enrol into private tutoring.
To address these concerns, we re-run our simulations using the augmented model that
explicitly accounts for high school choice. We only consider a complete ban on retaking in
order to avoid issues potentially caused by endogenous e¤ort between attempts.
In line with intuition, the retaking ban puts more pressure on students to perform well
in the …rst attempt, so that less of them choose public schools. As shown in Table 9, the
percentage of students who choose Anatolian schools and extra tutoring grows in all three
income groups. As a result, the distribution of placement scores shifts to the right after one
allows for endogenous schooling. Yet, this distribution is still dominated by the one in the
unlimited retaking scenario, as illustrated in Figure 10. Consequently, admission cuto¤s in
the no-retaking scenario remain lower than in the unlimited retaking regime.
Finally, we obtain the expected gains from the ban for each expected …rst-time score
decile and income group. Figure 11 depicts the point estimates and the respective 95%
con…dence intervals obtained via bootstrapping. The gains depicted here account for costs
of e¤ort in high school, in contrast to those plotted in Figure 9. The inverse U shaped gains
are less pronounced and the average gain is halved due to welfare reducing e¤ort e¤ects
34

Income group
Policy
Anatolian, no prep
Anatolian, prep
Private, no prep
Private, prep
Public, no prep
Public, prep

Low
Current 1 attempt
0.02
0.02
0.21
0.25
0.04
0.03
0.13
0.14
0.31
0.26
0.26
0.27

Middle
Current 1 attempt
0.01
0.02
0.35
0.48
0.02
0.01
0.18
0.20
0.14
0.05
0.26
0.21

High
Current 1 attempt
0.01
0.01
0.52
0.61
0.01
0.01
0.23
0.24
0.04
0.01
0.17
0.11

Simulated shares of students who go to public schools with no tutoring, private schools with no tutoring,
etc. Policies: current –unlimited retaking, 1 attempt max.

Table 9: Simulated schooling choices: unlimited retaking vs 1 attempt max

Figure 10: Distribution of Placement Scores: Fixed vs Endogenous Schooling
1
0.9

CDF of placement scores

0.8
0.7
0.6
0.5
0.4
0.3
0.2
Unlimited retaking
1 attempt, schools chosen
1 attempt, schools given

0.1
0
50

100

150
200
Placement score

35

250

300

Figure 11: Gains from Banning Retaking if School Choices are Endogenous
Expected gains (relative to the max payoff)

0.05

0.04

0.03

0.02

0.01

0
Low-income
Middle
High

-0.01

-0.02

1

2

3
4
5
6
7
8
Expected 1st attempt score decile

9

10

coming from the ban. The estimates are also noisier due to the high standard errors on the
cost parameters. Nevertheless, the results con…rm our main …nding: the vast majority of
students would gain from the retaking ban, and this gain is signi…cant, irrespective of their
income.

6

Conclusion

In this paper, we have documented that, at least for the setting we examine, limiting retaking,
though seemingly harmful to individuals, is in their interest in equilibrium. This stark
contrast between individual incentives and aggregate ones suggests that reform in this arena
may be di¢ cult to implement. Individuals will naturally resist attempts to reduce the
options open to them as general equilibrium e¤ects tend to be opaque. By quantifying the
full e¤ects of reform in a general equilibrium setting, we can identify win-win policies like
limiting retaking that will probably face opposition ex-ante.
In our analysis, we have, of course, made some simplifying assumptions. First, we assume
that preferences are vertical. Our focus is on retaking, not preferences, so that simplifying
the latter to zoom in on the former is natural.31 We model utility as increasing in the
score/rank of an agent. This would be true even if preferences were horizontal as a higher
score makes more options available to a student.
31

We should be careful in using purely vertical preferences if we were studying certain questions. For
example, had we been looking at the e¤ects of expanding certain schools it would be important to know substitution patterns in demand and imposing vertical preferences would constrain these patterns signi…cantly.
However, detailed information about substitution patterns seems less vital in modelling retaking.

36

Second, we do not account for active learning. In our model learning is a draw from
a distribution that an agent takes as given. By choosing to retake, the agent can choose
to draw from this distribution but cannot choose the distribution he draws from by, say,
expending e¤ort. Thus, we are not able to distinguish between …xed and variable (e¤ort)
costs of retaking in our estimates. We are however, able to incorporate e¤ort e¤ects prior to
the …rst attempt. We …nd that ex-ante welfare rises with a ban for most agents, though the
size of the welfare gain is roughly halved.
Third, we focus on steady state outcomes. The welfare consequences out of steady state
are likely to be di¤erent. In particular, if retaking is banned and the policy is unexpected,
then those who planned to retake would su¤er considerably. Thus, implementation would
have to be gradual and exempt previous cohorts, which would then reduce or eliminate
welfare gains for them. The precise timetable involved would be critical in determining out
of steady state welfare gains/losses. A better understanding of these tradeo¤s is a topic for
future work as the computation requirements would be considerable.

37

References
[1] Akerlof, George (1976) “The Economics of Caste and of the Rat Race and Other Woeful
Tales”. The Quarterly Journal of Economics, Vol. 90, No. 4 (November).
[2] Bonhomme, Stéphane and Jean-Marc Robin (2010). “Generalized Nonparametric Deconvolution with an Application to Earnings Dynamics.” Review of Economic Studies
77 (2), 491–533.
[3] Caner, A. and C. Okten (2010) “Risk and Career Choice: Evidence from Turkey.”
Economics of Education Review 29 (6), 1060–1075.
[4] Caner, A. and C. Okten (2013) “Higher education in Turkey: Subsidizing the rich or
the poor?”Economics of Education Review 35, 75–92.
[5] Deming, David, and Susan Dynarski (2008) "The Lengthening of Childhood." Journal
of Economic Perspectives, 22(3): 71-92.
[6] Fu, Qiang (2006) “A Theory of A¢ rmative Action in College Admissions”. Economic
Inquiry, Vol. 44, No. 3, July, pp.420–428.
[7] Fain, James R. (2009) “A¢ rmative Action Can Increase E¤ort”. Journal of Labor Research. Vol 30, pp. 168–175.
[8] Freyberger, Joachim. (2013) “Nonparametric panel data models with interactive …xed
e¤ects”Mimeo. University of Wisconscin.
[9] Frisancho, Veronica, Krishna, Kala, Lychagin, Sergey and Cemile Yavas (2013) “Better
Luck Next Time: Learning Through Retaking”. NBER Working Paper No. 19663.
[10] Hatakenaka, Sachi (2006) “Higher Education in Turkey for 21st Century: Size and
Composition,”November 2006, World Bank.
[11] Hotz, V. Joseph and Robert A. Miller (1993) “Conditional Choice Probabilities and the
Estimation of Dynamic Models”The Review of Economic Studies, Vol. 60, No. 3 (Jul.,
1993), pp. 497-529.
[12] Krishna, Lychagin and Tarasov (2015)
[13] Magnac, Thierry, and David Thesmar (2002) “Identifying Dynamic Discrete Decision
Processes”. Econometrica, Vol. 70, No. 2, pp. 801-816.

38

[14] Mankiw, N. Gregory and Michael D. Whinston. (1986) “Free Entry and Social Ine¢ ciency”. The RAND Journal of Economics, Vol. 17, No. 1 (Spring).
[15] Saygin, P. (2011) “Gender Di¤erences in College Applications: Evidence from the Centralized System in Turkey.”Working Paper.
[16] Tansel, A. and F. Bircan (2005) “E¤ect of Private Tutoring on University Entrance
Examination Performance in Turkey.”IZA Discussion Paper, No. 1609.
[17] Tornkvist, Birgitta, and Vidar Henriksson (2004) “Repeated test taking: Di¤erences
between social groups.”EM No. 47, Umea University.
[18] Train, Kenneth (2009). Discrete Choice Methods with Simulation, Cambridge University
Press.
[19] Vigdor, J. L. and C. T. Clotfelter (2003) “Retaking the SAT.” The Journal of Human
Resources 38 (1), 1–33.

39

7
7.1

Appendix (For Online Publication)
Standardizing high school GPA.

The discussion below is based on that in Frisancho et. al (2013). Raw and standardized
GPAs ignore potential quality heterogeneity and grade in‡ation across high schools. Since
we are interested in obtaining a measure that will allow us to rank students on the same
scale based on their high school academic performance, neither of these measures are useful.
Obtaining 10/10 at a very selective school is not the same as obtaining 10/10 at a very bad
school.
To deal with this issue, we constructed school quality normalized GPAs. Within each
track k and for each school j, we de…ne the adjustment factor, Ajk :
Ajk =

GPAjk
Weighted Scorejk

GPAk
Weighted Scorek

(9)

where GPAjk and Weighted Scorejk are the average GPA and weighted scores for each high
school and track combination. GPAk and Weighted Scorek are the average GPA and weighted
score across all comparable students from the same track.32 The numerator in (9) should go
up if the school is in‡ating grades relative to its true quality. For example, if the average
GPA in school j is about 8/10 but the average exam score for its students is only 5/10,
school j is worse than the raw GPAs of its students suggest. After all, since the ÖSS is
a standardized exam, Weighted Scorejk should be a good proxy for the true quality of the
school on a unique scale. The denominator in (9) is just a constant for all the students in
the same database and it takes the adjustment factor to a scale that is relative to everyone
in the same track.
De…ne the school quality normalized GPA for student i in school j and track k as:
GPAnormijk = 100

] ijk
GPA
max
]k
GPA

!

] ijk is de…ned as:
where GPA
] ijk =
GPA
max

]k
and GPA

GPAijk
Ajk

] ijk in a given k. Notice that if the student is in a
is just the maximum GPA

32

This adjustment factor is constructed using weighted quantitative scores for Science students while Social
Studies students’ factor relies on weighted verbal scores. For Turkish-Math students, we use the weighted
average.

40

school that tends to in‡ate the grades relative to true performance, the raw GPA of all the
students in such a school will be penalized through a higher Ajk .

7.2

Estimating the Factor Model.

In step one we estimate the parameters of the GPA and the four subject score equations
(10) using the sample of …rst-time takers. We obtain the estimates of g and j by running
each performance measure in (10) on X.

g = X0

g

+

0

g

+ "0

sj1 = X 0

j

+

0

j

+ "j1

(10)

Then, we use the residuals from the above regressions to pin down the factor loadings
= [ v ; q ] and the standard deviations of "0 ; "j1 where
g and j , the covariance matrix of
j stands for math, Turkish, social studies and science. The residuals contain the e¤ects
of unobservables and random shocks that sum up to a total of seven factors, ( v , q , "0 ,
"math;1 , "T urk;1 , "ss;1 , "sc;1 ). Factor loadings capture a possibly di¤erential e¤ect that verbal
and quantitative unobservable abilities may have on scores in di¤erent subjects. In order to
identify the loadings and the distributions of all shocks we rely on the following standard
assumption from the literature on factor models.
Assumption 1 The vector and the shocks "0 , "math;1 , "T urk;1 , "ss;1 ; "sc;1 are independent
of each other conditional on X.
Under the assumptions above one can identify g , j , the joint density of the common
factors [ v ; q ], and the densities of the transitory shocks "0 and "j1 non-parametrically
(see Freyberger (2013) for more details). However, if we did this non-parametrically, the
estimation in steps 2 and 3 would be computationally formidable. By imposing normality
on the distributions of "0 ; "j1 ; and we circumvent this problem. As explained below, under
normality all we need to estimate is the variance-covariance matrix of "0 ; "j1 ; and .
Let r be a vector of the …ve residuals from the system of equations (10)
2

6
6
6
r=6
6
6
4

11 v

+
31 v +
41 v +
51 v +

21 v

3
+ "g
7
22 q + "math;1 7
7
7
32 q + "T urk;1 7
7
42 q + "ss;1 5
52 q + "sc;1

+

41

12 q

Note that we can normalize these equations as follows: let ~q = 21 v + 22 q and
~v = 31 v + 32 q . We can invert these two equations so that v and q are expressed in
terms of ~v and ~q . Substituting for v and q in terms of ~v and ~q into the above system
gives us a normalized set of equations where the coe¢ cients on ~v and ~q in the math and
Turkish equations are math = [0; 1] and T urk = [1; 0] respectively.
2

3
~ 11 ~v + ~ 12 ~q + "g
6
7
~q + "math;1
6
7
6
7
6
7
~
r=6
v + "T urk;1
7
6 ~
7
~
4 ~ 41 v + ~ 42 q + "ss;1 5
~ 51 ~v + ~ 52 ~q + "sc;1
Thus the normalization adds no further constraints. The covariance matrix of r can be
expressed as
E[rr0 ] = 0 E[ 0 ] + I"
where I" is a diagonal matrix with the variances of "’s on the diagonal. Thus, the left hand
side of the above equation is a 5x5 matrix, which can be estimated from the data. By
symmetry, only 15 elements of this matrix need to be considered. On the right hand side, we
have …ve variances of the " shocks, two variances and one covariance of the common factors
, and six factor loadings . As we normalize the loadings in the math and Turkish equation
to math = [0; 1] and T urk = [1; 0], four of the factor loadings in are …xed. Therefore, we
have 15 equations and 14 unknowns. We obtain the estimates of the unknown parameters
using GMM with these equations as moment conditions.

7.3

Estimating the Dynamic Model of Retaking.

After estimating the factor model on the sample of …rst-time takers, we turn to the dynamic
decision problem that models retaking behavior. We proceed in two steps. First, we use data
to identify the parameters of the learning shocks and the decision rule that students follow
given their ability and shocks to the score. We do so without imposing the full structure
of the dynamic model. Then, using an insight from Hotz and Miller (1993), we invert the
estimated decision rules to …nd equilibrium values of retaking and estimate the remaining
parameters of the dynamic decision problem.
We start by estimating the retaking decision rules and separating learning shocks from
selection into retaking. We illustrate our strategy by focusing on second-time takers; however,
the same logic can be applied by induction to all subsequent retaking attempts. Knowing the
actual density of placement scores and GPA, s2 and g, among second-time takers, one can
42

solve an inverse problem and back out the retaking retaking threshold e1 and the distribution
of the learning shock. Let a denote the number of attempts that a student has made. We
express the joint density of placement scores and GPA among second-time takers in terms
of the similar density among …rst-time takers. Let = 2 + "2 ; the sum of the transitory
and the permanent shock at the second attempt. Note that all densities are conditional on
the covariates X though we suppress X in our notation. Let fs2 ;gja=2 (s2 ; g) denote the joint
density of scores in the second attempt and GPA conditional on being a second time taker.
Similarly, fs2 ;g;"1 ;s1 ja=2 (s2 ; g; "1 ; s1 ) denotes the joint density of scores on the second attempt,
GPA, shocks to the score in the …rst attempt and the permanent component of the …rst time
score conditional on being a second time taker. Then,

fs2 ;gja=2 (s2 ; g) =
=
=
=

ZZ

ZZ

ZZ

ZZ

fs2 ;g;"1 ;s1 ja=2 (s2 ; g; "1 ; s1 )d"1 ds1
f

;g;"1 ;s1 ja=2 (s2

s1 ; g; "1 ; s1 )

fg;"1 ;s1 ja=2 (g; "1 ; s1 )f (s2

@( ; g; "1 ; s1 )
d"1 ds1
@(s2 ; g; "1 ; s1 )

s1 )d"1 ds1

fg;"1 ;s1 ja=1 (g; "1 ; s1 )I("1 < e1 (s1 ))f (s2

s1 )d"1 ds1

1
Prfa = 2g

(11)

In the …rst line we integrate the joint distribution of second-time score, s2 , GPA, g, shocks
"1 and …rst-time noise-free score s1 among second-time takers over the last two variables.
Then, in the second line, we express the density fs2 ;g;"1 ;s1 ja=2 via the density f ;g;"1 ;s1 ja=2 using
the fact that = s2 s1 . In the third line we use independence of to separate the marginal
density of from the joint density of s1 ; g and "1 . This requires the following assumption:
Assumption 2 The distribution of learning shocks, t , and idiosyncratic shocks, "t ; are
independent of the history conditional on observables, X.
Finally, in the last line we go from conditioning on being a second-time taker to being
…rst-time taker. The density of second-time takers is merely the density of …rst-time takers
who meet the selection rule scaled by the fraction of …rst-time takers who retake (in other
words, we use Bayes rule).
Note that the estimate of fg;"1 ;s1 ja=1 can be obtained from the factor model; the probability
Prfa = 2g is the retaking rate directly observable in the data. Given a decision rule e1 and
a distribution of the second attempt shocks to the placement score, f , one can predict the
distribution of scores and GPA among the second-time takers. The estimates of e1 and
f are obtained by …tting this prediction to the data. For each of the income groups, we
43

partition the set of second-time takers by their GPA using GPA terciles as cuto¤s. Each of
the resulting three subsets is further cut into three smaller sets of equal sizes using placement
score terciles. We use equation 11 to predict the numbers of retakers in the nine subsets
of the score-GPA space de…ned above and match them to the numbers of retakers in the
data. This gives us nine moment equations per income group, which we use to obtain GMM
estimates of e1 (3 unknowns) and the parameters of f (2 unknowns).
Note that one needs additional assumptions to separate learning, 2 , from idiosyncratic
shocks, "2 , given the density of their sum, f . Assuming that "2 is drawn from the same
distribution as "1 (identi…ed from the factor model) and that "2 is orthogonal to 2 , one can
identify the distribution of 2 by deconvolution.
Assumption 3 The distribution of idiosyncratic shocks "t does not vary across attempts.
Learning shocks t are independent of "t conditional on X.
The above argument can easily be generalized to attempts 3 and 4. It has to be appropriately modi…ed for attempts 5 onwards as agents who take the exam …ve times or more
are pooled in the data (that is, we cannot separate 5-time takers and 6-time takers). Let
fs;gja>4 (s; g) be the density of the permanent component of the placement score and GPA in
the population of 5 and more time takers. For simplicity, we assume that there is no learning
beyond attempt 4. As learning is the only reason why s evolves, each student’s s is …xed
after the fourth attempt. Moreover, the decision rule is unchanging after the 4th attempt, as
the student faces a stationary environment in the absence of learning shocks. The aggregate
group of 5+ time takers is composed of those 4 and 5+-time takers who decided to retake
in the past. Thus,
fs;gja>4 (s; g) = fs;gja=4 (s; g) + fs;gja>4 (s; g) F"1 (e4 (s)):
Rearranging gives:
fs;gja>4 (s; g) =

fs;gja=4 (s; g)F"1 (e4 (s))
:
1 F"1 (e4 (s))

(12)

This equation can be used to obtain the distribution of scores and grades among students
who retake 5 times and more. Note that f"t ("t ) is the same for all t by assumption. For this
reason we drop the subscript t below.

44

fs;gja>4 (s; g) =
=
=

Z
Z
Z

fs;gja>4 (s

"; g)f" (")d"

fs;gja>4 (s; g)f" (s

s)ds

F" (e4 (s))
fs;gja=4 (s; g)f" (s
1 F" (e4 (s))

s)ds

In the …rst line above we get the distribution of s = s + " from that of s and " using
independence. In the third line we substitute using equation (12). The density fs;gja=4 is
identi…ed as outlined above. Knowledge of F" and the selection cuto¤ e4 gives us the righthand side of the above equation. We identify e4 by matching the right-hand side to the
empirical distribution of scores and GPAs of 5 and more time takers.
After obtaining the equilibrium decision rules we are in a position to estimate the dynamic
model’s parameters by following along the same lines as Hotz and Miller (1993) in their
second step. First, we use the decision rules to compute continuation values in the dynamic
model of retaking. Then, assuming that each student maximizes his/her expected welfare, we
pin down the retaking costs and the placement utility function that best explain the retaking
rates in the nine subsets of placement scores and GPA de…ned above. We implement this
step in the GMM framework and use bootstrapping to obtain standard errors.

7.4

Simulation Algorithm.

In our counterfactual policy experiments we simulate retaking behavior in the steady states
that arise after policy changes. Given the model’s parameters, a steady state can be characterized by a distribution of placement scores of those students who choose to be placed which
pins down the allocation of students (identi…ed by their score) to schools.This distribution is
a general equilibrium object; it changes whenever the policy environment is being changed.
Among other things, the distribution of scores captures the level of competition in the exam.
Given this distribution, each student knows what seat his score will buy, should he decide
to be placed.
The objective of the simulation algorithm is to …nd the above conditional distribution.
The c.d.f. of this distribution is approximated on a uniform grid of 36 points. The numerical
procedure is as follows:
1. Given a candidate c.d.f., the algorithm solves each student’s dynamic decision problem
2. The solution to the dynamic problem is used to simulate student scores and retaking
45

decisions
3. Scores of retakers are used to compute the new conditional c.d.f.
4. If the candidate c.d.f. and the new one are close, the algorithm stops. Otherwise, a
new candidate c.d.f. is tried.

46

