                                NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




     THE ANALYSIS OF FIELD CHOICE IN COLLEGE AND GRADUATE SCHOOL:
                   DETERMINANTS AND WAGE EFFECTS

                                          Joseph G. Altonji
                                          Peter Arcidiacono
                                           Arnaud Maurel

                                        Working Paper 21655
                                http://www.nber.org/papers/w21655


                      NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                               1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                 Cambridge, MA 02138
                                     October 2015




We thank Magne Mogstad, Matt Wiswall, and Seth Zimmerman for helpful comments. Luis Candelaria,
Hye Yoon Chung, Brian Clark, Vivek Sumpathkumar and Ling Zhong provided excellent research
assistance. The views expressed herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views
of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.

© 2015 by Joseph G. Altonji, Peter Arcidiacono, and Arnaud Maurel. All rights reserved. Short sections
of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full
credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
The Analysis of Field Choice in College and Graduate School: Determinants and Wage Effects
Joseph G. Altonji, Peter Arcidiacono, and Arnaud Maurel
NBER Working Paper No. 21655
October 2015
JEL No. I23,I26,J24

                                             ABSTRACT

As the workforce has become more educated, educational decisions are no longer just about whether
to acquire more, but rather what type of education to pursue. In college, individuals somewhat specialize
through their choice of college major. Further specialization occurs in graduate school. This chapter
investigates how majors and graduate school affect labor market outcomes as well as how the individuals
make these potentially important decisions. To do so, we develop a dynamic model of educational
decision-making. In light of the model, we examine the estimation issues associated with obtaining
causal effects of educational choices on earnings. We then examine ways that authors have overcome
the selection problem as well as the approaches authors have taken to estimate the process by which
these educational decisions are made.


Joseph G. Altonji                                   Arnaud Maurel
Department of Economics                             Department of Economics
Yale University                                     Duke University
Box 208264                                          213 Social Sciences Building
New Haven, CT 06520-8264                            Box 90097
and NBER                                            Durham, NC 27708
joseph.altonji@yale.edu                             and NBER
                                                    apm16@duke.edu
Peter Arcidiacono
Department of Economics
201A Social Sciences Building
Duke University
Durham, NC 27708
and NBER
psarcidi@econ.duke.edu
1         Introduction
The literature on the returns to education often focuses on the returns to years of schooling
(Card, 1999), treating education as unidimensional. This may be a reasonable approach
when there is relatively little specialization in school, as for example in secondary education
in the United States.1 But as the workforce has become more educated, educational decisions
are about the type of education to pursue as well as about the quantity. While a liberal arts
education is supposed to provide a broad background in many areas, there is nonetheless
some specialization as individuals choose college majors that have different emphases in their
coursework. Graduate education leads to even more specialization. An additional year of
schooling in a Master’s in Education program is quite different from that of engineering.
        Wage difference across college majors are large. Using data from the 2009 American
Community Survey, Altonji et al. (2012) show that the log wage gap between male electrical
engineers and male general education majors is within two percentage points of the gap be-
tween college and high school graduates. And Altonji et al. (2014b) and Gemici & Wiswall
(2014) show that these differentials have been significantly increasing over time. With in-
creases in the returns to skill, the incentives to obtain graduate degree have also increased,
with the share of individuals getting a Master’s degree more than doubling between 1985
and 2010.
        From an aggregate viewpoint, the distribution of college majors is an important input
to the skill composition of tomorrow’s workforce. In 2010, there were 209 federal programs
designed to increase knowledge of STEM fields and attainment of STEM degrees with overall
spending of more than three billion dollars (Scott, 2013). The governor of Florida has
proposed freezing tuition for STEM majors (Alvarez, 2012), and the state of New York is
offering free tuition for high performing students who enroll in public institutions and are
STEM majors, conditional on working in the state for at least five years (Chapman, 2014).
    1
        Even in secondary education in U.S., there is a great deal of heterogeneity in the mix of courses that
students take–both with high schools and across high schools. See Altonji et al. (2012) for a survey the
literature on the choice of high school curriculum and the labor market effects of high school curriculum.



                                                        2
      The raw wage differences across majors may, however, reflect a number of factors besides
differential accumulation of human capital across majors. One obvious issue is selection.
Perhaps those who major in the more apparently lucrative fields would also have earned
more in other majors. Perhaps those who choose less lucrative majors would have earned
even less in the better paying majors because their skills are a poor match with the work
required. These issues become even more complicated given the importance of occupations
in the labor market, to the degree that individuals are heterogeneous in their preferences for
occupations, and to the degree that majors have heterogeneous effects on both the pecuniary
and non-pecuniary returns to different occupations.
      But even if some majors have a larger causal effect on productivity than others, the high
paying majors may be less attractive for students on other dimensions. For example, they
may involve heavier university workloads or lead to less pleasant or fulfilling jobs. Initial
interest in STEM majors at the undergraduate level, for example, is quite high. However,
48% switch out of STEM majors, with half dropping out and half switching to another
major.
      Universities may place less weight on student labor market prospects when deciding how
much priority to give to increasing the number of STEM majors. For example, they may
prefer a distribution of students across majors that is in line with the distribution of faculty
members in their various departments. Princeton explicitly pushes students to consider
departments with fewer students per instructor. And institutions may understate tradeoffs
between non-pecuniary considerations and labor market prospects when counseling students.
For example, the introduction to Major Choices vol. II, available on Princeton’s website,
states that its

        “purpose is to encourage undergraduates to follow their intellectual passions and
        study what they love, with confidence in the fulfilling lives that lie ahead and the
        knowledge that in no way will their choice of major limit the career choices they
        may wish to make in the future.”2
  2
      http://www.princeton.edu/pr/pub/mc/v2/home/index.htm



                                                 3
As a result of this push, departments with the largest percentage increases were classics,
Slavic languages and literature, comparative literature, and religion.3 But while we do not
present evidence for samples drawn exclusively from elite universities, the evidence for a
broad set of schools suggests strongly that choice of major does limit career choice.
      In this chapter, we investigate how majors and graduate school impact labor market out-
comes as well as how individuals make these potentially important decisions. In particular,
we:

  1. Document the trends in the number and earnings of different undergraduate majors
        and graduate programs (Section 2).

  2. Develop a model for how to think about the various factors that influence major choice
        (Section 3).

  3. In light of the model, examine the estimation issues associated with obtaining causal
        effects of educational choices on earnings and discuss the progress to date on addressing
        these issues (Section 4).

  4. Review research on how individuals make postsecondary decisions regarding choice of
        major and graduate school, paying attention both to choices by the student as well as
        how choices by universities make particular fields of study more attractive (Subsections
        5.1 and 5.2).

  5. Discuss work using subjective expectations data to get at student beliefs regarding the
        benefits of choosing particular educational paths (Subsection 5.3).

We cover some of the same ground as the recent survey by Altonji et al. (2012). However,
we give much more emphasis to graduate education. As we document, graduate school
attendance has grown rapidly over the past two decades. Now is a good time to pull together
the existing literature on the demand for and return to graduate school, although it is still
relatively sparse. We also give more emphasis to how students make choices and to the role
  3
      http://www.princeton.edu/main/news/archive/S11/45/32K06/index.xml


                                                 4
that universities play in influencing them. And we highlight papers that collect subjective
expectations as a way of eliciting student beliefs about the monetary and nonmonetary value
of various fields of study and the career paths that they will lead to. These beliefs play a
central role in models of education choice.



2     Descriptives
We begin this chapter by providing descriptive evidence on the allocation of students across
undergraduate majors and graduate degrees, together with the wage premia associated with
the various combinations of undergraduate and graduate degrees. In Section 2.1 we examine
the distribution of undergraduate majors among all individuals with a Bachelor’s degree,
discuss its evolution over time and report the mean wages associated with each major. In
Section 2.2 we turn to graduate degrees and discuss the trends in the number of individuals
graduating with different types of advanced degrees, in particular Master’s, Ph.D., M.D., J.D.
and Dental degrees. Finally, Section 2.3 focuses on the joint distribution of undergraduate
and graduate degrees, and further presents descriptive results about the wage returns to
different pairs of undergraduate and graduate degrees.


2.1    Undergraduate Degrees

Table 1 below reports the distribution of majors among individuals with a Bachelor’s degree
between the age of 27 and 58, using data from the 2013 American Community Survey.
The five most common fields of study are Business (22.5%, includes Business Management,
Accounting and General Business), Education (10.1%), Engineering (8.2%), Social Sciences
(7.3%, includes Economics, Sociology, Anthropology and Archeology, Political Science and
Government), and Medical and Health Services (7.2%). More than half of college graduates
have a Bachelor’s degree in one of those areas. We also report in this table the average hourly
wage for each major. There are very large differences across majors in this dimension. For
instance, individuals with an Engineering degree earn on average close to 80% as much as


                                              5
individuals who obtained a degree in Education. Interestingly though, and consistent with
non-pecuniary factors playing an important role when choosing a college major, Education
majors account for a larger share of Bachelor’s degrees than Engineering majors. In addition
to Engineering, other high-paying college majors (with mean wages above $40 per hour)
include Biology, Computer and Information Systems, Physical Sciences, Mathematics and
Transportation Sciences. On average, individuals who earned a Bachelor’s degree in any
of those fields of study earn at least 50% more than college graduates who obtained their
Bachelor’s degree in fields of study such as Education, Fine Arts, Public Administration,
Family and Consumer Sciences, Theology, and Cosmetology and Culinary Arts. From the
outset, it is important to keep in mind that those stark differences across majors are clearly
partly driven by the fact that students with different productivity levels tend to choose
different majors. Accounting for endogenous sorting of students across majors is crucial in
order to estimate the causal effect of college majors on wages. We will discuss this issue
thoroughly in Section 4.

       While the dramatic increase in college graduation rates in the last four decades has been
the object of much attention, relatively little is known about the change in the distribution
of undergraduate majors over time. Figure 1 reports the evolution from 1981 to 2013 of the
proportions of students graduating with a Bachelor’s degree in Business, Life Sciences, Social
Sciences, Engineering, Mathematics and Physical Sciences, Health, Education, Humanities,
Fine Arts and other fields, among all students receiving a Bachelor’s degree in any given
year.4 Those shares are computed using data from the Higher Education General Information
Survey (HEGIS) through 1985-86, and the Integrated Postsecondary Education Data System
(IPEDS) from 1986-87 to 2012-13. Majors in Business, Social Sciences, Humanities and Fine
Arts, along with the majors included in the Other fields category, have been accounting for
the highest share of Bachelor’s degrees since the late eighties. As of 2013, these majors
   4
       Other fields includes fields such as Communication and Journalism, Homeland Security, Law Enforcement
and Firefighting, Park, Recreation, Leisure and Fitness Studies, Agriculture and Natural Resources, Public
Administration and Social Services, as well as Family and Consumer Sciences.



                                                      6
accounted for as much as 68% of college graduates, up from 63% in 1981. Health majors
have become more popular in the last ten years. Those majors account for 9.8% of the
Bachelor’s degrees awarded in 2013, which is about twice as much as in 2003. On the other
hand, majors in Education, and, to a lesser extent, majors in Engineering, Math and Physical
Sciences have become less popular over time. In particular, the fraction of Bachelors’ degrees
awarded in Education dropped from 12% in 1981 to 6% only in 2013. As of 2013, Life Sciences
(the least popular field of study throughout this period) accounted for only 5% of the total
number of Bachelor’s degrees awarded during that year.


2.2       Graduate Degrees

The share of individuals receiving an advanced degree has increased very substantially in the
last thirty years. Figure 2 reports the evolution of the number of individuals graduating with
a Master’s degree in the U.S. (restricted to permanent residents and U.S. citizens) over the
period 1985 to 2013, computed as a fraction of the total resident population of 24 year olds.5
The share of individuals getting a Master’s degree within each cohort has increased by 240%
between 1985 and 2013, likely reflecting an increase in the demand as well as in the supply of
those types of advanced degrees. It is worth noting that this trend is steeper than the growth
in the number of Bachelor’s degrees awarded each year (+86% over the period 1985 to 2013,
see Figure 3), reflecting a large increase in the rate at which college graduates go on to a
Master’s program. While the share of individuals getting a Master’s degree has increased
significantly for all fields over that period, the growth has been particularly dramatic for
Health and, to a lesser extent, Business (see Figure 4).
      Figure 5 reports the proportions of students who graduated with a Master’s degree in
Business, Education, Health Professions, Other STEM and Other Non-STEM fields, among
all students (again restricted to permanent residents and U.S. citizens) receiving a Master’s
degree in any given year from 1985 to 2013.6 Education and Business together account for
  5
      The number of degrees awarded each year, used in Figures 2 to 7, are obtained from the HEGIS (1985-86)
and IPEDS (1986-87 through 2012-13).
   6
     Other STEM fields includes Computer and Information Sciences, Engineering, Mathematics, Physical


                                                      7
around 50% of the Master’s degrees awarded throughout this period. Education was, by
a substantial margin, the most popular field until 2007, then followed in the most recent
years by a steady decline in the proportion of Master’s degrees awarded in this field. As of
2013, Education and Business accounted for pretty much the same share of Master’s degrees
awarded in that year. It will be interesting to see whether the decline in the popularity of
Education is confirmed in the next couple of years.
On the other side of the spectrum, Master’s degrees in Health and STEM are, throughout
the period, the least popular fields. Notably, in 2013, about 10% of the Master’s degrees
were received in STEM fields, which represents less than half of the share of Master’s degrees
awarded in Business or Education.

    Ph.D. degrees have also become more prevalent over this period, while still accounting
for only a small share of each cohort. Figure 6 below reports the evolution of the number
of permanent residents and U.S. citizens graduating with a Ph.D. degree in the U.S., as a
fraction of the total resident population of 28 year olds. The share of individuals receiving
a Ph.D. degree has fluctuated between 0.6% and 1.1% over the period 1985 to 2013, with
the number of Ph.D. degrees awarded in 2013, as a share of 28 year-old U.S. residents, being
70% higher in 2013 relative to 1985. Figure 7 reports for each year the share of students
who earned a Ph.D. degree in STEM, Social Sciences, Humanities, Business, Education and
Other fields, among all students receiving receiving a Ph.D. degree in that year.7 Throughout
this period, Business (and Others) are the least popular fields, while STEM fields account
for the highest fraction of Ph.D. degrees. It is worth noting that, although the flow of new
Sciences and Social Sciences. Other Non-STEM fields includes fields such as Visual and Performing Arts,
Theology, Public Administration and Social Services, English and Literature, Communication and Journal-
ism, Architecture as well as Homeland Security, Law Enforcement and Firefighting.
   7
     STEM includes Biological and Medical Sciences, Mathematics and Statistics, Physical Sciences, Com-
puter and Information Sciences, and Engineering. Social Sciences includes Economics, Sociology, Political
Science, Psychology, Public Administration and Social Services. Humanities includes Visual and Perform-
ing Arts, Foreign Languages, Literatures and Linguistics, English and Literature, and Theology. Finally,
Other fields includes Agriculture and Natural Resources, Architecture, Multi/interdisciplinary Studies, Park,
Recreation, Leisure and Fitness Studies, and Homeland Security, Law Enforcement and Firefighting.


                                                     8
PhD degrees awarded each year has substantially increased over time, the distribution of
fields within those types of degrees is pretty similar in 2013 to what it was close to three
decades ago. The most noticeable change occurs for Education, with a decrease in the share
of Ph.D.’s in that field from 24.9% to 21.5%.

      Turning to professional degrees, Figure 8 plots the evolution of the number of individuals
graduating with a M.D., J.D. or a Dental degree, as a fraction of the total resident population
of 28 years olds. The share of individuals graduating with a Dental degree or with a M.D.
degree has been remarkably stable over the last 30 years, hovering around 0.1% and 0.4%,
respectively. The share of J.D. degrees is somewhat more volatile but remains of similar order
of magnitude in the most recent years as 30 years ago (around 1%). Those patterns contrast
sharply with the large increase in the share of individuals graduating with a Master’s or a
Ph.D. degree over the same period.

      Interestingly, Figures 9 and 10 show that the number of applications to M.D. and J.D.
programs fluctuate significantly more over the last fifteen years than the number of ma-
triculants and first-year enrollments, respectively.8 These patterns are consistent with the
demand for those types of advanced degrees being constrained by the supply side. Figure 9
further points to a significant increase over this period in the selectivity of M.D. programs,
while Figure 10 shows that rejection rates from J.D. programs are in fact slightly lower in
2012 than in 2000.


2.3       The Distribution of Undergraduate and Graduate Degrees

In this section we provide basic facts about the joint distribution of undergraduate and
graduate degrees. The source of the information is the 2010 sample of the National Survey
of College Graduates (NSCG10). We report results for persons between the ages of 27 and
59, inclusive. The NSCG10 information provides facts about the stock of college graduates
  8
      The numbers reported for M in Figure 9 also include the number of applicants, matriculants and first-year
enrollments to Doctor of Osteopathic Medicine (D.O.) programs.




                                                       9
at a point in time.9        It complements the IPEDS and HEGIS, which we use to summarize
trends in college and advanced degrees.10
       Table 2 reports on the proportions of male and female college graduates with advanced
degree, by broad graduate degree type. The fractions of men and women with at least one ad-
vanced degree are almost identical: 0.353 and 0.344, respectively. However, the distribution
is different, with the women much more likely to have a master’s in education or psychology,
and less likely to have a master’s in a business related field, an MBA, a master’s in com-
puter and mathematical sciences, engineering, or a medical degree. The gender differences
in graduate degrees in part reflects gender differences in undergraduate field. For example,
the proportions of men and women with a bachelor’s degree in education are 0.053 and 0.151
respectively while the corresponding proportions in engineering are 0.132 and 0.023.11
       Table 3 reports on graduate degree attainment by field of undergraduate study. Column
1 provides the unweighted sample size for each major.                 Column 2 reports the fraction of
college graduates with a bachelor’s degree in the specified field.                Column 3 reports the
fraction of college graduates in each field who obtain at least one advanced degree.12 The
remaining columns of each row report the fraction of persons in the specified undergraduate
field who obtained the graduate degree listed in the column heading. Consider engineering.
   9
       The sample size does not permit a cohort analysis at the level of disaggregation by field that we use.
One could use earlier waves of the NSCG to examine trends, but we have not done so.
 10
    The IPEDS and HEGIS lack information on the interrelationship between undergraduate field and
graduate degree type.
  11
     See Appendix Table 1, which is also based on NSCG10 but includes ages 24 through 59. All summary
statistics and regression results based on the NSCG10 use sample weights.
  12
     About 19.4 percent of the sample report a second undergraduate field, although this also includes minors.
For persons with a second undergraduate field, we use the first major specified. Altonji & Zhong (2015)
provide evidence that to a first approximation, the earnings and occupations of double majors are a weighted
average of the earnings and occupation distribution associated with the separate fields, but with more of
the weight on the first. Presumably, the presence of double majors in the sample will blur to some degree
the connection between the specified undergraduate major and graduate degree type. Note also that some
sample members report more than one graduate degree and are counted as having a graduate degree in more
than one column of the table.



                                                      10
In the NSCG sample, 7.4% of undergraduates obtained an engineering degree (column 2). Of
these 39.5% obtained at least one graduate degree. 18.2% obtained master’s in engineering
and 3.6% in computer science and mathematical sciences. 7.7% obtained an MBA and 2.2%
obtained a master’s in a business related field.13           The fractions are much lower for other
non-science related graduate degrees.
       The table supports the following generalizations. First, and not surprisingly, there is a
strong link between the undergraduate major and graduate degree type.14 The large fraction
of engineers who obtain a Masters in engineering is echoed in the fact that 36.0% of education
majors get an education-related Masters degree, 9.5% of biology/agricultural/environmental
life sciences majors get a Masters in a life-sciences field and 18.5% of these majors get a
Medical degree.        Similarly, 14.1% of business majors get master’s degrees in a business
related field or an MBA. 15.7% of nurses obtain a Masters in nursing, while only 0.6% of
all undergraduates obtained a Masters in nursing.
       Second, aggregating across groups of majors within the same broad field obscures the
links.     Consider the social sciences.     The percentage of economics majors who obtain an
MBA or a business-related Masters degree is 15.5%. The percentage who obtain a law degree
is 9.0%. In contrast, the corresponding values for political science are 6.4% for business and
26.3% for law. The differences with psychology are also very large.
       Third, the degree of concentration in particular advanced degrees varies across under-
graduate majors.        One can see this by noting that the relative values of the row entries
vary more for some majors than others.             Table 4 makes this point more directly.            Each
row of Table 4 reports the ratio of the share of the advanced degree specified in the column
accounted for by the specified undergraduate major to the share of that major among all
  13
       The MBA category consists of master’s in business administration and management, in business and
managerial economics, in business, general and other business management/administrative services. The
category Masters in a business related field consists of accounting, marketing, and financial management.
  14
     Black et al. (2003) analyze the role of graduate degree attainment in earnings difference across under-
graduate degrees using the 1993 National Survey of College Graduates. For a small set of majors, they
present evidence on the distribution of graduate degrees by type of undergraduate degree.




                                                    11
college graduates (column 2). If majors were equally represented in each graduate degree,
all the cell values would be 1 (aside from sampling error). In the case of nursing, the value
is 27.0 for a Masters degree in nursing. That is, a person with a Masters degree in nurs-
ing is 27.0 times more likely to have majored in nursing than undergraduates as a whole.
Undergraduate nursing majors are also substantially overrepresented in Health Services Ad-
ministration, but are underrepresented in all other broad graduate programs. On the other
hand, economics majors are overrepresented in several graduate degree types but are not
massively overrepresented in any.
   Finally, the extent to which particular advanced degrees draw from a broad set of majors
varies considerably. Graduate Nursing draws almost entirely from undergraduate nursing
majors, with biologists also slightly overrepresented. This point is made most directly in
table 5.    Each column of table 5 reports the shares of the specified graduate degree that
are contributed by the various undergraduate majors. MBA programs draw from a number
of undergraduate majors, while nursing draws almost entirely from undergraduate nursing
majors. The columns of table 4 also provide information on the same point. Again, the
entries show the relative odds that a person in the major specified in the row has received
a graduate degree of the type indicated in the column. These are the shares of a major in
a graduate degree normalized by the size of the undergraduate major.       One can see that
the values are much more tightly concentrated around 1 for an MBA degree or a Masters
degree in a business related field than for fields such as nursing or engineering. In nursing
and engineering, field specific preparation at the undergraduate level may be critical.


2.3.1      Facts About Earnings

In Table 6 we provide descriptive evidence on the relative return to various undergraduate
and graduate degrees based on 1993 and 2010 NSCG surveys. The table reports coefficients
from the regression of log earnings on 19 mutually exclusive indicators for undergraduate
field of study and on 20 mutually exclusive indicators for advanced degree type. The model
includes controls for gender, race/ethnicity interacted with gender, and a cubic in age in-



                                             12
teracted with gender. We control for mother’s education category and father’s education
category but lack data on test scores and high school curriculum. The sample is restricted
to full-time workers between the age of 24 and 59, inclusive.15 The sample only includes
people with at least a bachelor’s degree. The returns are relative to a bachelor’s in educa-
tion. Column 1 reports coefficients on undergraduate major, with education as the excluded
category. Column 2 reports coefficients on advanced degrees. Both columns come from the
same regression.
       The estimates show that the highest returns are in engineering, the physical sciences,
computer and mathematical sciences, accounting, and nursing. The highest-paid major is
which pays 0.392 log points more than education. The next four highest-paid fields are ac-
counting (.327), computer and mathematical sciences (0.327), economics (0.313), and nursing
(.312). Political science majors earn a 0.176 premium over teachers. English, Languages and
Literature, other humanities (which includes History), other social sciences, and psychology
majors earn a small premium over education. The life sciences pay less than the physical
sciences. The patterns are consistent with evidence from many other data sets for the U.S.,
as we discuss in more detail in section 4. Fine and Performing Arts is the lowest paid major
among the set broken out in the table followed by education being the second lowest, with
other humanities a close third. Altonji et al. (2012) and other studies that report results for
more disaggregated categories find a number of majors that pay less than education.
       The results show a premium for a master’s in education of 0.124 (.01). The returns to
master’s degrees in the sciences range from 0.053 (.02) for biology/agricultural/environmental
life sciences, to 0.229 (.02) for computer and mathematical sciences The return is only .081
(.01) for psychology/social work but 0.166 (.02) for the other social sciences. It is .068 (.01)
for a miscellaneous category of fields outside of science and engineering and is negative for
  15
       Altonji et al. (2012) report the results of a similar regression using the log hourly wage rate as the
dependent variable and a much larger set of degree categories. They lack information on parental education.
Their data are from the 2009 ACS. The ACS is much larger, but it does not provide information on the
field of study of graduate degrees.




                                                      13
the humanities (-.106). The ranking of the returns for an MBA, Law and MD match the
ranking of the number of years of study these degrees typically require.
   The above model assumes that the return to undergraduate and graduate degrees are
additively separable in a log specification. What about complementarity between undergrad-
uate and graduate degrees in the labor market? Much of the complementarity presumably
operates through preparation for graduate school. An individual’s skill set upon completion
of an engineering master’s depends upon having a base in science and engineering to build
on. Application decisions and admissions decisions will both reflect this dependence. The
undergraduate English major who is studying for a master’s in engineering is unusual. On
the other hand, some graduate degrees, such as law and MBA programs, do not have strong
prerequisites. The degree of complementarity is likely to differ across degree pairs.
   Table 7 reports estimates of the return to various combinations of undergraduate and
graduate degrees relative to an undergraduate degree in education with no graduate degree.
The table was constructed from a regression that includes the main effects of the undergrad-
uate degree categories with education omitted, and interactions between the undergraduate
categories (including education) and the aggregated graduate degree categories shown in the
table. The row label specifies the undergraduate field and the column label indicates highest
degree. The table also reports the number of observations underlying the main effects of
the majors and the interaction terms. We have suppressed entries based on fewer than 15
observations.
   Estimates of the return to undergraduate major relative to education are reported in the
first column. They echo the results in table 4, although the values differ to some extent.
Some graduate degrees narrow differences across undergraduate fields, while others preserve
or widen them. A Master’s in education narrows differentials substantially. For example,
engineering majors with a Masters in education earn about the same amount as an education
major with a Masters degree, despite the fact that an engineer without a graduate degree
Masters earns 0.46 more than an education major without a graduate degree. If one regresses
the returns to the undergraduate field/Masters in education combinations that are reported



                                             14
in column 2 on the returns to undergraduate major in column one, the intercept and slope are
0.196 (.04) and 0.0172 (.16).16 Proceeding on to graduate school education has a leveling
effect across undergraduate degree types, presumably because many of those who pursue
master degrees in the education field work as teachers and school administrators within a
relatively narrow pay band.
       In the case of terminal master’s degrees outside education, the corresponding regression
yields an intercept of 0.0526 and a slope of 1.19 (0.172). That is, master’s degrees raise the
earnings of undergraduates by an amount that increases more than 1 for 1 with the relative
return to the undergraduate major. For an MBA the intercept and slope are 0.421 (.04) and
0.476 (0.13), respectively. This indicates that getting an MBA narrows the gap in earnings
between low and high paying majors, although .48% of that gap is preserved. In the case
of law, the intercept and the slope are 0.627 (0.04) and 0.305 (0.17). The point estimates
suggests that in percentage terms the payoff to law is higher on average for those coming
from a lower paying undergraduate degree. Medicine follows the same pattern, although the
coefficient is very imprecise
       These estimates are undoubtedly affected in complicated ways by selection bias, and
are imprecise.17        Nevertheless, they suggest that the relative return to different fields of
graduate study varies sharply across undergraduate majors. We return to this question when
discussing the relatively limited evidence on return to graduate education in section 4.6.


Math Test Scores, Course Content and Earnings Differential Across Fields A
number of papers, including Paglin & Rufolo (1990), Weinberger (1999), Arcidiacono (2004),
and Altonji et al. (2012) show that average scores on math and verbal tests differ substantially
across undergraduate majors. Paglin & Rufolo (1990) show that the average Math GRE score
for the major (toward the end or after college) explains 82 percent of the variance across fields
  16
       This regression and those described in the next paragraph are limited to undergraduate majors with at
least 20 cases for the specified graduate degree.
  17
     The slope coefficients are also biased toward zero by sampling error in the estimates coefficient on the
undergraduate major in column 1 of Table 7. However, the variance of the coefficient estimates is large
relative to sampling error variances, so this bias is small.


                                                       15
of study in entry level wages. Using the 2009 ACS, Altonji et al. (2012) find that average
SAT math and SAT verbal test scores (taken before college) account for about 58 percent
varaince in the major specific earnings coefficients. However, they point out that part of this
reflects the association between the average scores and the major specific averages of other
unobserved student characteristics that matter for wage rates. These characteristics may
influence wage rates regardless of major and occupation, and they may also influence wage
rates by influencing occupational preferences. As we discuss in section 4, controlling for an
individual’s test scores usually reduces the variance of major specific earnings differences,
but by less than controlling for the major specific averages does.18 Some of the empirical
studies that we discuss below examine the link between test scores and grades and major
choice. Some examine the extent to which return to a major depends on them.


Occupation Choice and Earnings Differentials Across Fields Black et al. (2003),
Ransom & Phipps (2010), Altonji et al. (2012) and Altonji et al. (2014a) present evidence on
the degree to which undergraduate majors are concentrated in particular occupations. Ar-
cidiacono et al. (2014) also present evidence on this question using data from Duke students.
Altonji et al. (2012, Figure 3) displays the distribution of the major specific proportions of
graduates who work in the ten most common 3 digit occupations for the major. It is based
on the 2009 ACS. The mode of the distribution is about .43. The occupational concentration
is larger for younger workers.           They also report evidence on the proportion of workers in
each occupation that is accounted for by the three most popular majors in that occupa-
tion. The fraction varies widely across occupations, in ways that generally coincide with
conceptions about how specific the skill requirements of the occupations are. For example,
nursing, psychology, and multi-disciplinary or general science majors account for 82.9% of
all registered nurses between the age of 40 and 44. Accounting, business management and
administration, and finance majors together account for 72.1% of all accountants and au-
ditors in the same age range. On the other hand, the top three majors account for only
  18
       Noise in the student level test scores may be part of the reason why the major specific averages are more
important.


                                                        16
30.7% of first-line supervisors/managers and sales workers and only 32.1% of marketing and
sales managers. Differences across majors in the strength of the link between preferences for
fields of study and preferences for the mix of tasks associated with particular occupations is
one reason why the strength of the links between particular occupations and fields of study
varies. Differences in the degree to which occupational tasks require knowledge that is spe-
cific to particular fields of study are a second reason.   Note that the connection between
undergraduate field of study and occupation is also presumably affected by the connection
between undergraduate field of study and graduate degree, and between graduate degree
and occupation. We do not have quantitative evidence on this.




3    Model
In this section we present a series of models that highlight a number of key factors in the
decisions individuals make about what type of education to get, how much to get, and
where to get it. The most important of these are the fact that individuals are uncertain
about their ability and labor market returns as they relate to specific fields of study and
occupations. What they learn about these variables over time depends on prior education
choices. The second is that past choices about type of education condition future education
and labor market opportunities. We begin with a simple three period model that highlights
the role of uncertainty about ability, with only two field choices. In Section 3.2 we expand
the number of majors, incorporate choice of institution, add uncertainty about meeting
graduation requirements, and add graduate school. In Section 3.3 we add occupation choice,
giving special emphasis to the fact that treatment effects of a major on wage rates depend on
effects of wages in a given occupation and effects on occupation choice through non-pecuniary
benefits and search frictions. Section 3.4 discusses in more detail the role of learning about
ability in the return to a specific field of study, the decision to change majors, and decision
to obtain additional education. Section 3.5 briefly discusses the role of the supply side of
education–the implications of the fact that institutions set admissions requirements, the


                                              17
pecuniary and non-pecuniary costs of particular fields of study, and the costs of changing
majors.


3.1        A Simple Model of Dynamic Major Choice

We begin by specifying a three-period model in the spirit of Altonji (1993) to illustrate how
uncertainty about one’s abilities affects the dynamics of major choice. To save notation and
words, we allow abilities to influence both pecuniary and non-pecuniary costs and benefits
of schooling and labor market choices rather than separately introduce tastes.19 In period 1
individuals choose between two majors, m or h, or choose not to attend college, n. Denote
dijt as an indicator for whether individual i chose option j at time t. For the moment we
treat the decision not to attend college as terminal. In period 2, those individuals who chose
one of the college options update their beliefs about their abilities and then choose again
among the different schooling options and not attending college. In period 3, all agents work,
reaping the benefits of their past educational decisions. Since no additional decisions are
made in period 3, we collapse the period 3 payoffs into those for period 2.
       In period 1, payoffs for each of the choices depend on the individual’s abilities—abilities
that, at least for the schooling choices, are uncertain. An individual’s ability in major j,
denoted by Atot
              ij , is given by the sum of two terms: Aij , which is known in period 1, and

ζij which is initially unknown and only realized if the individual chooses j in either period
1 or 2. ζij is i.i.d. N (0, σj ).20 We normalize the utility payoff to not attending college at
all to zero. For simplicity, we also make the stark assumption that the post school utility
flow if a person leaves school after one period is the same as the flow if the person never
attends school, and thus is also zero. Relative to not attending college, the first period of
school offers a one period utility flow (which could be negative) but also the option value of
completing school.
       Denote Aij1 as the beliefs of the individual regarding his ability in option j in the first
  19
       This modeling assumption is also consistent with most of the empirical literature dealing with schooling
choices in the presence of imperfect information on the part of the students.
  20
     We relax this assumption by allowing for correlated learning across majors in Section 3.4.


                                                       18
period, so that Aij1 = Aij . Beliefs in period 2 depend on the choices made in periods 1 and
are given by:
                                
                                 A +ζ
                                    ij1 ij             if dij1 = 1for j 6= n
                      Aij2    =
                                 A                    otherwise.
                                       ij1

   Expected flow payoffs for each of the options depend on the individual’s beliefs regarding
their abilities. In addition, if the individual changes his schooling decision in period 2 the
individual incurs a switching cost. We specify expected flow payoffs while in school in each
period as the following linear functions (j ∈ {m, h}):

                             Uij1 = α0j + α1j Aij1

                             Uij2 = α0j + α1j Aij2 − α2j I(dij1 6= 1).

In the third period, when everyone is working, the expected utility is

                               U3ij = (γ0j + γ1j Aij2 )(dih2 + dim2 ).

In the equation for Uij2 , I(·) is the indicator function, implying α2j is the cost of switching
to major j. The αj terms represent expected utility while in school, while the γj terms give
the expected utility in the final period as a function of Aij2 for those who complete college.
Note that U3ij = 0 if the person did not attend school or left school after 1 period.
   Denoting the discount factor by β, individuals choose their educational decisions to se-
quentially maximize the discounted sum of their payoffs:
                                                              
                             X3    X                          
                                           t−1
                          E               β dijt (Uijt + εijt )
                                                              
                                  t=1 j∈{h,m,n}

where the εijt , j ∈ {h, m, n}, t ∈ {1, 2, 3} are idiosyncratic shocks. Note that the schooling
options dih2 and dim2 when t = 2 are not available if i chose the labor market option din1
when t = 1. This simple model produces a number of implications for the dynamics of major
choice:

  1. All else equal, individuals in the first period will choose the major with the higher
      variance on the unknown ability.

                                                  19
   Analogous to the occupational choice model of Miller (1984), high variance majors
   should be sampled first. If the fit with the major is bad, then the individual can
   always choose a different major. Even if switching to another major is prohibitively
   costly, the option to drop out still works to insure against bad information draws.

2. All else equal, individuals in the first period will choose the major that is most difficult
   to switch into.

   Majors that have high switching costs due to, for example, the course material building
   on past material will also be more attractive in period 1 all else equal (e.g. Engineering
   versus History).

3. The timing of information revelation matters.

   Better prior information reduces the option value of high switching cost majors and of
   college in general. Better posterior information increases the option value associated
   with the high switching cost majors and for college in general. Dropping out in this
   model is rational as individuals respond to the new information they receive.

4. Ability sorting may be driven either by the payoffs in school or in the labor market.

   Ability could matter only in the labor market (γ1j > 0, α1j = 0) or only in school
   (γ1j = 0, α1j > 0). In the former case, the school provides information about the
   individual’s abilities which influence labor market productivity and the non-pecuniary
   value of work, but do not affect the utility received in school. In the latter case, it may
   be that everyone receives higher returns in one major over another, but low ability
   individuals do not choose that major because of the difficulty of the subject matter in
   school.

5. Changes in returns to particular majors elicit larger long run supply responses than
   short run responses, particularly for high switching cost majors.

   Suppose the baseline returns to the different education options, the γ0j ’s, evolved
   stochastically. Because i) switching majors is costly and ii) schooling takes two periods,

                                            20
        the response to changes in labor market returns is gradual. If switching costs in major
        j are high, fewer individuals will find it optimal to switch to major j in response to
        a positive shock to γ0j after the first period. Asymmetries in response to shocks to
        major-specific labor market returns then arise due to differences in switching costs.


3.2      Heterogeneity in Schooling Options

3.2.1      Expanding the Choice Set

We now consider a model that expands the number of majors from 2 to J, allows C institu-
tions of higher education, incorporates uncertainty for graduation, and incorporates graduate
school. We again treat the decision not to go to college as an absorbing state. Before ob-
taining a bachelor’s degree, individuals decide to begin schooling in one of the J majors at
one of the C institutions. Not all the institutions grant bachelors degrees, incorporating the
case of 2-year colleges. Individuals in college have a positive probability of graduating. If
they do so, they then have the option of attending graduate school in one of J g subjects.
   Schools influence the choice of major—and in turn the choice of occupation—in part
through the flow payoffs individuals receive. We generalize the within-school flow payoffs as
follows:
               Uijct = α0jc + α1jc Aijt + α2jc I(dijt−1 6= 1) + α3jc I(dict−1 6= 1) + ijct    (1)

The specification above allows schools to differ along four dimensions: the intercept for major
j (α0jc ), the return on ability for major j (α1jc ), the cost of switching to major j (α2jc ), and
the cost of switching to school c (α3jc ).

   6. Consider two schools c and c0 where α0jc < α0jc0 and α1jc > α1jc0 . Then all else equal
        there is a cutoff Aijt such that those above Aijt would prefer school c and those below
        would prefer c0 .

        Schools with higher endowments may have higher payoffs, either through the effect of
        these resources on human capital or through the effect on the college experience. These
        effects, however, may differ by both major and academic preparation. For example,

                                                   21
      schools could tailor their curriculum to the preparation levels of their students. An
      introductory math course at one university may require more math background and
      proceed at a faster pace than the same course at another university. The effects can
      differ across majors because preparation may matter more for some majors than others.

   7. The cost of switching majors (α2jc ) may vary by school and the set of majors offered
      may vary as well, limiting responses to changes in the labor market.

      When a major is not offered at a particular school, this is equivalent to α0jc = −∞.
      Some schools in the United States specialize in particular majors such as engineering.
      Others do not offer engineering. In many countries, students are accepted into a
      particular major and switching majors entails starting the college application process
      over. When only a subset of majors are offered or when students must pre-commit to
      a major, the short-run response to an increase in the returns to another major will be
      limited, similar to implication 5.

Up until now we have treated the cost of switching as operating through the utility function.
But there may be other costs associated with switching majors such as an increase in gradu-
ation times. Denote Cijct as an indicator for whether i has completed a degree in major j at
school c by time t. Denote Hit as the history of educational choices and outcomes up until
time t. Think of Hit as a vector of credits and grades in various courses. We treat gradua-
tion as a stochastic process that depends on Ait and Hit so that the individual’s perceived
probability of graduating is:

                                  P r(Cijct = 1) = fjt (Ait , Hit )                       (2)

where fjt (·) maps {Ait , Hit } into the unit interval.

   8. Switching may delay graduation more in some majors than in others. Later switches
      may delay graduation more than earlier switches.

      Some courses of study may require that courses be taken in sequence or require more
      specific courses than other majors. The cost of delaying graduation may be particularly

                                                 22
        acute for those with limited finances for whom paying for an additional year of college
        could be especially burdensome.

Should the individual graduate, the choice set changes. The person now must decide whether
to enter the labor market or attend graduate school. Let n indicate as before the choice
to enter the labor market. Denote g as an indicator for the highest level of educational
attainment which, if the individual has graduated with a bachelor’s or a post-bachelor’s
degree, includes their school and major for their last degree. Extending the baseline payoff
for working to incorporate the expanded educational options, the payoff for working at time
t is:
                                    Uingt = γ0g + γ1g Aig + ingt

   9. All else equal, those who chose less-lucrative schooling options will be more likely to
        attend graduate school. Further, graduate school serves as insurance against changes
        in demand for particular majors.

        By attending graduate school, the individual can partly erase the earnings dependence
        from the previous schooling choice. If for idiosyncratic reasons similar individuals chose
        different majors, then persons choosing the lower-paying major should be more likely
        to pursue graduate work. However, this assumes that majors do not prepare students
        differently for graduate work, and ignores complementarities between undergraduate
        major and graduate degree type. In Subsection 2.3.1 we presented descriptive evidence
        that such complementarities differ substantially across graduate degree types. In this
        case, Uingt would also depend on the undergraduate field j. Note also that if the
        earnings premium for a school-major combination falls, then individuals in those school-
        major combinations may find graduate school attractive, particularly if the change in
        the earnings premium is seen as persistent.


3.3      Heterogeneity in Occupations

We now extend the baseline model discussed in Section 3.1 by allowing for K > 1 occupations
in the workforce. distinguish the expected flow payoffs in school from the expected flow

                                                 23
payoffs for working, we denote the expected flow payoff for i working in occupation k after
graduating from major j as Uikj . We specify this flow payoff as the sum of two parts:
pecuniary and non-pecuniary. Both the pecuniary aspects (given by the expected wage) and
the non-pecuniary aspects are functions of the individual’s abilities (Ai ) given by wkj (Ai )
and npkj (Ai ) respectively so:

                                   Uikj = npkj (Ai ) + γ1 wkj (Ai )                        (3)

with γ1 ≥ 0.
   In this framework, individuals make their schooling and occupational choices to sequen-
tially maximize the discounted sum of their payoffs:
               ( 2                                                                   )
                 XX                                  XX
             E           β t−1 dijt (Uijt + εijt ) +    β 2 dij2 dik3 (Uikj + eikj )
                   t=1   j                            j   k

where (εijt , eikj )k,j,t is a vector of idiosyncratic shocks. Note that individuals now choose
their occupation upon entering the labor market in period 3.

 10. The treatment effect of a major on wages operates through both the choice of occupation
      and through the effects on wages in each occupation. These effects may be of opposite
      sign if majors affect the non-pecuniary benefits of occupations.

      Note that since individuals value more than just the wage on the job, they may prefer
      a major j over a major j 0 even though the treatment effect of major j relative to j 0
      on future earnings is negative. Furthermore, the treatment effect of graduating from
      college with a given major j (relative to high school) on future earnings can also be
      negative even if the effects on earnings are positive within each occupation. Consider
      someone who chooses to complete a degree in education. Completing a degree in edu-
      cation may increase earnings in all occupations relative to not having a college degree.
      But if it also raises the non-pecuniary returns to working in an education occupation
      and working in education pays less than other occupations, then the unconditional
      effect of majoring in education (relative to no college degree) on earnings could be
      negative.

                                                 24
        Even if some majors do not affect the non-pecuniary benefits of occupations, the un-
        conditional effect on earnings may still be ambiguous. Namely, if the pecuniary returns
        for a particular major are larger in low-paying but high non-pecuniary benefits occu-
        pations, the probability of choosing a low paying occupation may increase, leading to
        an overall negative effect on earnings.

In practice, individuals from different demographic subgroups may attach different values to
the non-pecuniary aspects of the occupations. For instance, workplace flexibility is likely to
be more important for women than men. Denoting by Xi a set of demographic characteristics
for individual i, we can extend our framework by writing the non-pecuniary part of the flow
payoff for occupation k as npkj (Ai , Xi ).

 11. Treatment effects of major on wages may vary across individuals with identical wages
        in all occupations.

        The treatment effect of graduating from college with any given major j may be lower for
        those individuals who place a greater emphasis on non-pecuniary job benefits, and are
        more likely to prefer relatively low-paying but high non-pecuniary benefits occupations.


3.3.1     Accounting for Search Frictions

We have implicitly assumed so far that, after graduating from college, individuals can always
choose across all possible occupations. We now relax this assumption by allowing workers
who graduated from major j to receive λjk job offers within each occupation l, where λjk
may be zero for certain (major,occupation)-pairs.

 12. Individuals choose their college major by taking into account the occupation-specific
        effects of majors on wages, job offer arrival rates and non-pecuniary benefits.

        For instance, completing a college degree in Science (relative to Humanities) may lead
        to an increase in wages in science occupations, as well as in the job offer arrival rates
        and non-pecuniary returns to these occupations. Individuals take into account those
        three effects when deciding whether to major in Science.

                                                  25
3.3.2     The Effect of Labor Market Conditions

This framework can be extended to incorporate aggregate labor market conditions. Specif-
                S
ically, define Uikj to be the expected flow payoff for individual i working in occupation k
when the economy is in state S ∈ {R, E} (recession or expansion, respectively) after gradu-
ating from major j. Wages within each occupation and major vary across the business cycle,
resulting in the following expected flow payoff:


                                    S                      S
                                   Uikj = npkj (Ai ) + γ1 wkj (Ai )                          (4)

 13. The effect of aggregate labor market conditions on wages may vary across majors,
        through both i) the choice of occupation and ii) the effect on wages within each occu-
        pation.

        For instance, i) jobs in Education are likely to benefit less from good economic condi-
        tions than other occupations such as Science, while ii) workers with a Science degree
        working in Science are likely to be less affected by a recession relative to those who
        work in Science and graduated from another major.
        It follows that the allocation of students across majors may vary across the business
        cycle. Although this stylized framework abstracts from these considerations, it is worth
        noting that, in practice, the effect of labor market conditions on the decision to en-
        roll in a given major will also depend on how persistent students anticipate the labor
        market conditions to be.


3.4      Evolution of Beliefs

Individuals have innate abilities in each of the J majors and K occupations with a population
distribution that is multivariate normal. Let Σ denote the (J + K) × (J + K) population
covariance matrix of the abilities. Abilities may be correlated across majors and occupations,
resulting in a generally non-diagonal matrix Σ. Individual i’s expectations of these abilities
at time t are given by Ait , a J + K vector, where Aijt gives expected ability in major j and


                                                 26
Aikt gives expected ability in occupation k.21
       These expectations evolve with the signals received across different choice paths. Specif-
ically, consider the case in which individuals who attend college learn about their academic
ability through their schooling performance, as measured by their GPA by the end of the
year. Any discrepancy between the actual and expected GPA leads the individuals to update
their belief in a Bayesian fashion. Since Σ is non-diagonal, GPA in a given college major j
also provides some information about the abilities in other majors j 0 6= j as well as about
the abilities in all occupations k. Similarly, those who enter the labor market and work in
occupation k update their beliefs about their abilities in all occupations and all majors using
their log-wage as a signal. Hereafter we relax the assumption that labor market is absorbing
by allowing for college re-entry, which arises here as a natural consequence of learning about
ability.22
       Formally, denoting by Σt (Ai ) the posterior ability covariance matrix at the end of period
t, ability beliefs are updated as follows:

                        Ait = [(Σt−1 (Ai ))−1 + Ωit ]−1 [(Σt−1 (Ai ))−1 Ait−1 + Ωit Sit ]                 (5)

                    Σt (Ai ) = [(Σt−1 (Ai ))−1 + Ωit ]−1                                                  (6)

where Ωit is a (J +K)×(J +K) matrix with zeros everywhere except for the diagonal element
corresponding to the major or occupation of individual i in period t. The nonzero diagonal
element is inverse of the variance of the idiosyncratic shock affecting the GPA received in
that major or the wage received in that occupation, respectively. Sit denotes a J + K vector
with zeros everywhere except for the element corresponding to the major or occupation of
  21
       The model discussed in this subsection shares the same features as the correlated learning model esti-
mated in Arcidiacono et al. (2015). In that model, individuals are uncertain about their abilities in two-year
colleges, in four-year colleges as STEM majors, in four-year colleges as non-STEM majors. They are also
uncertain about their ability in the skilled and unskilled sectors of the labor market. We discuss other work
that emphasizes learning about preferences and ability in Section 5.1.2.
  22
     Of course, students receive other signals about their academic ability. They also learn about their
preferences for non-pecuniary aspects of a field of study and the occupations related to it through the
experience of taking classes in the field.


                                                      27
individual i in period t. That element is the ability signal received in t, i.e. GPA if individual
i is enrolled in college and the log-wage otherwise.
   This updating rule, which follows from the assumption that ability is normally dis-
tributed, boils down to the standard “signal-to-noise ratio times the signal plus noise-to-
signal ratio times the prior belief” updating formula in the unidimensional case. As indi-
viduals accumulate signals, the prior ability variance shrinks towards zero, thus giving more
weight to the prior about ability and less to the new signals when updating the ability beliefs.

 14. Treatment effects of majors on wages partly operate through learning about ability.

      Suppose it is the case that individuals who enroll in a Science major acquire a better
      sense of their comparative advantage, both in terms of major-specific and occupation-
      specific abilities, than those who enroll in the Humanities. Then this informational
      edge would lead Science graduates to make better decisions in the labor market (from
      an ex-post optimality viewpoint). All else equal, this should result in higher wages.

 15. Individuals who do not perform as well as expected revise their major-specific ability
      downward and may, as a result, find it optimal to switch major.

 16. Individuals who leave college before graduating may decide to subsequently re-enroll in
      the same or a different major as they update their beliefs about the wage returns to
      graduation and the wage returns to the different majors.

      Some of the individuals who left college and realize that they earn less than expected in
      the high-school sector may decide to re-enroll and get a Bachelor’s degree. Depending
      on the correlation patterns across the different occupation and major-specific abilities,
      those individuals may either re-enroll in their initial major, or enroll in a new major.


3.5    Supply side

Until now we have focused on how individuals make their educational decisions taking the
environment as given. Yet the production of degrees in various fields is also affected by


                                               28
institutions of higher education. Consider the recent work by Hastings et al. (2013) and
Kirkebøen et al. (2015), who analyze school and major choices in Chile and Norway respec-
tively. In these countries, individuals apply to school-major combinations and switching
majors is very costly. Admissions into school-major combinations is determined by test
scores, with programs taking those with the highest test scores admitted into the program
until all the spots are filled. This introduces discontinuities that can be used in the identi-
fication of the treatment effects of different majors on outcomes such as earnings. But the
fact that these discontinuities exist suggest that, at least for some programs, the number of
majors is not determined by demand but by supply. A clear next step in this research is to
understand how schools are choosing the size of their programs.
    Even when individuals are allowed to change their major, the school may make it more
or less attractive to do so. Returning to the baseline model, schools influence the cost
of effort and switching majors through the workload they require; α0j , α1j , and α2j are
in part choice variables of the universities. Universities affect these parameters through
the allocation of resources across departments. To the extent that a department has low
(high) demand relative to the funding provided by the university, the department may have
incentives to make their major more (less) attractive through the assignment of workload or
grading standards. As pointed out earlier, many individuals begin in STEM fields but switch
out, with those switching out tending to have lower test scores. This might be indicative of
STEM departments facing high demand given their teaching resources relative to non-STEM
departments.



4     Estimating the Return to College Majors
In this section we provide an overview of the literature on the returns to specific fields of
study. We begin by highlighting the key sources of endogeneity that have to be addressed,
focussing on the largely neglected problem posed by the fact that people choose occupations.
We then discuss the methods and estimates.



                                              29
4.1        Sources of Bias in Estimating the Return to College Majors

Estimating the return to specific college majors is a formidable task. Two main issues have
been broadly recognized in the empirical literature. First, the absolute advantage of workers
may differ across college majors for a number of reasons. For example, general labor market
ability may be related to non-pecuniary preferences for particular majors. It also may affect
the ability of students to complete more difficult ones, and the amount of study time they
need to do so. Second, students may have occupation specific talents that alter the relative
payoffs of different majors. A student may be good at engineering and poor at teaching,
and as a consequence have a relatively high return to engineering compared to teaching. As
long as students choose their college major partly based on the labor market returns, this
type of sorting on comparative advantage will typically result in biased OLS estimates of the
returns to majors. Sorting based on comparative advantage is of course a pervasive issue in
economics, and the subject of a vast econometrics literature on heterogenous treatment effects
and essential heterogeneity.23 The potential selection bias arising from absolute advantage
is also common to many discrete choice problems.
       A third source of bias is more subtle. As we discussed in Section 3.3, with heterogeneity in
preferences across occupations, the treatment effect of a major on observed wages operates
through both the choice of occupation and through effects on wages in each occupation.
The particular field that a college student chooses alters the distribution of wage rates and
employment opportunities that the student will experience in each of the occupations in the
economy. For example, a computer science degree presumably has a larger positive effect on
the wage offer distribution for computer programming jobs than for social worker positions.
If graduates simply maximize income, then they would choose the highest paying occupation
given their majors. In this case, the treatment effect on actual wages rates, abstracting from
occupation, would be a natural summary of how field of study affects productivity. However,
  23
       See, for example, Heckman et al. (2006). See also the seminal work of Roy (1951) on sorting based on
comparative advantage, and subsequent empirical analyses by, among others, Heckman & Sedlacek (1985),
Heckman & Honore (1990) in the context of the Roy’s model, and more recent work by Eisenhauer et al.
(2015) and D’Haultfoeuille & Maurel (2013) dealing with the empirical analysis of extensions of Roy’s model.


                                                     30
with occupation specific preferences, the utility maximizing choice of occupation will depend
on an individual’s preferences for non-pecuniary characteristics of occupation. The observed
wage rate of a computer science graduate will be affected by both the size of the treatment
effects on potential wages in various occupations and by what occupation the graduate
chooses to pursue given both pecuniary and non-pecuniary considerations. Consequently,
pre-existing differences across majors in occupation preferences, and the treatment effect of
field of study on occupation preferences both influence the treatment effect of a major on
wage rates.
   To better see the implications, consider what one could learn from an experiment in
which individuals are forced to choose a major that is selected at random, and then forced
to pursue a career in an occupation that is also chosen at random. This experiment would
identify differences across fields in the vector of average treatment effects on potential wage
rates in various occupations. Next consider an alternative experiment in which individuals
are forced to choose a major that is selected at random but are then allowed to choose jobs
freely. The alternative experiment would identify average treatment effects of majors on
observed wages rates and on occupational choices. However, identifying the effect of majors
on wages in an occupation is more complicated as the observed wage response depends on
both the effects on occupation-specific potential wages and the distribution of occupational
preferences. This poses a formidable estimation problem.
   Consider an instrumental variables estimation strategy that relies on a vector of instru-
ments that do not affect occupation specific potential wages but influence choice of field of
study by altering the non-pecuniary benefits of particular occupations. Such an IV strategy
will not identify the LATE for majors on realized wage rates, because variation in the instru-
ment will be associated with variation in the types of jobs that individuals choose conditional
on major. On the other hand, suppose that the instruments influence the monetary and/or
non-pecuniary benefits during college to a particular field of study but do not influence the
monetary returns or the non-pecuniary benefits of particular occupations. Then IV could
identify the LATE of major choice on realized (not occupation-specific) wage rates.



                                              31
   To help frame the discussion, consider the following equation for the log wage rate of an
individual i who majored in field j and is working in occupation k in period t.




    ln wijkt = γ00 + γjk + γA Ai + γjA Ai + γkA Ai + γjkA Ai + Q0c(i) γjQ + Xit0 γjkX + vijkt   (7)

   In (7), γjk is the average treatment effect of being assigned to field j and occupation
k. We normalize the γjk to be relative to an excluded field-occupation combination. All
other variables are deviations from population averages. Ai is a vector valued measure of the
student’s ability. The coefficient γA is the influence of Ai on wages in all occupation/field
combinations. It captures the effect of ability on absolute advantage. The coefficient γjA is
the effect of Ai on comparative advantage in j. It reflects the interaction between j and Ai
in the production of general human capital that is valued in all jobs. It also reflects comple-
mentarity between Ai and the skills taught in j. Similarly, the coefficient γkA corresponds
to the effect of Ai on comparative advantage in occupation k. The coefficientγjkA is the
differential effect of Ai on the wages of those who study j and work in k. It arises from
complementarity between the task requirements of k and field j, and captures the effect of
Ai on comparative advantage in the field/occupation pair j, k. Since γA is defined to be the
average effect of Ai over all field/occupation combinations, the γjA sum to 0 over j, γkA sum
to 0 over k, and γjkA sum to 0 over j, k.
   The vector Qc(i) is a vector of measures of the quality/selectivity of the college c that
i attends. demographic characteristics and labor market experience. The effects of these
variables may depend on j and k. The error term captures random factors that influence
wages in j, k at a particular point in time.
   As noted in the theoretical discussion of choice of major in Section 3, students choose j
in part based upon the labor market payoffs in the various occupations given their beliefs
about Ai and Xit , and in part based upon non-pecuniary factors associated with alternative
majors and associated occupations. Conditional on the major j, and absent search frictions,
individuals would then choose to work in occupations k that yield the highest utility given


                                                32
the wage equation (7). In practice though, search frictions imply that individuals may only
get to choose among a subset of all possible occupations. the observed choice of k and the
associated wage rate depends upon j, Ai , non-pecuniary factors, and labor market frictions.
Fully modeling the selection rule that leads i to a field j, occupation k pair would be quite
complicated. However, it will be difficult to estimate complementarities between fields of
study and occupational wage rates without understanding the selection process.
   Empirical evidence on interactions between occupation and major in earnings equations
is very limited. Some studies include occupation fixed effects as an informal way to assess
the extent to which the return to major operates within occupations rather than across oc-
cupations. Arcidiacono et al. (2014) obtain data from a sample of Duke University students
on beliefs about potential earnings by occupation for both chosen major and for alternative
majors. The data indicate that students believe that the monetary returns to particular ma-
jors vary substantially across occupations, consistent with the existence of complementarities
between majors and occupations. Expected earnings for any given major-occupation pair
are also found to be highly heterogenous across individuals. Lemieux (2014) is one of the
few papers in the literature that uses multiple regression to estimate the system of potential
wage equations for j, k pairs given by (7). Robst (2007), Nordin et al. (2010), Yuen (2010),
Kinsler & Pavan (forthcoming), Lemieux (2014), Lindley & McIntosh (forthcoming) and
Altonji et al. (2014a) show that college graduates receive a larger earnings premium when
individuals report that the skill requirements of their occupation is a good match for their
college major or when their occupation is typical for their major.
   The wage equation used by most studies is


                 ln wijt = γ0 + γ̄j + γ̄A Ai + γ̄jA Ai + Qc(i) γjQ + Xit0 γ̄jX + vijt        (8)

   In the above equation γ̄j is the average treatment effect of major j relative to the reference
major. It is a weighted average of the γjk . The parameter γ̄A is the sum of γA and a weighted
average of the γkA . sum of γjA , a weighted average of the γjkA , and a term that reflects
differences by j in weighted average of the γkA . Thus all of the parameters reflect differences


                                                 33
by major in occupation choice.
   We now discuss the alternative approaches that have been taken to estimate of variants
of (8).


4.2       Multiple Regression with Controls for Ai

Most studies in the literature have used multiple regression to estimated variants of (8).
Table 8 summarizes the results from a few studies. The studies differ primarily in the choice
of control variables. Most include basic demographic variables such as race. Almost all either
control for gender or estimate separate equations for men and women. Some include parental
background measures such as parental income and education. Most include prior test scores
and/or high school grades. Webber (2014) controls for personality traits that are associated
with labor market success. A few papers, including James et al. (1989) and Altonji (1993)
control for high school curriculum. A few studies, such as Rumberger & Thomas (1993)
and Loury & Garman (1995) control for college quality or selectivity.         Failure to control
for college quality could lead to biased estimates if college quality directly affects wage rates
and is correlated with major choice.
   Much of what leads to different (true) returns to different major is likely reflected in the
different courses taken. Hamermesh & Donald (2008) is one of the few studies to explore the
degree to which earnings effects depend on the course content of the major by adding counts
of course credits in various subjects. They find that adding the course credits account for
part of the difference across fields, with math and science courses entering positively. College
grades also enter positively in a log specification. This implies that differences across fields
in the level (as opposed to the log) of earnings are larger for those with high grades.
   The content of the coursework will also vary with how easy it is to switch majors. In
much of Europe, individuals pre-commit to majors, allowing for more specialization at the
cost of perhaps worse matches.
   Some studies use hourly wage rates rather than earnings as the compensation measure,
while some report results for both, and comment on the degree to which earnings effects


                                               34
operate through hours rather than wage rates. Most studies find larger differences across
fields in earnings effects than in wage effects, although the correlation between the two is
high. Most studies condition on positive earnings.24 Some studies condition on full-time
work.
       We now turn to the estimates, which are reported in the last columns of the table.25 For
each set of estimates we identify the reference category. When possible, we have expressed
the coefficients as relative to education. In some cases, the estimates are relative to high
school.
       Most studies find that the return to engineering is substantially larger than the return to
education. In U.S studies, the differential is typically about 0.4 even when family background
and prior test scores are included. There is also a substantial premium to business, although
the estimate is typically below that of engineering. Social studies majors also earn more
than education majors.
       Controlling for occupation compresses the earnings differences across fields of study, as
illustrated by the estimates from James et al. (1989) in the table, or the estimates in Altonji
et al. (2012) mentioned earlier. One would expect this if complementarity between field of
study and occupation specific tasks that are highly valued in the labor market is key to
differences in the payoffs to fields of study. But it also may be due in part to differences in
compensating differentials for non-pecuniary characteristics of occupations, to unobserved
heterogeneity in general labor market ability that is correlated with choice of field and
occupation and to the fact that conditioning on occupation in an earnings regression is to
some degree conditioning on the dependent variable.
       Most studies find that controlling for prior test scores, family background, and/or high
  24
       Hamermesh & Donald (2008) is the only paper we are aware of that corrects for selection into employ-
ment. They find that doing so reduces earnings differentials by between 10 and 20%.
 25
    A few entries in the table are taken from a similar table in Altonji et al. (2012). We have included
a number of more recent studies, including the handful that attempt to address bias from unobserved
heterogeneity. We have converted estimates that are expressed as a percentage effect or in terms of actual
earnings to log points.




                                                     35
school curriculum reduces estimates of the differences, but the changes are not always large.
For example, Hamermesh & Donald (2008) obtain very similar estimates when they add high
school class rank and SAT scores to their basic model.26 In Table 9, we use the NLSY79 to
explore how the returns change as we add additional controls to a model with fairly detailed
field of study categories. The estimation sample is constructed by pooling across survey
waves (1981 to 2012) the observations of individuals with at least a high school degree, who
are 24 years old or older, and work 30 hours or more per week. In all four regressions we
include dummy variables indicating whether individuals have a high school degree or some
college education only. To make the results easier to assess, we have ordered the majors from
the highest return to lowest return based on the specification with only controls for gender,
race/ethnicity and age, which we report in the first column. The returns to the various majors
are computed here relative to Education. Columns (2) to (4) report the estimated returns as
we add the following controls to the baseline specification, namely (2) father’s and mother’s
highest grade completed, (3) six components of the ASVAB test (Arithmetic Reasoning,
Numerical Operation, Coding Speed, Mathematics Knowledge, Paragraph Comprehension,
and Word Knowledge), and finally (4) measures of personality traits (Rosenberg Self-Esteem
and Rotter Locus of Control Scales). Overall, the estimated returns do change somewhat
as we add these different sets of controls, but for most majors these changes are pretty
small. There are a few exceptions though, with the returns to a major in military sciences
or general studies exhibiting sizable changes as we go from specification (1) to specification
(4) (0.256 to 0.185 log-points and 0.083 to 0.039 log-points, respectively). In most cases
the estimated returns (relative to Education) fall as we control for differences in parental
education, cognitive ability and personality traits. When interpreting these results, it is
important to keep in mind that the ASVAB scores as well as the Rotter and Rosenberg
scales are noisy and incomplete measures of cognitive and non-cognitive ability. It follows
that, even in the specification with the most comprehensive set of controls (Column (4)),
  26
       The fact that their sample is from only one university may affect class rank and SAT scores and other
student characteristics, given the rank and SAT scores are used in determining admission at U. of Texas and
also influence the decision to attend that school rather than somewhere else.


                                                     36
the estimated returns to the various majors are likely to biased upward. The size of the bias
from selection on unobservables is a key empirical question. We discuss papers that address
selection on unobservables when estimating the returns to majors in Sections 4.3-4.5.



4.2.1       OLS Evidence on Heterogeneity in the Returns

  For a few studies we present estimates separately for men and women. Grogger & Eide
(1995) is a good example. The relative returns are positively correlated, and there is no clear
pattern in the differences. Brown & Corcoran (1997) report estimates using the 1984 SIPP
panel for a sample of college graduates, but use field of highest degree (15 categories) rather
field of undergraduate degree with controls for graduate education. Gender differences in the
returns to major are relatively small. Altonji (1993, Appendix Table A1) reports separate
estimates for men and women in a regression that includes dummies for less than 2 years of
college, more than 2 years but no degree, and 16 mutually exclusive indicators for highest
degree consisting of 10 undergraduate and 6 graduate degree categories. Relative to no
college, women receive a higher payoff to nontechnical fields than men do, and about the
same return in technical fields. But relative to education and other nontechnical fields, men
tend to receive a higher premium in business and STEM fields.27 Using the ACS 2009 with
minimal controls, Altonji et al.(2012, Supplemental Table 3) report estimates by gender
of the effects of college major on log wages, with a degree in education as the reference
category. They use 171 major categories. The effects relative to education are larger for
men than women in most fields. However, the correlation in the estimates is large. The
results suggest that the gender gap for those obtaining a degree in education is smaller than
in most other fields. Chevalier (2011) finds that for women education pays well relative to
most other majors, while for men most other fields pay better, with physical science being
an odd exception. The correlation in the relative returns to the degrees is fairly strong at
  27
       Brown and Corcoran include controls for high school curriculum. Altonji includes controls for high school
curriculum, SAT Math and Verbal scores, high school grades, and the student’s self assessment of whether
or not he is college material.



                                                        37
0.597, especially given that this value is downward biased by sampling error in the regression
coefficients.
       Several studies examine the effects of ability measures on the relative returns to field of
undergraduate degree. Altonji (1993, Table A3) finds that the gap between the return to a
technical major and a nontechnical major is substantially larger for those with higher values
of a set of ability measures. Webber’s (2014) evidence based on NLSY79 is less clear. We
discuss other evidence on this issue in the next section.



4.2.2       Estimation Using Selection on Observables as a Guide to Selection on
            Unobservables

Webber (2014) estimates the effects of some college and a college degree in STEM, Business,
Social Sciences, and Arts and Humanities on log earnings using the NLSY79. In line with
several prior studies, he measures the effects of bias from selection on observables by ex-
amining how the coefficients on the college degree parameters change when the AFQT test,
mother’s education, the Rotter score measure of self control and the Rosenberg Self-Esteem
scale are added to the controls. In addition, he also examines the effects of selection on
unobservables using the methodology proposed by Altonji et al. (2005). Altonji et al. pro-
vide a set of assumptions under which the strength of the relationship between selection into
various education outcomes and the observed explanatory variables in the earnings model
are informative about the degree of selection based upon unobserved characteristics. Webber
reports the fraction of the premium (over high school) associated with the different degrees
that is due to selection on unobservables under the assumption that the degree of selection
on unobservables is the same as the degree of selection on the observables. The fractions are
large, but the assumption that selection on unobservables is as strong as selection on the ob-
servables is extreme in a study of the effects of field choice on earnings.28 Using a simulation
  28
       This is because much of the variance in earnings at a point in time is due to measurement error or
permanent and transitory shocks that occur after college decisions have been made. These components of
measured earnings are not related to education choices and thus are not a source of selection bias.



                                                    38
methodology that involves the use of the American Community Survey as well as estimates
of selection bias parameters that are based upon the NLSY79, Webber provides estimates of
the effects of the majors on lifetime earnings under alternative assumptions about the de-
gree of selection on unobservables relative to observables. When test scores and personality
measures are excluded, the estimates indicate that STEM graduates earn 39.1% more than
Arts/Humanities majors. The corresponding values for Business and Social Science Majors
are 34.1% and 21.6%. Correcting for observable ability measures changes these percentages
to 37.4%, 77.6% and 16.4%. degree of selection on unobservables is half as large as selection
on observables, the STEM, Business and Social Science premiums over Arts/Humanities are
reduced to a relatively modest 11%, 10.9% and 4.9% respectively.29 As we note below, most
of the other approaches to accounting for selection on unobservables show larger differences
across fields in returns.


4.3        Control Function Approaches To Controlling for Selection on
           Unobservables

The OLS approaches assume that the control variables are sufficient to address the prob-
lem of unobserved variation in ability, family background, and high school preparation that
may alter the estimated returns to specific fields of study. A few studies have attempted
to address selection on unobservables based on absolute advantage and/or comparative ad-
vantage. Drawing on Heckman (1979) and Lee (1983), Berger (1988) deals with selection
by constructing a control function based on a reduced form multinomial logit model of the
choice among five fields—Education, Liberal Arts, Business, Science, and Engineering. The
data are the NLS Young Men panel, which included men aged 14 to 24 in 1966. The sample is
restricted to college graduates who do not get an advanced degree. The logit model includes
  29
       Webber also reports that selection into college and into STEM and Business majors is less strongly
related to ability measures in the NLSY97 cohort than in the NLS79 cohort. Part of the discrepancy may be
due to differences in the test instruments used and to the fact that the test was administered to the NLSY97
cohort at younger ages.



                                                    39
variables that belong in Ai and Xit plus a set of additional variables that are assumed to alter
major choice by shifting the non-pecuniary preferences for field of study but not to directly
affect wage rates. These variables include father’s occupation, an indicator for whether both
parents were present in the household when the respondent was 14, mother’s and father’s
education, college prep high school curriculum, and ethnic origin. Given the literature on
intergenerational links, there is reason to believe that some of these variables have a direct
effect on wages. Furthermore, to the extent that variables such as father’s occupation affect
occupation choice conditional on field of study, they would affect the weighting that defines
the parameters in (8).
   Berger finds substantial differences in the average payoff to major that are in line with
many other studies in the literature (see Table 8). The pattern of the coefficients on the
sample selection terms varies across fields of study. They are only statistically significant
in the wage rate equations for Education majors and Liberal Arts majors. The coefficients
indicate positive selection into these majors. The sign on the ability measures (IQ and
Knowledge of the World of Work) are mixed across equations. The experience profiles of
wages vary across majors but also depend on the birth cohort, so it is hard to draw strong
conclusions about whether they differ by field.
   Even though the use of a reduced form model of major choice is a straightforward way to
address selection on unobservables when estimating (8), Berger is the only study we know
of that has employed it. The lack of obvious choices for variables that influence choice of
major but not wages may partially explain the lack of use.


4.4    Structural Modeling of Major Choice and Wages

Arcidiacono (2004) estimates the monetary return to fields of study as a piece of a full
dynamic discrete choice model. The model considers the decisions of whether to remain
in college (conditional on having applied), where to attend college, and field of study. A
key purpose of the paper is to shed light on why students sort by ability across schools and
majors, not simply to estimate wage equations. But modeling the education decision making


                                              40
process is also the most natural way to get a handle on effects of heterogeneity in ability and
on dynamic selection that is induced by the arrival of information about talent, tastes, and
field specific wages.
       Students may transfer, and optimal choice depends on field of study and ability. The
monetary payoff to college depends on college quality with a field specific coefficient. The
non-pecuniary costs of attending college and of effort depend on college quality as well as
the match between the student and the college.30
       The basic set up is as follows. The analysis is restricted to students those who were
admitted to at least one 4 year college. The college application decision and the set of colleges
to which a student is admitted are treated as exogenous. These individuals presumably have
at least some interest in college and the opportunity to attend. As in Altonji’s (1993) stylized
model, individuals are forward looking but uncertain about preferences, ability, and labor
market opportunities. In the first period, an individual chooses a major and a college from
the set she was admitted to, or she makes an irreversible decision to enter the labor market.
After making these choices, college students get new information about ability from grades,
and about preferences for particular programs of study.
       In Period 2, those who were college students in the first period once again choose a major
and choose a college from the set they were originally admitted to.31 Alternatively, they may
leave school and enter the labor market. After period 2, those who had remained in college
get additional information about their ability and preferences and enter the labor market.
       For present purposes, the key equation of the model is the wage equation. Ability has
three components. The first two are proxied by the SAT math and SAT verbal scores. These
are assumed to be known at the start of college. The second is proxied by cumulative grades.
In the model, as college progresses, agents learn about their general ability and subject spe-
  30
       The effort level and associated utility cost to i of attending a college of a given quality Qc(i) depends
on a major specific term that depends on Q. It also depends on a term that is increasing in the mismatch
between a student of ability Ai and Qc(i) .
  31
     Arcidiacono’s results imply that ability sorting across majors is primarily due to heterogeneity in pref-
erences for major and the workplace.



                                                        41
cific abilities only through grades. The flow of information affects choices about college
major and whether to remain in school, but cumulative grades and test scores are assumed
to fully summarize the agent’s ability. Cumulative grades and test scores are included in
the wage equation. Thus, in Arcidiacono’s basic specification, all components of ability that
influence wage rates are assumed to be observed by the econometrician. The wage equation
of the model can be estimated consistently by ordinary least squares. However, Arcidiacono
also estimates a second specification that includes fixed person specific unobserved hetero-
geneity. The unobserved heterogeneity influences both the returns to each major as well as
preferences. In the wage equation this amounts to replacing the parameters γ̄j with γ̄r(i)j
where r(i) is i0 s type. He allows for two types. Thus the wages take the form



 ln wijt = γ̄r(i)j +[SAT Mi , SAT Vi , Gradesi ]0 γ̄Aj +[SAT Mc(i) , SAT Vc(i) ]0 γjQ +Xit0 γ̄jX +vijt (9)

The equation must be estimated jointly with the other equations of the model. Identification
of the type parameters comes from the correlation between the various outcomes. For exam-
ple, someone may have a high unobservable preference for engineering. This preference may
be correlated with grades and with wages in ways that are not accounted for by observables.
       The results are as follows. In the two-type model, the premium relative to no college
is highest in the natural sciences (which include engineering) followed by business. Social
sciences/humanities have a 5% return, and education is slightly negative for males and has
a return of 6% for women.32
       The parameters on average test scores for the school and for the individual are con-
strained to be greater than or equal to zero. SAT Mi and SAT Mc(i) are typically positive
and statistically significant for all majors except for education. SAT Mi also substantially
increases the return to the “no college”option, so the net positive effect on the return to
college is small. A 100 point increase in SAT math has little effect on the premiums for
  32
       Similar findings with the same data are found in Arcidiacono (2005) who does not model the dynamics
of major choice but does model the college application decision and the decisions by colleges as to who to
admit.


                                                     42
the various majors relative to the return to no college. It increases the return to natural
sciences and business relative to education by about 2.5%. The non-negativity constraint
binds in many cases for SAT Vi and SAT Vc(i) . Indeed, a number of studies have noted that
verbal test scores sometimes appear with a negative sign in regression models that include
math test scores.33 Since verbal skills will almost certainly raise productivity across a broad
array of jobs rather than lower it, a natural explanation for the negative coefficients is that
conditional on grades and SAT M , SAT V is associated with preferences for occupations that
pay less for non-pecuniary reasons. However, Sanders (2015) does not find much support
for this interpretation. He finds that the negative return is concentrated in occupations for
which interpersonal contact is important. He speculates that reading scores may proxy for
introversion conditional on math scores. This is an interesting area for future research.
       What about school quality? The results indicate that attending a school with a one-
hundred-point higher average math SAT score raises the return to natural sciences degree
by 2.8% and a social sciences degree by 6%. These numbers are small compared to the
differences in returns across majors.
       A few other papers have taken a structural approach.              Beffy et al. (2012) estimate a
sequential model in which university entrants choose a field, and then decide on the (initially
uncertain) level of education before entering the labor market. The model is estimated using
data from two cohorts of students in France, where there is evidence that a large fraction
of students complete a level of education which differs from the level they aspired to when
starting college. The choice of field of study, which is the main focus of the paper, is based
on both monetary and nonmonetary factors. The earnings equation allows the effects of field
(Sciences, Humanities and Social Sciences, and Law, Economics and Management) to interact
with the level (5 levels from dropout to graduate school) and to vary across cohorts. The
equation includes controls for gender, foreign birth and whether the parents are immigrants,
but test scores and secondary school grades are not observed in the data. Unobserved
  33
       See Kinsler & Pavan (forthcoming) and Seki (2013), who use SAT math and verbal scores and study a
sample of college graduates. Sanders (2015) finds a negative effect of verbal test scores using five different
data sets.


                                                     43
heterogeneity is accounted for through the use of vectors of heterogeneity parameters that
allow for correlation between earnings, field choice and degree level (3 heterogeneity types).
Estimation results show that, for both cohorts (students entering the labor market in 1992 or
1998) and most of the levels of education, majoring in Science leads to the highest earnings,
followed by Law, Economics and Management and Humanities and Social Sciences. The
returns to field of study are highly heterogeneous across cohorts and levels of education.
Notably, for those graduating in 1992, receiving a Maitrise (four year of college) in Science
is associated with a 15.2% premium over a degree in Humanities and Social Sciences. The
premium goes up to 27.3% for the individuals graduating in 1998. The returns to Science
relative to Humanities and Social Sciences also tend to increase with the level of education.
   Kinsler & Pavan (forthcoming) also develop and estimate a structural model of field of
study and labor market outcomes. Individuals first choose what to study and then choose
a job type. They are endowed with two types of human capital, math and verbal, but are
imperfectly informed about them when they are deciding what to study. Human capital
accumulation depends upon choice of major. Individuals find out their true human capital
when they finish school. They choose which sector to work in based upon wage rates, non-
pecuniary factors, and random variation in the opportunities available to them.
   Kinsler & Pavan estimate the model using the 1993 cohort of Baccalaureate and Beyond.
They complement the structural analysis by providing descriptive information on test scores
and grades, subject matter by field of study, on the occupation distribution. They also
present regression evidence on the interplay between wage rates, field of study, and on
employment in a job that is related to their field of study.
   Kinsler & Pavan report average treatment effects of the return to business and science
relative to an “Other” category. They obtain estimates of 0.145 for business and 0.184 for
science. These are below the corresponding OLS estimates of 0.204 and 0.229 in the base
specification and 0.185 and 0.214 when SAT math and verbal scores and Major GPA are
controlled for. Thus OLS overstates the difference in returns even with controls, in part
because the controls are noisy measures of ability and human capital. Kinsler & Pavan also



                                              44
use the model to show that the monetary return to science does not vary much across the
population. The returns to business are actually a bit smaller for those who choose business.
Finally, the paper presents both descriptive evidence and evidence from the model that the
payoff to science and to the “Other” major category strongly depend on working in a job
related to the major. In the case of Science, the difference is almost 30%. The payoff to
business does not depend much on this, although the estimates are somewhat noisy.34



4.5        Using Variation in Access to Fields of Study to Identify Re-
           turns

4.5.1       Methods

The use of exogenous variation in access to fields of study is an alternative approach to
identifying returns. In many universities, the access to some fields of study, such as business
or computer science, is restricted. When well-defined, measurable student characteristics
are used to determine admission, and the admissions criteria are known or can be easily
estimated, then the possibility of using variation in the probability of admission to particular
programs of study arises. In the United States, one could in principle use grade point
average cutoffs along with other criteria to identify the return to selective programs. This
would require assembling information on the cutoffs at a few universities. One would also
need detailed information on the college transcripts of students. Multiple states, including
Florida, Texas, and North Carolina, have invested in student record systems that could in
principle be used for this purpose. Variation over time in the field specific admissions cutoffs
would also be very helpful.
       The research possibilities are greater in the many countries where public provision of
higher education dominates, admission is to a specific college program, and the criterion
is an index of test scores or secondary school grades. Bertrand, Hanna & Mullainathan
  34
       Across a full set of 50 majors, Altonji et al. (2014a) find that earnings are 29% higher for those who
work in a occupation that is among the top 5 most common one for the major.



                                                      45
(2010), Hastings et al. (2013) (hereafter, HNZ) study for Chile and Kirkebøen et al.’s (2015)
(hereafter KLM) study for Norway show the potential as well as the challenges.35 As we
mentioned previously, in both countries admission is to a school/field combination. Students
provide a ranked list of their preferred programs. They are generally admitted to the most
preferred program for which they exceed the admissions cut off.36 The cost of changing pro-
grams is very high, so new crossing the admissions threshold has a very large, discontinuous
effect on the odds that a student will matriculate in a particular program. This provides
the potential for a fuzzy RD design. At first glance, this seems straightforward. However,
the appropriate use and interpretation of IV estimators, including those based on fuzzy RD
designs, to estimate the effects of multiple unordered categorical choices raises very difficult
issues that are still being sorted out. HNZ and KLM are an important start of what we
expect to become a very active area of research.
       To illustrate the regression discontinuity approach, consider a simple case where there
are three fields and only one school. Let si denote i’s test score. Denote sj as the test score
cutoff for field j. Order the fields according to their test score cutoffs: s2 > s1 > s0 and, for
ease of exposition, assume that the cutoff for field 0 never binds.
       We can obtain the effect of crossing the threshold in field j on earnings by examining
those who were near the threshold for field j. Let ti1 (ti1 ) equal one if i (a) listed field 1 ahead
of field 0 and (b) had a test score slightly above (below) s1 , and equal zero otherwise. For
now, assume that admission is perfectly determined by the student’s score and field ranking
(strict RD design). The average treatment effect for crossing the threshold for field 1 for
those for whom ti1 = 1 or ti1 = 1 is given by:
  35
       Bertrand, Hanna & Mullainathan (2010) use an RD approach to study the returns to engineering colleges
in India. They use variation across castes in admissions cutoff scores. We do not discuss their study in detail,
because their estimates of earnings effects are too noisy to draw strong conclusions. Other countries that use
indices based on grades and/or test scores heavily in the admissions process include Turkey and Columbia.
  36
     Students are permitted to rank up to 8 school/field combinations in Chile and up to 15 in Norway. In
the absence of these restrictions (which do not bind for most students), students have an incentive to rank
schools in accordance with their preference and without regard to admissions chances.




                                                      46
                               ∆1 = E(Yi |ti1 = 1) − E(Yi |ti1 = 1)                              (10)

where Yi is some measure of earnings. This treatment effect has a clear interpretation. It
gives the expected earning from being assigned to field 1 ahead of field 0 for this subset of
individuals.
   The corresponding effect for crossing the threshold for field 2 is not as straightforward
to interpret. Let ti2 (ti2 ) equal one if i (a) listed field 2 first and (b) had a test score slightly
above (below) s2 , and equal zero otherwise.The average treatment effect for crossing the
threshold for field 2 for those for whom ti2 = 1 or ti2 = 1 is given by:

                               ∆2 = E(Yi |ti2 = 1) − E(Yi |ti2 = 1).                             (11)

The second term is now a mixture of earnings from those rejected by 2 who choose field 1
and others who choose field 0. Letting dij indicate being assigned to field j, the second term
can be decomposed as:

 E(Yi |ti2 = 1) = E(di0 |ti2 = 1)E(Yi |ti2 = 1, di0 = 1) + E(di1 |ti2 = 1)E(Yi |ti2 = 1, di1 = 1)

   In order to recover the treatment effect of assignment to field 2 relative to 1, either more
data is needed or more structure needs to be placed on the problem. HNZ take the latter
approach, writing earnings as:

                      Yi = θi + (γ0 + φi0 )di0 + (γ1 + φi1 )di1 + (γ2 + φi2 )di2                 (12)

The first term gives the absolute advantage across all fields. A major advantage of the RD
design over OLS is that it eliminates bias from the unobserved components of the absolute
advantage term θi . The coefficients on the field of admission dummies dij include comparative
advantage terms φij . HNZ express the comparative advantage terms as depending on a
function of observables, Xi , and unobservables, νij :

                                          φij = Xi φj + νij                                      (13)


                                                 47
       Let νi be the vector of comparative advantage terms of which νij is an element. HNZ
assume no selection into fields based on unobservables that affect earnings for those near the
cutoff:
                        E(dij |ti2 + ti2 = 1, θi , Xi , νi ) = E(dij |ti2 + ti2 = 1, Xi )               (14)

Given enough data, we could then calculate the field-specific premia for those near the
threshold and holding particular values of Xi . Namely, the premium for field 2 over field 1
is:
                       ∆21 (Xi ) = E(Yi |ti2 = 1, Xi ) − E(Yi |ti2 = 1, di1 = 1, Xi )                   (15)

       HNZ note that the assumption of no selection on νi might be a reasonable approximation
if students are unaware of individual heterogeneity in returns and/or are not very responsive
to earnings differentials when choosing majors. They provide some evidence supporting these
assumptions in the Chilean context.37 As HNZ point out, even under these conditions, the
νij could lead to bias if they are correlated with non-pecuniary preferences for fields that
influence rankings and affect comparative advantage. For example, suppose that students
who enjoy engineering and science courses are more likely to be good engineers. Or suppose
that they are more likely to pursue occupations for which an engineering degree adds value.
Then occupation or major-specific abilities will be correlated with field rankings. Indeed,
Arcidiacono’s (2004) model assumes that the effects of ability on relative returns and on
preferences are strongly related. The empirical significance of this issue is still an important
research question.
       KLM provide weaker conditions for identifying treatment effects when data on the next-
best alternative, defined as the alternative that would have been chosen if the preferred
alternative is not part of the choice set, is available. Identification is conditional on the
  37
       For example, HNZ report that males, students from higher-SES schools, and students who are strong at
math are not more likely to apply to programs for which returns are estimated to be high for these subgroups.
Hastings, Neilson, Ramirez and Zimmerman (2015a, b) provide evidence for Chile that applicants are poorly
informed about the earnings and education costs of different college programs. This is particularly true for
low-SES students. See Section 5.3 for a discussion of evidence on the role of expectations and learning in
major choice.


                                                       48
standard IV/LATE assumptions, plus an assumption that they refer to as the “irrelevance
and next-best alternative” condition. This condition states that if crossing the admissions
threshold to field 1 does not induce i to choose 1, then crossing the threshold does not induce
her to choose 2 either. Similarly, it states that if crossing the admissions threshold to field
2 does not induce her to choose 2, then it does not induce her to choose field 1 either. In
this case, we compare differences in earnings for those who are either just above or below the
threshold and who have the same next-best alternative. Let di2k denote whether i listed field
k immediately after field 2. Under their assumption, in the strict RD case we can calculate
the local average treatment effect of being admitted to 2 over the next-best alternative k
using
                         ∆∗2k = E(Yi |ti2 = 1, di2k = 1) − E(Yi |ti2 = 1, di2k = 1).                        (16)

This is an important result that shows the value of information about next-best alternatives
in this context.38
       KLM, however, focus on degree completion rather than admission. They also report
reduced form estimates for predicted admission based on crossing the admissions threshold.
We would often rather obtain the effects of completing a field than being assigned to a field, so
the degree completion results are of great interest. But, from a more general methodological
viewpoint, it also raises the question of the conditions under which exogenous variation
in field assignment can be used to identify the treatment effect of field completion. It is
possible that the irrelevance condition may not hold for field completion even when it holds
for admission.
       Let gij indicate whether i completes a degree in field j. Assume for the moment that
individuals only complete degrees in the fields for which they are initially assigned. KLM’s
estimate of the treatment effect for completing a degree in field 2 relative to field j would
  38
       In practice, KLM use a fuzzy RD design as admission to the preferred field is not a deterministic function
of the application score. They extend the previous result to a fuzzy RD setting by showing that these
assumptions are sufficient to identify the LATE of being admitted to field 2 over the next-best alternative k.




                                                        49
then be given by

            ∆c2j = E(Yi |ti2 = 1, di2j = 1, gi2 = 1) − E(Yi |ti2 = 1, di2j = 1, gij = 1),      (17)

where the superscript c indicates completion.
   In their baseline specification for effects of degree completion, KLM select their sample by
restricting to individuals who have obtained a post-secondary degree. For the discontinuity
in admissions to be used to recover the completion premium for field 2 relative to next-best
alternative j, one needs to be in a scenario where this restriction does not lead to a sample
selection bias. In particular, this empirical strategy leads to consistent estimates of the
premium of interest if either of the following scenarios holds:

  1. Degree completion is unrelated to factors that affect earnings, implying that expected
      earning in the degree completion state is the same for actual completers as well as
      non-completers.

  2. Crossing the admission threshold does not affect degree completion. Formally, for any
      individual i, di0 (ti2 = 1) = di0 (ti2 = 0) where di0 (ti2 = 1) and di0 (ti2 = 0) respectively
      denote the potential degree completion status for test scores above the admission cutoff
      for field 2 and below the admissions threshold for 2.

The first scenario is clear. The second scenario is more subtle. To see why this condition is
needed if the first scenario does not hold, we turn back to HNZ’s decomposition. Suppose
completing a degree depends on θi but a higher θi is needed to complete a degree in field
2 than j. Then those who cross the admission threshold for field 2 and then graduate will
be positively selected relative to those who do not cross the threshold, biasing upward the
estimated treatment effect of completion. This condition is implied by what KLM refer to
as the irrelevance condition.
   KLM consider whether their results are sensitive to conditioning on degree completion.
First, they show that, averaging across preferred and next-best alternative pairs, crossing the
admissions cutoff for the preferred field has a negligible effect on the graduation rate. Second,
they estimate models that include all individuals, not just college completers, and show that

                                                 50
their estimates change very little. This is true even when they add a dummy for completing
post-secondary education as an additional endogenous outcome. These findings provide
reassurance that differential selection by field in who graduates conditional on admission to
field j is a second order issue for their analysis. While in the Norwegian context the second
condition above appears to hold, it is possible that both conditions are violated in other
contexts. These are important questions for future research.


4.5.2   Discontinuities in Practice

In practice, the data are not as clean as what we described above. Both HNZ and KLM
see many individuals who either (i) cross the cutoff but do not attend their supposedly best
available option or (ii) do not cross the cutoff but later are found to have attended that
program. The first could result from students changing their minds and the second from
individuals deciding to wait for another admissions cycle in the hopes of enrolling in their
first-choice program. Furthermore, in KLM’s analyses of effects of degree completion, some
enroll in a program may end up graduating in a different program or not graduating with
a degree. There are also differences in college quality and many more majors than three.
Some aggregation of majors is then necessary to obtain statistical precision, particularly if
a small window around the test threshold is used.
   HNZ consider combinations of schools and majors which they refer to as degree programs.
Each of these programs is characterized by an admission cutoff that varies in an arguably
unpredictable way from one year to another. HNZ first estimate the effects of crossing the
various program-specific admission cutoffs on future earnings, for students whose test scores
lie in the neighborhood of the admission cutoffs. They also examine how these effects vary
across program selectivity, major and socioeconomic background. As discussed above though,
these effects are complicated to interpret in a structural fashion as different “untreated”
individuals who are just below the admission cutoff may end up enrolling in different degrees.
HNZ address this issue by imposing the restriction that individuals do not choose their
program based on their unobserved (to the econometrician) program-specific comparative



                                             51
advantage. Under this assumption, they are able to estimate the effects on future earnings
of being admitted to the different programs relative to not being admitted to any selective
program. Specifically, they rely on the following specification of the earnings equation, for
the set of individuals applying to the program p:
                                                 P
                                                 X
                           Yip = fp (sip ) +           (θr + Xi ψr )dir + ip              (18)
                                                 r=1

where P denotes the total number of programs, dir is a dummy for admission into program
r and fp (sip ) is a smooth (program-specific) function of the difference between individual
i’s test score and the admission cutoff for program p. The authors then estimate (18) by
instrumenting for the admission dummies dir and their interactions with the Xi0 s using the
threshold-crossing dummies tir . Note that absent the assumption that individuals do not
choose their program based on their unobserved comparative advantage, one would need to
estimate instead a correlated random coefficient model in order to recover the payoffs to
being admitted to each program.
   KLM focuses on graduation rather than admission. Letting Xi now denote the set of
observed characteristics such as gender, age, and the running variable, KLM use the following
specifications for every next-best field k:
                                X
                        Yi =           βjk gij + Xi γk + λjk + i                          (19)
                                j6=k
                                X
                       gij =           πjk tij + Xi ψjk + ηjk + ζi       ∀j 6= k           (20)
                                j6=k

where the first subscript refers to the preferred field and the second to the next-best alterna-
tive. Graduation in field j, gij , is then instrumented for with whether the individual crossed
the test score threshold. To gain precision, they estimate the first stage for all next-best
alternatives at once and then the second stage returns for all next-best alternatives at once,
imposing a more restricted version where λjk = µk + θj and ηjk = τk + σj . They then show
that their results are robust to including all interactions between preferred and next-best
alternatives. They also show that their results are robust to including more flexible functions
of the running variable.

                                                  52
       In practice, the field specific grade cutoffs vary across universities and over time within
universities. That is, at a given point in time, s2 might exceed s1 at one school while s1
exceeds s2 at another. And at a given university, the ranking of the cutoffs change over time
in some cases. Both KLM and HNZ take advantage of such variation. Cutoff reversals are
particularly important in order to separately identify the returns to field j relative to field k,
and the returns to field k relative to field j. KLM find little evidence of complementarities
between school quality and fields of study in the Norweigan data. As a result, in their
main analysis KLM assume that the effect of school quality on earnings is the same for all
fields. With this additive separable specification, one is justified in using variation across
schools and the relative values of the admissions cutoffs to identify the βjk . This increases
the number of βjk parameters that are identified.


4.5.3       Results Using the Fuzzy RD Approach

HNZ provide estimates of effects of admission to a program relative to the outside option of
not being admitted to any selective program, which are not directly comparable to estimates
of degree completion effects. One would expect them to lie below the effects of degree
completion.39 In any event, they find earnings effects of 25.6% (of the average sample
earnings) of being admitted to a health degree, 16.1% for social science degree, 11.9% for
a science/technology degree, 15.1% for a law degree, and 10.1% for a business degree. The
effect of education is 4.2%, while the effects of art/architecture and humanities are essentially
zero. The relative returns are broadly consistent with the literature that takes field choice
as exogenous conditional on a rich control set. HNZ also estimate the effect of program
selectivity on future earnings. They find that being admitted to a program in the bottom
selectivity quartile, relative to not being admitted to any selective program, raises earnings
by 4.7%. The effect is much larger for the highly selective programs (24.2% for the top
quartile). The relative returns to fields of study depend upon the selectivity of the degree
program j. For example, the return to admission to law and social science programs are
  39
       They do not have information about college completion rates that one might use to do a rough adjustment
of these estimates.


                                                       53
primarily associated with admission to high selectivity degree programs. Here one should
keep in mind that variation in selectivity arises from both variation in selectivity of the
institution and variation in the selectivity of the specific program within the broad categories,
e.g. nursing versus physician in the health category. Interestingly, HNZ find that students
from high SES backgrounds receive large gains (30.7%) from admission to highly selective
business programs, while the return for low SES students is close to zero. On the other hand,
the return to highly selective health programs is large and positive for both groups.
       Table 4 of KLM reports the estimates of the returns to different fields (j) relative to
next-best alternatives (k) parameters for almost all pairs of 10 fields. Here we emphasize
two main findings.40 First, there are large differences in the returns across fields.41 For
example, relative to the teaching degree, returns are large and positive in all fields except
the humanities and social sciences. For engineers the gain over teaching is US $75,240,
which is very large relative to the average of $46,150 for teachers. Second, the pattern of the
gains to j over k is broadly consistent with what we would expect given the difference in the
average earnings of those who complete a degree in j and the average earnings of those who
complete a degree in k. One can reject, however, the restriction that the estimates of the
relative gains are equal to the corresponding differences among 10 return parameters, one for
each field, as opposed to the series of pairs. HNZ’s basic specification in the homogeneous
returns case implies this restriction.42
       Overall, recent work employing RD designs to establish the earnings effects of particular
fields of study as well as the quality of an institution is a major step forward. There is scope
  40
       In addition to estimating relative returns, KLM also provide a rich analysis of how relative returns
influence preferences, and provide evidence that students rank majors in part based upon them.
  41
     Under the KLM’s baseline specification, there are no college quality effects. KLM show that specifications
which do add the effects of institutions indicate field of study is much more important than college quality,
at least in Norway. Further, controlling for institution effects has little impact on the premiums associated
with particular fields.
  42
     KLM also provide OLS estimates of a reduced form model of the earnings effects of a predicted offer
of admission to preferred field j for each preferred/next best combination. The prediction is based on the
threshold crossing instrument. See their Table A4.



                                                      54
for much more work. We would highlight two areas. The first is to build directly on the
work of Bertrand, Hanna & Mullainathan (2010), HNZ, and KLM. Further work is required
on how best to balance between the restrictiveness of the samples used to identify relative
returns to particular pairs of fields, how best to handle unobserved heterogeneity in returns,
and how best to address complementarity between the quality/selectivity of an institution
in particular fields of study. It would also be valuable to make richer use of measures of
socioeconomic background and high school preparation in studying heterogeneity in returns.
       The second area is to combine the use of discontinuities in admissions with explicit
modeling of how students rank schools and fields of study. One could start with a reduced
form approach that relates student rankings of school/field programs to observed variables
and unobserved variables that are influenced by the pecuniary and non-pecuniary returns
to particular fields of study and occupations. A more ambitious approach is to work with a
structural model of field and school choice.


4.6       Returns to Graduate Degrees

As noted in the previous section, one of the primary barriers to estimating the returns to
college majors is the selection problem: those who are in high-paying majors may have also
received high labor market returns in other majors. This issue is partly mitigated when
estimating the returns to an MBA because MBA programs often require work experience
before entry.43 Seeing earnings absent the MBA degree makes it possible to control for
individual fixed effects in the wage equation. Note that it is not obvious a priori that fixed
effects will produce the correct estimate as selection may be occurring into the MBA program
based on wage residuals. Those who have temporarily low wages may be more likely to enroll
in MBA programs due to the lower opportunity cost. This is similar to estimating the effects
of training programs where wages often dip immediately before enrollment, which is known
as the “Ashenfelter dip” (Ashenfelter, 1978).
  43
       Arcidiacono et al. (2008) show that over 90% of MBA students entered their MBA programs with at
least two years of work experience.



                                                   55
       Arcidiacono et al. (2008) use panel data from those who registered to take the Graduate
Management Admissions Test (GMAT) in 1990 to estimate the returns to different MBA
programs. Four surveys were administered with the latest data coming in 1998. Note that
this is already a selected sample in that the individual must have already been considering
enrollment in an MBA program to take the test. Controlling for observed covariates such
as GMAT scores, undergraduate grades, demographics, and other advanced degrees shows
virtually no return for males unless they were attending a program in the top-25.44 Top 10
(11-25) programs were associated with earnings that were 25% (20%) higher than those who
did not obtain an MBA.
       Controlling for individual fixed effects, however, substantially changes the results, re-
ducing the importance of quality of the program. The returns to a top-10 MBA program
fall to 19% while the returns to attending a program outside the top-25 increase to 9%.
The first finding is to be expected: those who attend the most selective MBA programs are
likely those who have the highest unobserved abilities. That the return increases for those
outside the top-25 is unexpected, particularly given that these students have significantly
higher test scores and undergraduate grades than those who do not enter an MBA program.
The authors show that the increase in returns is not being driven by the Ashenfelter dip.
Rather, there is a component of skills that individuals who enter these programs are weaker
on. Namely, individuals were asked about their perceptions of how the MBA program would
help them. Individuals who enroll perceive that the MBA would improve their skills on in
areas not measured by test scores, suggesting the possibility that these students are “book
smart” but not “people smart”.
       Specialization within MBA tracks also affects future earnings. Using the same data set
and identification strategy as Arcidiacono et al. (2008), Grove & Hussey (2011) examine
  44
       The regression estimate based on the NCES in Table 6 is 0.284 for obtaining any MBA. The NCES
covers a much broader population and does not have information on test scores and grades. The data
in Arcidiacono et al. (2008) includes only individuals who registered for the GMAT and so were at least
considering obtaining an MBA. This suggests that those who are considering an MBA have stronger labor
market skills the general population conditional on the same degree attainment.



                                                   56
the returns to specialties within MBA programs. Concentrating in finance or management
information systems yields returns of 6% and 8% respectively above an MBA degree in
another concentration. Returns to finance classes within an MBA program has also been
shown in a study of University of Chicago MBA’s by Bertrand, Goldin & Katz (2010), who
attribute part of the differences in the returns to an MBA between men and women to the
share of courses in finance. This finding is consistent with Grove & Hussey (2011) who show
that women are significantly less likely to choose a finance concentration.
   Specialization is even more important in medical school. For example, the average sur-
geon earned $269,000 compared to $131,200 for family practice doctors (Bhattacharya, 2005).
Bhattacharya (2005) considers a number of factors for the large income disparities across
specialities. First, high-income specialities often require more hours, implying that the wage
gap across specialties is not as large as the corresponding income gap. Second, although
the time to graduation does not vary across specialties, physicians have a period where they
serve as residents before they can become “board certified” and this period varies substan-
tially across specialties. High-income specialties often have longer residency programs. For
example, pediatrics residency programs typically take three years while surgical residency
programs take at least five. Finally, the returns to skills may be higher for specialists and
this induces high-skilled medical students to sort into these residency programs.
   To assess the role each of these explanations play in explaining the differences in labor
market outcomes across specialties, Bhattacharya (2005) estimates a model of physician spe-
cialty choice and labor market earnings where unobserved factors (such as ability) influence
both specialty choice and earnings via discrete factors. Using data from the 1991 Survey
of Young Physicians, he shows that just moving from salaries to hourly wages reduces the
surgery premium from 55% to 46% over family practitioners. Selection on observed and
unobserved abilities reduces the premium to 41%, and accounting for differences in training
program length reduces the premium to 31%. This is still a substantial “unexplained” gap,
with two clear sources remaining. First, there may be a compensating differential for working
as a specialist. Second, not all medical school graduates are able to work as surgeons due



                                             57
to limits on the number of residency slots. With the number of entering surgeons restricted,
wages for surgeons (and other specialties where the residency caps bind) are high due to low
supply.
   Long residency programs and work hours may make the high-income specialties unattrac-
tive for those with family concerns, who are disproportionately female. Taking time away
or reducing hours when one has a family limits the time medical school graduates have to
recoup their investments. Chen & Chevalier (2012) suggest that female family practitioners
would actually have higher lifetime earnings have they instead become physician assistants.
Becoming a physician assistant requires two year of post-baccalaureate work (as opposed to
four for medical school) with no residency programs. Using data from the Robert Wood
John Community Tracking Physician Survey of 2004-05 and the American Academy of of
Physician Assistant’s annual survey for 2005, they show that, not surprisingly, medical school
graduates are stronger on such factors like undergraduate grade point average than those
who graduate as physician assistants. Yet, given the (uncorrected for selection) wages for
female physician assistants and the hours worked by female family practitioners, the net
present value from working as a physician assistant would be on average higher than the
net present value for female family practitioners. These results are driven by the extended
time in medical school and low wages during residency programs coupled with female family
practitioners working less hours than their male counterparts. Indeed, male family practi-
tioners see higher lifetime earnings (again uncorrected for selection) as family practitioners
than as physician assistants because they work more hours at the high post-residency wage.
   Whether individuals are able to recoup their investments also depends on the returns to
hours worked and the penalties associated with time away. Bronson (2015) provides evidence
that the wage penalties associated with taking time off in occupations such as engineering
are higher than in other majors and provides a partial explanation for why women may
find the sciences unattractive. Goldin (2014) shows that in some occupations the returns to
hours worked is linear with low penalties for taking time off, but in other occupations the
last hour worked has a much higher return than the first hour and the penalties for taking



                                             58
time off are high. This latter group includes occupations associated with obtaining an MBA
or a law degree. Goldin (2014) finds no gender gap between male and female MBA and law
school graduates one year after graduation but a substantial gap emerges later in life, in large
part due to differences in labor supply decisions. In contrast, the returns to hours are linear
in pharmacy, there is no part time penalty. Bertrand, Goldin & Katz (2010)’s regression
analysis of MBAs from the University of Chicago indicates that the fact that men work
more hours per week and have fewer spells of nonemployment leads to a substantial male
advantage in earnings growth in the first 10 years after MBA completion. Using the GMAT
registrant data employed by Arcidiacono et al. (2008), Gicheva (2013) estimates a regression
model relating wage growth to a nonlinear function of weekly hours in the previous period.
She finds that a substantial effect of long work hours on hourly wage growth for MBAs. The
point estimate is larger for MBAs than for persons who registered for the GMAT but did not
receive an MBA. Her estimates are quite consistent with Bertrand, Goldin & Katz (2010)’s
results on the link between weekly hours and wage growth.
   Black et al. (2003) use the 1993 National Survey of College Graduates to see how the
returns to graduate school may vary by undergraduate major. Recall from the theoretical
model that those with low paying undergraduate majors may have a greater incentive to go
to graduate school if by doing so they erase some of the earnings disadvantage associated
with their undergraduate major. However, it may be the case that graduate school builds
on past human capital accumulation. Black et al. (2003) show results suggesting that the
premium associated with being an economics major over majors like history and English
are just as high if one gets an MBA or a law degree as it is without an advanced degree,
suggesting the additional treatment effect of having an MBA or a law degree is the same
across these undergraduate majors. An important caveat is that the estimates are calculated
based on matching on demographics; there are no controls for things like test scores or for
selection into graduate school. Furthermore, Black et al. (2003)’s finding are somewhat at
odds with the evidence in Table 7, which we discussed earlier. Table 7 shows for a broader set
of majors using the 1993 and 2010 National Survey of College Graduates that in percentage



                                              59
terms the gain from an MBA or a law degree is larger for individuals from low paying majors
than high paying majors. Additional work on complementarity between undergraduate and
graduate degrees is needed.
       As is the case for undergraduates, excellent data are available on entry to graduate
programs in other countries, expanding the possible identification strategies. A good example
of this is Ketel et al. (forthcoming) who examine the choice to enter medical school in the
Netherlands.45 Weighted lotteries determine whether an interested individual can enroll
in medical school. Higher high school grades and exam scores are associated with higher
probabilities of admittance, but even those with very low scores may be admitted at the
expense of higher-achieving classmates.
       Ketel et al. (forthcoming) use winning the medical school lottery as an instrument for
medical school completion in a log earnings regression.46 They do this for many years, making
it possible to trace out the effects over time. Ketel et al. (forthcoming) show substantially
higher earnings for medical school completers in all years after graduation, with earnings
differences of almost 40% twenty-two years after high school.
       Instrumenting for medical school completion–as opposed to assignment–raises two of the
same issues that were discussed in Section 4.5.1. First, as pointed out by HNZ and KLM,
what is the treatment effect relative to? Lottery losers are likely to pursue a degree in
some other field and so the estimated effects are relative to some combination of earnings
in different fields. Ketel et al. acknowledge this difficulty of interpretation. They shed
some light on this question by documenting the distribution of fields of study chosen by
the lottery losers. Second, winning the lottery may affect future earnings irrespective of
whether individuals end up graduating from medical school, thus leading to a violation
  45
       While entering medical school in the Netherlands, like many countries outside of the United States, takes
place immediately after high school, the amount of training required places medical school under graduate
education.
  46
     Some students who won the lottery chose not to attend while others who lost chose to enter the lottery
the following year. Ketel et al. (forthcoming) use the outcome of the lottery the first time the individual
enters as their instrument.




                                                        60
of the exclusion restriction required to identify the LATE. In the context of Ketel et al.
(forthcoming) where a large share (82%) of the lottery winners end up graduating from
medical school, this potential threat is most likely of second order importance.
    In other contexts where non-completion rates are higher, this could be a serious problem.
Consider an extreme example where only half of those who win the lottery complete medical
school with the other half dropping out and entering the labor market. Further assume
that those who lose the lottery enter business school and graduate with probability one. In
this case, the IV estimates will not give the return to completing medical school relative
to completing business school, or relative to not completing any education. In fact, even if
medical school completers earn more than business school completers, the IV estimate could
still be negative if business school completers earn sufficiently more than medical school
dropouts. The problem in this specific example is that the exclusion restriction does not
hold as the instrument (indicator for winning the lottery) affects earnings not only via the
treatment status (medical school completion), but also through the potential earnings in
the untreated state (earnings of medical school dropouts for lottery winners, and earnings
of business graduates for lottery losers). Using the terminology of KLM, this is a situation
where the irrelevance condition does not hold since the instrument affects completion of post-
secondary education. In this example where the untreated state includes both dropping out
from medical school and graduating from business, this, in turn, leads to a violation of the
exclusion restriction. In this setting though, one can still produce a consistent estimate of
the expected earnings gain from beginning medical school versus not, if one instruments for
assignment to medical school in the earnings regression and as long as there is no effect of
winning the lottery on the potential earnings in the untreated state (not assigned to medical
school).



5     Choice of Major
As discussed in the previous section, the choice of college major has key implications in terms
of future earnings and career prospects. In the last ten years, the empirical literature has

                                              61
paid increasing attention to the determinants of college major choice, and in particular to
the relative importance of expected earnings versus non-monetary factors including abilities
and preferences.



5.1     Demand Side

5.1.1   The Role of Expected Earnings

Although the results vary depending on the context and the methodology used, most of
the recent evidence available points to a significant but quantitatively modest elasticity of
college major choice to expected earnings. Beffy et al. (2012) use French data to estimate
a sequential schooling decisions model where students choose their major by comparing the
(rationally) expected earnings and non-monetary characteristics associated with each major.
In this framework, in the spirit of Altonji (1993), the potential level of education that would
be completed within each major is uncertain to the individual at the time of the choice.
Beffy et al. use variation across the business cycle in the relative returns to the different
majors to identify the earnings elasticity of college major choice. They find significant but
quantitatively small elasticities of major choice to expected earnings, ranging between 0.09
and 0.14 for majors in Sciences and Humanities and Social Sciences, respectively.
   Earlier work by Berger (1988) on this question uses a rational expectations framework
where the utility for each major is also given by the sum of the present value of expected
lifetime earnings in that major and a non-pecuniary major-specific component. Berger uses
a sample drawn from the National Longitudinal Survey of Young Men (NLS), which is made
up of individuals who entered the labor market from 1962 to 1977. Key to the identification
of the earnings elasticity of college major choice is the assumption that college major choices
vary over this period only through the monetary returns to majors. Consistent with the stu-
dents being forward-looking when choosing their college major, Berger finds that expected
lifetime earnings are a better predictor of the choice of college major than the earnings at
the start of the career. In his model, students are only uncertain about the future earnings
associated with each potential major. In particular, when forming their expectations over

                                              62
lifetime earnings, students implicitly assume that they would complete any of the potential
majors.47 This assumption comes in contrast with Altonji (1993) and subsequent work allow-
ing for uncertainty regarding major completion. Montmarquette et al. (2002) estimate the
effect of expected earnings on college major choice by allowing the completion probabilities
to be smaller than one and to vary across individuals and majors. However, unlike Berger
(1988) and Beffy et al. (2012), the major-specific expected earnings are estimated without
controlling for selection into each major, thus implying that one needs to be cautious when
interpreting the estimated choice elasticities.
       Long et al. (2015) examines the effects of wages on major choice using U.S. survey data
(IPEDS and CPS) combined with administrative data from Washington state over the period
1982-2012. Their estimate of the elasticity of major choice to the lagged major-specific wage
premia is 0.67. This value is substantially larger than the ones obtained by Beffy et al.
(2012) and by Wiswall & Zafar (forthcoming) (discussed in Subsection 5.3). However, the
analysis of Long et al. is descriptive in nature, and as a result this discrepancy is likely to
partly reflect the fact that those elasticity parameters have different interpretations.
       Blom (2012) uses ACS data on major choice for cohorts of college graduates who were 20
years old between 1976 to 2006. She uses the occupational composition of majors to construct
region specific time series of major-specific wage premia based on region/occupation/year
specific wage data from the CPS. For the combined period, she finds the elasticity of major
share with respect to the major-specific wage is only .0166 for men and .0646 for women,
estimates that are broadly consistent with Beffy et al. (2012) and Wiswall & Zafar (forthcom-
ing). Neither value is statistically significant. However, Blom also finds that the elasticities
are positive and substantial for the early cohorts but negative and substantial for the later
cohorts. The negative estimates are puzzling, and so caution is called for.48 Long et al.
  47
       Berger also assumes independence from irrelevant alternatives, which is unlikely to hold in the context
of college major choice.
  48
     Blom (2012) and Blom et al. (2015) use similar data to examine how general economic conditions
influence major choice. They show that the aggregate unemployment rate at the age when college students
are choosing their majors has a substantial positive effect on the probability that students choose a high
paying field. The shift toward higher paying majors induced by a 3 point in rise the unemployment rate


                                                       63
(2015) find that the major choice elasticities display a large degree of heterogeneity across
individuals and majors. In particular, their results suggest that enrollments are more sen-
sitive to changes in earnings for those majors which are tightly associated with particular
occupations, such as nursing.


5.1.2    Ability Sorting and Learning

The literature has also examined the effect of perceived ability on college major choice.
As we discussed above, Arcidiacono (2004) estimates a dynamic model of college and major
decisions where students are uncertain about their abilities. In this model, it may be optimal
for students to dropout, switch majors or switch colleges after observing their grades and
updating their ability beliefs accordingly. Estimation results indicate that ability is an
important factor in explaining the decision to enroll in a given major. Interestingly, Math
ability is found to play a much more important role in major choice than verbal ability.
Arcidiacono also finds that learning about ability is an important factor in the decision to
switch majors or drop out of college. Finally, most of the ability sorting across majors
appears to be driven by the heterogeneity across abilities in major-specific preferences
    Recent work by Arcidiacono et al. (2015) also examines how students update their ability
beliefs as they receive new information, and the extent to which this learning process accounts
for the observed transitions between college and work, as well as between STEM and non-
STEM majors. To do so, Arcidiacono et al. use data from the NLSY97 to estimate dynamic
model where students decide at each period whether to attend college, either in a two- or
four-year institution (in a STEM or non-STEM major), work part-time or full-time, or engage
in home production. Unlike Arcidiacono (2004) and the other papers discussed below, their
framework allows for correlated ability learning through college grades (in the different types
of colleges and majors) and wages, as in the model discussed in Section 3.4. Arcidiacono
et al. find that the ability components which are revealed over time account for a sizable
leads to an increase in 1.5% increase in average wage rates for the cohort. Since these effects are permanent,
they are large enough to offset a substantial part of the losses of students who graduate in a recession found
by Kahn (2010), Oreopoulos et al. (2012), Altonji et al. (2014a) and others.


                                                     64
share of the dispersion in grades and wages, with the abilities in STEM and non-STEM
majors being highly, though not perfectly, correlated. However, grades earned in college,
both in STEM and non-STEM majors, reveal little about future labor market performance.
Inasmuch as college education should help prepare students for the labor market, the latter
finding suggests that the screening mechanisms in place in college perform poorly. Overall,
estimation results show that college exit and re-entry decisions as well as major switching
are all affected by learning about ability.
    Fricke et al. (2015) provides interesting evidence on the impact of exposure to a given field
of study on college major choice. Specifically, Fricke et al. make use of a natural experiment
at the University of St. Gallen (Switzerland) where first-year students, who have not chosen
a major yet, have to write a research paper in business, economics or law. Excess demand for
business leads the university to assign the field of the paper randomly for the students who
expressed a preference for business, thus making it possible to identify for those students
the effect on major choice of exposure to economics and law. Having to write a paper
in economics is found to increase by 2.7 percentage points the probability of majoring in
economics, which is significant and large in comparison with the share of economics majors
within this group (5.9%). Note that the mechanism at work here combines the exposure to
additional information on the economics field along with the accumulation of skills in that
field.
    Using administrative data from the University of Toulouse, Pistolesi (2014) focuses on the
effects of providing information to high-school students about their probability of graduating
from college in a given field. Pistolesi uses a fuzzy RDD approach to identify the impact
of receiving a negative or positive (as opposed to neutral) signal about future graduation
prospects on enrollment in each field. While receiving a positive signal has virtually no
effect on enrollment, receiving a negative signal has a strong negative effect (-14 pp.) on the
enrollment probability.


Should Higher Education Systems Require Students to Specialize Early? The
evidence that students are learning about field-specific wage rates and their preferences and

                                               65
talents while proceeding through school raises an important question about the optimal
design of higher education systems: When should students specialize? Some jurisdiction,
including England, France, Chile, and Norway, require students to choose a school and a
field as part of the college admissions process. The cost of switching later are quite high.
Others, such as Scotland, the US, and Canada either require or permit students students to
choose a field later. In such “late choice” systems students typically take fewer field specific
courses. Malamud(2010, 2011) provides a simple model that highlights some of the tradeoffs.
Students who specialize early can take more courses in their chosen field. This is a benefit
if depth in that field area is valued in the labor market. It is a negative if more broad
education is valued. The labor market value of depth versus breadth likely varies across
fields of study and across individuals. Students who specialize earlier must do so with less
information about the costs and benefits of pursuing particular fields of study. Consequently,
early specializers may be more likely to pursue a field of study that they regret. Whether
or not they will be more likely to switch away from the occupation that their chosen major
prepared them for depends upon the degree of mismatch relative to the return feel specific
preparation in the occupation. Malamud shows that students in the English university
system are more likely to switch to occupations that are different from those associated with
their field of study than students in the Scottish system. However, Malamud (2011) shows
that the consequences for wages are relatively small.
   In an ambitious paper, Bordon & Fu (forthcoming) estimate the equilibrium effects, in
the presence of individual uncertainty about major-specific match quality, of switching from
a college-major specific admission system (as in Chile and many other countries) to a system
where students choose their major after entering college (as in the U.S. and Canada). Bordon
& Fu find that this would result in a 1% increase in average student welfare, which would
disproportionally benefit females as well as low-income and low-ability students. However,
the authors do not have data on college grades or other direct measures of the flow of
information to the student about ability and preferences. They do observe dropout decisions,
but because transfers across majors are very difficult and thus rare, the researchers do not



                                              66
have access to the information about transfer costs and learning about talent and preferences
that observing them would provide. Consequently model specification appears to play an
important role in identifying features that are key to assessing the gains from allowing
students to delay specialization.
   Bridet & Leighton (2015) address similar questions using panel data on college graduates
from U.S. from Baccalaureate and Beyond: 1993-2003. They specify a structural model
of course selection and specialization with the following features. A particular program
of study influences both the types of human capital acquired and what the student learns
about her abilities and preferences. Changing fields while in college or after entering the labor
market is costly. In the model, students enter college with prior beliefs about their type (say
engineering versus business). If they do not specialize initially, they acquire skills in both
fields, and also obtain signals about their true type. Engineering courses raise productivity in
engineering occupations more than in business occupations. The opposite is true of business
courses. After specialization, students accumulate human capital in the chosen field. They
do not acquire any more information about their type until they enter the labor market, at
which point type is revealed. A student’s choice of when to specialize is a key endogenous
variable in the model. She does so when she is confident enough about her type given that the
opportunity costs of additional time in school are rising and taking account of the size of the
labor market gains from more depth in the field under consideration. Using information on
test scores, course taking, grades, time to specialization, occupation, and wage rates, Bridet
and Leighton estimate model parameters governing the rate at which students learn about
type, the labor market return to field specific knowledge when used in one’s chosen field and
when used in the alternatives, and the fixed cost of switching fields after graduation. The
estimates suggest that a person working in her field of comparative advantage earns up to
20 percent more than a student in the same field who is poorly matched. This paper offers a
number of original insights about the trade-offs. Simulations indicate the changing the U.S.
system to require that students specialize at college entry would increase the share who end
up working outside their field of comparative advantage by 7%. Expected earnings would



                                               67
fall by 1.5%.
       In summary, the work to date suggests that on net, allowing students to specialize later
leads to modest gains in earnings and student welfare. However, much more work is needed
to understand information flows and human capital production by fields. In addition, a full
analysis must account for the effects of timing of specialization on higher education costs,
and how early specialization influences student behavior in secondary school.49


5.1.3       Other determinants

Gender-Specific Preferences Rather than attempt to provide a comprehensive survey
of the literature on gender differences in college major choice, we simply highlight a few
recent studies.50 Gemici & Wiswall (2014) examine the determinants of the gender gap in
college major choice as well as its evolution over time. Their analysis is based on a dynamic
model of human capital investments, both in terms of numbers of years of schooling and
field of study, and labor supply, where agents are assumed to form rational expectations
about future outcomes. The authors estimate this model combining data from the National
Survey of College Graduates (NSCG) with the Census and the CPS. Similar to Zafar (2013)
(discussed in Subsection 5.3), their results provide evidence that differences in preferences
for majors are the main driving force behind the gender gap in college major choice. Gender
differences in the distribution of major-specific skills, while significant, are far less important
  49
       Timing of specialization may also matter in terms of peer effects on college major choice. The role
played by students’ peers on the decision to enroll in a given college major is an important question, which
has not been the object of much attention in this literature. Notable exceptions include Sacerdote (2001)
and De Giorgi et al. (2010). Using data from Dartmouth college and exploiting the random assignment
of roommates among Freshmen, Sacerdote (2001) finds no evidence of peer effects on college major choice.
This finding contrasts with De Giorgi et al. (2010) who use data from Bocconi University and a different
identification strategy based on the existence of partially overlapping peer groups. They conclude that peers
have a significant influence on major choice.
  50
     Older papers include Daymont and Andrissani (1984), who make use of measures of the importance the
individual places on particular job characteristics, and Blackemore and Low (1984), who provide evidence
that women choose majors with lower skill depreciation rates.



                                                     68
in explaining the gender gap. Estimation results also show that males were more responsive
than females to the increase of the relative prices of science and business skills during the
80’s and 90’s, leading to a widening of the college major gender gap during this period.
       Earlier analysis on this question by Turner & Bowen (1999) also finds that differences in
skills across males and females, as measured by SAT Math and Verbal scores, only account
for less than half of the overall gender gap in major choice. Turner & Bowen conclude that
other factors, in particular gender-specific preferences for majors, play a dominant role in
                                                                          51
explaining the significant gender differences in major choice.


Parental Influence: A couple of papers have examined the role played by parents on the
choice of college major. Notably, Zafar (2012, 2013) addresses this question using subjective
expectations data collected from a sample of sophomores from Northwestern University.
Zafar finds that getting approval of parents is one of the most important factors underlying
the choice of majors. According to the students, the probability of the parents approving a
given major increases with the social status as well as the wage returns associated with the
major.
  51
       Dickson (2010) uses administrative data from three public universities in Texas to show that women are
less likely than men to begin college intending to major in engineering and computer science relative to the
social sciences conditional on SAT scores and high school class rank. Women are more likely to intend to
major in the humanites and relative to the social sciences. Dickson also shows that they are also less likely
to graduate in engineering and computer science and more likely to graduate in the humanities and other
majors conditional on initial field choice. Morgan et al. (2013) analyze gender differences in initial interest
in STEM related occupations and early college major using the ELS 2002-2006 panel data survey. The ELS
panel follows students who were in 10th grade in 2002 for four years. They find that high school preparation
and work-family orientation explain only a modest portion of the gender gap in college major choice. Gender
differences in occupational plans play a strong role. See also Weinberger (2004), who surveyed women in
a set of female dominated majors and in economics and business about importance of course preferences,
course difficulty, classroom atmosphere, taste for occupations, and labor market prospects in their decisions
not to choose each of a set of alternative majors.




                                                      69
Risk Aversion: Several papers have also examined the influence of risk aversion on col-
lege major choice. Assuming that individuals have constant relative risk aversion preferences,
Wiswall & Zafar (forthcoming) find that students tend to exhibit a high degree of relative
risk aversion (around 5). The authors further show that ignoring risk aversion in this context
would result in overestimating substantially the earnings elasticity of college major choice.
Nielsen & Vissing-Jorgensen (2005) investigate the role played by risk aversion on the choice
of post-secondary curriculum in Danemark and estimate a high degree of relative risk aver-
sion of similar magnitude as in Wiswall & Zafar (forthcoming). Saks & Shore (2005) also
examine the impact of risk, as measured by the volatility of wages associated with different
types of careers, on college major choice. Consistent with decreasing absolute risk aversion
preferences, they find that students from wealthier background tend to choose riskier majors
such as business.


5.2    Supply Side

That ability sorting occurs is partly a result of differences in expectations of the instructors
across fields. Grading differences and workloads differ substantially across fields in ways that
suggest competition for students. Dickson (1984) shows that fields that have low student
to faculty ratios give higher grades and Freeman (1999) shows that fields that pay less also
give higher grades. The fields that are typically associated with low student to faculty ratios
and low pay are courses in the the humanities and social sciences, excluding economics. The
differences in grading standards can be so dramatic as to swamp any comparative advantage
students in particular fields. For example, Johnson (2003) shows that students at Duke
University who major in biology actually receive higher grades in the classes they take in all
other departments, with the exception of chemistry and math classes. If grading standards
were uniform across departments, we would expect students to have higher grades in courses
in their own major due to sorting on comparative advantage.
   When student demand for a course is low, perhaps due to poor labor market conditions
in the field, faculty may have incentives to provide higher grades as a way of inducing


                                              70
more demand for their courses. Sabot & Wakeman-Linn (1991) and Johnson (2003) provide
evidence that suggests students do respond to differences in grading standards. But perhaps
the most compelling evidence is Butcher et al. (2014), who examine a policy at Wellesley
College which required introductory (100 level) and intermediate (200 level) courses with
at least ten students to have average grades that did not exceed a B+. Average grades
in STEM classes and economics were below this cutoff while on average courses in other
disciplines were above it. Predictably, grades fell in the non-STEM or economics courses, by
0.17 points. But enrollments in these courses fell as well, falling by almost 19%, with majors
in these fields falling a remarkable 30%. The drops in enrollment occurred despite grades
also falling in courses in non-treated departments (STEM and economics) by 0.09 points.
Grades might fall in a non-treated department because the cap was binding for some classes
in that department even if the departmental average grade across all classes was below the
cap. But it also could be an equilibrium response to increased demand for its courses.
   Instructors have more tools to induce demand for their courses besides grades. Arcidi-
acono, Aucejo & Spenner (2012) provide multiple pieces of evidence from Duke University
suggesting that STEM and economics classes are on average more demanding than their
humanities and social science counterparts. First, their results suggest that freshmen stu-
dents study fifty percent more in STEM and economics classes than in humanities and social
science classes. Second, students were fifty percent more likely to list a STEM or economics
course as their most challenging class compared to random assignment. Finally, students
were significantly more likely to report they were switching majors due to lack of pre-college
academic preparation or academic difficulty of the subject matter if their initial major was
in STEM or economics.
   The differences in grading standards and workloads differentially affect persistence in the
major. Giving lower grades affects those at the bottom of the distribution more than those
at the top due to both censoring at the top grade as well as the risks of failing out. The
effect of Wellesley’s anti-grade-inflation policy on black students in non-STEM and economics
courses was over twice as large as the overall effect, resulting in average grade drops for black



                                               71
students in these courses of 0.36 points (Butcher et al., 2014). That the effect was larger for
black students is due to blacks being significantly more likely to be toward the bottom of the
grade distribution as a result of facing a worse pre-college educational environment. Data
from Duke University showed 76.7% of African American males declaring an initial interest
in a major in STEM or economics yet only 35% obtain a degree in one of these majors.
The corresponding numbers for white males are 68.7% and 63.6% (Arcidiacono, Aucejo &
Spenner, 2012). So while African American males came in just as interested as white males
in STEM or economics, white males finished at a much higher rate. Arcidiacono, Aucejo &
Spenner (2012) show that these cross-racial differences can be accounted for by controlling for
differences in academic background, either as manifested in SAT scores and Duke’s measures
of application quality or in first year performance. Similarly, African American were much
more likely to switch fields because of lack of academic preparation or course difficulty yet
accounting for differences in pre-college preparation again eliminates the racial gap.
       These findings suggest the possibility that a relative position in the academic prepara-
tion distribution of a school may have a positive effect on obtaining a STEM degree. A
related possibility is that affirmative action policies, which result in under-represented mi-
norities being more likely to be toward the bottom of the preparation distribution within
a college, may work against minorities completing degrees in the sciences.52 Arcidiacono
et al. (forthcoming) provides evidence from the University of California system that this is
the case. Using data for the three years preceding the implementation of Proposition 209,53
Arcidiacono et al. (forthcoming) show that sorting out of STEM fields on the basis of low
relative academic preparation happens at each school in the system. The effects are large
enough that a student admitted under affirmative action at UC Berkeley would have a higher
probability of graduating in the sciences at UC Riverside (but not necessarily a higher prob-
ability of graduating college overall). Smyth and McArdle (2004) do not directly address
  52
       As noted by Arcidiacono & Lovenheim (forthcoming), the literature suggest affirmative action affects
where individuals attend college, not whether they attend at all.
 53
    Proposition 209 went into effect in 1998 and banned the use of racial preferences in admissions for public
institutions.



                                                     72
the effects of affirmative action but do examine the effects of relative academic preparation
on major choice. They use the selective and highly selective public and private institutions
in the College and Beyond data set. They also find that a student’s preparation relative to
the school average positively affects the odds of attaining a STEM degree, controlling for
the student’s preparation. The findings of these two studies are at odds with Arcidiacono’s
(2004, 2005) results using NLS72 data and variants of the structural model discussed earlier.
He finds that increases in college quality raise the probability of majoring in the sciences for
all students. Arcidiacono (2015c) concludes that weight of the evidence is consistent with a
positive relative preparation effect once the lowest quality institutions are excluded. More
research is needed on this important topic.
   While a number of papers have examined the role played by financial aid and tuition
fees on college attendance, very little is known about their impact on college major choice.
Two recent papers have addressed this question and reached different conclusions regarding
the effect of differential pricing by major. Stange (2015) which analyzes the effect of dif-
ferential pricing by major on the allocation of students across majors. Exploiting the fact
that universities throughout the U.S. have adopted a differential pricing policy at different
times, Stange shows that college major shares, in particular in engineering, do vary after the
adoption of the policy. The author also provides some evidence that women and minorities
are disproportionally affected by the introduction of higher tuitions for engineering. Related
work by Evans (2013) uses administrative data from public institutions in Ohio to examine
the effect of being eligible for a Science and Mathematics Access to Retain Talent (SMART)
grant on majoring in STEM. SMART grants, which are attributed based on merit and finan-
cial need (students need to have received a Pell Grant), provide students in their junior and
senior years with up to $4,000 per year conditional on majoring in STEM. Evans estimates
the impact of being eligible for a SMART grant using a regression discontinuity design, and
concludes that it had a negligibly small effect on the probability to major in STEM.




                                              73
5.3    Subjective Expectations

Key to the dynamic models discussed in the previous section are the assumptions made
about individual beliefs. These include beliefs about the availability of different schooling
options, the difficulty of the course material, and the labor market returns associated with
different educational paths. These dynamic models often assume that individuals, while not
possessing perfect information, have beliefs that are at least right on average and are aware
of how their abilities translate into future labor market success.
   Yet there is evidence that individuals—and in particular those from poorer households—
may be lacking important information when making their college decisions. Hoxby & Avery
(2013) show that students from poor households with very high SAT scores apply to schools
of much lower quality than those from wealthier households. This occurs despite the fact
that it would often be less expensive for these students to attend elite institutions, given the
generous financial aid policies. The importance of knowledge about potential financial aid
and how to receive it is also evidenced in Bettinger et al. (2012), who show that students
who received help filling out their FAFSA forms were significantly more likely to enroll in
college.
   Given the results in Hoxby & Avery (2013), Hoxby & Turner (2013) provided information
to poor students with high SAT scores about their chances of getting into various types
of schools as well as expected financial aid. Students who received this information were
significantly more likely to apply and attend private institutions than the control group,
though the overall rates of initial college attendance were unchanged. Informational issues
are also studied in Pallais (2015) who examined how college application and enrollment
decisions changed when the ACT increased the number of places scores are sent for free from
3 to 4. This small change increased both the quality of colleges that low income students
applied to as well as the quality of the institution attended. This occurred even though the
cost of submitting an extra score was only $6.
   Lack of information may also be relevant once individuals enter college. Both Arcidiacono
et al. (2011) and Stinebrickner & Stinebrickner (2014a) show that students substantially


                                              74
overestimate their first year grades for two very different schools (Duke and Berea). Indeed,
Arcidiacono et al. (2011) show that Duke students have virtually no information regarding
their abilities to perform well in the classroom that is not already known by the university.
Given that Duke is a very selective university with students who have highly educated
parents, we would expect informational concerns to be even more prevalent at less-selective
institutions.
   Information concerns may be particularly important in light of the substantial differences
in grading policies and study hours across majors as well as the predictability of who is going
to leave the low-grading/high study time majors. Stinebrickner & Stinebrickner (2014b)
provide direct evidence on this point. Stinebrickner & Stinebrickner (2014b) show that the
student over-optimism regarding performance at Berea is primarily driven by over-optimism
about science grades.
   As students take more classes, they generally revise their expected performance in the
sciences downward. This holds true even for students who persist in the sciences. Those
students expect their science grades to be about 0.3 points lower in their junior year than
in their freshman year. Those who begin in the sciences but then switch out have much
larger downward revisions. Their expected science grades drop by about 0.7 points between
freshmen and junior year.
   The over-optimism about performance in the sciences is also reflected in perceived versus
actual probabilities of persisting in or switching to different majors. Stinebrickner & Stine-
brickner (2014b) show that those who begin in the sciences are much less likely to persist
in the science than they perceive, while those who begin in the humanities are much more
likely to persist. Similarly, those who do not begin in the sciences expect to finish in the
sciences at much higher rates than actually occurs.
   Subjective expectations data have also been used to examine beliefs about earnings in
both actual and counterfactual majors. These beliefs can then be used to see how expected
earnings affects choices, providing another way to obtain wage elasticities. Zafar (2013)
was the first to pursue such a strategy using subjective expectations data from students at



                                              75
Northwestern. He found little evidence that expected future earnings are important to major
choice. Rather, consistent with the literature using observational data, non-pecuniary com-
ponents play a dominant role in major choice. Larger elasticities are found in Arcidiacono,
Hotz & Kang (2012) who surveyed students at Duke University. The two main differences
between Arcidiacono, Hotz & Kang (2012) and Zafar (2013) is that Arcidiacono, Hotz &
Kang (2012) focus on males and also elicits information on occupations.54 For each major
(both actual and counterfactual), students were asked expected earnings and the probabil-
ities of pursuing different occupations.55 Due to attenuation bias, one might expect to find
larger earnings elasticity estimates when using subjective expectations data than rational
forecasts of earnings based on a statistical model if students do not have fully rational ex-
pectations. On the other hand, measurement error in student reports of their subjective
expectations will lead to attenuation bias in estimates based on student reports. Wiswall
& Zafar (forthcoming) find similar elasticities to Arcidiacono, Hotz & Kang (2012) for a
sample of NYU students despite not asking about occupations when they use an estimation
strategy similar to Arcidiacono, Hotz & Kang (2012).56
       An important objective of Wiswall & Zafar (forthcoming) is to address the possibility
that major choice elasticities are upward-biased because (unobserved) preferences for majors
are correlated with the expected earnings for majors. To circumvent this issue as well as
to study how students update their beliefs, Wiswall and Zafar provided their sample with
information about average salaries by field for the U.S. population. Specifically, in the initial
stage of the survey, for each of a set of majors, the NYU respondents were asked about
  54
       There is some evidence in the literature (see, e.g., Montmarquette et al., 2002) that expected earnings
play a more important for males than females in the context of college major choice. This might explain
part of the discrepancy between those two studies.
  55
     Focus groups suggested that students had an easier time thinking about expected earnings for different
majors when they were tied to occupations. Using data from the same survey as Arcidiacono, Hotz & Kang
(2012), Arcidiacono et al. (2014) examine the complementarities between majors and occupations in terms
of expected earnings.
  56
     Given the difference in results from Zafar (2013), this suggests the wording of the questions may be
important for eliciting these beliefs.



                                                       76
the probability that they would graduate in that major and what they would earn if they
did so. They were also asked about population averages of earnings for each major. In
the intermediate stage, they were provided with the data on average earnings by major. In
the final stage, the questions regarding probabilities of graduating with different majors and
expected earnings by major were repeated. The authors essentially regress the change in
major choice probabilities on the change in the vector of major specific earnings (relative to
earnings in the humanities). Since the unobserved tastes likely did not changed in between
the two times the question was asked, the authors get an estimate of the income elasticity
with the taste factor differenced out. The estimated income elasticities shrink substantially
and are on the order of those found with observational data. However, this shrinking of
the elasticities likely reflects more than the correlation of the unobserved preference with
earnings. The change in information is a shock. To the extent that individuals have already
committed, or at least partially committed, to majors through their coursework, then the
elasticity measured here is to the shocks in the labor market while in school. The long run
responses for those who enter having not taken any coursework would likely be larger. More
research is needed on this important question.
   That students respond to information regarding average salaries suggests imperfect infor-
mation regarding the market. Students in Wiswall & Zafar (forthcoming) tend to overesti-
mate, sometimes quite substantially, the average wages in certain fields, including economics
and business and the humanities and arts. They underestimate the average wages in some
other fields including engineering and computer science. For instance, students overestimate
on average by as much as 31.1% females’ wages in engineering and computer science. There
is, however, a fair amount of heterogeneity across students. For example, the median stu-
dent underestimates males’ wages in the natural sciences by 10.5%, but 10% of the students
overestimate wages in the natural sciences by more than 37.7%.
   Arcidiacono, Hotz & Kang (2012) examine how misinformation regarding labor market
beliefs affects choices using a different approach than Wiswall & Zafar (forthcoming). Arcidi-
acono, Hotz & Kang (2012) asked students to report what the average Duke student would



                                             77
make in different occupation-major combinations. Then, under the assumption that Duke
students are right on average about labor market returns, they forecast how choice of major
would change if the expected returns were purged of errors regarding average labor market
returns. Arcidiacono, Hotz & Kang (2012) findings suggest that 7.8% of students would have
chosen different majors had they had correct measurements of population returns. Note that
this number is not the response to new information (in which case the response would be
intermingled with switching costs), but how choices would have differed from the status quo
if students already had the correct information. There are likely conflicting biases present.
First, the response may be biased upward for the reasons suggested by Wiswall & Zafar
(forthcoming). But these responses may also be biased downward if students’ forecasts of
their future earnings have changed since they have committed to a major, the same issue
faced by Wiswall & Zafar (forthcoming). This will lead to an underestimate of the coefficient
on future earnings in the utility function, which would then translate to smaller responses
to correct information.
      In the Chilean context, Hastings et al. (2015) survey college applicants about earnings
and as well as tuition costs associated with particular programs of study and conduct an in-
formation provision experiment.57 And advantage of the study is that it include individuals
from a wide range of backgrounds who are considering institutions across the quality spec-
trum. The applicants were asked to list up to the top 3 institution-major degree programs
they planned to apply to. For each program they were then asked about expected earnings
and the tuition costs they would experience if they enrolled in it. They were also asked
about what the typical graduate in each program would earn. The results indicate that
students overestimate earnings and have unbiased but highly variable beliefs about costs.
Low-SES students are more poorly informed. They plan to choose degrees with lower net
value (earnings net of costs) than other degrees that would be likely to be admitted to.
      A randomly chosen treatment group of the applicants were then provided with data on
the earnings and cost outcomes of past students who had pursued the respondents’ planned
 57
      See also Hastings et al. (forthcoming).




                                                78
enrollment choices. The treatment group members were told whether they could obtain a
higher net value by pursuing their first choice major at other institutions that they were likely
to get into (given admissions test data), and what the expected net gain would be. They
were also told whether they were competitive for other degree programs that offer higher net
value but featured an alternative major in the same broad field as their first degree choice,
and the size of the expected net gain. Finally, the treatment group students was given
access to a data base application that could be used to help them find institutions (given a
specified test score) that they could get into and that offer a high net value than their first
choice major. They could also use it to find high net value majors in the same broad field as
their chosen major. Hastings, Neilson and Zimmerman study the effects of the information
treatment on enrollment in college and on degree program choice. They find that the effects
are relatively small and are concentrated among low-SES students. The low-SES students
become more likely to enroll in programs that lead to higher net returns. The results are
qualitatively consist with Hoxby & Avery (2013) and Hoxby & Turner (2013)’s evidence of
“undermatch”. Ninety percent of the expected gain in expected earnings operates through
major choice and 10% through institution choice. The overall increase in returns is large
relative to the cost of the treatment.
   Many papers in this literature find that preferences for non-monetary benefits of college
majors play a key role in the decision to enroll in a given major. This is the case of Wiswall
& Zafar (forthcoming), who find that tastes for each major are the most important deter-
minant of college major choice. The authors also provide evidence of a substantial degree
of individual heterogeneity in the preferences for each major. In particular, they find that
males, Asians, and high-SAT Math students tend to exhibit stronger distastes for humanities.
However, 80% of the variation in major-specific tastes remains unexplained by observable
characteristics. Similarly, Zafar (2013) investigates the gender gap in college major choice
using subjective expectations data collected from sophomore students at Northwestern Uni-
versity. He finds that gender differences in preferences for majors are, by far, the main
determinants of the gender gap in college major choice. Gender differences in beliefs about



                                               79
ability and major-specific earnings, on the other hand, do not account for a significant share
of the gender gap. Zafar also finds that differences in non-pecuniary outcomes across majors
matter significantly more for females than for males. Note that the potential gains from
providing students with better information about returns to field are limited to the degree
that non-pecuniary factors dominate decisions about field.


5.4       Graduate School

now turn to the choice to attend graduate school. Given the many different options both
in level (Master’s, PhD) and educational content, and given limited data, this literature is
relatively underdeveloped and few broad conclusions can be drawn. We highlight three areas
where work has been undertaken: (i) how the business cycle affects graduate school enroll-
ment, (ii) the factors that influence the decision to obtain an MBA and (iii) the determinants
of specialty choice for medical students.


5.4.1      Demand for Graduate School and the Business Cycle

Bedard & Herman (2008) examine how the demand for post-baccalaureate degrees varies
with the business cycle. Using five cohorts of the National Survey of Recent College Grad-
uates (NSRCG),58 Bedard and Herman estimate separate probit models for the decision to
enter a PhD program, enter a professional program (JD, MD), or enter a Master’s program.
Consistent with the opportunity cost of schooling being low when the economy is poor, higher
state unemployment rates59 are associated with higher probabilities of entering a PhD pro-
gram for men. Somewhat surprisingly, there is no effect of the state unemployment rate on
enrollment in professional programs and the effect is actually negative and significant for
  58
       The NSRCG data used comes from survey data taken every other year from 1993 to 2001. NSRCG
focuses on those who have obtained a Bachelor of Science or a Master’s degree in the past two years, with
this paper focusing on those who obtained a bachelor of Science.
  59
     Controls include state and year effects.




                                                   80
enrolling in a Master’s program for men.60 A possible explanation for Master’s enrollment
being pro-cyclical is that some Master’s degrees in some fields (e.g. business) require work
experience. When the economy is poor, students will have had less work experience and
also may be reluctant to give up their current positions. Some support for this is found
went Bedard and Herman interact the state unemployment rate with undergraduate major,
finding that the pro-cyclical relationship is strongest among social science majors, arguably
the group most likely to pursue an MBA.61
       Johnson (2013) considers the same question as Bedard & Herman (2008) but uses data
from the Current Population Survey (CPS). The advantage of doing so is two-fold. First,
the analysis is not limited to those who obtained a Bachelor of Science, implying humanities
majors are included as well. Second, many individuals wait to go to graduate school, with
about half of individuals starting graduate school more than 18 months after they finish their
undergraduate degree. Weighed against this is the lack of information on undergraduate
majors, no measures of ability, and small sample sizes. Overall, Johnson (2013) finds that
the state unemployment rate positively affects graduate school enrollment for women with
no effect for men, with evidence that higher unemployment rates shift individuals into part-
time programs conditional on enrollment. When the type of program is modeled (Master’s,
PhD or professional), the patterns become more similar to Bedard & Herman (2008) in that
the reaction to changes in state unemployment rates for men and women with regard to
Master’s enrollment are opposite, with men being less likely to enroll in Master’s programs
when the unemployment rate is high. However, while the qualitative patterns are similar,
the estimates are too noisy to say much at the program level.
  60
       Results for women display a completely different pattern, with higher unemployment rates associated
with increased professional school enrollment and no effect on PhD or Master’s enrollment. To the extent
that slots in professional programs are constrained, it may be the case that, when the unemployment rate
is high, women crowd out some of the men who would otherwise be interested in entering a professional
program. This might explain the lack of significant effects of the unemployment rate on professional program
enrollment as a whole.
  61
     The other undergraduate majors were classified as physical science, computer science and math, life
science, and engineering.


                                                     81
5.4.2       Demand for MBA’s

The only study we are aware of that examines the choice over which MBA program to
attend is Montgomery (2002). Montgomery estimates a nested logit model where a set of
MBA programs are in one nest, attending a part-time program is in another nest, with the
final nest including the option to not attend at all. Montgomery estimates his model in
two stages; first estimating the probability of choosing a particular full-time MBA program
conditional on enrolling a full-time MBA program and second the probability of enrolling in
a part-time or full-time MBA program or not enrolling at all.
       Like Arcidiacono (2004, 2005), Montgomery needs to make assumptions regarding what
MBA programs are in the individual’s choice set. Montgomery’s data contains information
about whether the individual was admitted to their first choice school. Montgomery esti-
mates a probit on the probability of being admitted to the first-choice school conditional
on characteristics of the school and the individual; the coefficients of which are then used
to form admissions probabilities for every MBA program. Next, Montgomery draws from a
uniform distribution to see whether or not each of the schools is available to the individual.
Note that assumes that, conditional on observables, admissions outcomes are independent.
Montgomery then reduces the choice set further to keep computation feasible by assuming
the choice set consists of the chosen school (for those who attended an MBA program) plus
14 schools randomly drawn from the set that first stage revealed that the individual would
be admitted to.62
       Conditional on attending graduate school, a number of measures of the quality of the
program show up as important, including the ranking of the institution, and the average
GMAT and undergraduate GPA of the student body. Conditional on these quality mea-
sures, higher tuition results in lower attendance. Average starting salaries of the graduates,
however, shows up negative, likely indicative of the noisy measures of quality.
       Turning to the decision to enroll in an MBA program, it is important to note that
  62
       While this procedure may seem arbitrary, Montgomery notes that using 30 schools instead gave similar
results.



                                                     82
substantial selection has already occurred as Montgomery’s sample comes from students who
took the GMAT and therefore at least had a passing interest in enrolling in an MBA program.
This makes the results difficult to interpret. We do see, however, some evidence of positive
selection on the basis of the student’s GMAT scores, with factors such as currently being
employed and positive expectations on the employer providing tuition assistance making
attending a part-time program more likely.
      Gicheva (2012) delves deeper into the decision to enroll in a full or part-time MBA
program, though abstracting away from the choice of school. Her focus is on the specific
incentives workers have to go either full or part-time and how employers influence this deci-
sion. Gicheva develops a search model where workers have heterogeneous costs of changing
employers and where workers and firms bargain over wages. Workers with high adjustment
costs have lower incentives to invest in human capital because the high adjustments costs
lowers their threat point with their firm. But since these workers are more likely to stay at
their current position, the firm has an incentive to encourage their investment as the firm
benefits from the worker being more productive. In the model, these mobility costs effec-
tively translate into whether the skills acquired are general or firm-specific. If the worker has
extremely high mobility costs then the skills acquired through an MBA program will only be
used at their current employer, implying that the worker has little bargaining power. The
individual would be in a situation comparable to that of a worker who acquired firm-specific
training.
      Gicheva’s model assumes that (i) full-time programs provide more networking opportuni-
ties than their part-time counterparts, so full-time graduates have higher offer arrival rates,
and (ii) total cost of the program (tuition plus lost earnings) is lower for part-time programs.
Firms then have a incentive to subsidize part-time programs over full-time programs for two
reasons. First, they are more likely to see a return on their investment due to the lower offer
arrival rates associated with part-time programs. Second, individuals with high mobility
costs will underinvest from the firm’s perspective due the reasons above.63 Using the same
 63
      See Acemoglu & Pischke (1998) for an analysis of why firms may pay for general training.




                                                     83
data as Montgomery (2002), Gicheva finds support for each of these predictions.


5.4.3       Demand for Medical School Specialties

The market for physicians is highly regulated. Individuals who graduate from medical school
are generally required to enter a residency program that can last anywhere between 3 and 6
years depending on the speciality. But medical school graduates cannot enter any residency
program they like. Rather, medical school graduates list their preferred residency programs,
which is a combination of both a specialty (e.g. surgery, pediatrics, etc.) and a teaching
hospital. Residency programs also list their preferences over medical students. For some
specialities, such as surgery, there is an excess supply of graduates: many more graduates
list their top choice as surgery than there are surgical residency positions.
       Nicholson (2002) is the only paper that explicitly takes into account the probability of
matching in a residency program when estimating a model of physician specialty choice.
Nicholson estimates a conditional logit of specialty choice where the key coefficient is on
the expected present value of lifetime earnings.64 This earnings measure is constructed
by multiplying the probability of matching in a specialty (which depends on the student’s
abilities as measured by test scores) by the earnings stream associated with the particular
specialty. Those who do not match in their preferred speciality receive the income associated
with the lowest paying specialty (family practice/pediatrics).
       Two key assumptions are made. First, earnings in the different specialties only depend on
gender and experience, not ability.65 Second, ability does not affect preferences for particular
specialities. This latter assumption is key to Nicholson’s identification strategy. Namely,
  64
       Agarwal (2015) studies the National Residency Matching Program. He estimates preferences for resi-
dency programs in family medicine, and hospital preferences for residences but does not examine choice of
specialty.
  65
     Support for this assumption is found in Nicholson & Souleles (2001) who show that subjective measures
of expected income do not vary with MCAT scores once one conditions on specialty. However, their results
are from one medical school. If sorting across medical schools is driven largely by ability, the variation in
overall ability within a medical school may be small and test scores may be negatively correlated with other
ability measures within schools even though if they are positively correlated across schools.


                                                     84
the lifetime earnings calculations depend on ability through the probability of matching in
different residency programs. Hence to the extent that ability is related to choice of medical
specialities, this is indicative of individuals responding to financial incentives.
   In contrast with the literature on the responsiveness of the undergraduate major choice
to earnings, Nicholson (2002) finds a substantial earnings elasticity. Since the model is both
nonlinear and depends on the wage level, the average earnings elasticity varies by specialty
despite the common coefficient estimate on the lifetime earnings measure, ranging from 1.0
to 2.2 across the specialities.
   As with the literature on major choice, assumptions must be made about what individuals
would earn in counterfactual specialties if observational data is used to obtain the earnings
elasticities. Sivey et al. (2012) avoid these issues by presenting Australian medical students
with different scenarios regarding compensation and job characteristics about two specialities
and asking which specialty they would choose. By varying the compensation schemes and
job characteristics in the hypotheticals it is then possible to measure the importance of these
factors in specialty choice. Sivey et al. (2012) find large earnings elasticities, on the order
of 0.95 for general practitioners. Their estimates also reveal that medical students have a
strong preference to avoid having little control of their hours of work and being on call, with
the estimates suggesting a marginal willingness to pay of over $70,000 to go from being on
call one in four nights to one being on call one in ten nights.
   Control of hours, average hours worked, and fraction female vary substantially across
specialities. In 2014, residency applicants for surgery were 36% female while residency ap-
plicants for pediatrics were 71% female AAMC (2014). Goldin & Katz (2011) suggest that
these differences are driven in part by workplace flexibility. They point to gastroenterology
as a specialty that had very women but, as the job became more routine due to recommenda-
tions for routine colonoscopies, many more women entered the specialty. To our knowledge,
however, there is no work in economics that seeks to decompose the gender gap in specialty
choice into, for example, workplace flexibility, monetary renumeration, and tastes.




                                               85
6     Conclusion
Choice of major is an important determinant of future earnings and is strongly associated
with the type of jobs that people hold. The evidence suggests that much of the effect of major
on earnings is causal, with STEM and business related majors leading the way. Indeed, even
the choice of specialization within graduate programs has a large effect on earnings, be it
choosing a more finance-related concentration in business school or choosing to be a surgeon
in medical school. Further, although less clear, these positive effects appear to be present
across the board: humanities majors would earn more had they majored in business. That
they choose not to major in the more lucrative fields suggest compensating differentials in
school or in the workplace, and an important role for heterogeneity in tastes for fields of
study and the occupations they lead to.
    One clear avenue for future research is to consider the ways universities affect major
choice. For example, consider the regression discontinuity designs in Hastings et al. (2013)
and Kirkebøen et al. (2015). Are the measures used to screen who gets access to particular
slots the best measures for predicting performance in these fields, be it probabilities of
persistence to graduation or future labor market earnings? Similarly, are the skills that
translate into successful completion of STEM degrees in the U.S. the same skills that are
rewarded in the labor market for these fields? If not, might there be more efficient ways to
allocate university resources?
    Another avenue is to consider the link between field of study and occupations. We
summarized a small set of studies that indicate that particular majors may increase earnings
in some occupations but not others. Much more research is needed. And differences in
occupations in other dimensions, such as the penalty for time away from the workforce and
the reward for long work hours may be useful for understanding why students make the
choices they do. As occupations change, so too may the composition of the majors that feed
those occupations. On the labor market side, more research is also needed to understand
the determinants of the distributions of occupations within each field of study.
    We have summarized some of the research on how degree completion by field and future


                                             86
earnings varies across schools, but more work is needed in this area. Here are some of the
questions that are key to evaluating policies concerning student advising, admissions, and
which schools and degree programs to support through loans or grants. Do some schools have
absolute advantage for most students? To what extent do outcomes depend on the match
among the student, the field of study, and the school? What characteristics of students
and schools matter? To what extent would providing students with more information about
admissions chances, degree completion probabilities and the earnings of past graduates by
field and school lead to better choices? What is the role for admissions preference policies
and financial aid policies that increase access of students from disadvantaged backgrounds
to elite programs? What about graduate degree programs?
   Research into the determinants and consequences of field choice in higher education has
taken off in recent years. Indeed, many of the papers we discuss are still in working paper
form or were published in the last two or three years. There is much left to do, and we hope
that the questions raised in this chapter will stimulate further research on this fascinating
topic.




                                             87
References
AAMC (2014), ‘Residency applicants of u.s. medical school by specialty and sex, 2014’.
  URL: https://www.aamc.org/download/321560/data/factstable39.pdf

Acemoglu, D. & Pischke, J.-S. (1998), ‘Why do firms train? theory and evidence’, Quarterly
  Journal of Economics 113(1), 79–119.

Agarwal, N. (2015), ‘An empirical model of the medical match’, American Economic Review
  105, 1939–78.

Altonji, J., Blom, E. & Meghir, C. (2012), ‘Heterogeneity in human capital investments: High
  school curriculum, college major, and careers’, Annual Review of Economics 4, 185–223.

Altonji, J., Elder, T. & Taber, C. (2005), ‘Selection on observed and unobserved variables:
  Assessing the effectiveness of catholic schools’, Journal of Political Economy 113(1), 151–
  184.

Altonji, J. G. (1993), ‘The demand for and return to education when education outcomes
  are uncertain’, Journal of Labor Economics 11, 48–83.

Altonji, J., Kahn, L. & Speer, J. (2014a), ‘Cashier or consultant? entry labor market
  conditions, field of study, and career success’, NBER Working Paper 20531.

Altonji, J., Kahn, L. & Speer, J. (2014b), ‘Trends in earnings differentials across college ma-
  jors and the changing task composition of jobs’, American Economic Review 104(5), 387–
  93.

Altonji, J. & Zhong, L. (2015), The effects of double majors and advanced degrees on occu-
  pation choice and wages. Yale University.

Alvarez, L. (Dec. 9th, 2012), ‘To steer students toward jobs, florida my cut tuition for select
  majors’.



                                              88
Arcidiacono, P. (2004), ‘Ability sorting and the returns to college major’, Journal of Econo-
  metrics 121, 343–375.

Arcidiacono, P. (2005), ‘Affirmative action in higher education: how do admission and fi-
  nancial aid rules affect future earnings?’, Econometrica 73, 1477–1524.

Arcidiacono, P., Aucejo, E., Fang, H. & Spenner, K. (2011), ‘Does affirmative action lead to
  mismatch? a new test and evidence’, Quantitative Economics 2, 303–333.

Arcidiacono, P., Aucejo, E. & Hotz, V. (forthcoming), ‘University differences in the gradu-
  ation of minorities in stem fields: evidence from california’, American Economic Review
  .

Arcidiacono, P., Aucejo, E. M. & Spenner, K. (2012), ‘What happens after enrollment? an
  analysis of the time path of racial differences in gpa and major choice’, IZA Journal of
  Labor Economics 1, 1–24.

Arcidiacono, P., Aucejo, E., Maurel, A. & Ransom, T. (2015), College attrition and the
  dynamics of information revelation. Unpublished.

Arcidiacono, P., Cooley, J. & Hussey, A. (2008), ‘The economic returns to an mba’, Inter-
  national Economic Review 49(3), 873–899.

Arcidiacono, P., Hotz, V. J. & Kang, S. (2012), ‘Modeling college major choices using elicited
  measures of expectations and counterfactuals’, Journal of Econometrics 166, 3–16.

Arcidiacono, P., Hotz, V., Maurel, A. & Romano, T. (2014), ‘Recovering ex ante returns and
  preferences for occupations using subjective expectations data’, NBER Working Paper
  20626.

Arcidiacono, P. & Lovenheim, M. (forthcoming), ‘Affirmative action and the quality-fit trade-
  off’, Journal of Economic Literature .

Ashenfelter, O. (1978), ‘Estimating the effect of training programs on earnings’, The Review
  of Economics and Statistics 60(1), 47–57.

                                              89
Bedard, K. & Herman, D. (2008), ‘Who goes to graduate/professional school? the impor-
  tance of economic fluctuations, undergraduate field, and ability’, Economics of Education
  Review 27, 197–210.

Beffy, M., Fougere, D. & Maurel, A. (2012), ‘Choosing the field of studies in postsecondary
  education: Do expected earnings matter?’, Review of Economics and Statistics 94, 334–
  347.

Berger, M. (1988), ‘Predicted future earnings and choice of college major’, Industrial and
  Labor Relations Review 41, 418–429.

Bertrand, M., Goldin, C. & Katz, L. (2010), ‘Dynamics of the gender gap for young pro-
  fessionals in the financial and corporate sector’, American Economic Journal: Applied
  Economics 2(3), 228–255.

Bertrand, M., Hanna, R. & Mullainathan, S. (2010), ‘Affirmative action in education: Ev-
  idence from engineering college admissions in india’, Journal of Public Economics 94(1-
  2), 16–29.

Bettinger, E. P., Long, B., Oreopoulos, P. & Sanbonmatsu, L. (2012), ‘The role of appli-
  cation assistance and information in college decisions: Results from the h&r block fafsa
  experiment’, The Quarterly Journal of Economics 127, 1205–1242.

Bhattacharya, J. (2005), ‘Specialty selection and lifetime returns to specialization’, Journal
  of Human Resources XL(1), 115–143.

Black, D., Sanders, S. & Taylor, L. (2003), ‘The economic reward for studying economics’,
  Economic Inquiry 41(3), 365–377.

Blom, E. (2012), Labor market determinants of college major. Unpublished.

Blom, E., Cadena, B. & Keys, B. (2015), Investment over the business cycle: Insight from
  college major choice. IZA Discussion Paper No. 9167.



                                             90
Bordon, P. & Fu, C. (forthcoming), ‘College-major choice to college-then-major choice’,
  Review of Economic Studies .

Bridet, L. & Leighton, M. (2015), The major decision: Labor market implications of the
  timing of specialization in college. Toulouse School of Economics.

Bronson, M. (2015), Degrees are forever: Marriage, educational investment, and lifecycle
  labor decisions of men and women. Georgetown University.

Brown, C. & Corcoran, M. (1997), ‘Sex-based differences in school content and the male-
  female wage gap’, Journal of Labor Economics 15(3), 431–465.

Butcher, K., McEwan, P. & Weerapana, A. (2014), ‘The effects of an anti-grade-inflation
  policy at wellesley college’, Journal of Economic Perspectives 28(3), 189–204.

Card, D. (1999), The causal effects of education on earnings, in O. Ashenfelter & D. Card,
  eds, ‘Handbook of Labor Economics’, Vol. 3A, Elsevier Science B.V., chapter 30, pp. 1801–
  1863.

Chapman, B. (May 2014), ‘Top-performing high school seniors can get free ride to state
  colleges for science studies’.

Chen, M. & Chevalier, J. (2012), ‘Are women overinvesting in education? evidence from the
  medical profession’, Journal of Human Capital 6(2), 124–149.

Chevalier, A. (2011), ‘Subject choice and earnings of uk graduates’, Economics of Education
  Review 30, 1187–1201.

De Giorgi, G., Pellizzari, M. & Redaelli, S. (2010), ‘Identification of social interactions
  through partially overlapping peer groups’, American Economic Journal: Applied Eco-
  nomics 2, 241–275.

D’Haultfoeuille, X. & Maurel, A. (2013), ‘Inference on an extended roy model, with an
  application to schooling decisions in france’, Journal of Econometrics 174, 95–106.


                                            91
Dickson, L. (2010), ‘Race and gender differences in college major choice’, The ANNALS of
  the American Academy of Political and Social Sciences, 627, 108–124.

Dickson, V. (1984), ‘An economic model of faculty grading practices’, The Journal of Eco-
  nomic Education 15(3), 197–203.

Eisenhauer, P., Heckman, J. & Vytlacil, E. (2015), ‘The generalized roy model and the
  cost-benefit analysis of social programs’, Journal of Political Economy 123, 413–443.

Evans, B. J. (2013), Smart money: Do financial incentives encourage college students to
  study science? Working paper.

Freeman, D. (1999), ‘Grade divergence as a market outcome’, The Journal of Economic
  Education 30(4), 344–351.

Fricke, H., Grogger, J. & Steinmayr, A. (2015), ‘Does exposure to economics bring new
  majors to the field? evidence from a natural experiment’, NBER Working Paper 21130.

Gemici, A. & Wiswall, M. (2014), ‘Evolution of gender differences in post-secondary human
  capital investments: College majors’, International Economic Review 55, 23–56.

Gicheva, D. (2012), ‘Worker mobility, employer-provided general training, and the choice of
  graduate education’, Labour Economics 19, 232–240.

Gicheva, D. (2013), ‘Working long hours and early career outcomes in the high-end labor
  market’, Journal of Labor Economics 31(4), 785–824.

Goldin, C. (2014), ‘A grand gender convergence: Its last chapter’, American Economic
  Review 104(4), 1–30.

Goldin, C. & Katz, L. (2011), ‘The cost of workplace flexibility for high-powered profession-
  als’, Annals fo the American Academy of Political and Social Science 638, 45–67.

Grogger, J. & Eide, E. (1995), ‘Changes in college skills and the rise in the college wage
  premium’, Journal of Human Resources 30, 280–310.

                                             92
Grove, W. & Hussey, A. (2011), ‘Returns to field fo study versus school quality: Mba selection
  on observed adn unobserved heterogeneity’, Economic Inquiry 49(3), 730–749.

Hamermesh, D. & Donald, S. (2008), ‘The effect of college curriculum on earnings: An affinity
  identifier for non-ignorable non-response bias’, Journal of Econometrics 144(2), 479–491.

Hastings, J., Neilson, C., Ramirez, A. & Zimmerman, S. (forthcoming), ‘(un)informed college
  and major choice: evidence from linked survey and administrative data’, Economics of
  Education Review .

Hastings, J., Neilson, C. & Zimmerman, S. (2013), ‘Are some degrees worth more than
  others? evidence from college admissions cutoffs in chile’, NBER Working Paper 19241.

Hastings, J., Neilson, C. & Zimmerman, S. (2015), The effects of earnings disclosure on
  college enrollment decisions. NBER Working Paper No. 21300.

Heckman, J. (1979), ‘Sample selection bias as a specification error’, Econometrica 47, 153–
  161.

Heckman, J. J. & Honore, B. (1990), ‘The empirical content of the Roy model’, Econometrica
  58, 1121–1149.

Heckman, J. J. & Sedlacek, G. (1985), ‘Heterogeneity, aggregation, and market wage func-
  tions: an empirical model of self-selection in the labor market’, Journal of Political Econ-
  omy 93, 1077–1125.

Heckman, J. J., Urzua, S. & Vytlacil, E. (2006), ‘Understanding instrumental variables in
  models with essential heterogeneity’, Review of Economics and Statistics 88(3), 389–432.

Hoxby, C. & Avery, C. (2013), ‘The missing “one-offs”: The hidden supply of high-achieving,
  low-income students’, Brookings Papers on Economic Activity Spring 2013, 1–50.

Hoxby, C. & Turner, S. (2013), ‘Expanding college opportunities for high-achieving, low
  income students’, SIEPR Discussion Paper No. 12-014 .


                                             93
James, E., Alsalam, N., Conaty, J. C. & To, D.-L. (1989), ‘College quality and future
  earnings: Where should you send your child to college?’, American Economic Review
  79(2), 247–252.

Johnson, M. (2013), ‘The impact of business cycle fluctuations on graduate school enroll-
  ment’, Economics of Education Review 34, 122–134.

Johnson, V. (2003), Grade inflation: a crisis in college education, Springer-Verlag New York,
  Inc.

Kahn, L. (2010), ‘The long-term labor market consequences of graduating from college in a
  bad economy’, Labour Economics 17(2), 303–316.

Ketel, N., Leuven, E., Oostereck, H. & van der Klaauw, B. (forthcoming), ‘The returns to
  medical school: Evidence from admission lotteries’, American Economic Journal: Applied
  Economics .

Kinsler, J. & Pavan, R. (forthcoming), ‘The specificity of general human capital: Evidence
  from college major choice’, Journal of Labor Economics .

Kirkebøen, L., Leuven, E. & Mogstad, M. (2015), Field of study, earnings, and self-selection.
  University of Chicago working paper.

Lee, L.-F. (1983), ‘Generalized econometric models with selectivity’, Econometrica
  51(2), 507–512.

Lemieux, T. (2014), ‘Occupations, fields of study and returns to education’, Canadian Jour-
  nal of Economics 47(4), 1–31.

Lindley, J. & McIntosh, S. (forthcoming), ‘Growth in within graduate wage inequality: The
  role of subjects, cognitive skill dispersion and occupational concentration’, Labour Eco-
  nomics .

Long, M., Goldhaber, D. & Huntington-Klein, N. (2015), ‘Do completed college majors
  respond to changes in wages?’, Economics of Education Review 49, 1–14.

                                             94
Loury, L. & Garman, D. (1995), ‘College selectivity and earnings’, Journal of Labor Eco-
  nomics 13(2), 289–308.

Malamud, O. (2010), ‘Breadth versus depth: the timing of specialization in higher education’,
  LABOUR 24(4), 359–390.

Malamud, O. (2011), ‘Discovering one’s talent: learning from academic specialization’, In-
  dustrial and Labor Relations Review 64(2), 375–405.

Montgomery, M. (2002), ‘A nested logit model of the choice of a graduate business school’,
  Economics of Education Review 21, 471–480.

Montmarquette, C., Cannings, K. & Mahseredjian, S. (2002), ‘How do young people choose
  college majors?’, Economics of Education Review 21, 543–556.

Morgan, S., Gelbgiser, D. & Weeden, K. (2013), ‘Feeding the pipeline: gender, occupational
  plans, and college major selection’, Social Science Research 42, 989–1005.

Nicholson, S. (2002), ‘Physician specialty choice under uncertainty’, Journal of Labor Eco-
  nomics 20, 816–847.

Nicholson, S. & Souleles, N. S. (2001), ‘Physician income expectations and specialty choice’,
  NBER Working Paper 8536.

Nielsen, H. S. & Vissing-Jorgensen, A. (2005), The impact of labor income risk on educational
  choices: Estimates and implied risk aversion. Working paper.

Nordin, M., Persson, I. & Rooth, D.-A. (2010), ‘Education-occupation mismatch: Is there
  an income penalty?’, Economics of Education Review 29, 1047–1059.

Oreopoulos, P., von Wachter, T. & Heisz, A. (2012), ‘The short- and long-term career effects
  of graduating in a recession’, American Economic Journal: Applied Economics 4, 1–29.

Paglin, M. & Rufolo, A. M. (1990), ‘Heterogeneous human capital, occupational choice, and
  male-female earnings differences’, Journal of Labor Economics 8(1), 123–144.

                                             95
Pallais, A. (2015), ‘Small differences that matter: Mistakes in applying to college’, Journal
  of Labor Economics 33, 493–520.

Pistolesi, N. (2014), The effect of advising students at college entrance: Evidence from a
  french university reform. Working paper.

Ransom, M. & Phipps, A. (2010), Career and occupational implications of undergraduate
  majors: evidence from the national survey of college graduates. Brigham Young University.

Robst, J. (2007), ‘Education and job match: The relatedness of college major and work’,
  Economics of Education Review 26, 397–407.

Roy, A. D. (1951), ‘Some thoughts on the distribution of earnings’, Oxford Economic Pa-
  pers(New Series) 3, 135–146.

Rumberger, R. & Thomas, S. (1993), ‘The economic returns to college major, quality and
  performance: A multilevel analysis of recent graduates’, Economics of Education Review
  12(1), 1–19.

Sabot, R. & Wakeman-Linn, J. (1991), ‘Grade inflation and course choice’, Journal of Eco-
  nomic Perspectives 5(1), 159–70.

Sacerdote, B. (2001), ‘Peer effects with random assignment: Results for dartmouth room-
  mates’, Quarterly Journal of Economics 116, 681–704.

Saks, R. E. & Shore, S. H. (2005), ‘Risk and career choice’, Advances in Economic Analysis
  & Policy 5, 1–43.

Sanders, C. (2015), Reading skills and earnings: Why do doing words good hurt you’re
  wages? Working paper.

Scott, G. (2013), ‘Testimony before the subcommittee on early childhood, elementary, and
  secondary education, committee on education and the workforce, house of representatives’.



                                             96
Seki, M. (2013), Heterogeneous returns to u.s. college selectivity and the value of graduate
  degree attainment. Bank of Canada.

Sivey, P., Scott, A., Witt, J., Joyce, C. & Humphreys, J. (2012), ‘Junior doctors’ preferences
  for specialty choice’, Journal of Health Economics 31, 813–823.

Stange, K. (2015), ‘Differential pricing in undergraduate education: Effects on degree pro-
  duction by field’, Journal of Policy Analysis and Management 34, 107–135.

Stinebrickner, T. & Stinebrickner, R. (2014a), ‘Academic performance and college dropout:
  Using longitudinal expectations data to estimate a learning model’, Journal of Labor
  Economics 32, 601–644.

Stinebrickner, T. & Stinebrickner, R. (2014b), ‘A major in science? initial beliefs and final
  outcomes for college major and dropout’, Review of Economic Studies 81, 426–472.

Turner, S. E. & Bowen, W. G. (1999), ‘Choice of major: The changing (unchanging) gender
  gap’, Industrial and Labor Relations Review 55, 289–313.

Webber, D. (2014), ‘The lifetime earnings premia of different majors: Correcting for selection
  based on cognitive, noncognitive, and unobserved factors’, Labour Economics 28, 14–23.

Weinberger, C. (1999), ‘Mathematical college majors and the gender gap in wages’, Industrial
  Relations 38(3), 407–413.

Weinberger, C. (2004), ‘Just ask! why surveyed women did not pursue college majors or
  careers in information technology fields’, IEEE Technology and Society 23(2), 28–35.

Wiswall, M. & Zafar, B. (forthcoming), ‘Determinants of college major choice: identification
  using an information experiment’, Review of Economic Studies .

Yuen, J. (2010), ‘Job-education match and mismatch: Wage differentials’, Perspective on
  Labour and Income 11, 1–26.



                                             97
Zafar, B. (2012), ‘Double majors: One for me, one for the parents?’, Economic Inquiry
  50, 287–308.

Zafar, B. (2013), ‘College major choice and the gender gap’, Journal of Human Resources
  48, 545–595.




                                          98
7   Tables




             99
   Table 1: Fraction of Bachelor’s Graduates by Major

                Major                     Proportion (in %)          Mean Wage
 Business                                         22.5                  $35.86
 Education                                        10.1                  $25.23
 Engineering                                        8.2                 $45.20
 Social Sciences                                    7.3                 $37.57
 Medical & Health Services                          7.2                 $35.93
 Biology                                            4.8                 $43.07
 Psychology                                         4.7                 $29.04
 Communications                                     4.3                 $30.18
 Fine Arts                                          4.2                 $25.15
 Computer & Information Systems                     3.9                 $40.01
 Physical Sciences                                  3.0                 $41.33
 English Language & Literature                      2.9                 $30.96
 History                                            1.9                 $34.63
 Criminal Justice                                   1.9                 $27.98
 Liberal Arts & Humanities                          1.4                 $28.69
 Public Administration                              1.4                 $25.15
 Mathematics                                        1.3                 $41.08
 Agriculture                                        1.0                 $28.77
 Physical Fitness                                   0.9                 $26.97
 Linguistics                                        0.9                 $30.29
 Engineering Technologies                           0.8                 $36.89
 Architecture                                       0.7                 $31.93
 Family & Consumer Sciences                         0.7                 $24.79
 Interdisciplinary Studies                          0.7                 $29.41
 Environmental Science                              0.6                 $29.73
 Philosophy & Religion                              0.6                 $31.99
 Theology                                           0.6                 $22.43
 Ethnic Studies                                     0.3                 $33.78
 Transportation Sciences                            0.3                 $40.37
 Construction Services                              0.2                 $33.88
 Court Reporting                                    0.2                 $29.44
 Communication Technologies                         0.1                 $26.73
 Cosmetology & Culinary Arts                        0.1                 $20.61

Source: American Community Survey, 2013 1-year PUMS.
Proportions reported for all college graduates with a BA degree or higher, between the
ages of 27 and 58. Mean wage is annual earnings, divided by average hours worked per
week times weeks worked in the past year. Mean wages are censored to be larger than
$5/hr. and less than $400/hr.
                                         100
Table 2: Proportion of Male and Female College Graduates with Advanced Degrees By Degree Type
                                                                         All       Male     Female
                                                                         (1)        (2)       (3)
Masters-Education Field                                                   0.077      0.042      0.108
Masters in Business related field                                         0.020      0.027      0.013
Masters in Public Administration                                          0.005      0.006      0.004
Masters in Arts field                                                     0.006      0.005      0.007
Masters in Humanities field                                               0.015      0.016      0.014
Masters-Other Non-Science and Engineering Field                           0.010      0.008      0.011
Masters in Psychology or Social Work                                      0.020      0.010      0.029
Masters-Other Social and related sciences                                 0.011      0.011      0.010
Masters in Health Services Administration                                 0.003      0.002      0.003
Masters in Nursing                                                        0.006      0.001      0.010
Masters-Biological/agricultural/environmental life sciences               0.008      0.008      0.008
Masters-Computer and mathematical sciences                                0.014      0.021      0.008
Masters-Engineering                                                       0.017      0.029      0.006
Masters-Physical and related sciences                                     0.004      0.005      0.002
Masters-Other Science and Engineering related fields                      0.018      0.011      0.023
MBA                                                                       0.046      0.060      0.034
Law                                                                       0.032      0.036      0.029
MD                                                                        0.023      0.031      0.015
PhD                                                                       0.029      0.038      0.020
Other professional degree                                                 0.003      0.002      0.003
Has at least one advanced degree                                          0.348      0.353      0.344
N                                                                        56133      30367      25766
Source: AdvDegreeStats_v3.do. Data: National Survey of College Graduates 2010. The sample includes
individuals aged 27 to 59. Estimates are weighted using sample weights
                                                                                                  Table 3: The Fraction of Undergraduate Majors Who Obtain Graduate Degrees, by Major and Degree Type
                                                                         Fraction of Fraction with                                                                                                 Masters-Other Non-              Masters in          Masters-Other       Masters in Health
                                                                           College     Advanced     Masters-Education Masters in Business Masters in Public    Masters in Arts      Masters in        Science and                 Psychology or       Social and related       Services
                                                       Raw Counts        Graduates      Degrees             Field           related field    Administration         field        Humanities field   Engineering Field              Social Work             sciences         Administration   Masters in Nursing
                                                          (1)                (2)          (3)                (4)                 (5)              (6)                (7)                (8)               (9)                          (10)                  (11)                (12)              (13)
Major
Education                                                         2138        0.108           0.425               0.360               0.002                0.000               0.004                0.007                0.007                0.014                0.003                0.001                0.001
English/Languages/Literature                                       891        0.039           0.447               0.121               0.007                0.010               0.005                0.102                0.029                0.009                0.020                0.000                0.000
Fine/Performing Arts                                               681        0.043           0.209               0.046               0.006                0.001               0.085                0.007                0.005                0.007                0.002                0.000                0.004
Other Humanities                                                  1035        0.054           0.415               0.112               0.007                0.005               0.009                0.095                0.016                0.016                0.014                0.001                0.000
Communications/Journalism                                          648        0.043           0.182               0.058               0.006                0.001               0.005                0.007                0.039                0.004                0.009                0.000                0.001
Accounting                                                         526        0.048           0.211               0.006               0.089                0.006               0.000                0.001                0.000                0.001                0.004                0.005                0.001
Business                                                          2205        0.140           0.213               0.021               0.037                0.005               0.000                0.007                0.002                0.002                0.003                0.002                0.000
Marketing                                                          446        0.031           0.216               0.018               0.082                0.000               0.000                0.000                0.015                0.001                0.002                0.000                0.000
Other Non-S and E Fields                                           326        0.021           0.228               0.060               0.001                0.020               0.006                0.000                0.042                0.006                0.004                0.001                0.000
Economics                                                         1989        0.022           0.383               0.022               0.061                0.003               0.001                0.005                0.003                0.004                0.052                0.006                0.000
Political science                                                 2571        0.034           0.521               0.041               0.011                0.048               0.001                0.014                0.012                0.008                0.047                0.001                0.001
Psychology or Social Work                                         4467        0.063           0.431               0.081               0.007                0.005               0.002                0.008                0.009                0.193                0.009                0.003                0.003
Other Social and related sciences                                 4303        0.057           0.377               0.084               0.008                0.009               0.005                0.018                0.021                0.049                0.055                0.001                0.002
Nursing                                                           1596        0.030           0.232               0.004               0.002                0.001               0.000                0.001                0.002                0.003                0.001                0.014                0.157
Biological/agricultural/environmental science                     6824        0.067           0.505               0.034               0.010                0.002               0.001                0.005                0.003                0.006                0.006                0.004                0.004
Computer and mathematical sciences                                5271        0.048           0.315               0.031               0.016                0.003               0.000                0.005                0.003                0.001                0.003                0.001                0.000
Engineering                                                      11907        0.074           0.395               0.004               0.022                0.001               0.003                0.002                0.004                0.000                0.003                0.000                0.000
Physical and related sciences                                     3874        0.023           0.574               0.029               0.009                0.001               0.000                0.006                0.006                0.001                0.007                0.003                0.001
Other S and E-Related Fields                                      4120        0.056           0.332               0.029               0.004                0.002               0.003                0.003                0.007                0.007                0.002                0.011                0.002
Total                                                            55818            1

                                                                                                             Masters-                                                                    Masters-Other
                                                                                                      Biological/agricultu Masters-Computer                        Masters-Physical       Science and
                                                                                                      ral/environmental and mathematical          Masters-           and related       Engineering related                                                                                      Other professional
                                                                                                          life sciences        sciences          Engineering          sciences               fields               MBA                  Law                  MD                   PhD                 degree
                                                                                                               (14)              (15)                (16)               (17)                  (18)                (19)                 (20)                 (21)                 (22)                  (23)
Major
Education                                                                                                         0.002               0.004                0.001               0.000                0.007                0.009                0.003                0.001                0.018                0.001
English/Languages/Literature                                                                                      0.002               0.006                0.001               0.000                0.007                0.028                0.068                0.012                0.040                0.001
Fine/Performing Arts                                                                                              0.000               0.009                0.001               0.000                0.014                0.002                0.010                0.001                0.013                0.000
Other Humanities                                                                                                  0.001               0.001                0.001               0.000                0.005                0.024                0.094                0.013                0.023                0.000
Communications/Journalism                                                                                         0.001               0.002                0.001               0.000                0.003                0.014                0.030                0.001                0.008                0.000
Accounting                                                                                                        0.000               0.009                0.001               0.000                0.001                0.079                0.008                0.000                0.004                0.000
Business                                                                                                          0.000               0.009                0.001               0.000                0.002                0.104                0.017                0.002                0.002                0.000
Marketing                                                                                                         0.000               0.001                0.000               0.000                0.003                0.088                0.002                0.000                0.001                0.002
Other Non-S and E Fields                                                                                          0.002               0.002                0.000               0.000                0.021                0.031                0.027                0.001                0.004                0.000
Economics                                                                                                         0.001               0.011                0.005               0.000                0.003                0.094                0.090                0.011                0.027                0.000
Political science                                                                                                 0.003               0.002                0.001               0.000                0.008                0.053                0.263                0.004                0.015                0.001
Psychology or Social Work                                                                                         0.001               0.009                0.001               0.000                0.027                0.026                0.027                0.015                0.041                0.010
Other Social and related sciences                                                                                 0.003               0.002                0.002               0.000                0.018                0.031                0.054                0.007                0.021                0.003
Nursing                                                                                                           0.001               0.000                0.000               0.000                0.017                0.014                0.005                0.002                0.008                0.000
Biological/agricultural/environmental science                                                                     0.095               0.005                0.004               0.003                0.036                0.030                0.014                0.185                0.077                0.009
Computer and mathematical sciences                                                                                0.004               0.129                0.018               0.001                0.009                0.050                0.010                0.009                0.033                0.001
Engineering                                                                                                       0.001               0.036                0.182               0.002                0.013                0.077                0.010                0.007                0.039                0.001
Physical and related sciences                                                                                     0.013               0.020                0.045               0.126                0.012                0.032                0.017                0.088                0.181                0.007
Other S and E-Related Fields                                                                                      0.006               0.008                0.006               0.000                0.128                0.030                0.006                0.060                0.020                0.010


Column 1 provides the unweighted sample size for each major. Column 2 reports the fraction of college graduates with a bachelor's degree in the specified field. Column 3 reports the fraction of college graduates who obtain at least one advanced degree, by undergraduate field. Columns 4 to 23 report the
share of the advanced degree specified in the column accounted for by the undergraduate major listed in the row. Source: AdvDegreeStats_v3.do. Data: National Survey of College Graduates, 2010. The sample includes individuals aged 27 to 59. Estimates are weighted using sample weights.
                                                                  Table 4: Ratio of the Fraction of Advanced Degree Receipients in College Major to the All College Graduates in that Major, by Advanced Degree type and College Major.
                                                                                                                      (Prob(major m | grad degree f))/Prob(major m|college graduate)
                                                                       Fraction of Fraction with                                                                                                       Masters-Other Non-     Masters in             Masters-Other       Masters in Health
                                                                         College      Advanced      Masters-Education Masters in Business Masters in Public       Masters in Arts      Masters in         Science and        Psychology or          Social and related       Services
                                                       Raw Counts      Graduates       Degrees            Field           related field     Administration             field         Humanities field   Engineering Field     Social Work                sciences         Administration   Masters in Nursing
                                                          (1)              (2)            (3)              (4)                 (5)                 (6)                  (7)                (8)                (9)                 (10)                     (11)                (12)              (13)
Major
Education                                                        2138       0.1081           0.425                 4.65                0.10                0.01                0.73                 0.49                0.75                 0.69                 0.27                0.54                 0.25
English/Languages/Literature                                      891        0.039           0.447                 1.56                0.38                1.95                0.74                 6.91                2.97                 0.46                 1.95                0.06                 0.05
Fine/Performing Arts                                              681        0.043           0.209                 0.59                0.28                0.15               13.88                 0.45                0.49                 0.33                 0.15                0.00                 0.73
Other Humanities                                                 1035        0.054           0.415                 1.45                0.36                0.96                1.55                 6.46                1.65                 0.79                 1.33                0.23                 0.05
Communications/Journalism                                         648        0.043           0.182                 0.74                0.31                0.19                0.77                 0.46                4.02                 0.19                 0.81                0.00                 0.21
Accounting                                                        526        0.048           0.211                 0.08                4.56                1.09                0.00                 0.04                0.03                 0.06                 0.34                2.02                 0.09
Business                                                         2205        0.140           0.213                 0.27                1.92                0.90                0.01                 0.48                0.18                 0.09                 0.27                0.77                 0.04
Marketing                                                         446        0.031           0.216                 0.24                4.21                0.03                0.02                 0.03                1.54                 0.05                 0.15                0.16                 0.00
Other Non-S and E Fields                                          326        0.021           0.228                 0.77                0.06                3.90                0.97                 0.00                4.33                 0.28                 0.38                0.42                 0.00
Economics                                                        1989        0.022           0.383                 0.29                3.10                0.69                0.24                 0.34                0.28                 0.18                 4.95                2.19                 0.00
Political science                                                2571        0.034           0.521                 0.52                0.58                9.44                0.10                 0.96                1.25                 0.38                 4.47                0.55                 0.12
Psychology or Social Work                                        4467        0.063           0.431                 1.05                0.38                0.89                0.27                 0.57                0.92                 9.65                 0.91                1.35                 0.45
Other Social and related sciences                                4303        0.057           0.377                 1.08                0.40                1.79                0.87                 1.20                2.10                 2.48                 5.24                0.46                 0.32
Nursing                                                          1596        0.030           0.232                 0.05                0.11                0.23                0.04                 0.10                0.21                 0.13                 0.13                5.30                26.96
Biological/agricultural/environmental science                    6824        0.067           0.505                 0.44                0.49                0.40                0.18                 0.36                0.31                 0.29                 0.58                1.44                 0.68
Computer and mathematical sciences                               5271        0.048           0.315                 0.40                0.84                0.59                0.06                 0.33                0.34                 0.05                 0.28                0.38                 0.00
Engineering                                                     11907        0.074           0.395                 0.05                1.13                0.16                0.49                 0.12                0.37                 0.01                 0.25                0.00                 0.00
Physical and related sciences                                    3874        0.023           0.574                 0.37                0.45                0.21                0.07                 0.43                0.64                 0.03                 0.67                1.05                 0.21
Other S and E-Related Fields                                     4120        0.056           0.332                 0.37                0.18                0.38                0.54                 0.19                0.76                 0.37                 0.15                4.19                 0.36
Total                                                           55818            1

                                                                                                            Masters-                                                                    Masters-Other
                                                                                                     Biological/agricultu Masters-Computer                        Masters-Physical       Science and
                                                                                                     ral/environmental and mathematical          Masters-           and related       Engineering related                                                                                    Other professional
                                                                                                         life sciences        sciences          Engineering          sciences               fields               MBA                 Law                  MD                   PhD                degree
                                                                                                              (14)              (15)                (16)               (17)                  (18)                (19)                (20)                 (21)                 (22)                 (23)
Major
Education                                                                                                         0.19                 0.25                0.07                0.10                 0.39                0.19                 0.09                 0.06                0.68                 0.23
English/Languages/Literature                                                                                      0.21                 0.41                0.06                0.02                 0.40                0.61                 2.14                 0.52                1.51                 0.36
Fine/Performing Arts                                                                                              0.02                 0.62                0.08                0.11                 0.77                0.04                 0.31                 0.06                0.51                 0.10
Other Humanities                                                                                                  0.11                 0.11                0.03                0.07                 0.29                0.53                 2.95                 0.59                0.87                 0.15
Communications/Journalism                                                                                         0.11                 0.13                0.03                0.01                 0.18                0.29                 0.94                 0.05                0.31                 0.00
Accounting                                                                                                        0.01                 0.65                0.05                0.03                 0.04                1.72                 0.26                 0.02                0.16                 0.00
Business                                                                                                          0.03                 0.62                0.04                0.07                 0.10                2.27                 0.53                 0.10                0.08                 0.15
Marketing                                                                                                         0.02                 0.06                0.02                0.02                 0.19                1.92                 0.05                 0.00                0.04                 0.87
Other Non-S and E Fields                                                                                          0.23                 0.17                0.01                0.00                 1.19                0.68                 0.85                 0.06                0.15                 0.00
Economics                                                                                                         0.07                 0.80                0.32                0.03                 0.18                2.04                 2.83                 0.49                1.03                 0.05
Political science                                                                                                 0.36                 0.12                0.03                0.03                 0.44                1.14                 8.26                 0.18                0.56                 0.23
Psychology or Social Work                                                                                         0.15                 0.64                0.04                0.09                 1.51                0.56                 0.86                 0.68                1.57                 3.91
Other Social and related sciences                                                                                 0.38                 0.17                0.10                0.13                 1.04                0.67                 1.69                 0.33                0.80                 1.25
Nursing                                                                                                           0.16                 0.02                0.00                0.00                 0.96                0.31                 0.15                 0.07                0.32                 0.12
Biological/agricultural/environmental science                                                                    11.86                 0.35                0.22                0.79                 2.04                0.66                 0.45                 8.33                2.92                 3.69
Computer and mathematical sciences                                                                                0.47                 9.19                1.06                0.32                 0.50                1.09                 0.31                 0.39                1.25                 0.32
Engineering                                                                                                       0.16                 2.57               10.96                0.70                 0.73                1.69                 0.31                 0.31                1.49                 0.23
Physical and related sciences                                                                                     1.64                 1.46                2.69               36.08                 0.68                0.70                 0.53                 3.97                6.89                 3.01
Other S and E-Related Fields                                                                                      0.69                 0.56                0.34                0.07                 7.22                0.66                 0.18                 2.69                0.76                 3.96
Column 1 provides the unweighted sample size for each major. Column 2 reports the fraction of college graduates with a bachelor's degree in the specified field. Column 3 reports the fraction of college graduates who obtain at least one advanced degree, by undergraduate field. Columns 4 to 23 report the
ratio of the share of the advanced degree specified in the column accounted for by the undergraduate major listed in the row to the share of that major among all college graduates reported in column 2. Source: AdvDegreeStats_v3.do. Data: National Survey of College Graduates, 2010. The sample includes
individuals aged 27 to 59. Estimates are weighted using sample weights.
                                                                                              Table 5: Fraction of Advanced Degree Recipients in College Major, by Advanced Degree Type and College Major
                                                                        Fraction of Fraction with                                                                                                   Masters-Other Non-            Masters in         Masters-Other       Masters in Health
                                                                          College     Advanced    Masters-Education Masters in Business Masters in Public        Masters in Arts     Masters in        Science and               Psychology or      Social and related       Services
                                                       Raw Counts       Graduates      Degrees            Field           related field     Administration           field        Humanities field   Engineering Field            Social Work            sciences         Administration   Masters in Nursing
                                                          (1)               (2)          (3)               (4)                 (5)                (6)                 (7)               (8)                (9)                        (10)                 (11)                (12)              (13)
Major
Education                                                        2138       0.1081           0.425                 0.50                0.01                0.00                 0.08                 0.05                0.08                0.07                 0.03                0.06                 0.03
English/Languages/Literature                                      891        0.039           0.447                 0.06                0.01                0.08                 0.03                 0.27                0.12                0.02                 0.08                0.00                 0.00
Fine/Performing Arts                                              681        0.043           0.209                 0.03                0.01                0.01                 0.59                 0.02                0.02                0.01                 0.01                0.00                 0.03
Other Humanities                                                 1035        0.054           0.415                 0.08                0.02                0.05                 0.08                 0.35                0.09                0.04                 0.07                0.01                 0.00
Communications/Journalism                                         648        0.043           0.182                 0.03                0.01                0.01                 0.03                 0.02                0.17                0.01                 0.03                0.00                 0.01
Accounting                                                        526        0.048           0.211                 0.00                0.22                0.05                 0.00                 0.00                0.00                0.00                 0.02                0.10                 0.00
Business                                                         2205        0.140           0.213                 0.04                0.27                0.13                 0.00                 0.07                0.03                0.01                 0.04                0.11                 0.01
Marketing                                                         446        0.031           0.216                 0.01                0.13                0.00                 0.00                 0.00                0.05                0.00                 0.00                0.00                 0.00
Other Non-S and E Fields                                          326        0.021           0.228                 0.02                0.00                0.08                 0.02                 0.00                0.09                0.01                 0.01                0.01                 0.00
Economics                                                        1989        0.022           0.383                 0.01                0.07                0.02                 0.01                 0.01                0.01                0.00                 0.11                0.05                 0.00
Political science                                                2571        0.034           0.521                 0.02                0.02                0.32                 0.00                 0.03                0.04                0.01                 0.15                0.02                 0.00
Psychology or Social Work                                        4467        0.063           0.431                 0.07                0.02                0.06                 0.02                 0.04                0.06                0.61                 0.06                0.09                 0.03
Other Social and related sciences                                4303        0.057           0.377                 0.06                0.02                0.10                 0.05                 0.07                0.12                0.14                 0.30                0.03                 0.02
Nursing                                                          1596        0.030           0.232                 0.00                0.00                0.01                 0.00                 0.00                0.01                0.00                 0.00                0.16                 0.80
Biological/agricultural/environmental science                    6824        0.067           0.505                 0.03                0.03                0.03                 0.01                 0.02                0.02                0.02                 0.04                0.10                 0.05
Computer and mathematical sciences                               5271        0.048           0.315                 0.02                0.04                0.03                 0.00                 0.02                0.02                0.00                 0.01                0.02                 0.00
Engineering                                                     11907        0.074           0.395                 0.00                0.08                0.01                 0.04                 0.01                0.03                0.00                 0.02                0.00                 0.00
Physical and related sciences                                    3874        0.023           0.574                 0.01                0.01                0.00                 0.00                 0.01                0.01                0.00                 0.02                0.02                 0.00
Other S and E-Related Fields                                     4120        0.056           0.332                 0.02                0.01                0.02                 0.03                 0.01                0.04                0.02                 0.01                0.24                 0.02
Total                                                           55818            1

                                                                                                            Masters-                                                                     Masters-Other
                                                                                                     Biological/agricultu Masters-Computer                        Masters-Physical        Science and
                                                                                                     ral/environmental and mathematical          Masters-           and related        Engineering related                                                                                   Other professional
                                                                                                         life sciences        sciences          Engineering          sciences                fields              MBA                  Law                 MD                   PhD                degree
                                                                                                              (14)              (15)                (16)               (17)                   (18)               (19)                 (20)                (21)                 (22)                 (23)
Major
Education                                                                                                          0.02                0.03                0.01                 0.01                 0.04                0.02                0.01                 0.01                0.07                 0.02
English/Languages/Literature                                                                                       0.01                0.02                0.00                 0.00                 0.02                0.02                0.08                 0.02                0.06                 0.01
Fine/Performing Arts                                                                                               0.00                0.03                0.00                 0.00                 0.03                0.00                0.01                 0.00                0.02                 0.00
Other Humanities                                                                                                   0.01                0.01                0.00                 0.00                 0.02                0.03                0.16                 0.03                0.05                 0.01
Communications/Journalism                                                                                          0.00                0.01                0.00                 0.00                 0.01                0.01                0.04                 0.00                0.01                 0.00
Accounting                                                                                                         0.00                0.03                0.00                 0.00                 0.00                0.08                0.01                 0.00                0.01                 0.00
Business                                                                                                           0.00                0.09                0.01                 0.01                 0.01                0.32                0.07                 0.01                0.01                 0.02
Marketing                                                                                                          0.00                0.00                0.00                 0.00                 0.01                0.06                0.00                 0.00                0.00                 0.03
Other Non-S and E Fields                                                                                           0.00                0.00                0.00                 0.00                 0.03                0.01                0.02                 0.00                0.00                 0.00
Economics                                                                                                          0.00                0.02                0.01                 0.00                 0.00                0.04                0.06                 0.01                0.02                 0.00
Political science                                                                                                  0.01                0.00                0.00                 0.00                 0.02                0.04                0.28                 0.01                0.02                 0.01
Psychology or Social Work                                                                                          0.01                0.04                0.00                 0.01                 0.10                0.04                0.05                 0.04                0.10                 0.25
Other Social and related sciences                                                                                  0.02                0.01                0.01                 0.01                 0.06                0.04                0.10                 0.02                0.05                 0.07
Nursing                                                                                                            0.00                0.00                0.00                 0.00                 0.03                0.01                0.00                 0.00                0.01                 0.00
Biological/agricultural/environmental science                                                                      0.79                0.02                0.01                 0.05                 0.14                0.04                0.03                 0.55                0.19                 0.25
Computer and mathematical sciences                                                                                 0.02                0.44                0.05                 0.02                 0.02                0.05                0.02                 0.02                0.06                 0.02
Engineering                                                                                                        0.01                0.19                0.81                 0.05                 0.05                0.12                0.02                 0.02                0.11                 0.02
Physical and related sciences                                                                                      0.04                0.03                0.06                 0.83                 0.02                0.02                0.01                 0.09                0.16                 0.07
Other S and E-Related Fields                                                                                       0.04                0.03                0.02                 0.00                 0.41                0.04                0.01                 0.15                0.04                 0.22

Column 1 provides the unweighted sample size for each major. Column 2 reports the fraction of college graduates with a bachelor's degree in the specified field. Column 3 reports the fraction of college graduates who obtain at least one advanced degree, by undergraduate field. Columns 4 to 23 report the
share of the advanced degree specified in the column accounted for by the undergraduate major listed in the row. Source: AdvDegreeStats_v3.do. Data: National Survey of College Graduates, 2010. The sample includes individuals aged 27 to 59. Estimates are weighted using sample weights.
                                              Table 6: The Return to Undergraduate and Graduate Degrees
                                                      coef/se                                                                                                     coef/se
Education                                              0.000              Masters-Education Field                                                                  0.124
                                                          .                                                                                                        (0.01)
English/Languages/Literature                           0.105              MBA                                                                                      0.263
                                                       (0.02)                                                                                                      (0.02)
Fine/Performing Arts                                   -0.059             Law                                                                                      0.503
                                                       (0.02)                                                                                                      (0.02)
Other Humanities                                       0.013              MD                                                                                       0.710
                                                       (0.02)                                                                                                      (0.02)
Communications/Journalism                              0.142              Other professional degree                                                                0.328
                                                       0.026                                                                                                       (0.03)
Accounting                                             0.328              PhD                                                                                      0.208
                                                       (0.02)                                                                                                      (0.01)
Business                                               0.184              Masters in Business related field                                                        0.336
                                                       (0.02)                                                                                                      (0.03)
Marketing                                              0.237              Masters in Public Administration                                                         0.208
                                                       (0.03)                                                                                                      (0.03)
Other Non-S and E Fields                               0.142              Masters in Arts field                                                                    0.060
                                                       (0.02)                                                                                                      (0.03)
Economics                                              0.313              Masters in Humanities field                                                              -0.106
                                                       (0.02)                                                                                                      (0.03)
Political science                                      0.176              Masters-Other Non-Science and Engineering Field                                          0.068
                                                       (0.02)                                                                                                      (0.01)
Psychology or Social Work                              0.079              Masters in Psychology or Social Work                                                     0.081
                                                       (0.01)                                                                                                      (0.01)
Other Social and related sciences                      0.082              Masters-Other Social and related sciences                                                0.166
                                                       (0.01)                                                                                                      (0.02)
Nursing                                                0.312              Masters in Health Services Administration                                                0.263
                                                       (0.01)                                                                                                      (0.03)
Biological/agricultural/environmental science          0.125              Masters in Nursing                                                                       0.192
                                                       (0.01)                                                                                                      (0.02)
Computer and mathematical sciences                     0.327              Masters-Biological/agricultural/environmental life sciences                              0.053
                                                       (0.01)                                                                                                      (0.02)
Engineering                                            0.392              Masters-Computer and mathematical sciences                                               0.229
                                                       (0.01)                                                                                                      (0.02)
Physical and related sciences                          0.230              Masters-Engineering                                                                      0.196
                                                       (0.01)                                                                                                      (0.01)
Other S and E-Related Fields                           0.271              Masters-Physical and related sciences                                                    (0.11)
                                                       (0.02)                                                                                                      (0.02)
                                                                          Masters-Other Science and Engineering related fields                                     0.179
                                                                                                                                                                   (0.02)
This table reports coefficients from a regression of ln(earnings) a set of indicator variables for undergraduate major and a set of indicator variables for graduate degree
type. A BA in education in the reference undergraduate major. The other control variables include a cubic in age interacted with gender, father's education (6
categories) mother's education (6 categories), gender interacted with race (6 categories), and Hispanic. The data are from The National Survey of College Graduates 1993
and 2010. The sample consists of persons with at least a BA/BS degree and is restricted to full-time workers between the ages of 24 and 59. The regression is weighted
using survey weights. N=144635. R2 = .282. Source: AdvDegreeRegs_v3.do
                                 Table 7: Returns to Combinations of Undergrad and Grad Degrees
                                        Coefficient (Standard Error) [Unweighted Cell Count]
                                                           Masters-         Non-
                                            Bachelors      Education MBA/Educ/La
                                               Only           Field      w Masters        MBA                             Law              MD
Education                                            0              0.242              0.196            0.331            0.588           0.588
                                                    (0)            (0.01)              (0.03)           (0.05)           (0.08)          (0.15)
                                                 [6877]            [4768]             [1007]            [127]              [68]           [34]
English/Languages/Literature                      0.116             0.228              0.276            0.599            0.645           0.981
                                                  (0.03)           (0.05)              (0.04)           (0.12)           (0.06)          (0.14)
                                                 [2227]             [552]             [1293]            [123]            [231]            [65]
Fine/Performing Arts                             -0.026             0.205              0.108             0.35            0.699           0.789
                                                  (0.03)           (0.05)              (0.03)            (0.1)          (0.09)           (0.15)
                                                 [2139]             [174]              [777]             [38]              [34]           [29]
Other Humanities                                  0.042              0.19              0.024             0.55            0.711           0.678
                                                  (0.03)           (0.05)              (0.04)           (0.08)          (0.06)           (0.12)
                                                 [2581]             [449]             [1185]            [154]            [432]           [114]
Communications/Journalism                         0.201             0.009              0.341            0.694            0.577
                                                  (0.03)           (0.11)              (0.06)           (0.19)          (0.06)
                                                 [2079]              [89]              [330]             [66]              [54]
Accounting                                        0.397              0.38              0.577              0.6            0.764
                                                  (0.02)           (0.15)              (0.07)           (0.06)          (0.06)
                                                 [3432]              [17]              [472]            [273]              [93]
Business                                           0.24             0.274              0.477            0.451            0.718           0.836
                                                  (0.02)           (0.08)              (0.05)           (0.04)          (0.06)           (0.21)
                                                 [9370]             [195]             [1037]           [1073]            [252]            [21]
Marketing                                         0.291             0.442              0.476            0.596            0.799
                                                  (0.03)           (0.12)              (0.06)          (0.07)           (0.08)
                                                 [2020]              [27]              [219]            [142]              [21]
Other Non-S and E Fields                          0.196             0.203               0.35            0.435            0.453            0.874
                                                  (0.02)           (0.03)             (0.02)           (0.07)           (0.05)           (0.03)
                                                 [5654]             [180]             [1231]            [189]             [65]            [885]
Economics                                         0.375             0.089              0.631            0.647            0.818            0.629
                                                 (0.03)            (0.06)             (0.04)           (0.04)           (0.04)           (0.15)
                                                 [1711]              [38]              [682]            [311]            [272]             [28]
Political science                                 0.244             0.068              0.446            0.516            0.697            1.112
                                                 (0.02)            (0.07)             (0.03)           (0.05)           (0.03)           (0.13)
                                                 [2211]             [164]              [801]            [204]           [1213]             [20]
Psychology or Social Work                         0.116             0.218              0.251            0.537            0.672             0.95
                                                 (0.02)            (0.02)             (0.02)           (0.05)           (0.06)           (0.07)
                                                 [4007]             [719]             [2437]            [205]            [242]            [185]
Other Social and related sciences                 0.129             0.172               0.27            0.382            0.702            0.844
                                                 (0.02)            (0.03)             (0.02)           (0.11)           (0.04)           (0.09)
                                                 [4735]             [584]             [2089]            [249]            [392]             [75]
Nursing                                           0.374               0.2              0.554            0.571            0.675            0.974
                                                 (0.02)            (0.08)             (0.02)           (0.07)           (0.08)           (0.17)
                                                 [1768]              [50]              [710]             [49]             [19]             [15]
Biological/agricultural/environmen                0.158               0.2              0.303            0.472            0.735            0.914
tal science                                      (0.01)            (0.03)             (0.02)           (0.06)             (0.1)          (0.03)
                                                 [6224]             [371]             [2954]            [270]            [116]           [2303]
Computer and mathematical                         0.411             0.246               0.53            0.544            0.788            1.006
sciences                                         (0.01)            (0.03)             (0.02)           (0.05)             (0.1)          (0.09)
                                                 [6733]             [282]             [2184]            [456]             [67]             [70]
Engineering                                        0.46             0.234              0.616             0.67            0.853            0.876
                                                 (0.01)            (0.12)             (0.01)           (0.02)           (0.06)           (0.07)
                                                [16663]              [67]             [7090]           [1592]            [155]            [132]
Physical and related sciences                     0.291             0.208              0.423            0.503            0.753            0.967
                                                 (0.02)            (0.06)             (0.02)           (0.05)           (0.09)           (0.03)
                                                 [3854]             [146]             [2378]            [240]             [78]            [557]
Other S and E-Related Fields                      0.348              0.18              0.413            0.621            0.507            1.038
                                                 (0.03)            (0.06)             (0.03)           (0.07)           (0.12)            (0.1)
                                                 [1791]              [75]              [723]            [129]             [24]            [177]

This table reports estimates of the return (in logs) to various combinations of undergraduate degrees and graduate degrees relative to an
undergraduate degree in education with no graduate degree. The table was constructed from a regression that includes the main effects of the
undergraduate degree categories with education omitted. It also includes interactions between the undergraduate categories and the aggregated
graduate degree categories. The row label specifies the undergraduate field and the column label indicates highest degree. The table also reports
the number of observations underlying the main effects of the majors and the interaction terms. We suppress results based on fewer than 20 cases.
The other control variables include a cubic in age interacted with gender, father's education (6 categories) mother's education (6 categories), gender
interacted with race (6 categories), and Hispanic. The data are from The National Survey of College Graduates, 1993 and 2010. The sample consists
of persons with at least a BA/BS degree and is restricted to full-time workers between the ages of 24 and 59. The regression is weighted using
survey weights. N=144635. R2 = 0.284. Source: AdvDegreeRegs_v3.log
                                                              Table 8: Empirical Studies of the Earnings Effects of College Major
    Study                   Data & Method                             Types of controls used                      Outcome variable                   Majors                              Results

                                                                                                                 Regression or Matching Based Studies
                                                         Log of years of experience, graduation-1900, and
                                                                                                                                                                          1 year exper       12 years experience
                                                         their interaction; IQ score and Knowledge of the        Log hourly wages for
                                                                                                                                           Business                           0.35                   0.13
                                                         World of Work score; US male unemployment rate,         the 1974 male college
                 NLS; conditional logit and selection                                                                                      Engineering                        0.41                   0.36
Berger (1988)                                            race, health status, married, residence in a standard   graduates in 1986 USD,
                 correction in the wage equation                                                                                           Science                            0.12                   0.22
                                                         metropolitan statistical area, South, enrolled in       corrected for selection
                                                                                                                                           Arts                               0.10                  -0.07
                                                         school, log of annual weeks worked; selction            bias
                                                                                                                                           Ref Cat: Education
                                                         correction
                                                                                                                                                                       Without occupation With occupation and
                                                                                                                                                                       or industry dummies industry dummies
                                                         Family background, SAT, high school rank, academic                                Business                            0.26               0.15
James et al.                                                                                                1985 log annual
                 NLS 72 (men only); WLS                  track, math credits, Catholic high school various                                 Engineering                         0.47               0.45
(1989)                                                                                                      earnings
                                                         college-level variables, labor market variables                                   Math and science                    0.20               0.12
                                                                                                                                           Social science                      0.24               0.18
                                                                                                                                           Humanities                          0.06              -0.03
                                                                                                                                                                              Men                  Women
                                                                                                                                           Business                           0.18                  0.24
                                                         SAT, high school grades, self-assessment of college     Log of real hourly        Engineering                        0.41                  0.28
                                                         ability; various education interactions; experience     wage; coefficients on     Physical Science                   0.24                  0.07
Altonji (1993)   NLS72; OLS                              and experience-squared, gender, race, family            terminal majors           Math and Computer Science          0.39                  0.23
                                                         background; high school curriculum; postgraduate        presented (not all        Life Science                       0.12                  0.21
                                                         degree                                                  presented)                Social Science                     0.10                  0.01
                                                                                                                                           Humanities                         0.06                  0.00
                                                                                                                                           Ref Cat: Education

                                                                                                                                                                              Men                  Women
                                                                                                                                           Business                           0.18                  0.25
                 Survey of recent college graduates                                                                                        Engineering                        0.39                  0.51
Rumberger &                                              Family background, race, GPA, private college,          1987 log annual
                 (1987); heirarchical linear modeling,                                                                                     Science and Math                   0.26                  0.30
Thomas (1993)                                            college selectivity, labor market variables             earnings
                 OLS                                                                                                                       Health                             0.30                  0.44
                                                                                                                                           Social science                     0.08                  0.13
                                                                                                                                           Ref Cat: Education
                                                                                                                                                                             Whites                Blacks
                                                                                                                                           Business                           0.21                   0.26
Loury &                                                  College selectivity, years of education, parental       Log weekly earnings,      Engineering and science            0.37                   0.55
                 NLS72; OLS
Garman (1995)                                            income, GPA, SAT, weeks worked, rural dummy             1979 or 1986              Social science                     0.09                  -0.10
                                                                                                                                           Humanities                        -0.16                   0.03
                                                                                                                                           Ref Cat: Education
                                                                                                                                                                              Men                  Women
                                                                                                                                           Business                           0.16                  0.11
                                                         Standard tests, high school grade; family income;
Grogger & Eide                                                                                                   Log hourly wage 1977-     Engineering                        0.28                  0.07
               NLS72, HSB; GLS                           experience; race; educational attainment (not shown:
(1995)                                                                                                           1979, 1986                Science                            0.06                  0.22
                                                         with occupation controls), full-time workers only
                                                                                                                                           Social science                     0.02                  0.02
                                                                                                                                           Ref Cat: Education
                                                                                                                                           Business (hard)                    0.49
                                                                                                                                           Business (soft)                    0.38
                 Graduates of University of Texas,       High-school background, college achievement,
                                                                                                                                           Engineering                        0.32
Hamermesh &      Austin, 1980-2000 (selected years);     demographic, postgrad degree, hours worked,             Log earnings (selected
                                                                                                                                           Natural science                    0.27
Donald (2008)    double selection correction (into       waudratic in propensity scores for working and          majors presented only)
                                                                                                                                           Social science                     0.28
                 employment and survey nonresponse)      survey response
                                                                                                                                           Humanities                         0.09
                                                                                                                                           Ref Cat: Education
                                                                                                                                                                                     Full sample    Men      Women
                                                                                                                                                 Physical Science                      -0.10        -0.09      0.16
                                                                                                                                                 Medicine                               0.40        0.58       0.35
                                                                                                                                                 Biology, veterinary                   -0.16        0.05      -0.23
                                                                                                                                                 Mathematics                           -0.04        0.16      -0.11
                                                                                                                                                 Engineering and tech                   0.02        0.20      -0.09
                                                                                                                                                 Business                              -0.08        0.11      -0.14
                                                                                                                                                 Finance & Accounting                  -0.17        0.18      -0.05
Chevalier        LDLHE (UK) - random sample of one          Ethnicity, age, disability status, parental social class,   Log earnings three       Economics                             -0.04        0.20      -0.21
(2011)           cohort; OLS, quantile regression           fee status, type of school attended and A-level score       years after graduation   Architecture & Planning                0.04        0.21      -0.04
                                                                                                                                                 Social Studies                        -0.10        0.07      -0.14
                                                                                                                                                 Law                                   -0.06        0.20      -0.16
                                                                                                                                                 Psychology                            -0.17        0.03      -0.23
                                                                                                                                                 Communication                         -0.17        -0.05     -0.19
                                                                                                                                                 Language and Literature               -0.16        0.08      -0.21
                                                                                                                                                 History and Philosoph                 -0.19        -0.06     -0.19
                                                                                                                                                 Creative Arts                         -0.18        -0.01     -0.24
                                                                                                                                                 Ref Cat: Education
                 NLSY79, NLY97, and American
                                                                                                                                                                                          Regression           Correction for
                 Community Survey, National Survey of
                                                                                                                                                 STEM                                       0.30                   0.17
                 College Graduates 1993, 2003. (United      See section 4.1: age, black, hispanic, AFQT, mother's
                                                                                                                                                 Business                                   0.28                   0.17
Webber (2014)    States); OLS with controls. OLS with       education, Rotter scale score, Rosenberg Self-Esteem
                                                                                                                                                 Social Science                             0.23                   0.15
                 bias corrections for selection on          test
                                                                                                                                                 Arts/Humanities                            0.16                   0.13
                 unobservables based on Altonji et al
                                                                                                                                                 Ref Cat: High School
                 (2005)
                                                                                                                                                                                                 Highest
                                                                                                                                                                                                               Highest Degree
                                                                                                                                                                                     Full sample Degree
                                                                                                                                                                                                                 Bachelor's
                                                                                                                                                                                                Bachelor's
                                                            Sex, race, whether Hispanic or Latino, whether                                                                                                     Men        Women
Del Rossi &
                 NSCG 2003; OLS                             married or living in a marriage-like relationship, male                              Business                             0.16          0.16        0.15        0.15
Hersch (2008)
                                                            * married indicator, age, age squared                                                Education                           -0.09          -0.12      -0.13       -0.13
                                                                                                                                                 Engineering                          0.29          0.28        0.46        0.25
                                                                                                                                                 Science/Math                         0.14          0.15        0.16        0.13
                                                                                                                                                 Ref Cat: Arts/Social Science [Single Major]

                                                                                                                           Dynamic Discrete Choice Model

                                                                                                                                                                                            Struct. Model, Unobs. Het
                                                                                                                                                                                            Males              Females
Arcidiacono                                                                                                                                      Science                                    0.20                 0.20
                 NLS72; dynamic discrete choice model       Demographics like gender and SAT scores                                              Business                                   0.13                 0.24
(2004)
                                                                                                                                                 Social Sci/Humanities                      0.05                 0.06
                                                                                                                                                 Education                                  0.01                 0.07
                                                                                                                                                 Ref Cat: High School
                                                                                                                                                                                             Struct. Model, Unobs. Het

Beffy, Fougere                                              Demographics, including gender, place of birth,                                      Returns to 4 years of college in:           1992                      1998
                 French data; structural model of college
and Maurel                                                  parents' citizenship; year of labor market entry (1992
                 major choice                                                                                                                    Science                                 0.15                          0.27
(2012)                                                      or 1998)
                                                                                                                                                 Law, Economics and Managemen            0.1                           0.23
                                                                                                                                                 Ref Cat: Humanities and Social Sciences
                                                                                                                                                                                             OLS             Struct. Model (ATE)
Kinsler and      Baccalaureate and Beyond; OLS,                                                                                                  Business                                    0.18                    0.15
                                                            SAT, GPA, demographics
Pavan (2014)     structural model of human capital                                                                                               Science                                     0.21                    0.18
                                                                                                                                                 Ref Cat: Other majors
                                                                                         Fuzzy Regression Discontinuity Design Using Field Specific Admissions Thresholds

                                                                                                                                                                                               Less     More
                                                                                                                                                                                             Selective Selective
                                                                                                                                                Business                            0.06       -0.03     0.17
Hastings,       Chilean data; 2SLS-fuzzy RD design                                                                                              Art/Architecture                    -0.03      0.01      0.00
Neilson, and    using instruments based on whether          Gender, socioeconomic status, relative proficiency in                               Education                           0.00       0.00      0.00
Zimmerman       index of grades and test scores exceeds     math and reading                                                                    Law                                 0.11       -0.04     0.19
(2014)          program specific admission thresholds                                                                                           Health                              0.21       0.10      0.27
                                                                                                                                                Sci/Tech                            0.08       0.01      0.18
                                                                                                                                                Humanities                          -0.05      -0.01     0.04
                                                                                                                                                Social Sciences                     0.12       0.02      0.21
                                                                                                                                                                                          Return to Completed Field
                                                                                                                                                                                    Levels    Levels   log spec.   log spec
                                                                                                                                                Humanities                          -0.05     -0.35      -0.19         -0.56
                                                                                                                                                Social Science                      0.08      -0.20      -0.08          -0.3
               Norwegian data; 2SLS-fuzzy RD design                                                                                             Health                              0.07      -0.11       0.07         -0.19
Kirkeboen,                                                                                                                                      Education                                     -0.11                    -0.12
               using instruments based on whether           Application score (running variable), gender, cohort
Leuven,                                                                                                                                         Science                             0.26      -0.03       0.49          0.03
               index of grades and test scores exceeds      and age at application
Mogstad (2015)                                                                                                                                  Engineering                         0.42      -0.08       1.28          0.11
               program specific admission thresholds.
                                                                                                                                                Technology                          0.17      0.04        0.27          0.23
                                                                                                                                                Business                            0.22                  0.43
                                                                                                                                                Law                                 0.25      -0.01       0.40          0.11
                                                                                                                                                Medicine                            0.37      0.12        0.83           0.4
                                                                                                                                                Ref Cat. Education, Educ is next best field


        Notes: A few entries in the Table are taken from Altonji et al (2012) Table 2.
               Webber (2014). Calculated from rows 1 and 5 of his table 6. Percentage gains converted to log point.
               Arcidiacono (2004). Calculated from his Table 7.
               Beffy, Fougere and Maurel (2012). Calculated from Table 3.
               Chevalier (2011). Estimates are based on his Table 2, column 6 and Table 3. Values renormed so that education is the reference category.
               We have excluded some majors that he reports results for.
               Kinsler and Pavan (2014). From Table 3, column 3.
               Del Rossi and Hersch (2008). From Table 3. Full Sample, controlling for graduate/professional degrees.
               HNZ (2014). From Table 5, column 3 and Table 6, columns 2 and 4. Values renormed so that education is the reference category.

                KLM (2015). The first two columns are calculated from Table 4 using the average value across preferred fields of 46.15 (75.61)when teaching (business) is the next best
                alternative. The second two columns (log spec.) are from Table A7, which reports log returns for preferred field/next best alternative pairs based on a log specification.
                                                     Table	  9:	  Returns	  to	  Undergraduate	  Degrees	  using	  Different	  Sets	  of	  Controls	  (NLSY79)
                                                                                             Coefficient	  (Standard	  Error)	  

                                                                                                             (2)	  Demographics	                                         (3)	  Demographics,	                                                       (4)	  Demographics,	  Parental	  Education,	  
                                                                                     (1)	                      and	  Parental	                                          Parental	  Education	   ASVAB	  and	  Personality	  Traits	  (Rotter	  and	  
                                                                              Demographics                          Education                                                     and	  ASVAB                                                                      Rosenberg	  scales)
                                                                                  0.284                                    0.282
                                                                                                                             	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	                  	  0.285
                                                                                                                                                                                           	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	   	  	  	  	                            0.316
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  
Engineering                                                                       (0.04)                                	  (0.04)
                                                                                                                              	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	                  (0.04)
                                                                                                                                                                                      	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	   	  	                                      	  (0.03)
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  
                                                                                  0.274                                    0.269
                                                                                                                             	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	                  	  0.264
                                                                                                                                                                                           	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	   	  	  	  	                            0.264
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  
Computer	  and	  Information	  Sciences                                        (0.04)                                	  (0.04)
                                                                                                                              	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	                  (0.04)
                                                                                                                                                                                      	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	   	  	                                      	  (0.04)
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  
                                                                                  0.256                                    0.253
                                                                                                                             	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	                  	  0.232
                                                                                                                                                                                           	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	   	  	  	  	                            0.185
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  
Military	  Sciences                                                              (0.09)                                	  (0.10)
                                                                                                                              	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	                  (0.10)
                                                                                                                                                                                      	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	   	  	                                      	  (0.07)
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  
                                                                                  0.232                                    0.230
                                                                                                                             	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	                  	  0.225
                                                                                                                                                                                           	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	   	  	  	  	                            0.221
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  
Health	  Professions                                                             (0.03)                                	  (0.03)
                                                                                                                              	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	                  (0.03)
                                                                                                                                                                                      	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	   	  	                                      	  (0.03)
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  
                                                                                  0.200                                    0.197
                                                                                                                             	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	                  	  0.193
                                                                                                                                                                                           	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	   	  	  	  	                            0.183
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  
Business	  and	  Management                                                     (0.02)                                	  (0.02)
                                                                                                                              	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	                  (0.02)
                                                                                                                                                                                      	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	   	  	                                      	  (0.02)
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  
                                                                                  0.191                                    0.176
                                                                                                                             	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	                  	  0.173
                                                                                                                                                                                           	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	   	  	  	  	                            0.182
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  
Foreign	  Languages                                                              (0.08)                                	  (0.08)
                                                                                                                              	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	                  (0.08)
                                                                                                                                                                                      	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	   	  	                                      	  (0.07)
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  
                                                                                  0.180                                    0.178
                                                                                                                             	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	                  	  0.166
                                                                                                                                                                                           	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	   	  	  	  	                            0.163
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  
Mathematics                                                                       (0.07)                                	  (0.07)
                                                                                                                              	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	                  (0.07)
                                                                                                                                                                                      	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	   	  	                                      	  (0.07)
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  
                                                                                  0.162                                    0.158
                                                                                                                             	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	                  	  0.157
                                                                                                                                                                                           	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	   	  	  	  	                            0.149
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  
Public	  Affairs	  and	  Services                                              (0.04)                                	  (0.04)
                                                                                                                              	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	                  (0.04)
                                                                                                                                                                                      	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	   	  	                                      	  (0.04)
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  
                                                                                  0.149                                    0.134
                                                                                                                             	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	                  	  0.134
                                                                                                                                                                                           	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	   	  	  	  	                            0.133
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  
Physical	  Sciences                                                              (0.07)                                	  (0.07)
                                                                                                                              	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	                  (0.07)
                                                                                                                                                                                      	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	   	  	                                      	  (0.06)
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  
                                                                                  0.141                                    0.147
                                                                                                                             	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	                  	  0.149
                                                                                                                                                                                           	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	   	  	  	  	                            0.145
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  
Other	  Fields                                                                   (0.05)                                	  (0.05)
                                                                                                                              	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	                  (0.05)
                                                                                                                                                                                      	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	   	  	                                      	  (0.05)
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  
                                                                                  0.128                                    0.112
                                                                                                                             	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	                  	  0.119
                                                                                                                                                                                           	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	   	  	  	  	                            0.114
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  
Architecture	  and	  Environmental	  Design                                    (0.06)                                	  (0.06)
                                                                                                                              	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	                  (0.06)
                                                                                                                                                                                      	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	   	  	                                      	  (0.05)
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  
                                                                                  0.096                                    0.083
                                                                                                                             	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	                  	  0.086
                                                                                                                                                                                           	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	   	  	  	  	                            0.079
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  
Social	  Sciences                                                                (0.03)                                	  (0.04)
                                                                                                                              	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	                  (0.03)
                                                                                                                                                                                      	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	   	  	                                      	  (0.03)
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  
                                                                                  0.090                                    0.075
                                                                                                                             	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	                  	  0.060
                                                                                                                                                                                           	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	   	  	  	  	                            0.063
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  
Library	  Science                                                                (0.10)                                	  (0.10)
                                                                                                                              	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	                  (0.11)
                                                                                                                                                                                      	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	   	  	                                      	  (0.09)
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  
                                                                                  0.083                                    0.067
                                                                                                                             	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	                  	  0.056
                                                                                                                                                                                           	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	   	  	  	  	                            0.039
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  
General	  Studies                                                                (0.10)                                	  (0.11)
                                                                                                                              	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	                  (0.11)
                                                                                                                                                                                      	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	   	  	                                      	  (0.11)
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  
                                                                                  0.073                                    0.066
                                                                                                                             	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	                  	  0.072
                                                                                                                                                                                           	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	   	  	  	  	                            0.093
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  
Communications                                                                    (0.04)                                	  (0.04)
                                                                                                                              	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	                  (0.04)
                                                                                                                                                                                      	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	   	  	                                      	  (0.04)
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  
                                                                                  0.049                                    0.045
                                                                                                                             	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	                  	  0.036
                                                                                                                                                                                           	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	   	  	  	  	                            0.032
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  
Biological	  Sciences                                                            (0.05)                                	  (0.05)
                                                                                                                              	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	                  (0.05)
                                                                                                                                                                                      	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	   	  	                                      	  (0.05)
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  
                                                                                  0.027                                    0.020
                                                                                                                             	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	                  	  0.018
                                                                                                                                                                                           	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	   	  	  	  	                            0.003
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  
Psychology                                                                        (0.05)                                	  (0.05)
                                                                                                                              	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	                  (0.05)
                                                                                                                                                                                      	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	   	  	                                      	  (0.05)
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  
Education	                                                                          Ref                                            Ref                                                          Ref                                                                                   Ref
                                                                                 -­‐0.017                             	  -­‐0.025
                                                                                                                            	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	              	  -­‐0.029
                                                                                                                                                                                          	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	   	  	  	  	  	                    	  -­‐0.014
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  
Letters                                                                           (0.05)                                	  (0.05)
                                                                                                                              	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	                  (0.05)
                                                                                                                                                                                      	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	   	  	                                      	  (0.05)
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  
                                                                                 -­‐0.017                             	  -­‐0.030
                                                                                                                            	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	              	  -­‐0.019
                                                                                                                                                                                          	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	   	  	  	  	  	                    	  -­‐0.002
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  
Fine	  and	  Applied	  Arts                                                    (0.04)                                	  (0.04)
                                                                                                                              	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	                  (0.04)
                                                                                                                                                                                      	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	   	  	                                      	  (0.04)
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  
                                                                                 -­‐0.063                             	  -­‐0.063
                                                                                                                            	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	              	  -­‐0.063
                                                                                                                                                                                          	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	   	  	  	  	  	                    	  -­‐0.083
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  
Agriculture	  and	  Natural	  Resources                                        (0.06)                                	  (0.06)
                                                                                                                              	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	                  (0.06)
                                                                                                                                                                                      	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	   	  	                                      	  (0.07)
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  
                                                                                 -­‐0.132                             	  -­‐0.145
                                                                                                                            	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	              	  -­‐0.137
                                                                                                                                                                                          	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	   	  	  	  	  	                    	  -­‐0.095
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  
Home	  Economics                                                                 (0.07)                                	  (0.07)
                                                                                                                              	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	                  (0.07)
                                                                                                                                                                                      	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	   	  	                                      	  (0.07)
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  
                                                                                 -­‐0.145                             	  -­‐0.182
                                                                                                                            	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	              	  -­‐0.191
                                                                                                                                                                                          	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	   	  	  	  	  	                    	  -­‐0.177
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  
Area	  Studies	                                                                 (0.14)                                	  (0.14)
                                                                                                                              	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	                  (0.14)
                                                                                                                                                                                      	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	   	  	                                      	  (0.14)
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  
                                                                                 -­‐0.231                             	  -­‐0.244
                                                                                                                            	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	              	  -­‐0.226
                                                                                                                                                                                          	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	   	  	  	  	  	                    	  -­‐0.199
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  
Theology	                                                                        (0.08)                                	  (0.08)
                                                                                                                              	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	                  (0.08)
                                                                                                                                                                                      	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	   	  	                                      	  (0.08)
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  
This	  table	  reports	  estimates	  of	  the	  return	  (in	  logs)	  to	  various	  undergraduate	  degrees	  relative	  to	  a	  Bachelor's	  in	  Education.	  The	  table	  was	  constructed	  from	  a	  regression	  that	  
includes	  the	  undergraduate	  degree	  categories,	  and	  two	  dummy	  variables	  for	  high	  school	  only	  and	  some	  college	  education	  only.	  The	  other	  control	  variables	  include	  (1)	  a	  quadratic	  
in	  age,	  gender,	  race,	  and	  Hispanic,	  (2)	  father's	  and	  mother's	  highest	  grade	  completed,	  (3)	  Six	  components	  of	  the	  ASVAB	  test	  (Arithmetic	  Reasoning,	  Numerical	  Operation,	  Coding	  
Speed,	  Mathematics	  Knowledge,	  Paragraph	  Comprehension,	  and	  Word	  Knowledge),	  and	  (4)	  Rosenberg	  Self-­‐Esteem	  and	  Rotter	  Locus	  of	  Control	  Scales	  .	  The	  data	  are	  from	  the	  
National	  Longitudinal	  Survey	  of	  Youth	  1979.	  The	  sample	  is	  constructed	  by	  pooling	  across	  survey	  waves	  (1981	  to	  2012)	  the	  observations	  of	  persons	  with	  at	  least	  a	  high	  school	  
degree,	  who	  are	  24	  years	  old	  or	  older	  and	  work	  30	  hours	  or	  more	  per	  week.	  N=55724	  observations	  (9117	  individuals).	  Standard	  errors	  are	  clustered	  at	  the	  individual	  level.
Appendix Table 1: The Distribution of Male and Female College Graduates by Field of Degree
                                                                         All       Male       Female
                                                                        (1)          (2)        (3)
Education                                                                 0.106       0.053      0.151
English/Languages/Literature                                              0.039       0.025      0.051
Fine/Performing Arts                                                      0.044       0.039      0.048
Other Humanities                                                          0.054       0.055      0.053
Communications/Journalism                                                 0.045       0.035      0.053
Accounting                                                                0.047       0.051      0.043
Business                                                                  0.138       0.165      0.114
Marketing                                                                 0.030       0.032      0.029
Other Non‐S and E Fields                                                  0.021       0.025      0.019
Economics                                                                 0.022       0.032      0.013
Political science                                                         0.034       0.041      0.029
Psychology or Social Work                                                 0.065       0.037      0.089
Other Social and related sciences                                         0.057       0.042      0.070
Nursing                                                                   0.029       0.005      0.049
Biological/agricultural/environmental science                             0.068       0.073      0.064
Computer and mathematical sciences                                        0.048       0.071      0.029
Engineering                                                               0.073       0.132      0.023
Physical and related sciences                                             0.023       0.034      0.014
Other S and E‐Related Fields                                              0.056       0.054      0.058
Total                                                                         1           1          1
N                                                                        59273       31743      27530

Source: AdvDegreeStats_v3.do. Data: National Survey of College Graduates 2010. The sample includes
individuals aged 24 to 59. Estimates are weighted using sample weights.
8   Figures




              112
                                                       Figure 1: Percentage of Bachelor’s degrees in each field
                                           25
          Percentage of Bachelor's Graduates
           5       10      15      20




                                                1980        1985          1990   1995          2000         2005          2010
                                                                                   Year

                                                               Business                Engineering, Math and Physical Sciences
                                                               Life Sciences           Education
                                                               Social Sciences         Humanities and Fine Arts
                                                               Health                  Other




Source: U.S. Dept. of Education (NCES), Higher Education General Information Survey (HEGIS), 1980-81
through 1985-86; Integrated Postsecondary Education Data System (IPEDS), 1990-91 to 2012-13.




                                                                                 113
                                                  Figure 2: Share of Master’s graduates
                         16          14
          Percentage of 24 year-olds
                 10      8
                         6 12




                                          1985   1990       1995       2000       2005    2010
                                                                     Year



Source, Master’s graduates: U.S. Dept. of Education (NCES), Higher Education General Information Survey
(HEGIS), 1985-86; Integrated Postsecondary Education Data System (IPEDS), 1990-91 to 2012-13.
Source, population: U.S. Census Bureau, Population Division; Quarterly U.S. Population Estimates by Age,
Sex, Race, and Hispanic Origin (1980-1989); Monthly Intercensal Estimates of the U.S. Population by Age
and Sex (1990-2000); Intercensal Estimates of the Resident Population by Single Year of Age, Sex, Race,
and Hispanic Origin for the U.S. (2000-2010); Annual Estimates of the Resident Population by Single Year
of Age and Sex for the U.S. (2011-2013).




                                                                   114
                                              Figure 3: Share of Bachelor’s graduates
                        40        35
          Percentage of 24 year-olds
          25         30 20




                                       1985   1990      1995        2000       2005     2010
                                                                  Year



Source, Bachelor’s graduates: U.S. Dept. of Education (NCES), Higher Education General Information
Survey (HEGIS), 1985-86; Integrated Postsecondary Education Data System (IPEDS), 1990-91 to 2012-13.
Source, population: U.S. Census Bureau, Population Division; Quarterly U.S. Population Estimates by Age,
Sex, Race, and Hispanic Origin (1980-1989); Monthly Intercensal Estimates of the U.S. Population by Age
and Sex (1990-2000); Intercensal Estimates of the Resident Population by Single Year of Age, Sex, Race,
and Hispanic Origin for the U.S. (2000-2010); Annual Estimates of the Resident Population by Single Year
of Age and Sex for the U.S. (2011-2013).




                                                               115
                                         Figure 4: Share of Master’s graduates broken down by field
                        5
          Percentage of 24 year-olds
              2         3
                        1        4




                                       1985       1990           1995       2000          2005   2010
                                                                          Year

                                                 Health Professions           Business            Education
                                                 Other STEM                   Other non-STEM




Source, field of study: U.S. Dept. of Education (NCES), Higher Education General Information Survey
(HEGIS), 1985-86; Integrated Postsecondary Education Data System (IPEDS), 1990-91 to 2012-13.
Source, population: U.S. Census Bureau, Population Division; Quarterly U.S. Population Estimates by Age,
Sex, Race, and Hispanic Origin (1980-1989); Monthly Intercensal Estimates of the U.S. Population by Age
and Sex (1990-2000); Intercensal Estimates of the Resident Population by Single Year of Age, Sex, Race,
and Hispanic Origin for the U.S. (2000-2010); Annual Estimates of the Resident Population by Single Year
of Age and Sex for the U.S. (2011-2013).




                                                                        116
                                                    Figure 5: Percentage of Master’s degrees in each field
                           35
          Percentage of Master's Graduates
             15      20    1025      30




                                             1985         1990           1995       2000          2005   2010
                                                                                  Year

                                                         Health Professions           Business               Education
                                                         Other STEM                   Other non-STEM




Source, field of study: U.S. Dept. of Education (NCES), Higher Education General Information Survey
(HEGIS), 1985-86; Integrated Postsecondary Education Data System (IPEDS), 1990-91 to 2012-13.




                                                                                117
                                                  Figure 6: Share of Ph.D. graduates
                         1.1         1
          Percentage of 28 year-olds
                 .8      .7
                         .6.9




                                         1985   1990      1995       2000        2005   2010
                                                                   Year



Source, field of study: U.S. Dept. of Education (NCES), Higher Education General Information Survey
(HEGIS), 1985-86; Integrated Postsecondary Education Data System (IPEDS), 1990-91 to 2012-13.
Source, population: U.S. Census Bureau, Population Division; Quarterly U.S. Population Estimates by Age,
Sex, Race, and Hispanic Origin (1980-1989); Monthly Intercensal Estimates of the U.S. Population by Age
and Sex (1990-2000); Intercensal Estimates of the Resident Population by Single Year of Age, Sex, Race,
and Hispanic Origin for the U.S. (2000-2010); Annual Estimates of the Resident Population by Single Year
of Age and Sex for the U.S. (2011-2013).




                                                                 118
                                                 Figure 7: Percentage of Ph.D. degrees in each field
                         40
          Percentage of Ph.D. Graduates
              10        20
                         0       30




                                          1985        1990       1995        2000        2005          2010
                                                                           Year

                                                                  STEM                  Soc. Sci.
                                                                  Humanities            Business
                                                                  Education             Other



Source: U.S. Dept. of Education (NCES), Higher Education General Information Survey (HEGIS), 1985-86;
Integrated Postsecondary Education Data System (IPEDS), 1990-91 to 2012-13.




                                                                        119
         Figure 8: Share of individuals graduating with a MD, JD or Dental degree
                        2
          Percentage of 28 year-olds
           .5         1 0      1.5




                                       1980   1985   1990           1995   2000        2005   2010
                                                                    Year

                                                            Total          Dentistry
                                                            MD             Law



Source: U.S. Dept. of Education (NCES), Higher Education General Information Survey (HEGIS) Degrees
and Other Formal Awards Conferred surveys (1980-1985), Integrated Postsecondary Education Data System
(IPEDS) Completions Survey (1987-1999), IPEDS Completions component (2000-2010).




                                                               120
                          Figure 9: MD degrees: Number of applicants and matriculants
            50       40
Individuals (Thousands)
20         30
            10




                          2003      2005         2007            2009       2011       2013
                                                              Year

                                                 Applicants             Matriculants



                                   Source: Association of American Medical Colleges




                                                         121
Figure 10: JD degrees: Number of applicants, admitted applicants and first-year enrollments
                      100
          Individuals (Thousands)
              60      40   80




                                    2000   2002       2004          2006   2008        2010          2012
                                                                    Year

                                            ABA Applicants                 ABA Admitted Applicants
                                            First Year Enrollment



Source, applicants: Law School Admission Council, National Decision Profiles (2015)
Source, enrollment: American Bar Association, Section of Legal Education and Admission to the Bar




                                                                122
