NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

BUSINESS IN THE UNITED STATES:
WHO OWNS IT AND HOW MUCH TAX DO THEY PAY?
Michael Cooper
John McClelland
James Pearce
Richard Prisinzano
Joseph Sullivan
Danny Yagan
Owen Zidar
Eric Zwick
Working Paper 21651
http://www.nber.org/papers/w21651
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
October 2015
This work does not necessarily reflect the views of the U.S. Treasury Department or the National
Bureau of Economic Research. We thank Alan Auerbach, Curtis Carlson, Martin Feldstein, Austan
Goolsbee, Marty Harris, Jim Hines, Joe Koshansky, Adam Looney, James Mackie, Larry May, Janet
McCubbin, Susie Nelson, Jim Poterba, Emmanuel Saez, Nina Shumofsky, Larry Summers, Alan Viard,
George Yin, and Gabriel Zucman, as well as participants in the National Tax Association Spring Symposium
and the Statistics of Income Consultants Panel for helpful conversations on this topic. We thank Jessica
Henderson and Prab Upadrashta for excellent research assistance. Yagan gratefully acknowledges
financial support from the University of California at Berkeley's Burch Center for Tax Policy and
Public Finance. Zidar gratefully acknowledges support from the Kathryn and Grant Swick Faculty
Research Fund and the University of Chicago Booth School of Business. Zwick gratefully acknowledges
financial support from the Neubauer Family Foundation, the Polsky Center, and the Hultquist Faculty
Research Endowment at the University of Chicago Booth School of Business.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peerreviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.
© 2015 by Michael Cooper, John McClelland, James Pearce, Richard Prisinzano, Joseph Sullivan,
Danny Yagan, Owen Zidar, and Eric Zwick. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed
two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice,
is given to the source.

Business in the United States: Who Owns it and How Much Tax Do They Pay?
Michael Cooper, John McClelland, James Pearce, Richard Prisinzano, Joseph Sullivan, Danny
Yagan, Owen Zidar, and Eric Zwick
NBER Working Paper No. 21651
October 2015
JEL No. D31,D33,E25,E62,H2,H22,H25,M2
ABSTRACT
“Pass-through” businesses like partnerships and S-corporations now generate over half of U.S. business
income and account for much of the post-1980 rise in the top- 1% income share. We use administrative
tax data from 2011 to identify pass-through business owners and estimate how much tax they pay.
We present three findings. (1) Relative to traditional business income, pass-through business income
is substantially more concentrated among high-earners. (2) Partnership ownership is opaque: 20%
of the income goes to unclassifiable partners, and 15% of the income is earned in circularly owned
partnerships. (3) The average federal income tax rate on U.S. pass- through business income is 19%|much
lower than the average rate on traditional corporations. If pass-through activity had remained at 1980's
low level, strong but straightforward assumptions imply that the 2011 average U.S. tax rate on total
U.S. business income would have been 28% rather than 24%, and tax revenue would have been approximately
$100 billion higher.
Michael Cooper
US Department of Treasury
Office of Tax Analysis
Washington DC 20020
michael.cooper@do.treas.gov
John McClelland
Department of the Treasury
john.mcclelland@treasury.gov
James Pearce
Department of the Treasury
james.pearce@do.treas.gov
Richard Prisinzano
Department of the Treasury
Richard.Prisinzano@do.treas.gov

Joseph Sullivan
Department of the Treasury
jsullivan@jd18.law.harvard.edu
Danny Yagan
Department of Economics
University of California, Berkeley
530 Evans Hall, #3880
Berkeley, CA 94720
and NBER
yagan@berkeley.edu
Owen Zidar
University of Chicago
Booth School of Business
5807 South Woodlawn Avenue
Chicago, IL 60637
and NBER
owen.zidar@chicagobooth.edu
Eric Zwick
Booth School of Business
University of Chicago
5807 South Woodlawn Avenue
Chicago, IL 60637
and NBER
ezwick@chicagobooth.edu

The structure of business activity used to be relatively simple, with C-corporations—
traditional corporations subject to the corporate income tax—earning the vast majority of
business income. This is no longer the case. C-corporations now account for less than half
of business income, with “pass-throughs”—businesses whose annual income is taxed at the
owner -level—growing rapidly in importance (Slemrod, 1996; Carroll and Joulfaian, 1997;
Gordon and Slemrod, 2000; Yagan, 2015). Figure 1 shows this dramatic transformation:
54.2% of U.S. business income in 2011 was earned in the pass-through sectors, compared to
only 20.7% in 1980.1
The rise of pass-throughs accounts for much of the rise in income inequality over the last
three decades. Figure 2 uses Piketty and Saez (2003) data (updated through 2013) to plot
two series: the actual share of Form 1040 household income accruing to the top-1% highestincome tax-filing over the last century and the hypothetical share holding pass-through
income fixed at the 1980 level. As is well-known, the top-1% income share doubled (from
10.0% to 20.1%) between 1980 and 2013. Less well-known is that 41% of that increase came
in the form of higher pass-through business income.2
Despite this profound change in the organization of U.S. business activity, we lack clean,
clear facts about the consequences of this change for the distribution and taxation of business
income. This problem is especially severe for partnerships, which constitute the largest, most
opaque, and fastest growing type of pass-through. This paper uses rich administrative data
to identify U.S. business owners and estimate how much tax they pay, with special emphasis
on the partnership sector.
We begin by documenting who owns partnerships and S-corporations, as compared to Ccorporate and sole proprietorship ownership. Partnership ownership is particularly murky:
partnerships can be owned by other partnerships which in turn can be owned by other
partnerships. Partnership owners can also be foreigners, corporations, tax-exempt entities,
and trusts, and partnership income and deductions need not be allocated pro rata to owners.
We address these complications by systematically linking tax-year-2011 partnerships to their
1

Pearce (2014) obtains a similar figure for pass-through income as a share of total business income after
accounting for double-counting of partnership income paid to partnership and corporate partners, homogenizing income definitions, and including the other two major pass-through forms (regulated investment
companies and real estate investment trusts) in the computation.
2
Saez (2004) presents an earlier decomposition that emphasized the role of rising salary income through
the 1990s which subsequently decelerated. Note that pass-through income reported on 1040 returns is
pre-annual-income-taxes while C-corporate income reported on 1040 returns (i.e., dividends and capital
gains) is post-annual-income-taxes (i.e., the corporate income tax). However, the 1980-2013 rise in top-1%
income shares could have been just as large if pass-through businesses had been organized as C-corporations.
The reason is that owner-managers of C-corporations seeking to avoid payout taxes may report profits as
managerial salary income, which escapes the corporate income tax just like pass-through profits. See Saez
(2014) for evidence that top-earners’ charitable contributions (a type of expenditure) have risen in lock-step
with their rising income shares, consistent with a large real rise in top income shares.

2

owners using Form 1065 K-1 information returns in U.S. tax data, following money through
partnership tiers, and accounting for detailed allocations of various income and deduction
streams to each owner.
We find that pass-through participation and pass-through income are especially concentrated among high-earners. Relative to households in the bottom half of the income
distribution, households in the top-1% of the income distribution are over fifty times as
likely to receive positive partnership income. And the average top-1% household earns over
six-hundred times the amount of partnership income as the average household in the bottom
half. Overall, 69% of pass-through income earned by individuals accrues to the top-1%. Scorporate income is similarly concentrated, but other business income (typically considered
very concentrated) is substantially less concentrated. For instance, only 45% of C-corporate
income (as proxied by dividends) accrues to the top-1%, and top-1% households are only
eight times as likely to receive C-corporate income as households in the bottom half. Furthermore, the majority of partnership income earned by the top-1% derives from partnerships
in finance and professional services. As shown below, income earned by finance partnerships
is on average taxed at preferred rates.
Partnership ownership is not only concentrated, but also opaque. First, twenty percent
of partnership income is earned by partners that we have not been able to classify in administrative data.3 Second, following money through partnership structures—between the
partnership generating the income and the ultimate owners taxed on that income—proves
challenging as well. We develop an algorithm that recursively traces income through partnership structures to ultimate non-partnership owners and attempts to assign that income
back to an originating partnership. This recursive algorithm reaches a fixed point before
all partnership income has been successfully assigned: fifteen percent of income is in circular structures and cannot be uniquely linked to an originating partnership. Together, the
union of income flowing (1) to unclassifiable partners and (2) through circular partnerships
amounts to $200 billion or thirty percent of income earned in the partnership sector overall.4
In the second part of the paper, we estimate the overall average tax rate on business
income. We define the average tax rate in a sector as the difference between the actual U.S.
tax bill and a hypothetical U.S. tax bill that would prevail if all sector income were set to
zero—divided by total sector U.S. income. For our baseline measure, we follow the definition
of U.S. business income used for corporate taxation, so it excludes interest payments and
unrepatriated foreign income. For the partnership sector as an example, this rate answers
3

Unclassifiable partners are those for which processed information returns do not report the type of entity
associated with a particular taxpayer identification number.
4
We use the available information to approximate taxes paid on this income. Section 3.1.1 describes how
we treat unclassifiable income and appendix A describes how we treat circular partnerships.

3

the simple question: holding all other income in the economy constant, how many extra
dollars of tax are owed per dollar of partnership income?
We estimate that the average income tax rate on income earned in the partnership sector
in 2011 was 15.9%. Extending our tax rate definition to other sectors, we estimate the
average tax rate in 2011 in the C-corporate sector to have been 31.6%, in the S-corporate
sector to have been 24.9%, and in the sole proprietorship sector to have been 13.6%. Hence,
partnership income is taxed at the lowest income tax rate in the major formal business sectors
(i.e., non-sole-proprietorships). Weighted by 2011 sector income shares, these estimates
imply an average tax rate on U.S. business income of 24.3%. We believe this estimate to be
the most comprehensive estimate available of the average tax rate on U.S. business income.
Why are partnerships taxed at a relatively low rate, even though they are owned mainly
by high-income Americans who face high statutory ordinary income tax rates? Three mechanisms push the average partnership rate below owners’ statutory ordinary income tax rates.
First, capital gains and dividend income, which are taxed at preferred rates, amount to 45%
of partnership income. This fact is especially clear in our partnership tax rate estimates by
industry, with finance and real estate subject to an average rate of only 14.7%. Second, tax
exempt and foreign entities earn roughly fifteen percent of partnership income and pay tax
rates below 5%. Third, unidentifiable entities and circular partnerships pay an estimated
tax rate (10.6%) that is one-third lower than the average tax rate on partnership income
overall. The relative flexibility in the allocation of income and deductions among partners
can also combine to make the average tax burden on partnerships relatively low.
These tax rates reflect taxes paid to the U.S. Treasury on U.S. business income accruing
to equity owners. To estimate an all-in tax rate on U.S. business income, we combine the
above figures with total foreign tax credits and estimates of total taxes paid on business
interest payments. These additional considerations give rise to an all-in tax rate on U.S.
business income of 23%.
In the final part of the paper, we conduct a counterfactual exercise that asks: how much
higher might the average tax rate on U.S. business income in 2011 have been were it earned
in the traditional C-corporation and sole proprietorship sectors, as in 1980? Specifically and
for each pass-through sector, we reallocate 2011 pass-through income and deductions pro rata
to the C-corporate and sole proprietorship sectors in order to match the 1980 distribution
of sector income shares. We estimate that if 2011 business income had instead been earned
along 1980 sector income shares, the average tax rate on U.S. business income would have
been 28.0%. Total business income in 2011 was $2.6 trillion in income, so an additional 3.8
percentage points would have generated an additional $100 billion in tax revenue.
This work connects to a long literature on U.S. business taxation and economic activity.
4

First, Auerbach (1983), Auerbach and Poterba (1987), and Altshuler et al. (2009) describe
trends in business tax revenue and explore the relative importance of policy and corporate
profits (Feldstein and Summers, 1977) in explaining these trends. We quantify the role
of the rise of pass-throughs in explaining this decline, under strong but straightforward
assumptions.
Second and going back to Harberger (1962), economists have emphasized implications
of heterogeneous business tax rates across sectors (Gordon, Hines and Summers, 1987).
We estimate large differences in average tax rates across sectors, implying potentially large
inefficiency in the U.S. business tax code under the standard assumptions of Gravelle and
Kotlikoff (1989). However, recent evidence from Zwick and Mahon (2014) suggests that
investment at small firms is much more responsive to taxes than investment at large firms,
suggesting some efficiency gain from tilting the business tax burden toward larger firms which
are mostly C-corporations.
Third, recent evidence indicates that business owners bear a substantial share of burden
of business taxation, rather than it being passed on to workers or other capital owners
(Suárez-Serrato and Zidar, 2014). We show that pass-through business income accrues much
more disproportionately to high-earners than C-corporate income, suggesting that the rise
of pass-throughs has significantly lowered the business tax burden for high-earners.
Finally, hundreds of economic models require an assumption on the U.S. federal tax rate
paid on U.S. business income. Authors frequently use top statutory rates on C-corporate
income: 35% (considering only annual corporate taxes) or 45% (considering dividend and
capital gains taxation as well). We estimate that this substantially overstates the average
tax rate paid on U.S. business income.
The remainder of this paper is organized as follows. Section 1 details how we match
business income to ultimate taxable owners. Section 2 presents descriptive statistics on who
owns pass-throughs, benchmarked to owners of other business sectors. Section 3 introduces
our average tax rate concept and how we apply it to the matched business-owner data.
Section 4 presents estimates of the average tax rates on business income and conducts the
counterfactual exercise. Section 5 concludes.

1

Data on Businesses and Their Owners

In this section, we detail our data sources. For the analysis of partnerships, we construct
matched firm-owner data, which is crucial for computing industry-level partnership statistics. For the analysis of S-corporations, we use owner-level data. For the analysis of sole
proprietorships, we use data that is by default matched firm-owner data. C-corporations
5

and their owners cannot be comprehensively matched; instead, we use data from annual
C-corporate income tax forms for analyses of the average tax rate and data on household
dividend income as an imperfect proxy for analyses of C-corporate ownership (see caveats
below).

1.1

Matched Partnership-Partner Data

Partnerships are flow-through entities that pay no entity-level tax; instead, partnership income is taxed at the partner-level. Our analysis of partnership tax rates therefore requires
matched partnership-partner data. We first describe data sources used by previous analyses of partnership activity, income, and taxes. We then detail our algorithm for matching
partnerships and partners and constructing our analysis sample covering year 2011, paying
particular attention to partnership tiers (partnerships owned by other partnerships). We
then assess the success of our match algorithm.
Most earlier work on partnerships has used one of two data sources. A first set of
papers relies on partnership-level information derived from the Internal Revenue Service
(IRS) Statistics of Income division’s (SOI) Partnership Study file. Every year, SOI randomly
samples partnership income tax returns (Form 1065), edits numerous variables for accuracy
and consistency, and uses them to publish aggregate statistics. These annual samples contain
no information on the entity’s partners and the taxes those partners may pay. Earlier authors
with access to tax data have used the Partnership Study microdata to analyze partnership
activities and organization (e.g., DeBacker and Prisinzano (2015)). A second set of papers
relies on a subset of partners, individuals who report partnership income on Form 1040
Schedule E, derived from SOI’s Individual and Sole Proprietorship file. Notably, Knittel
and Nelson (2011) link individual partners to their partnerships. We extend this work using
comprehensive data on on all partnerships and all partners.
We link partnerships to partners by merging partnership-level Form 1065 returns (hereafter referred to as “1065s”) to partner -level Form 1065 Schedule K-1 returns (hereafter
“K-1s”) by the unique identifier called the Document Locator Number (DLN). When a partnership files its return of partnership income on Form 1065, it is mandated to include in the
same aggregate filing exactly one Form 1065 Schedule K-1 for each of its partners. Similar
to other information returns filed with the IRS by an entity on behalf of a taxpayer (e.g.,
an individual’s Form W-2 filed by her employer), each partner’s K-1 details the amount of
the partnership’s income, deductions, and credits that the partnership is allocating to the
partner. Every dollar of a partnership’s income and deductions is required by law to be
allocated to exactly one partner; hence, the sum of each category across a partnership’s K-1s

6

is mandated to match the corresponding aggregate category listed on the Form 1065.
When a partnership’s aggregate filing is received by the IRS, the IRS assigns it a unique
DLN. Subsequent IRS data processing divides 1065 fields into one database and K-1 fields
into another database, but all retain the same unique DLN. We access unedited data for
2011 for 25,466,066 K-1s and 3,620,924 1065s in the U.S. Treasury’s population tax files,
which represent the near-universe of these returns. We merge these 1065s and K-1s by
merging on DLN and remove K-1s without DLNs and outlier K-1s with amounts exceeding
$1 billion in any K-1 field, yielding our partnership analysis sample. Using population-level
files allows us to analyze the distribution of partnership income across fine income bins and
to comprehensively trace partnership income across partnership ownership tiers.
Partnerships can be owned by individuals, other partnerships, and other types of entities. But partnership income and deductions can never remain in the partnership sector:
since partnerships cannot retain income, every dollar must eventually be distributed to nonpartnership “ultimate” owners. Where possible, we follow income flows through ownership
tiers to ultimate owners along the lines of earlier methods (May, 2012). This exercise allows
us to make statements about the tax rate for particular solved partnerships or for specific
industries within the partnership sector. We refer to partnerships or groups of partnerships
in which all income can be traced to ultimate owners as “solved” partnerships. However,
there are some circular ownership chains, and they are quantitatively important: 14.9% of
income flowing to ultimate owners is associated with circular partnerships. We further describe these circular partnerships in section 4, which presents our tax rate estimates, and in
appendix A, which provides more detail on our aggregation algorithm.
Finally, we match individual partners to the universe of unedited 2011 Form 1040 returns
by linking partners’ masked social security numbers to the masked social security number
of either the primary 1040 filer or the secondary 1040 filer. For the analysis of ownership
across the household income distribution in section 2.2, we top code individual K-1 records
when the absolute value of total partnership income exceeds 100 times the absolute value
of adjusted gross income (AGI) as a simple ad hoc way to account for likely erroneous
or unrepresentative outliers. For these records, we set partnership income equal to 100 ×
sign(partnership income) × |AGI|.
We successfully match 97.7% of 1065s to at least one K-1 by DLN. We believe that match
rates are below 100% because of some combination of DLN manual entry error, taxpayer
non-compliance (the partnership failing to issue K-1s), and potential isolated errors in data
processing. Many partnerships’ K-1 income fields do not sum to the partnership’s total for
those income fields as reported on the partnership’s tax return. However in aggregate, the
matched K-1s allocate to partners the vast majority of partnership income. For example,
7

the sum of ordinary business income across the K-1s equals 98.2% of aggregate ordinary
business income of the 1065s as computed from the 2011 SOI Partnership Study File; for
long-term capital gains, the figure is 98.7%.
We use the following variables, organized here by form.
Form 1065. Industry equals the principal business activity (NAICS) code reported in
Box A.
Form 1065 Schedule K-1. Total partnership income equals the sum of the K-1 fields
available to us from the unedited K-1 population data, across each partnership’s partners’
K-1s: ordinary business income, net rental real estate income, other net rental income,
guaranteed payments, interest income, ordinary dividends, royalties, net short-term capital
gain, and net long-term capital gain, less Section 179 expenses. We lack all other fields, most
notably other deductions and foreign tax credits.
Form 1040. The adjusted gross income (AGI) equals the adjusted gross income on the
individual partner’s Form 1040 filing; it equals zero for non-filing individual partners.
Various business income forms. Partner type equals “Individual” if the K-1 indicates
that the partner is an individual. If not, partner type equals the type of business income
tax return to which we match the partner’s masked taxpayer identificaton number (TIN).5
Partner type equals “Unidentified TIN type” if the partner is neither an individual nor was
matched to a business income tax return; it equals “Unidentified EIN” if the IRS database
classifies the taxpayer identifier as an employer identification number (EIN) but we are unable to match this EIN to a business income tax return. When we refer to partner types
below, we use these groupings:
Partner Type

Form Filed

Individual

1040

C- and other corporations

1120, 1120j ∀ j ∈ {F,PC,L,RIC,REIT,H,C,POL,ND,SF,FSC}

S-corporations

1120S

Tax-exempt

990, 990j ∀ j ∈ {T,R,PF,ZR,C}

Estate/trust

1041

Foreign person/entity

1042, 1042S, 8805, 8288A

Partnerships

1065, 1065B, 1066

Unidentified EIN

Taxpayer identifier classifiable as EIN, but tax form unknown

Unidentified TIN type

Taxpayer identifier not classifiable

5
We match non-individual partners to the universe of twenty types of business income tax returns from
complete years available in Treasury’s population business income tax return files (1996-2013). In the few
cases when a single partner matches to multiple business return types, we break such ties by proximity of
the matched business income tax return to 2011.

8

1.2

Matched S-corporation-owner Data

Our approach to matching S-corporations to owners is similar to the one followed above
for matching partnerships to partners. Like partnerships, S-corporations are flow-through
entities that generally pay no entity-level tax; instead, S-corporation income is taxed at the
owner-level. However unlike partnerships, S-corporations are owned only by individuals, so
there is no issue of ownership tiers or other complicated structures, which simplifies the
analysis. Therefore we use the data on the near-universe of 2011 Form 1120S Schedule K-1s
(analogous to the Form 1065 Schedule K-1s with similar fields available as detailed above)
from Treasury’s population tax files and match to the owner’s Form 1040.6

1.3

Sole Proprietorship Data

Sole proprietorships are unincorporated business entities owned by individual taxpapers, and
their income is reported on Form 1040 Schedule C. Thus the distinction between entity-level
and owner-level taxation is moot for sole proprietorships, and sole proprietorships are by
default linked to their owners on 1040’s. For the analysis of sole proprietorship tax rates, we
use the SOI Individual and Sole Proprietorship sample file (see section 1.1 for a description
of SOI study files). For the analysis of the distribution of business ownership and income,
we use information on the near-universe of 2011 1040’s in Treasury’s population tax files.

1.4

C-corporation Data

C-corporation income is taxed at both the entity level and at the owner level: annual income
is taxable at the entity level, and net-of-annual-income-tax earnings are taxable at the owner
level when distributed as a dividend or realized as a capital gain. For the analysis of Ccorporation tax rates, we proceed in two steps. First, we use the near-universe of 2011
Form 1120 returns from Treasury’s population tax files to estimate tax rates on annual
C-corporate income. We then use estimates from the literature as assumed tax rates on
C-corporate distributions. For the analysis of the distribution of business ownership by and
income to individuals, we use (as an imperfect proxy for C-corporate ownership) dividend
income as reported on the near-universe of Form 1040’s in Treasury’s population tax files.7
6

Prior work matching S-corporations to their owners includes Bull, Fisher and Nelson (2009) which linked
the SOI 2005 sample of S-corporations to their owners via K-1s.
7
This is an imperfect proxy for C-corporate ownership and income by individual tax-filing units because
some C-corporation income is distributed to shareholders as capital gains, because many C-corporations do
not distribute income at all in a given tax year, and because some non-C-corporation income is included in
the dividends Form 1040 field. We do not analyze capital gains because many capital gains do not derive
from C-corporation ownership; dividend income and capital gains exhibit similar ownership patterns. We

9

2

Who Owns Businesses in the Pass-through Sector?

We now use the data detailed in the previous section to describe pass-through (partnership and S-corporation) owners. We first focus on partnerships, documenting the share of
partnership owners (“partners”) that are individuals, C-corporations, S-corporations, and
other partners and also the share of partnership income allocated to these partner types.
We then document the distribution of partnership, S-corporation, sole proprietorship, and
C-corporation income earned across the individual income distribution.

2.1

Partner and Income Shares Across Types and Industries

Figure 3 divides the 25.3 million partner K-1s in the distribution analysis sample into one
of seven partner types: individuals, C- and other corporations, S-corporations, estates and
trusts, tax-exempt organizations, foreign entities, partnerships, and those partners whose
type could not be identified. A large majority of partners (73.9%) are individuals. The
second largest identifiable category is partnerships (5.6%). Another 5.0% are estates or
trusts. Another 2.9% are corporations, with slightly more S-corporate partners than Ccorporate partners. The remainder is divided among the other partner types.
Note that even with administrative data, it is not possible to identify all of the partners.
For 9.5% of partners, we are not able to find a tax return associated with the partner’s
taxpayer identification number. For the majority of these unidentified partners, we cannot
assign an entity type; however, we suspect that most of this income is paid to corporations
(see section 3 below for more detail).
Figure 3 displays a substantially different division of partnership income across partner
types. Though individual partners constitute 73.9% of partners, they receive only 31.5% of
partnership income. Corporate partners on the other hand are allocated a much larger share
of partnership income (7.7% for C- and other corporations and 3.4% for S corporations) than
the share of partners that they constitute (2.9%).
Three additional points are worth noting. First, partnerships themselves receive 26.3%
of partnership income allocations. Thus, any analysis of partnership activity must address
the issue of ownership tiers. Second, a disproportionate share of income accrues to taxexempt and lightly taxed entities (10.9% to tax-exempt and foreign partners). Note that
unlike C-corporate income, which is taxed at the entity level, partnership income earned
include both qualified and unqualified dividends. Unqualified dividends includes dividends from domestic
C-corporations in certain circumstances as well as dividend income paid by foreign corporations, dividend
income earned by pass-throughs, and money market interest. Note that the inclusion of money market
interest likely raises participation rates and income shares outside the top of the income distribution relative
to excluding it.

10

by tax-exempt entities may not be taxed at all. Third, 14.8% of income (including income
paid to other partnerships) accrues to entities that we cannot classify. This fact introduces
a challenge for the estimation of tax rates on partnership income.
Figure 4 shows the distribution of partnership income across partnership industries. The
partnership used to be a niche business form, only of use to groups of people who worked
together and shared general liability. Traditional partnerships, such as law and accounting firms and doctors’ offices, are still present and account for as much as 14.9% of total
partnership income.8 But they are no longer representative of the median partnership in
dollar-weighted terms; 70.0% of allocated income goes to partnerships in finance or those
that classify themselves as holding companies.9 This is consistent with the evidence in
DeBacker and Prisinzano (2015) showing that partnerships with limited liability are now
the most common form of partnership, and that many entities—which may have organized
as corporations in the past to enjoy limited liability protections—now choose this flexible
pass-through form.

2.2

Business Ownership across the Income Distribution

Figure 5 displays participation rates by business income type across the income distribution of U.S. tax filers.10 To create the graph, we divide all 145 million 1040 filing units
(“households”) from year 2011 into percentiles of adjusted gross income (AGI, including
all returns regardless of whether AGI is positive, negative, or zero). We then compute the
share of tax filing units within each percentile bin that earned positive income from each
of the four business sectors we analyze in this paper: sole proprietorship income (defined
as positive 1040 Schedule C income), C-corporation income (defined as positive 1040 dividend income)11 , S-corporation income (defined as either the primary earner or the secondary
earner having been issued a Form 1120S Schedule K-1 with positive summed income), and
partnership income (defined as either the primary earner or secondary earner having been
issued a Form 1065 Schedule K-1 with positive summed income).12 Note that these defini8

These partnerships are typically organized as general partnerships, in which all partners are jointly
or separately liable for the debts, taxes, or tortious liability of the partnership. This structure is not
attractive for most business organizations, because the owners’ personal assets are not protected (DeBacker
and Prisinzano, 2015).
9
This category also includes real estate and insurance industries, which together account for less than
five percentage points of the total.
10
We stress that these results are not based on the Treasury distribution model. We use an adjusted gross
income distribution for filing units only, rather than family-size-adjusted cash income for the population.
11
See footnote 7 for the caveat that “C-corporation income” here includes some income that does not
derive from C-corporations and excludes non-dividend C-corporation distributions.
12
We use positive income rather than all income in order to avoid negative income shares at the very bottom
and because dividend income is never negative. The relative skewness of top-1% pass-through participation

11

tions consider only direct taxable business ownership and thus, for example, do not reflect
indirect business ownership via pension funds or via tax-deferred retirement accounts.
The figure displays striking patterns of participation rates across the income distribution by business type. First, a relatively constant share of households—between 8% and
15%—participate in a sole proprietorship with relatively isolated exceptions. Second, participation rates in C-corporation income is over eight times higher at 80.4% among the top-1%
(households with over $375,738 in AGI) than in the bottom half of the income distribution.
However, many households at every AGI level own publicly traded dividend-paying stocks;
as a result, participation rates in C-corporation income are substantial (no lower than 7.3%)
in every AGI bin. Third and similar to C-corporate participation, partnership participation
rates are also high among top-1% households (71.3%). But unlike C-corporate participation,
partnership participation rates are trivial among bottom-50% households: partnership participation is over fifty-one times higher in the top-1% than in the bottom half of the income
distribution. S-corporation participation exhibits skewness similar to partnership participation. Hence, pass-through participation is very concentrated among high-income households
relative to these other two traditional forms of business activity.
Figure 6A shows that pass-through income is even more concentrated among high-income
households than pass-through participation and other forms of business income. To construct
this figure, we use the same data underlying the previous graph and, for each type of business
income, plot the share of that type of positive business income earned by households in each
AGI percentile. Thus within each series, the values of the one hundred data points sum to
100%. If a given type of business income were equally distributed across households, the series
would be a flat line at 1%. Instead, each type of business income is highly concentrated among
the economy’s highest-earning households. However, the degree of concentration varies by
business income type. Whereas 16.2% of total sole proprietorship income is earned by the
top-1%, 44.7% of total C-corporation income is earned by the top-1%. Pass-through income
is even more highly concentrated, with the top-1% earning 66.9% of total S-corporation
income and 69.0% of total partnership income.
Figure 6A may make it seem that since the top-1% earn most pass-through income, most
pass-through income earned by individuals is taxed at the top ordinary income tax rate
(35% in 2011). One reason this need not be the case is that a large share of partnership
income is portfolio investment income that is taxed at preferred rates. As a preview of the
comprehensive analysis of the character of business income in Section 3, Figure 6B zooms
in on the previous figure 6A’s partnership income series in order to show the distribution
of partnership income from three partnership industries: accommodation and food service
and income shares hold even when using an absolute-value-income concept.

12

(NAICS 72), professional services like law and accounting (NAICS 54), and finance and
holding companies (NAICS 52, 55, and 531). If all industries were shown, the sum of each
percentile bin’s data points in this figure would equal the bin’s corresponding partnership
series data point in figure 6A.
Figure 6B shows that most of the partnership income accruing to the top-1% accrues
from partnerships engaged in finance and company holding. Of the 69.0% of partnership
income that accrues to top-1% households, 36.6 of those percentage points accrue from
partnerships in the finance and holding company industry and another 16.0 accrue from
partnerships in the professional services industry. In contrast, only 0.6 percentage points
accrue from the accommodation and food service industry, a traditional “mom-and-pop”
industry. Taking into account all AGI percentiles, nearly half (48.7%) of partnership income
earned by individuals accrues from partnerships engaged in finance and company holding—
much of which is portfolio income taxed at preferred rates.13
The following two sections take comprehensive account of different types of income
streams being taxed at different rates across the individual partner, corporate partner, and
other partner income distributions in order to provide estimates of tax rates paid on partnership income in the United States.

3

Methodology for Estimating Average Tax Rates

This section describes how we calculate average tax rates on business income from partnerships, sole proprietorships, S-corporations, and C-corporations. These tax rates are important inputs for estimating the average tax rate on business income in the United States. In
addition, C-corporations themselves, for example, can be partners, so we need to be able to
assign a tax rate to partnership income flowing to C-corporation partners.

3.1

Partnership Income

The average tax rate on partnership income depends on the tax liabilities and incomes of
partners. We calculate tax rates on partnership income at three levels. First, we follow
income flows to partners and assign a tax rate to each payment from a partnership. Second,
we calculate tax rates at the partnership level. Third, we calculate tax rates at the level of
the overall partnership sector.
13

These findings are consistent with Kaplan and Rauh (2010), who show that partners at top law firms
and Wall Street-related individuals—including hedge fund managers, PE, and VC professionals whose firms
are usually organized as partnerships—earn a large and increasing share of the income at the top of the AGI
distribution.

13

3.1.1

Tax Rates on Income Distributed to Partners

We calculate tax rates for each payment that partners receive from a given partnership.
For these calculations, we use U.S. Treasury’s Office of Tax Analysis (OTA) tax calculators
where possible and directly assign tax rates otherwise. We define a tax rate Tik on income
type i to partner k from all partnerships p,
(
Tik =

TikOTA =
TikAssigned

T AXik
Yik

if k files f orm ∈ {1040, 1120, 1120S}
otherwise

(3.1)

P
where Yik = p∈P Yikp is the sum of payment of income type i to partner k from all partnerships p in the set of partnerships P, i is an income type in the set I = {dividends, interest,
capital gains, ordinary business income}, and T AXik is the tax liability from the OTA tax
calculator.
For partners who file a tax form for which we have a tax calculator, we recalculate
each partner’s income tax liability in the hypothetical case that they earned no positive (or
negative) income of that income type from all partnerships. For each partner, we consider
income without replacement in the following sequence. We first remove capital gains income,
then dividend income, then schedule E income (ordinary business income), and then interest.
The difference between actual tax liabilities and hypothetical tax liabilities is the numerator
of our average tax rate measure. For example, in the case of capital gains income, the
numerator of our average tax rate measure is:
T AXik ≡Tax Liabilityk |Taxable Income =

XX

Yipk

i∈I p∈P

− Tax Liabilityk |Taxable Income =

X

X

{i0 ∈I:i0 6=i}

p∈P

Yi0 pk

(3.2)

where i = capital gains.14 The tax consequences of sequentially zeroing out income of type
i for partner k from all partnerships relative to the size of the payment Yik defines our tax
rate Tik . This measure accurately accounts for the tax situation of each partner and the full
complexity of the tax code imbedded in OTA tax calculators.15
For partners who are C-corporations, we assume an average federal payout tax rate (the
14

Due to the sequential treatment of income, the income types included in the sum over income types (when
calculating hypothetical income) is not always i0 6= i. For dividend
income, the hypothetical
P
P tax liability is
based on the following taxable income: Taxable Income = {i0 ∈I:i0 6=capital gains or dividends} p∈P Yi0 pk since
dividend income is considered in the sequence after capital gains income.
15
This approach focuses on allocations of income to partners, but there are important tax implications of
allocations of losses and tax credits that can results in different tax rates. We discuss these considerations
in section 3.1.4.

14

tax rate paid by owners on after-corporate-income-tax income) of 8.25% based on earlier
work.16 For partners who file other tax forms, we assign the following tax rates:

TikAssigned


OTA

Ti,1040




OTA


 Ti,1120
.025
=


 0



OTA

 .025+Ti,1120
2

if
if
if
if

f orm ∈ {1120-RIC,1120-REIT,1066,1041}
f orm ∈ {1120j}∀ j ∈ {F,PC,L,H,C,POL,ND,SF,FSC}
f orm ∈ {8805,1042S,8288A,1042}
f orm ∈ {990,990j}∀ j ∈ {T,R,PF,ZR,C}

(3.3)

if k has unidentified EIN or tin type

OTA
is the tax rate for individuals from the
where f orm is the tax form partner k files, Ti,1040
OTA
OTA tax calculator for income type i, and Ti,1120
is the tax rate for C-corporations. The
2.5% rate is set to match the modest revenues from foreign withholding (Luttrell, 2013). We
assign tax-exempt entities which file Form-990-family forms a rate of 0%. While we observe
a substantial amount of income paid to these entities that could be subject to the Unrelated
Business Income Tax, we know from other sources that in fact little is subject to tax and
little tax is paid given that in aggregate about $350 million in tax is paid by tax exempts
on all sources of their business income (Jackson, 2014). Finally, we set the tax rate for
unidentified entities to the midpoint of two tax rates: the tax rate for C-corporations and
the tax rate for foreign entities. Reconciliations at the end of schedule K on the 1065 in SOI
data suggest that more partnership income is passed to corporate partners than we identify
based on traceable entities. However, the income composition earned by untraceable entities
more closely resembles the income composition of foreign entities. We use the average of
C-corporations and foreign entities to account for both considerations.17 We quantify the
implications of this approach for the average tax rate on partnership income in section 4.2.
16

To obtain an average tax rate on C-corporation payouts to shareholders, we make three assumptions.
First, shareholders receive 50% of after-corporate-income-tax income as dividends and the other 50% as
accrued capital gains. Second, the average dividend tax rate is 13.2% (=18.5%—the state-plus-federal
estimate from Poterba (2004) for 2003—minus 5.3%—the OECD’s average state dividend tax estimate).
Third, the accrued capital gains tax rate equals the average dividend tax rate (since the top federal longterm capital gains tax rate equaled the top federal dividend tax rate in 2011) divided by 4 (to account for
tax benefits from deferring realizations). These assumptions yield an average payout tax rate of 50% × .132 +
50% × .132 × 14 = .0825 and thus an average C-corporate partner tax rate of Tik + (1 − Tik ) × .0825 where
Tik is the tax rate from the OTA tax calculator for the first layer of income. This methodology follows work
going back to Bailey (1969) and employed recently in Desai and Goolsbee (2004) and Yagan (2015).
17
We used subsidiary information from form 851 to determine that the vast majority of untraceable income
is not associated with income from subsidiaries. See section 4.2 for more information on income composition.

15

3.1.2

Tax Rates on Partnerships

For a given partnership,18 we use these tax rates Tikp to construct a partnership tax rate:
P
Tp =

i∈I

P

k∈K

Tik Yikp


(3.4)

Yp

P P
where the numerator i∈I k∈K Tik Yikp is the sum of tax liabilities over income types i
and partners k associated with payments from partnership p and the denominator Yp =
P P
i∈I
k∈K Yikp is the total payments from partnership p. Consider the following example.
Suppose partnership A has two partners, 1 and 2. Suppose further that partner 1 receives
both ordinary income and capital gains and partner 2 only receives ordinary income. The
tax rate TA for partnership A is:

 

Tcapgains,1 Ycapgains,1,A
Tordinc,1 Yordinc,1,A
+
TA =
YA
YA


Tordinc,2 Yordinc,2,A
.
+
YA


(3.5)

This example shows that the distribution across income types for each partner and the
distribution across partners are key determinants of tax rates on partnership income.
3.1.3

Tax Rates on Partnership Sector

Finally, we construct a tax rate for the partnership sector:
P
T =

i∈I

P

k∈K

P

p∈P

Y

Tik Yikp


(3.6)

where the numerator is the sum of tax liabilities from payments from partnerships and the
P P
P
denominator Y = i∈I k∈K p∈P Yikp is the total payments from all partnerships.
3.1.4

Discussion of Assumptions

We could have calculated the tax rate as the ‘last dollar’ average rate, the ‘first dollar’
average rate, or the ‘first dollar of business income rate.’ In evaluating policy changes
(including revenue estimating settings), the ‘last dollar’ rate is often the most appropriate
measure. If one is considering an individual’s decision whether to participate in a partnership
18

See appendix A for a discussion of how we calculate tax rates for tiered partnerships for analysis at the
partnership level.

16

the ‘first dollar of business income’ may be preferable. Our measure has the advantage of
being straightforward to calculate and provides a reasonable way to calculate both the total
tax paid for a particular partnership and the average tax rate on the income flows of the
partnership sector overall.
In addition, it is possible that partnerships distribute different types of payments differently. For instance, gains and losses or tax deductions need not be symmetrically allocated to
partners. Different assumptions about asymmetries in distributions could result in different
tax rates.19 In addition, we do not model passive loss limits for individuals.
Furthermore, we focus only on income taxes. A portion of partnership income may be
subject to SECA tax but we do not observe self-employment income on the partner’s K-1 and
the Schedule SE may include income from partnerships, sole proprietorships and other forms
To the extent SECA tax is due on partnership income, a SECA deduction for the partner
will be generated which ideally we would zero out along with the partnership income. As a
result the calculated partnership tax rates for some individual partners are slightly misstated.
Finally, we also assume that all dividends are taxed at preferential rates.

3.2

Sole Proprietorship Income

We calculate tax rates on Sole Proprietorship income using SOI’s sample of individual tax
returns. Specifically, we measure the difference between actual taxes paid and hypothetical
taxes paid when we set income from schedule C and SECA deductions to zero using OTA’s
individual tax model.20

3.3

S-Corporation Income

We calculate tax rates on S-corporation income using OTA tax calculators. First, we measure the difference between actual taxes paid and hypothetical taxes paid when we set Scorporation income from Form 1120S Schedule K-1 to zero. Second, we divide this change
in tax liability by total Form 1120S K-1 income to estimate the tax rate on S-corporation
income.
19

Assumptions are required because not all fields (especially certain deductions and credits) are included
in our population-level pass-through income data.
20
We ignore payroll taxes except for the loss of the SECA deduction, which is listed as an above-the-linededuction as opposed to being claimed on the schedule C.

17

3.4

C-Corporation Income

There are two layers of taxation on C-corporation income. The first layer relates to the
corporate tax. The second layer relates to dividend taxes paid on distributions to the owners.
We divide actual taxes paid by taxable income to determine the average tax rate on the first
layer of taxation on corporate income.21 We use the estimate from Poterba (2004) on the
average tax rate on the dividend income to determine the second layer.22 We then sum the
tax rates on the first and second layers to obtain an estimate of the average tax rate on
C-corporation income.

4

Average Tax Rates on Business Income

We estimate that the average tax rate on business income in 2011 is 24.3%. This rate is an
income-weighted average of business tax rates. In section 4.1, we compare tax rates across
the business forms and industries that contribute to the overall average. In section 4.2, we
investigate and decompose tax rates on partnerships, which are a key determinant of lower
tax rates on business income. In section 4.3, we calculate the importance of the rise of
pass-throughs on the average tax rate on business income. Finally, we calculate the tax rate
on business income including debt in section 4.4.

4.1

Comparison of Tax Rates Across Business Form and Industry

Figure 7 shows the average tax rates by business form. We estimate that the overall tax rate
in 2011 on partnerships was 15.9%. Tax rates on the partnership sector are comparable to
those on the informal sector and are lower than the tax rates on both S-Corporations by 9.1
percentage points and C-corporations by 15.7 percentage points.
Figure 8A shows the average tax rates by type of partner. S-corporations, individuals, and
C- and other corporations face the highest rates at 22.0%, 21.0%, and 20.1%, respectively.
Estates and trusts pay 16.5% on average. For other partner types, we plot the assumed tax
rates as described in section 3.1.1.
To compute tax rates for each partnership, it is necessary in many cases to follow income
through multiple tiers of ownership until it reaches a taxable end point, and then assign
21

Note that taxable income for C-corporations is total income reported for U.S. tax purposes, which
includes income from partnerships.
22
We use the same approach that we take for C-corporate partners, i.e., as described in footnote 16, we
compute tax rates for C-corporations as τ + (1 − τ ) × 85 × .132 where τ is the tax rate on the first layer of
income. Note that we use 13.2% instead of 18.5% since we focus on the federal rather than the federal plus
state portions of the estimate in Poterba (2004).

18

that income back to an originating partnership. Figure 3B shows that 26.3% of income
flows from partnerships to other partnerships and thus must be followed through. The
algorithm for implementing this procedure is detailed in appendix A. We follow income
from partnership to partnership through the levels of ownership until the algorithm reaches
a fixed point, which allows us to uniquely assign 85.1% of non-partnership income flows to
a distinct partnership. The remaining 14.9% cannot be assigned this way. Because the K-1
reports the income amounts by income type and the partner type, we can still calculate a
tax rate for this unassigned income. For this unassigned income, we calculate a tax rate of
8.8%, considerably lower than the 15.9% overall rate on partnership income.
Figure 9A shows the average tax rates by partnership industry for the partnerships where
we can allocate all income associated with them. Finance and holding company income,
which accounts for 70.0% of partnership income, is taxed at a 14.7% rate on average. This
is the lowest rate among industries with nontrivial amounts of activity. Manufacturing and
mining, oil, and gas follow at 16.6% and 18.5%, respectively. The traditional partnership
industries, professional services at 22.4% and health care at 22.3%, pay the highest rates.

4.2

Decomposing the Tax Rate on Partnership Income

There are three main reasons why the tax rate on partnership income could be relatively
low: (1) partnership income may be distributed via income types with low tax rates, (2)
partnership income may be earned by partners that face low tax rates, and (3) flexible
allocation rules might allow losses to be passed on to partners with high rates and gains to
those with low rates. Related to the third reason is the possibility that tiering and complex
structures allow losses in one partnership to offset gains in another, or that these structures
create circular income flows that we do not observe leaving the partnership sector.
We find support for the first two explanations. Roughly one quarter of partnership income
is earned by taxpayers facing a zero rate. Nearly half of partnership income allocated to
taxable entities accrues in the form of tax preferred capital gains and dividends. We find
mixed evidence that losses are disproportionately allocated to partners with high tax rates.
Complex structures do coincide with relatively low rates but are not large enough to account
for the low overall rate.
Payments via Low Tax Income Types. Figure 8B presents a decomposition of partnership income by income type for each type of partner. The figure illustrates a key reason
why the partnership rate is low: capital gains and dividend income, both typically taxed at
preferred rates, represent 45% of total income that accrues to non-partnership partners.

19

The share of capital gains and dividend income varies by type of partner, with tax exempts
and foreigners primarily receiving capital gains and dividend income while the S-corporation
and individual capital income shares are significantly lower. Note that the income shares for
the unidentified partner types most closely resemble a mix between the foreign entity and
C-corporation income shares. This fact forms the basis of our tax rate assumptions for these
unknown partners.
Figure 9B presents a decomposition of partnership income by income type based on
partnership industry. This figure shows that finance and holding company firms earn nearly
sixty percent of their income as capital gains and dividends, while other industries earn the
bulk of their income as ordinary income.
Partners with Low Tax Rates. The distribution of income types is an important reason
for the low overall partnership rate, but it is not the only reason. For example, while
manufacturing and oil and gas partnerships earn most of their income as ordinary income,
they pay only somewhat higher rates than finance partnerships.
A second reason why the tax rate on partnership income can be low relates to the level of
tax rates faced by partners. Foreign partners, tax exempt partners, or lower-income partners
face low tax rates Tik on any income type that they earn. Payment shares of total partnership
income to foreign partners is 9.3%, tax-exempt partners is 5.5%. Unidentified partner types
earn another 20.1% of partnership income. Were these partners to be taxed at the average
individual tax rate, the average rate on partnership income would rise by approximately 2
percentage points.
Tiering and Flexible Loss Allocation Rules. Tiering and flexible allocation rules are
a third set of reasons why the average tax rate on partnership income could be low relative
to traditional businesses. If multiple partnerships are connected, it may be possible for losses
in one partnership to offset gains in another, such that gains are mainly realized for low tax
rate partners. Partnership income accruing to other partnerships amounts to 26.3% of total
income flows, so there may be wide scope for across-partnership offsetting to occur. Even
among partnerships without partnership partners, losses may be allocated to partners with
high marginal tax rates and gains may be allocated to partners with low marginal tax rates.
In addition to its role in generating low rates, the extent of partnership tiering presents
major challenges from a tax administration perspective. After our recursive algorithm
reaches a fixed point, there remain 22,417 “circular” partnerships for which we cannot
uniquely link all income to non-partnership owners. These partnerships issue 9.6 million
K-1s. To put this activity’s scale in perspective, our entire K-1 population file includes 25.5

20

million K-1s issued by 3.6 million partnerships. Thus, less than 1% of partnerships issue
nearly 40% of K-1s. Some of these partnerships issue more than 100,000 K-1s.
We divide the $671 billion of income reported on K-1s for non-partnership owners based
on whether the K-1s were issued by a solved or circular partnership. $100 billion remains
within the nexus of the 22,417 circular partnerships. Were we to collapse all of these partnerships into one partnership and estimate the tax rate based on the tax paid on income
received by their non-partnership partners, they would pay a rate of 8.8%. This 8.8% tax
rate is roughly half the tax rate paid on the remaining $571 billion, which amounts to 17.1%.
This evidence suggests that tax planning benefits associated with complex structures may
contribute to the low overall rate.
To explore the importance of flexible loss allocation rules, Figure 10 plots the share of
total losses and the share of total gains claimed by the partnerships grouped by partner
tax rates. Losses tend to be allocated disproportionately to partners with tax rates above
30%. However, payments facing relatively high tax rates between 20 and 30% are more
likely to represent gains than losses. Overall, the patterns in partner payment allocation
provide mixed evidence that flexible allocation rules contribute to the low average tax rate
on partnership income.

4.3

Tax Rate on Business Income without Pass-throughs

This section quantifies the importance of the rise of pass-throughs on the average tax rate
on business income.
In 2011, C-corporations earned 45.4% of business income and sole proprietorships earned
12.5%. We allocate pass-through income from partnerships and S-corporations, which amounted
to 25.6% for partnerships and 16.5% for S-corporations, to C-corporations and sole proprietorships in proportion to 1980 income shares.
We find that allocating partnership income to traditional businesses results in an average tax rate on business income of 28.1%, which exceeds the average tax rate on business
income of 24.3% in 2011 by 3.8 percentage points. Since the pass-through sector earned $1.1
trillion in business income in 2011, an additional 3.8 percentage points on the tax rate would
have generated 97 billion more dollars in business tax revenue, which would amount to an
approximately 15.5% increase in tax revenues from business income on an annual basis.23
We stress that this exercise is not a projection for the likely effects on tax revenue from
business tax reform. It is mechanical and assumes no behavioral responses, but has the
23

We compute the aggregate pass-through figure of $1.1 trillion by scaling partnership income of $671
billion by the ratio of the total pass-through income share to the partnership income share (equal to (.165 +
.256)/.256). These shares come from figure 1 of DeBacker and Prisinzano (2015).

21

advantage of being transparent.24

4.4

Overall Tax Rate on Business Income including Debt

This section calculates the overall tax rate on business income including interest income. This
overall tax rate τK is an income-weighted average of business income and interest deductions.

τK =

Ye
Ye + Yd




τe +

Yd
Ye + Yd


τd

(4.1)

where Ye is business income, Yd is the sum of interest deductions, τe is the tax rate on
business income and τd is the tax rate on interest income.25
Business income Ye = $2.6 trillion in 2011.26 We compute interest income in the business
sector by summing interest deductions claimed on forms 1120, 1120S, and 1065. Summing
these deductions amounts to Yd = $809 billion.
We use the average tax rate on business income from section 4 for τe = 24.3%. We
compute the tax rate on interest income τd by zeroing out interest income and recomputing
tax liabilities using OTA tax calculators (in a similar fashion to the rates underlying τe ).
In particular, we calculate τd as the average income tax rate on interest income and
non-qualified dividend income (which is typically interest). For both types of income, we
calculate the tax consequences of zeroing out that income type. We find that removing
interest income reduces tax liabilities by 20.6% of interest income and removing non-qualified
dividend income reduces tax liabilities by 20.1% of non-qualified dividend income. Weighed
by the shares of income, the average income tax rate on interest income τd equals 20.4%.
We weigh these rates to calculate an overall tax rate on business income that includes
debt:


τK =

2.6
2.6 + 0.8




24.3% +

0.8
2.6 + 0.8


20.4% = .76 × 24.3% + .24 × 20.4% = 23.3%

24

Furthermore, it maintains consistency with the rest of this paper by using the same underlying data, at
the cost of those data’s missing fields and top-coding (see section 1 for a discussion of data limitations that
introduce deviations between our aggregates and official aggregates.)
25
Note that τK is for the business sector as opposed to the tax rate on capital income. Our measure does
not include housing income.
26
This calculation scales partnership income by its share of overall business income, i.e., $671 billion/.256.

22

5

Conclusion

Most U.S. business income is now earned outside the traditional C-corporate and sole proprietorship sectors and is instead earned in the pass-through sectors. This income is taxed
at the owner-level and often at low rates. We used 2011 tax returns to trace pass-through
income in the two major pass-through sectors—the partnership sector and the S-corporate
sector—to their ultimate owners to document who owns U.S. businesses and how much U.S.
tax do those owners pay.
We found that pass-through owners are even more likely to be high-earners than the
owners of other business types including C-corporations. Holding all other sectors’ income
constant, we estimated an average partnership sector tax rate of 15.9%: for ever dollar
earned by a partnership, U.S. tax revenue rose by $0.159. For the S-corporate sector, we
estimated an average tax rate of 25.0%, yielding an average pass-through (partnership-plusS-corporate) tax rate of 19.5%. Combining these rates with our estimated C-corporate rate
(31.6%) and sole proprietorship rate (13.6%), we estimated an overall U.S. federal tax rate on
U.S. taxable business income of 24.3%—much lower than the top statutory personal (35%)
and C-corporate (35% income plus additional payout) rates.
The migration of business activity out of the C-corporate sector and into the pass-through
sector has likely substantially reduced U.S. tax revenue. If 2011 business income had instead
been earned along 1980 sector income shares, we estimated under strong but straightforward
assumptions that the average tax rate on U.S. business income would have been 28%, yielding
an extra $100 billion in tax revenue.
This paper’s analysis can be extended in at least three important directions. First,
business activity varies considerably across sectors; for example, most hedge funds are partnerships. It would therefore be valuable to estimate average tax rates across organizational
form holding business activity constant. Second, firms’ investment and location decisions
depend on worldwide tax rates on worldwide income, which would likely be substantially
smaller than the the U.S. tax rates on U.S. income estimated here. Broadening tax and
income definitions to encompass non-repatriated income (reported on Forms M-3 and 5471)
is an exercise left to future work. Third, inclusion of missing fields (especially certain deductions and credits) in our population-level pass-through income data would permit more
complete tax rate estimates.
Finally, we note that a long-standing rationale for the entity-level corporate income tax is
that it can serve as a backstop to the personal income tax system (e.g., Bank (2010), Zucman
(2014)). Our inability to unambiguously trace 30% of partnership income to either the
ultimate owner or the originating partnership underscores the concern that the current U.S.

23

tax code encourages firms to organize opaquely in partnership form in order to minimize tax
burdens. Historically, policymakers in the 1930s reduced the prevalence of opaque business
structures (“pyramids”) in the traditional corporate sector by instituting the intercorporate
dividend tax (Morck, 2004). Whether policymakers should pursue a similar approach today
remains an open question.

24

References
Altshuler, Rosanne, Alan Auerbach, Michael Cooper, and Matthew Knittel. 2009.
“Understanding U.S. Corporate Tax Losses.” Tax Policy and the Economy, 23: 73–122.
Auerbach, Alan J. 1983. “Corporate taxation in the United States.” Brookings Papers on
Economic Activity, 451–513.
Auerbach, Alan J., and James M. Poterba. 1987. “Tax loss carryforwards and corporate tax incentives.” In The effects of taxation on capital accumulation. 305–342. University
of Chicago Press.
Bailey, Martin J. 1969. “Capital Gains and Income Taxation.” The Taxation of Income
from Capital, , ed. Martin J Bailey and Arnold C Harberger, 11–49. The Brookings Institution.
Bank, Steven A. 2010. From Sword to Shield: The Transformation of the Corporate Income
Tax, 1861 to Present. Oxford University Press.
Bull, Nicholas, Robin Fisher, and Susan Nelson. 2009. “Characteristics of Business
Ownership: Overview for Pass-through Entities and Evidence on S Corporate Ownership
from Linked Data.”
Carroll, Robert, and David Joulfaian. 1997. “Taxes and corporate choice of organizational form.” US Department of the Treasury, OTA Paper, 73.
DeBacker, Jason M., and Richard Prisinzano. 2015. “The Rise of Partnerships.” Tax
Notes, 147(13): 1563–75.
Desai, Mihir A., and Austan D. Goolsbee. 2004. “Investment, overhang, and tax
policy.” Brookings Papers on Economic Activity, 35(2): 285–355.
Feldstein, Martin, and Lawrence Summers. 1977. “Is the rate of profit falling?” Brookings Papers on Economic Activity, 211–228.
Gordon, Roger H., and Joel Slemrod. 2000. “Are ’real’ responses to taxes simply income
shifting between corporate and personal tax bases?” Does Atlas Shrug? The Economic
Consequences of Taxing the Rich, , ed. Joel Slemrod. Russell Sage Foundation and Harvard
University Press.

25

Gordon, Roger H, James R Hines, and Lawrence H Summers. 1987. “Notes on the
tax treatment of structures.” In The effects of taxation on capital accumulation. 223–258.
University of Chicago Press.
Gravelle, Jane G., and Laurence J. Kotlikoff. 1989. “The incidence and efficiency costs
of corporate taxation when corporate and noncorporate firms produce the same good.”
Journal of Political Economy, 749–780.
Harberger, Arnold C. 1962. “The incidence of the corporation income tax.” Journal of
Political Economy, 215–240.
Jackson, Jael. 2014. “Unrelated Business Income Tax Returns, 2010.” Statistics of Income
Bulletin.
Kaplan, Steven N., and Joshua Rauh. 2010. “Wall Street and Main Street: What
contributes to the rise in the highest incomes?” Review of Financial Studies, 23(3): 1004–
1050.
Knittel, Matthew J., and Susan C. Nelson. 2011. “How Would Small Business Owners
Fare under a Business Entity Tax?” National Tax Journal, 64(4): 949–75.
Luttrell, Scott. 2013. “Foreign Recipients of U.S. Income, 2010.” Statistics of Income
Bulletin.
May, Larry. 2012. “Using Link Analysis To Identify Indirect and Multi-Tiered Ownership Structures.” 2012 IRS-TPC Research Conference http: // www. irs. gov/ uac/
SOI-Tax-Stats-2012-IRS-TPC-Research-Conference .
Morck, Randall. 2004. “How to Eliminate Pyramidal Business Groups: The Double Taxation of Inter-Corporate Dividends and Other Incisive Uses of Tax Policy.” Tax Policy &
the Economy, 19: 2013–610.
Pearce, James. 2014. “Aggregate Business Income.” OTA Working Paper.
Piketty, Thomas, and Emmanuel Saez. 2003. “Income Inequality in the United States,
1913–1998.” Quarterly Journal of Economics, 118(1): 1–41.
Piketty, Thomas, and Emmanuel Saez. 2014. “Income Inequality in the United States,
1913–1998 (Updated through 2012).” Quarterly Journal of Economics, 118(1): 1–41.
Poterba, James. 2004. “Taxation and Corporate Payout Policy.” American Economic Review, 94(2): 171–175.
26

Saez, Emmanuel. 2014. “Income and Wealth Inequality: Evidence and Policy Implications.” http: // eml. berkeley. edu/ ~ saez/ lecture_ saez_ chicago14. pdf .
Saez, Emmauel. 2004. “Reported incomes and marginal tax rates, 1960-2000: Evidence
and policy implications.” In Tax Policy and the Economy, Volume 18. 117–174. MIT Press.
Slemrod, Joel. 1996. “High-income families and the tax changes of the 1980s: the anatomy
of behavioral response.” In Empirical foundations of household taxation. 169–192. University of Chicago Press.
Suárez-Serrato, Juan Carlos, and Owen M Zidar. 2014. “Who Benefits from State
Corporate Tax Cuts? A Local Labor Markets Approach with Heterogeneous Firms.”
NBER Working Paper No. 20289.
Yagan, Danny. 2015. “Capital Tax Reform and the Real Economy: The Effects of the 2003
Dividend Tax Cut.” American Economic Review.
Zucman, Gabriel. 2014. “Taxing across Borders: Tracking Personal Wealth and Corporate
Profits.” The Journal of Economic Perspectives, 121–148.
Zwick, Eric, and James Mahon. 2014. “Do Financial Frictions Amplify Fiscal Policy?
Evidence from Business Investment Stimulus.” Working paper.

27

A
A.1

Appendix
Calculating Partnership Tax Rates

Our calculation for the tax rate on the overall partnership sector uses equation 3.6 as described in section 3.1.3. That rate is based only upon the tax liabilities of non-partnership
partners on their partnership incomes. Our partnership-level tax rates are consistent with
this overall tax rate and account for tiering of partnerships. These calculations require that
each partner in the partnership, including other partnerships, be assigned a tax rate for
each type of income (schedule E, capital gains, interest, and dividends). An overall tax
rate for a partnership requires weighting these rates using only the income generated by the
partnership after removing any income received from other partnerships. This insures that
double-counting of dollars does not occur and attributes income to the partnership that generated the income as opposed to the partnership that received it. The implicit assumption
in this method is that the tax rate by partners on a specific source of income applies to
both income generated by the partnership and income received from other partnerships. For
example, assume partnership A disburses $100 in capital gains income to its partners, $50
of which is created by partnership A and $50 of which it receives via a K-1 from partnership
B. If the partners of partnership A pay 15% in tax on this $100 of capital gains, we assume
that the 15% rate applies both to the $50 created by partnership A and the $50 it receives
from partnership B.
The process of assigning tax rates for each type of income to each type of partner is
described in the body of the paper for all partners that are not partnerships. We refer to
partnerships where every partner has a tax rate as “solved“ and all other partnerships as
“unsolved.” For partnerships with no partners that are partnerships, solving its four tax
rates is simple. Each partner is either assigned rates for each income type based solely on
its filing form or rates are calculated using a tax calculator for the form type. These simple
partnerships make up 85% of the 3.4 million partnerships in our sample. Unfortunately they
only account for $381 billion of the total $895 billion of partnership income (which includes
income owing to other partnerships). Thus solving the remaining partnerships is critical for
answering questions about the tax burden on individual partnerships.
Once the simple partnerships have been assigned tax rates for each of the four types of
income, we define a procedure for recursively solving tax rates for partnerships that are part
of dependent partnership structures, meaning that they have partners that are partnerships.
If a partnership has only simple partnerships below it, its various tax rates can be assigned
as described above for simple partnerships. As mentioned above, an overall tax rate for
each partnership requires weighting its four rates using only the income generated by the
28

partnership after removing any income received from other partnerships to prevent doublecounting dollars. These one-level partnership structures are then used to calculate tax rates
for two-level dependent structures. These structures include partnerships whose partnership
partners are either simple partnerships or one-level partnerships. This recursive process
is repeated on multi-level structures until each partnership is assigned a tax rate. Each
partnerships tax rates can then be weighted by the income it generates to calculate the
overall partnership sector tax rate calculated via equation 3.6.
The algorithm is implemented as a series of merges. The K-1s list taxpayer identification
numbers (TIN) for the payees and we merge the K-1 file back onto itself by joining where
payer TIN equals payee TIN. We use the partnership return’s DLN to identify the partnership
being solved. Where there are multiple DLNs associated with a single payer TIN, we sort
the data set and use the first DLN for that payer TIN.
The first step reduces the number of unsolved partnerships from 503,943 to 187,197 and
the amount of income in unsolved partnerships from $513 billion to $392 billion. Another
step reduces the count to 93,684 and the income to $329 billion. By the fifth step, the
algorithm begins to slow down and we still have 36,338 unsolved partnerships and $247
billion in unsolved income. By step ten, we still have 23,757 unsolved partnerships and
$207 billion in unsolved income. The algorithm reaches a fixed point at step twenty-two,
at which point we have 22,417 unsolved partnerships and $203 billion in unsolved income
(including income owing to other partnerships. These unsolved partnerships issue 9.6 million
(nearly forty percent) of the 25.2 million K-1s in our population file. Collapsing all of these
partnerships into one and calculating the tax rate based on the tax paid on income received
by their non-partnership partners yields that, as a group, they pay a rate of 8.8% on $100
billion on total income.

A.2

Illustrative Example of Circular Structure

To illustrate further why it is not possible to assign rates to individual partnerships in the
unsolved cases, consider the following simple example. In figure A.1, each triangle represents
a partnership; each line represents the direction of a K-1. In this example, partnerships A,
B and C can each be assigned an effective rate. Partnership A has no partners that are also
partnerships. As such, it is straightforward to assign an effective rate to A using our tax rate
calculators. Since partnership A is a partner in partnerships B and C, their effective rates
can only be assigned after A is assigned an effective rate since the rates are dependent upon
the weighted rates of each partner. It is also the case that since partnership B is a partner
in partnership C, the effective rates for B and C must be assigned sequentially.

29

In figure A.2, we present a circular relational structure, which would fall in the unsolved
group our algorithm identifies. Partnership D is a partner in partnership E, partnership
E is a partner in partnership F, and partnership F is a partner in D. These partnerships
cannot be assigned an effective rate. In the case of D, it could be assigned a rate if a rate is
assigned to E. However, E’s rate is dependent upon a rate being assigned to F which is in
turn dependent upon a rate for D.
Figure A.1: Tiered and Solved Partnership Example

Figure A.2: Tiered and Unsolved Partnership Example

30

Percentage of Total Net Business Income
0
25
50
75
100

Figure 1: Shares of Business Income by Entity Type, 1980-2010

1980

1990

2000

2010

Year
Sole Proprietorships
Partnerships
S Corporations
C Corporations

Notes: This figure shows the share of overall business income by entity types from 1980 to 2012 from
DeBacker and Prisinzano (2015).

31

Share of income earned by top 1% (%)
10
15
20
25

Figure 2: Role of Pass-Through Income in Rising Top-1% Income Share

4.1 p.p. increase
via pass-through
business income

10.1 p.p.
increase
since 1980

5

6.0 p.p. increase
via salaries and other
capital income

1920

1930

1940

1950

1960 1970
Year

1980

1990

2000

2010

Actual
Pass−through income share fixed at 1980 level

Notes: This figure uses data from Piketty and Saez (2003) to plot estimates of the income of households in
the top-1% of the income distribution as a fraction of total income for years 1916-2013, under two scenarios.
In blue circles, we plot actual top income share estimates from Piketty and Saez (2003), including capital
gains and updated through 2013 (Piketty and Saez, 2014). In red squares, we plot hypothetical top income
share estimates where we hold top-1% “entrepreneurial” income (predominately pass-through income since
1980 but also including Schedule C and farm income) as a share of total income fixed at its 1980 level
of 1.0% in every year (in contrast, for example, to the actual 2013 level of 5.0%)—while allowing other
top-1% income (salaries, dividend income, interest income, and capital gains) as a share of total income to
evolve as it actually did. These data define income as the sum of Form-1040 “total income” (i.e. adjusted
gross income before the adjustments) minus Form-1040 transfer income (social security and unemployment
benefits). Total income is defined as the sum of this 1040-based income measure across all 1040-filers plus
imputed non-filer income (equal to an assumed share of mean 1040-filer income that varies by year). See
Piketty and Saez (2003) for further documentation, and see our footnote 2 for interpretation.

32

Figure 3: Partnership K1s and Income Shares by Type of Partner
A. Number of K1s by Type of Partner
78.3

Individuals

73.9
7.9
7.4

Unidentified TIN type
Partnerships

5.6

Estate/trust

5.3
5.0

Unidentified EIN

2.2
2.1

Foreign person/entity

1.9
1.8

S-corporations

1.7
1.6

Tax-exempt

1.4
1.3

C- and other corporations

1.3
1.3

0

20

40
60
Number of K1s by Type of Partner (% of Total)

Without Partnership Partners

80

With Partnership Partners

B. Income Shares by Type of Partner
42.7

Individuals

31.5

Partnerships

26.3
13.0

Unidentified TIN type

9.6
10.5

C- and other corporations

7.7
9.3

Foreign person/entity

6.8
7.2

Estate/trust

5.3

Unidentified EIN

5.2

7.1
5.5

Tax-exempt

4.1
4.6

S-corporations

3.4

0

10
20
30
Partnership Income by Type of Partner (% of Total)
Without Partnership Partners

40

With Partnership Partners

Notes: Panel A shows the equal-weighted distribution of partnership owners by type of partner. We divide
the number of K1s received for each partner type by the total number of K1s received across all types. We
compute these shares both including and excluding K1s received by other partnerships. Panel B shows the
income-weighted distribution of partnership owners by type of partner. We divide total partnership income
for each partner type by total partnership income received across all types. We compute these shares both
including and excluding K1s received by other partnerships. See section 1.1 for a correspondence between
the partner types and tax forms filed.

33

Figure 4: Distribution of Partnership Income by Industry

Finance & Holding Cos

70.0

Professional Services

10.8

Other

7.0

Manufacturing

4.6

Health Care

4.1

Mining, Oil & Gas

3.5

0

20
40
60
Partnership Income by Partnership Industry (% of Total)

80

Notes: This figure shows the distribution of partnership income across partnership industry. We divide total
partnership income received for partnerships in each industry by total partnership income received. These
shares exclude income received by other partnerships. Industry groupings and NAICS codes are as follows:
Finance & Holding Cos (NAICS 52, 55, and 531); Professional Services (NAICS 54); Manufacturing (NAICS
31, 32, and 33); Health Care (NAICS 62); Mining, Oil, & Gas (NAICS 21).

34

0

Share with positive income (%)
20
40
60
80

Figure 5: Business Participation Rates by Household Income Percentile

0

10

20

30

40
50
60
AGI percentile

70

80

90

100

Sole proprietorship income
C−corporation income
S−corporation income
Partnership income

Notes: This figure plots the share of 2011 tax-filing households by percentile of adjusted gross income
with positive sole proprietorship income, positive C-corporation and foreign dividend income, positive Scorporation income, or positive partnership income, respectively.

35

Figure 6: Business Income Shares by Household Income Percentile

0

Share of income type (%)
20
40
60

80

A. Four Types of Business Income

0

10

20

30

40
50
60
AGI percentile

70

80

90

100

Sole proprietorship income
C−corporation income
S−corporation income
Partnership income

0

Share of partnership income (%)
10
20
30
40

B. Partnership Income of Three Sample Industries

0

10

20

30

40
50
60
AGI percentile

70

80

90

100

Accommodation and Food Service (NAICS 72)
Professional Services (NAICS 54)
Finance, Holding Companies (NAICS 52, 55, and 531)

Notes: Panel A plots the 2011 shares of positive sole proprietorship income, positive C-corporation and
foreign dividend income, positive S-corporation income, and positive partnership income, respectively, earned
by tax-filing households by percentile of adjusted gross income (AGI). Thus within each series, the values
of the one hundred data points sum to 100%. Panel B decomposes the partnership series of Panel A by
plotting positive partnership income earned by tax-filing households by industry, as a share of total positive
partnership income earned by tax-filing households. If all partnership industries were shown, the sum of each
percentile bin’s data points in Panel B would equal the bin’s corresponding partnership series data point in
Panel A.
36

Figure 7: Tax Rate by Entity Type

30

31.6

22.7
15.9
13.6

0

10

Tax rate (%)
20

25.0

Sole Proprietorships

Partnerships

Average Tax Rate

S-corps

C-corps

Payout Tax Rate

Notes: This figure shows average tax rates by business entity type. Average tax rates are the ratio of
a measure of tax liabilities to income. Our measure of tax liability is the difference between the actual
tax liability and a hypothetical tax liability that would prevail if income from the sector were set to zero.
Sections 3.2, 3.1, 3.3, 3.4 describe these calculations in more detail for Sole Proprietorships, Partnerships, SCorporations, and C-corporations, respectively. The payout rate for C-corporations, including C-corporate
partners, is based on existing estimates from the literature and is not independently estimated here as
documented in 3.4.

37

Figure 8: Average Tax Rates and Income Composition by Type of Partner
A. Tax Rates on Partnership Income by Type of Partner
S-corporations

22.0

Individuals

21.0

C- and other corporations

20.1

Estate/trust

16.5

Total Excluding Partnerships

15.9

Unidentified EIN

12.6

Unidentified TIN type

11.7

Foreign person/entity

2.5

Tax-exempt

0.0

0

5

10
15
Average Tax Rate on Partnership Income (%)

20

B. Composition of Partnership Income by Type of Partner
S-corporations
Individuals
C- and other corporations
Estate/trust
Total Excluding Partnerships
Unidentified EIN
Unidentified TIN type
Foreign person/entity
Tax-exempt
0

20

40
60
Composition of Partnership Income (%)

Ordinary Income

Interest

Capital Gains

80

100
Dividends

Notes: Panel A plots the average tax rates on partnership income by type of partner. Tax rates are defined
as the difference between actual tax liabilities and hypothetical liabilities in the case where all partnership
income is zeroed out, divided by partnership income earned. See Section 3.1 for more details on how we
calculate this rate for each partner type. Panel B decomposes the partnership income received by each
partner type into four income types: ordinary income, interest, short and long-term capital gains, and
dividends. See Panels A and B of Figure 3 for K1 counts and total income allocations for these groups.

38

Figure 9: Income Distribution and Average Tax Rates by Industry of Partnership
A. Tax Rates on Partnership Income by Industry of Partnership
Professional Services

22.4

Health Care

22.3

Other

22.1

Mining, Oil & Gas

18.5

Manufacturing

16.6

Finance & Holding Cos

14.7

0

5

10
15
Tax Rate by Partnership Industry

20

25

B. Distribution of Partnership Income by Industry of Partnership
Professional Services
Health Care
Other
Mining, Oil & Gas
Manufacturing
Finance & Holding Cos
0

20

40
60
Composition of Partnership Income (%)

Ordinary Income

Interest

Capital Gains

80

100
Dividends

Notes: Panel A plots the average tax rates on partnership income by partnership industry. Tax rates
are defined as the difference between actual tax liabilities and hypothetical liabilities in the case where all
partnership income is zeroed out, divided by partnership income earned. See section 3.1.2 for more detail
on how we calculate this rate for simple partners and appendix A for detail on how we calculate this rate
for tiered partnerships. Circular partnerships are excluded from these figures. Panel B decomposes the
partnership income received by each partnership industry into four income types: ordinary income, interest,
short and long-term capital gains, and dividends. Industry groupings and NAICS codes are as follows:
Finance & Holding Cos (NAICS 52, 55, and 531); Professional Services (NAICS 54); Manufacturing (NAICS
31, 32, and 33); Health Care (NAICS 62); Mining, Oil, & Gas (NAICS 21). See Figure 4 for total income
allocations for these groups.

39

25

Figure 10: Allocation of Gains and Losses in the Partnership Sector by Average Tax Rate

22.2

Share of Total Gain or Loss (%)
5
10
15
20

21.4

15.9

15.5
13.3

13.0

11.2 11.4
10.3

10.1

10.1

9.8

9.7

8.7
7.0

6.8

2.2

0

1.4

0

1−5

6−10

11−15

16−20
21−25
Average Tax Rate
Gains

25−30

31−35

36−50

Losses

Notes: This figure shows the share of overall gains and losses that are allocated to partners by bins of the
average tax rate on that payment. We use our estimated tax rates on every payment from partnerships
to partners to assign each payment a tax rate bin. We exclude payments to other partnerships since these
payments are ultimately passed through to taxable owners. We classify each payment as a gain if the
payment to a partner was positive and as a loss if the payment was negative. We then aggregate total
positive payments by tax rate bin and present its share of overall partnership gains. We follow the same
procedure for losses. The figure illustrates how gains and losses are allocated across different tax rates.

40

