                                NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




        THE EFFICIENCY CONSEQUENCES OF HEALTH CARE PRIVATIZATION:
                 EVIDENCE FROM MEDICARE ADVANTAGE EXITS

                                            Mark Duggan
                                           Jonathan Gruber
                                            Boris Vabson

                                        Working Paper 21650
                                http://www.nber.org/papers/w21650


                      NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                               1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                 Cambridge, MA 02138
                                     October 2015




Vabson is currently a full-time employee at Nuna, Inc., a health care analytics firm, in which he also
holds equity. Duggan is a member of the Advisory Board of Nuna, Inc. and also holds equity in the
company. Their involvement with Nuna has had no bearing on the data, research methodology, or
conclusions associated with this paper. The views expressed herein are those of the authors and do
not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

At least one co-author has disclosed a financial relationship of potential relevance for this research.
Further information is available online at http://www.nber.org/papers/w21650.ack

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.

© 2015 by Mark Duggan, Jonathan Gruber, and Boris Vabson. All rights reserved. Short sections of
text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit,
including © notice, is given to the source.
The Efficiency Consequences of Health Care Privatization: Evidence from Medicare Advantage
Exits
Mark Duggan, Jonathan Gruber, and Boris Vabson
NBER Working Paper No. 21650
October 2015
JEL No. H51,I13,I18,L33

                                              ABSTRACT

There is considerable controversy over the use of private insurers to deliver public health insurance
benefits. We investigate the efficiency consequences of patients enrolling in Medicare Advantage
(MA), private managed care organizations that compete with the traditional fee-for-service Medicare
program. We use exogenous shocks to MA enrollment arising from plan exits from New York counties
in the early 2000s, and utilize unique data that links hospital inpatient utilization to Medicare enrollment
records. We find that individuals who were forced out of MA plans due to plan exit saw very large
increases in hospital utilization. These increases appear to arise through plans both limiting access
to nearby hospitals and reducing elective admissions, yet they are not associated with any measurable
reduction in hospital quality or patient mortality.


Mark Duggan                                          Boris Vabson
Stanford University                                  Nuna Health
Department of Economics                              San Francisco, CA 94103
579 Serra Mall                                       and The Wharton School
Stanford, CA 94305-6072                              bvabson@wharton.upenn.edu
and NBER
mgduggan@stanford.edu

Jonathan Gruber
Department of Economics, E17-220
MIT
77 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02139
and NBER
gruberj@mit.edu
   The Medicare program, which currently provides nearly universal health insurance cover-
age to 55 million elderly and disabled U.S. residents, was introduced in 1965 as a monopoly
public insurance product that was run and …nanced by the Federal government (Common-
wealth Fund, 2015). Over time, it has evolved into a hybrid of public insurance and publicly
…nanced private insurance, along two channels: the Medicare Advantage (MA) program (Part
C) and prescription drug coverage (Part D). The MA program allows Medicare recipients
to enroll in a private health insurance plan (a Medicare HMO, PPO, or other coordinated
care plan), which is then reimbursed by the federal government. The Part D program allows
Medicare recipients to choose from a variety of private prescription drug insurance plans
(KFF, 2014). More than 40 million Medicare recipients are now enrolled in Medicare Part
C or Medicare Part D (CMS 2015).
   The growing privatization of Medicare has been motivated by potential e¢ ciencies from
the ‘care management’provided by private insurance companies. This is a particularly inter-
esting topic in the context of Medicare Advantage, where private insurers provide coverage
side-by-side with the government system. Evidence on the relative e¢ ciency advantages of
private Medicare Advantage plans, however, has been mixed (McGuire et al., 2011).
   This mixed evidence arises from two key challenges faced by the previous literature.
The …rst is the endogeneity of MA enrollment among seniors, for whom this is a choice –
individuals have the option to enroll in or disenroll from an MA plan. There is a large body
of past evidence which suggests that individuals don’t enroll randomly into MA, but rather
do so based on health status, leading to potential selection bias when evaluating the impact
of MA (Morrissey et al 2012, Brown et al 2014). The second is the limited availability of
data for those who are enrolled in MA. The Medicare claims data that is typically used for
empirical work in this area only tracks utilization for those enrolled in the traditional FFS
program, and not those in MA.
   The purpose of our paper is to address these empirical concerns with two innovations. The
…rst is to use hospital discharge data from New York State, which allows us to examine the


                                             2
health care utilization of Medicare recipients both inside and outside of Medicare Advantage.
A major advantage of these hospital data is that we obtained permission to longitudinally
link it at the individual level to Medicare enrollment …les, so that we can assess how an
individual’s utilization changes leading up to and following changes to that individual’s MA
enrollment status.
   The second is to use these novel data to identify the causal impact of MA plan enrollment
by studying counties in which MA plans completely exited in the early 2000s, and comparing
them to counties where there was no exit. In these counties, enrollees who were previously
in MA plans had no choice of remaining in MA, so our data allows us to study the utilization
impact of moving exogenously from MA plans to the FFS Medicare program.
   Doing so, we …nd that there is a substantial rise in inpatient hospital utilization after MA
plan exit. We estimate that previous MA enrollees see their utilization of the hospital rise
by about 60%, when moving back to the traditional FFS plan. This estimate is comparable
to the corresponding estimate of 65% from the RAND Health Insurance Experiment of the
1970s, which randomly assigned patients to managed care plans. The …nding is robust to
speci…cation checks and appears to be long-lasting, so that it does not simply re‡ect pent-up
demand that caused a temporary increase in utilization. The increases appear across all
types of hospitalizations, but are particularly pronounced for elective visits. We also …nd
substantial reductions in the average distance traveled to the hospital when patients exoge-
nously switch from MA to FFS following plan exit. This suggests that the mechanisms for
lowering costs under MA plans are both reduced hospital availability and greater restrictions
on elective care.
   At the same time, we …nd no evidence to suggest that the quality of care is rising along
any dimension. We …nd no change in the quality of hospitals used by enrollees as measured
by typical Medicare metrics, and more signi…cantly we see no reduction in mortality among
those who are forced to move from MA to FFS. This suggests that MA plans were delivering
care more e¢ ciently than the FFS Medicare program by using fewer hospital resources.


                                              3
Our …ndings therefore have important implications for Medicare and suggest that increased
management of hospital care could lower costs without reducing the quality of care.
        Our paper proceeds as follows. Part I provides background on the Medicare Advantage
program and reviews the previous literature on MA. Part II describes our data. Part III ex-
plores the impact of plan exit on utilization and outcomes. Part IV discusses the implications
of the …ndings for Medicare policy. Part V concludes.



1         Background on Medicare Advantage

Since 1982, Medicare recipients have had the option to enroll in private managed care plans.
Enrollment in the plans has ‡uctuated in response to changes in the generosity of plan
reimbursement and has varied substantially across geographic areas at any point in time
(McGuire et al 2011). Throughout the 1980s and 1990s, plan payments for an enrollee were
set to be 95 percent of a county’s per-capita Medicare FFS expenditures, and were further
adjusted based on the recipient’s age, gender, disability status, Medicaid enrollment status,
and nursing home status (Chaikind et al 2004). The program’s name changed over time,
beginning as Medicare managed care and then changing to Medicare+Choice in 1997 and
then to Medicare Advantage after 2003. In the pages that follow, we refer to Medicare Part
C as Medicare Advantage.
        Research demonstrated that individuals enrolling in Medicare managed care plans tended
to have signi…cantly lower costs than the average and thus plan contracting actually increased
Medicare spending.2 In response to this, legislation was enacted reducing the future growth
rate of private Medicare reimbursement, as part of the 1997 Balanced Budget Act. In this
same legislation, the government introduced payment "‡oors" in counties with low per-capita
FFS expenditures given substantially lower private Medicare penetration in those areas. The
    2
     Studies from the mid 1990s found that utilization among private Medicare enrollees was 12% (Riley et al
1996) to 37% (PPRC 1996) lower than those of demographically comparable enrollees in FFS. While some of
this could re‡ect treatment e¤ects rather than selection, the PPRC study actually compared the two groups,
during the time that both were still in FFS (they focused on the 6 months immediately preceding HMO
enrollment).

                                                     4
Bene…ts Improvement and Protection Act of 2000 further increased payment ‡oors in urban
counties that had low per-capita FFS expenditures, as described below (Chaikind et al 2004).
Despite these changes, private Medicare enrollment of 5.3 million in 2003 was approximately
equal to its 1997 level (5.4 million) (KFF 2014); the increases in enrollment in ‡oor counties
were approximately o¤set by lower enrollment in other counties. These di¤erential trends in
enrollment were driven by the more modest reimbursement growth across non-‡oor counties.3
       A large body of previous research has investigated the e¤ect of Medicare Advantage on
health care expenditures, the utilization of medical care, and health outcomes (see McGuire
et al, 2011 for an excellent review). One challenge when estimating these e¤ects is the
endogeneity of MA enrollment – individuals have the option to enroll in or disenroll from
an MA plan. To account for this, previous studies have taken a variety of approaches. One
subset of research has estimated cross-sectional models that include a rich set of controls for
individual’s age, health status, and related factors, assuming that there are no remaining
unobserved di¤erences between those who choose to enroll in managed care and those who
do not (Landon et al, 2012). Another branch of studies has used instrumental variable
approaches, with their methods assuming that certain factors (e.g. MA penetration in the
local market) in‡uence plan choice but do not a¤ect utilization (Mello et al, 2002). A …nal
strand of the literature has used longitudinal data to follow individuals over time and compare
the evolution of Medicare spending or other outcomes of interest among those switching
between MA and traditional Medicare and those not switching; Brown et al (2014) examine
   3
    Partly because of the stagnant MA enrollment growth, in 2003 the Medicare Modernization Act raised
reimbursement in all areas. The government also moved to a system of risk adjustment that began in the
early-2000s and that paid plans more for individuals with diabetes, pneumonia, or other medical conditions.
In 2006 the government moved to a bidding system whereby plans could submit a bid for expected costs of
providing coverage to recipients, which is comparable to traditional Medicare in scope. If a plan’s bid fell
below county-level benchmarks, the plan would rebate 34 of the di¤erence to enrollees in the form of enhanced
bene…ts or reduced premiums, while the government would keep the remainder. If a bid was above the
benchmark, the recipient would pay the full di¤erence between the bid and benchmark, in the form of higher
premiums (Chaikind et al, 2004). The A¤ordable Care Act has further transformed plan reimbursement by
gradually reducing benchmarks from 2011 to 2017, with the largest reductions occurring in counties with
the highest levels of per-capita FFS spending (Biles et al, 2012). This increase in reimbursement has led to
a steady rise in Medicare Advantage enrollment since 2004, and it now stands at more than three times as
many people (17 million) and more than twice as large a share of enrollment (31%) as 2004. Data available
at http://k¤.org/medicare/fact-sheet/medicare-advantage/


                                                     5
cases of voluntary switching, while Parente et al (2005) examine cases of switching following
plan exit. Critically, plan exit in the latter study is incomplete, meaning that individuals
can still remain in MA by switching to a plan that remains active; as such, in both cases,
the switching decision between MA and traditional Medicare remains endogenous.
   Altogether, the …ndings from this research are mixed, with most …nding that Medicare
Advantage does reduce utilization; however, it is di¢ cult to disentangle these estimated
e¤ects from favorable selection into MA plans (Mello et al, 2003).
   A related area of research has investigated the e¤ect of plan reimbursement on MA
enrollment and on the average characteristics of MA enrollees. These studies have exploited
variation over time (Cawley et al, 2005; Afendulis et al, 2013) and across geographic areas
(Cabral et al, 2014; Duggan et al, 2014) in the generosity of plan reimbursement and …nd
that there is a strong positive e¤ect on MA enrollment.
   A third area of research has considered the e¤ect of Medicare Advantage (or managed
care among the privately insured) on utilization for those enrolled in traditional Medicare.
The likely mechanism for such an e¤ect is that health care providers may change the way
that they treat individuals enrolled in traditional Medicare as more of their patients become
enrolled in managed care (Glied and Gra¤ Zivin, 2002). The results from this research suggest
that reimbursement-induced increases in Medicare Advantage enrollment reduce utilization
among those in traditional Medicare and that this e¤ect partially o¤sets the greater spending
on Medicare Advantage enrollees (Baicker et al, 2013; Afendulis et al. 2013).
   There is a broader literature which has evaluated the impact of managed care on health
care utilization. This literature follows the same type of approaches discussed above, such
as controlling for observable di¤erences across patients in FFS and managed care (Cutler et
al 2000) and instrumenting for managed care enrollment using area factors such as the area
penetration of managed care plans (Baker, 2000). These studies typically …nd that managed
care plans lower utilization, but are subject to the caveats noted above.
   There is, however, one source of exogenous experimental variation, which is an arm of the


                                             6
famous RAND Health Insurance Experiment of the 1970s. Best known for the randomization
of individuals across health insurance plans of di¤erential generosity, the RAND HIE also
randomized one set of individuals into the Group Health Cooperative of Puget Sound (an
HMO) and another set into a fee-for-service plan (Manning et al., 1987). This study found
very large reductions in inpatient care in the managed care plan, with roughly 65% higher
inpatient utilization under FFS relative to managed care. At the same time, outpatient
utilization was comparable across the two settings (Manning et al, 1985; Manning et al,
1987).



2     Data and Empirical Strategy

We use administrative datasets from CMS and New York State, which contain information
on Medicare & Medicare Advantage enrollment status, individual-level utilization metrics
for those in MA as well as FFS, and individual-level mortality indicators. Our ability to
track individual-level hospital inpatient utilization in Medicare Advantage is unique, as is
our ability to continuously track individual-level utilization for those switching between MA
& FFS. The dearth of available Medicare Advantage claims data has hindered past research,
and is an issue that we overcome here. In this section, we discuss the various data sources
used for this analysis and sample selection restrictions imposed. Further details are provided
in the Data Appendix.


2.1      Medicare & MA Enrollment Data

We obtain administrative Medicare data from CMS, in the form of a denominator …le con-
taining Medicare & Medicare Advantage enrollment status at a person-month level. This
denominator …le covers every person enrolled in Medicare, at any point during the 1998-2003
period, and is national in scope. This data also contains information on the demographic
characteristics of each enrollee, including birth date and age, gender, race, state of residence,


                                               7
and county of residence.
       As the Medicare Denominator data only identi…es overall MA enrollment status, and not
the speci…c plan to which an individual may belong, we supplement the data with public-use
…les from CMS, containing national Medicare Advantage enrollment information at a plan-
county-year level. Using this public-use …le, we are able to identify the extent to which any
US county experienced plan-exit, along with the timing of that exit. Speci…cally, we are able
to identify those counties experiencing complete plan-exit, and the years in which this took
place.


2.2       New York Utilization Data

Our primary measures of health care utilization relate to the inpatient setting, and cover
New York State. These measures are compiled for all those in Medicare, including MA
enrollees, by linking specialized New York State discharge-level hospital data to Medicare
Denominator data. This linking is performed using Social Security Numbers, which are
contained in both of the datasets (the inclusion of these SSN …elds in the data required
administrative permission from CMS as well as New York State).4 Through this linking, we
can construct an individual-level panel of inpatient hospital utilization, for the 1998-2003
period across New York State. This panel covers all individuals in Medicare, irrespective
of whether they happen to be enrolled in Medicare FFS or Medicare Advantage at any
given point, since hospitals compile uniform data across all payers. Given our approach
for constructing this panel, individuals are included in the sample even if they’ve had no
hospital utilization throughout the study period. With this data, we can bypass issues of
sample selection that would plague any analysis that uses just stand-alone hospital discharge
data.
       We aggregate our measures of hospital utilization to the person-year level. We focus
   4
    Linking was conducted using a combination of the last four digits of individuals’SSN, dates & years of
birth, gender, and county of residence; in combination, these variables uniquely identify Medicare recipients
over 99.9% of the time. The Medicare recipients that were not uniquely identi…ed were excluded from the
sample.

                                                     8
on cumulative, yearly metrics of the following: number of visits, number of days stayed,
number of procedures performed, and the log of hospital charge amounts.5 The means
of these utilization measures, for our two cohorts of interest, are presented in Table 1.
Among those initially in Fee-for-Service Medicare, these measures appear to be at least 60%
higher than among those initially in Medicare Advantage; however, the extent to which this
disparity is driven by patient composition, rather than by treatment di¤erentials, is not
readily discernible.
    Unfortunately, we are unable to include outpatient data, as it is not collected in the
same way in New York State. This limits our ability to speak to the impact of Medicare
Advantage on total medical spending. That said, studies of non-Medicare HMO’s have found
no meaningful HMO e¤ect on outpatient utilization, relative to a fee-for-service alternative
(Manning et al 1987; Manning et al 1985).


2.3     Mortality Data

We use …elds in CMS’s Medicare Denominator data, to construct person-year mortality
indicators. These data are national in scope, and cover the entirety of our sample period.
In constructing our sample, we allow for sample attrition through mortality; as such, if
an individual dies in 2002, their mortality indicator will be positive for that year, and the
individual will not appear in the sample in the following year.


2.4     Sample Restrictions

We focus on the 1998-2003 period, given that subsequent increases to MA reimbursement
resulted in a re-entry of plans to many counties that had previously experienced exit, with
virtually no counties having complete exit of MA plans after this period. We restrict to
Medicare recipients over 65, and restrict to those who were originally eligible for Medicare
   5
     To avoid the undue in‡uence of outliers, total charges for those above the 98th percentile are winsorized
(thus replacing the charge value with the 98th percentile value).



                                                      9
by virtue of age, rather than disability. We also restrict to those already in Medicare in 1998;
as such, we exclude those who aged into Medicare later in the study period. This allows us
to construct a baseline measure of utilization for every individual in our sample at least two
years before any of the MA exits that we study occurred. We construct cohorts based on
individuals’Medicare Advantage/FFS enrollment status at the start of the study period, to
combat bias from voluntary switching between the two at a later point.
   Throughout our plan-exit analyses, our treatment group is made up of eight counties
that saw complete plan exit, over either a one or two year period. Altogether, these counties
accounted for about 3% of all Medicare Advantage enrollees in New York State, prior to
plan-exit, and likewise accounted for about 7.5% of all FFS recipients. These eight exit
counties have MA penetration rates of 6.7% on average, as opposed to an overall NY average
of 15.2%. In six of the counties, exit is over a one year period; in the other two counties,
it is over a two-year period. The exiting plans are a mix of national for-pro…t carriers (the
largest enrollment was in Aetna) and local non-pro…t carriers (the second largest was in the
Capital Area Community plan); altogether there were six plans exiting. Some carriers exited
all New York counties in which they operated, while other carriers selectively exited certain
counties and continued being active in others.
   While we cannot fully explain plan exit, one cause of exit was clearly low reimbursement
rates. A sizeable literature …nds that the MA share of Medicare enrollment is strongly
related to MA reimbursement rates (Afendulis et al 2013, Cawley et al 2005, Pope et al
2006). In the Appendix, we demonstrate that reimbursement changes over this period are
strongly associated with the type of plan exits that we study. In particular, we …nd that
each $100 per month rise in MA reimbursement leads to around a 5% decrease in the number
of enrollees in exiting MA plans, as a fraction of Medicare recipients in that county. We are
unable to use reimbursement changes as instruments for plan exit, however, as they have
direct e¤ects on the treatment of MA patients even in counties that do not see exit, and
perhaps even spillover e¤ects on the treatment of FFS patients. But we demonstrate below


                                              10
that plan exit appears to be an exogenous shock to the counties that we study.


2.5        Empirical Strategy

      As reviewed above, enrollment in an MA plan results from endogenous decisions by
seniors that may be correlated with their health status. Thus any comparison of those who
do and do not choose to join MA plans may be biased. Our approach instead is to look at a
sample of individuals who exogenously lose access to MA plans: seniors residing in counties
where all available MA plans have exited. Such seniors have no option of choosing an MA
plan. For seniors who were previously enrolled in an MA plan, this results in an exogenous
shift out of MA into FFS care. As part of our main approach, we do not consider “partial”
plan exits, where some plans leave a county but others remain, due to the endogeneity of
the decision to remain in an MA plan. The two counties with partial plan exit during our
study period (Nassau and Su¤olk) are excluded from the analysis.
           We use the data described above to estimate regressions of the following form:

    (1)      U T ILijt =     +     Exitjt + Xijt    +   j   +   t   + "ijt

    Where i indexes individuals, j counties and t years; UTIL is one of our measures of
utilization and/or quality; EXIT is a dummy for whether the MA plans have exited county j
in year t; X is a limited set of demographic controls (5 year age group dummies and gender);
and    j   and   t   are a full set of county and year …xed e¤ects. For the two counties that exit
over two years, the “EXIT” variable takes on a value of 0.5 in the …rst year and 1.0 in the
second year. All standard errors are clustered at the county level.



3      Results

      As discussed in Part II, here we examine the impact of plan exits on the utilization of
health care. Our basic results are illustrated in Figure 1. This …gure shows the trend in the


                                                   11
average annualized number of hospital admissions for those who are initially in MA plans in
New York counties. The red line shows the number of visits for those who are in counties
that do not see MA plan exit over this period, while the blue line shows visits for those in
counties where MA plans exit. Both are trending up over time because the sample is aging
given that we restrict to individuals who are 65 years old and up in our base year 1998. This
graph includes counties in which exit occurred in both one year and over two years – the
blue vertical line marks the start of the …rst year, while the red vertical line marks the start
of the second year.
   There is a steady upward trend for both sets of counties, but an enormous jump up for
counties in which MA plans exit around the time of that exit. The trend is more rapid during
the …rst year as the two year-exit counties are fully integrated, and then trends return to
parallel. This previews our …nding of a robust increase in inpatient utilization among those
initially enrolled in MA in exit counties.
   The regression analysis of the impact of plan exit is shown in Table 2, for the sample
of individuals who are initially in an MA plan. We estimate the change in utilization in
counties that see plan exit versus those that do not while controlling for a full set of county
and year indicators. The coe¢ cient of interest is multiplied by an indicator for being in an
exit county interacted with the period after exit, controlling for a full set of county dummies
and year indicators. Further, the standard errors for all our regression results are clustered
at a county-level, to control for possible within-county serial correlation, since that’s the
level at which plan exit varies. Altogether, the results con…rm the implications of Figure 1:
there are very sizeable increases in utilization along every dimension.
   In particular, we show that those MA enrollees who see plan exit in their county (and who
therefore move to FFS Medicare) see their number of hospital admissions rise by an average
of 0.105; relative to the ex-ante mean of 0.177, this represents an increase of approximately
60 percent. Total hospital days rise by 0.65 (48%), and the number of hospital procedures




                                              12
rise by 0.13 (33%). Total charges rise by 53%.6
       The results therefore suggest that exit of MA plans led to very sizeable increases in
hospital utilization by former MA enrollees, with an estimated magnitude that is comparable
to …ndings from the RAND Health Insurance Experiment (Manning et al 1987; Manning et
al 1985). The rise in utilization appears to be mostly along the margin of admissions, with
proportionally smaller increases in days and in the number of procedures. Given that sicker
or more severely injured patients will tend to remain in the hospital for longer, this suggests
that the marginal admission is for a less serious condition.


3.1       Speci…cation Checks

We further explore these …ndings in Table 3, where we consider robustness tests along two
dimensions. First, we present a speci…cation that includes both lags and leads of the exit
e¤ect. The lead coe¢ cient allows us to test for di¤erential trends across treatment and
control counties. The lags allow us to address the important question of whether these large
e¤ects simply represent pent-up demand by those who were treated less intensively under
MA plans, which would then fade over time as enrollees become acclimated to the FFS
environment.
       The results of this speci…cation are shown in the …rst panel of Table 3. We …nd no
signi…cant lead e¤ect, consistent with no di¤erential pre-trends across these di¤erent types
of counties.7 In addition, we …nd that the estimated utilization response occurs quickly and
gets slightly stronger over the …rst three years. This is inconsistent with a pent-up demand
   6
     We add 1 to charges given that nearly 90 percent of person-year observations have zero charges and
would otherwise be dropped from the analysis. If we reestimate the model in the level of charges, including
zeros (but allowing perhaps undue in‡uence of outliers), we obtain an estimate that is similar in percentage
terms.
   7
     In a separate analysis, we …nd no evidence of increased attrition from exiting plans, in the months
immediately preceding exit. The lack of attrition increases can be attributed to a number of factors. First,
information on plan exits only became publicly available 3-4 months preceding exit; plans typically drop
out at the end of each year, while upcoming-year plan availability is only made public in September of
the previous year. In addition, there are some individual-level restrictions on MA-to-FFS switching, which
typically can only be undertaken during open enrollment periods. Finally, there is substantial inertia in MA
enrollment more generally.



                                                    13
explanation, at least over this three year window.
   Another concern is that, given the relatively small number of exit counties (eight), there
may be some other correlated factor that is changing at the same time as plan exit. To
address this concern, we reestimate our models on the sample of FFS Medicare enrollees
in these same NY counties over this same period. These enrollees should be impacted by
other factors that impact medical demand or supply over this period, but should be largely
una¤ected by the MA exits. Of course, to the extent that there are important spillovers from
MA onto treatment of FFS, then the reduced presence of MA in these counties could lead
to increased treatment of FFS bene…ciaries. But such an e¤ect would be biased in the same
direction as our …ndings, with those enrolled in FFS initially also using more care when MA
plans exit.
   The second panel of Table 3 shows the results of this exercise. In fact, we …nd no
signi…cant or sizeable impacts on those enrolled in FFS in our baseline year of 1998 in the
counties with plan exit. This suggests that there are not broad trends towards less e¢ cient
care in this set of counties (as well as no signi…cant spillovers) and that we are therefore
accurately capturing the e¤ect of MA enrollment.


3.2    Mechanisms

The striking increase in medical utilization from MA plan exit raises the question of how
MA plans are able to restrain hospital inpatient utilization so e¤ectively. In this section we
explore the e¤ects on several additional outcome variables, which point to the mechanisms
through which managed care plans are restricting utilization.
   One possible driver of utilization di¤erences between MA and FFS could be cost-sharing
di¤erentials. The sign of these di¤erentials is unclear ex-ante, however. This depends both on
what individuals do for supplemental Medicare coverage when they lose their MA coverage,
and on how generous that alternative is relative to Medicare Advantage.
   We have investigated this issue using data from the Medicare Current Bene…ciary Survey


                                             14
(MCBS), which gathers data for a large nationally representative set of Medicare enrollees
on their insurance coverage and medical spending over a two year period. We …nd that
among those leaving Medicare Advantage over the 1998-2003 period, 29% chose not to pur-
chase any supplemental coverage over the next year and therefore face the full extent of
Medicare inpatient cost sharing (which is a large deductible for the …rst sixty days and
a daily copayment after that). On the other hand, 21% obtained supplemental coverage
through employer-sponsored insurance, 36% purchased supplemental coverage through the
Medigap program, and 13% obtained supplemental coverage through government sources
(Medicaid or the Military’s Tricare program).
   Turning to the generosity of coverage, we …nd that those in the MCBS with no supple-
mental coverage bear on average 9.3% of their inpatient hospital bills. On the other hand,
those with some type of supplemental coverage bear about 2.5% of their bills, and that this
is almost completely invariant to the type of coverage. Regression estimates of inpatient
share of costs on dummies for insurance type show no signi…cant di¤erence among these
supplemental alternatives, with or without controls. Therefore, on net, cost sharing among
those leaving Medicare Advantage went up, which should if anything be reducing inpatient
utilization (the opposite of what we …nd).
   Another mechanism is through restricting choice of hospital, thereby eliminating the
marginal hospitalization (which would be consistent with the severity results above). To
assess this point, we measure the impact of MA plan exit on distance traveled and travel
time to the hospital using the latitutude and longitude of the Medicare recipient’s zip code of
residence and the zip code of the hospital. As discussed in the Appendix, these distance/time
calculations re‡ect driving rather than "as the crow ‡ies" distances.
   Table 4 shows the results for distance traveled. The sample here is restricted to those who
actually use the hospital, reducing our sample size. We …nd that MA plan exit is associated
with a sizeable reduction in distance traveled to the hospital: the average hospitalization is
almost 5 miles and 7 minutes closer in driving time. These represent 76% and 39% of the


                                              15
sample means, respectively.8 Clearly, enrollees are taking advantage of the less restrictive
network under FFS Medicare after MA plan exit. These results are robust to the inclusion
of DRG …xed e¤ects, suggesting that they are not driven by hospital visit composition
di¤erences across MA and FFS.9
       Another source of reduced hospitalization under MA plans could be fewer hospitalizations
among the least sick enrollees. To assess this we next explore the change in the types of
hospitalizations that take place when MA plans exit. We look at a variety of di¤erent types
of hospitalizations, and in each case we can compare the relative e¤ects to the roughly 60%
overall rise in hospital visits. The results described below are, again, robust to the inclusion
of DRG …xed e¤ects, suggesting that they are not driven by changes to visit composition.
       We begin by looking at two di¤erent types of admissions. The …rst is “emergency”
hospitalizations, which are inpatient admissions that initiate in the emergency room. We …nd
that the proportional e¤ects for emergency care (at 27%) are about half the magnitude of the
full sample results (at around 60% jump). In the rows that follow, we divide hospitalizations
into those that are elective and non-elective, as speci…ed in the discharge data, which de…nes
elective admissions as those where “the patient’s condition permits adequate time to schedule
the admission based on the availability of a suitable accommodation”. We …nd that there is
a much larger proportional rise in elective hospitalizations, which increase by 131% of their
baseline value after MA plans exit. This is in contrast to non-elective hospitalizations, which
rise by less than half (46%) of their baseline value.
       Indeed, as the next set of rows show, there is a much larger proportional rise in the inten-
   8
      One concern with this set of estimates is that MA a¤ects the composition of hospitalizations. To the
extent that the marginal admissions are to hospitals that are close to the patient’s home, this would tend
to mechanically lower the average distance when patients return to FFS. But given the magnitude of the
decline in average distance, this change in composition would not be su¢ cient to explain the di¤erence even
if the average distance for marginal admissions was zero.
    9
      Recent work on HMO’s in the Medicaid setting provides further indication that distance to nearest
hospital could be a driver of the e¤ect estimated here; in New York’s Medicaid program, the FFS option
is not associated with reduced distance to the nearest hospital, and produces only 30% higher inpatient
utilization (Vabson 2015), compared to the 60% increase that we estimate for Medicare. As such, the greater
e¤ect of HMO’s under Medicare could be accounted for by a greater e¤ect on distance to hospital (and other
aspects of hospital networks).



                                                    16
sity with which elective hospitalizations are treated. The number of procedures performed
rises by 94% for elective admissions, and only by 18% for non-elective ones.
       These results therefore suggest two important mechanisms through which MA plans re-
duce hospital utilization. The …rst is to restrict patients to hospitals that involve considerably
longer travel. The second is to more tightly restrict elective and non-urgent hospitalizations.
       In Table 5, we examine these mechanisms in further depth, by comparing the e¤ect of
plan exit based on individuals’ex-ante distances to in-network MA hospitals. MA enrollees
living close to in-network MA hospitals would experience a smaller decrease in hospital
distance, following plan exit, compared to MA recipients living farther away. We break out
our baseline sample of those initially in MA into two cohorts, based on each individual’s
distance to their nearest in-network MA hospital (pre-plan exit): the closest 50% and the
farthest 50%. We measure whether a given hospital is in-network based on whether enrollees
of MA plans in the corresponding county visit it at greater than de minimus rates.10 We
…nd that in these exit counties, 45% of hospitals on average (and 47% of hospital beds) are
classi…ed as in-network.
       As the …rst column of Table 5 shows, both of these cohorts experienced a reduction in
distance traveled to the hospital following plan exit, although obviously the reduction is
larger in the group that lives farther from an in-network hospital. We also …nd that the
cohort that was closer to an in-network hospital experienced a relatively larger increase
in utilization, following plan-exit. The higher level of visits is driven almost entirely by
a higher level of admissions from the emergency room. This suggests that restrictions on
emergency admissions could have a disproportionate impact on those who would most likely
use the ER, in this case those living closest to the hospital. The results further suggest
that a higher threshold on admissions from the ER could be a more likely mechanism for
  10
    For these purposes, we de…ne de minimus as receiving fewer than 4% of MA hospital admissions, for a
given county. In markets with exiting plans, there typically are only a limited number of hospitals, each of
which would enjoy substantially higher market share, in the absence of network restrictions (we con…rm this
by looking at visits under FFS). We do not set these thresholds to zero, given that individuals will go to
out-of-network hospitals even in the presence of network restrictions.



                                                    17
utilization reductions under MA, than increased distances to hospital.


3.3     Quality Impacts

If the exit of MA plans is causing such a substantial increase in utilization, a natural question
is whether this is delivering bene…ts to enrollees through higher quality care or improved
health outcomes. We explore this issue in Table 6 by examining a broad variety of quality
indicators.
   To measure the quality of care at the hospital level, we turn to two sets of standardized
measures from the CMS Hospital Quality Initiative database. The …rst set of metrics consists
of process measures, which are featured prominently as part of CMS’s Hospital Compare tool;
these capture the fraction of the time that a hospital follows ‘best-practices’, in the treatment
of a listed condition. Possible best practices include the administration of beta blockers or
antibiotics, for such conditions as heart failure, heart attacks, and pneumonia. Altogether,
for this set of measures, higher ratings would imply better quality of care.
   Meanwhile, the CMS Compare outcome measures are risk-adjusted mortality and read-
mission metrics for each hospital; these re‡ect the percentage of individuals dying/being
readmitted in the 30-day period following discharge, for the following separate conditions:
heart attacks, heart failure, and pneumonia. As such, these metrics are conditional on initial
hospitalization. Altogether, for these measures, higher ratings would imply worse quality of
care.
   Using these measures, we do not see any consistent evidence of moving to higher quality
hospitals, as seven of the nine measures are insigni…cant; further, one of the signi…cant
coe¢ cients suggest higher quality (improved process for pneumonia) while the other suggests
lower quality (worse outcomes for heart failure). Moreover, all of the coe¢ cients are very
small relative to mean values and precisely estimated, ruling out meaningful impacts.
   We next turn to more direct process measures of outcomes created from our discharge
data. One such measure, the 60-day hospital readmission rate, can proxy for quality given


                                               18
that many readmissions result from either ine¤ective in-hospital or ine¤ective post-hospital
care (Neal Axon et al, 2011). Another measure, preventable hospitalizations, identi…ed those
hospitalizations that are avertable under adequate outpatient care, such as visits involving
chronic conditions. We identify these preventable hospitalizations using AHRQ’s PQI algo-
rithm, which works o¤ the DRG codes and procedures associated with a given admission
(DHHS, 2001). For our analyses, we aggregate the readmission and preventable hospitaliza-
tion measures at a person-year level. Both of these measures are conditional on hospitaliza-
tion, so that we can assess whether under FFS the marginal hospitalization is more likely
to be a readmission or be preventable. As shown in Table 1, the number of readmissions
is higher among those initially in FFS than in the initially MA cohort, consistent with the
selection evidence discussed above, although the number of preventable hospitalizations is
lower.
       When MA plans exit, we …nd that both measures rise –that is, plan exit does not appear
to be translating to more e¢ cient care on net that is lowering readmissions or preventable
admissions. The odds of readmission, conditional on an initial hospitalization, rises by
about 15% among those initially in MA plans after plans exit. Meanwhile, the odds of a
given hospitalization being preventable rises by 10%. By these measures, therefore, quality
is falling for those initially enrolled in MA following the exit of MA plans.
       Finally, we examine the impact on mortality. For measuring mortality, we can extend our
analysis to consider not only the impacts in New York, but across the nation as a whole.11
This allows us to substantially increase the precision of our estimates on exit e¤ects.
       The e¤ects on mortality are shown at the bottom of Table 6. Both estimates are in fact
positive, suggesting that plan exit leads to higher mortality, although neither estimate is
signi…cant. Most importantly, we can rule out a meaningful reduction in mortality associated
with the higher hospital utilization under FFS plans. Even with the less precise New York
  11
    In New York State, there were 8 counties in which plans completely exited (which comprised our treat-
ment group), and 52 counties in which plans did not exit (which comprised our control group), along with
2 partial exit counties (which were dropped). Across the nation as a whole, the comporable …gures are 401
complete exit counties, 2373 non-exit counties, and 430 partial exit counties.


                                                   19
only data, we can rule out a reduction in mortality rates in excess of .35% (with 95%
con…dence) from a baseline of 4.1%; with the more precise national data, meanwhile, we can
rule out a reduction in excess of .10% (and also rule out an increase in excess of .14%), o¤
a baseline of 4.4%. Given that utilization of the hospital goes up by more than 60%, this is
a fairly tight bound.
    The results from this section appear to indicate that there is a sizeable ine¢ ciency in
transitioning elders out of Medicare Advantage into the FFS program. Utilization of, and
spending in, the hospital rises substantially, with no consistent indication of quality improve-
ment (although travel to the hospital is greatly reduced). If anything, we …nd a reduction
in quality, with readmissions, preventable hospitalizations and mortality (the last insigni…-
cantly) increasing after the shift out of managed care plans.



4     Conclusions

The role of private players in public insurance is the subject of a central debate in U.S.
public policy. This debate is perhaps most heated around the role of Medicare Advantage
plans. Advocates claim that the higher e¢ ciency of such private options should push the
government towards expanding the role of managed care plans. Opponents point to the
sizeable positive selection faced by these plans (and their high baseline reimbursement, even
independent of selection) to claim that they are over-reimbursed and are costing, rather than
saving, government dollars.
    Central to this debate is the question of whether MA plans actually deliver care more
e¢ ciently. Our paper contributes to the literature on this point in two important ways.
First, we make use of data that tracks the treatment of both traditional Medicare (FFS)
recipients and MA enrollees. Second, we make use of exogenous variation in MA availability,
arising from county-level exit of MA plans. Using these empirical advantages, we document
sizeable increases in hospital inpatient utilization along many dimensions when MA plans



                                              20
exit a county. Hospital inpatient utilization rises by 60%, and total charges by more than
50%. We …nd that MA insurers may achieve this by reducing the use of the hospital for
elective and emergency cases, and also by increasing the distance that a patient needs to
travel to the nearest hospital. Moreover, we …nd no evidence that this is accompanied by
reduced quality of care for Medicare patients when enrolled in MA; quality indicators, if
anything, deteriorate when MA plans exit.
   There are a number of caveats to these results. One concern is that the e¤ects of plan
exit-which we measure-may not be congruent to the e¤ect from plan entry. That said, we do
address one major di¤erence between exit and entry, which is that exit could be accompanied
by short-run pent up demand, which would dissipate over time. Examining utilization for
the three years following plan exit, we …nd no evidence for pent-up demand, as the e¤ects
do not appear to fade over that timeframe. An additional caveat is that plan exits may be
correlated with other factors that impact patient care, but the lack of pre-treatment e¤ects,
and the lack of e¤ects for FFS patients, suggest no such e¤ects.
   There remain two other limitations to our analysis, however. First, we are only able
to track inpatient care. It is possible that the main mechanism through which MA plans
reduced hospital care was by increasing spending on primary and outpatient care. How-
ever, the evidence that we provide is not consistent with that interpretation: preventable
hospitalizations as a share of hospitalizations do not appear to change when MA plans exit.
Furthermore, the closest existing study of HMO’s provide no evidence of o¤setting increases
to outpatient care, despite …nding large decreases in the inpatient setting (Manning et al
1987). That said, we may still be overstating the e¢ ciency gains associated with MA plans,
by ignoring non-hospital care.
   Second, our measure of outcomes is an extreme one, mortality. There may be other
dimensions along which outcomes improve when MA plans exit that are not captured by our
measures. We have documented one such outcome, distance traveled to the hospital. There
may be others, such as treatment quality or palliative care, which are not well captured by


                                             21
our coarse mortality measure.
   With those caveats in mind, it is worth discussing the implications of our …ndings for
government policy towards MA plans. Our results have subtle implications for MA reim-
bursement policy within the existing system. On the one hand, higher reimbursement leads
to more MA plan entry and greater choice for consumers (Afendulis 2013, Cabral et al 2014,
Duggan et al 2014). On the other hand, higher reimbursement increases inframarginal pay-
ments to plans that are already in the market. Existing evidence suggests that the MA plans
themselves keep more than half of this reimbursement change (Cabral et al. 2014, Duggan
et al. 2014), while much of what remains is a transfer to Medicare recipients. Optimal reim-
bursement must therefore weigh the social e¢ ciencies of care for those newly enrolling in MA
against the deadweight loss of raising the revenue to pay these higher rates for those already
enrolled in the plan. When MA plans are scarce, it seems likely that there are e¢ ciency
gains given the …ndings we have here. But as the MA share grows, these e¢ ciency gains
may become small relative to the inframarginal transfers.12
   On the other hand, our results suggest that there are large e¢ ciencies from ensuring
that at least some managed care option is available to enrollees. This could occur through
a premium support system of the type discussed in CBO (2013), which would set up com-
petitive exchanges through which private plans could compete with the government option.
Alternatively, the government could establish a monopoly MA provider for each area, and
auction o¤ the number of MA slots for the area, in that way minimizing the reimbursement
of MA plans while ensuring MA plan availability. Future work could usefully explore the
tradeo¤s of these alternatives.




  12
     Of course, if there are spillovers from a growing MA share in terms of increased FFS e¢ ciency, this
o¤sets the counter-argument. Existing work suggests that such spillovers do occur, as noted earlier.


                                                   22
5    References

"A Premium Support System for Medicare: Analysis of Illustrative Options." Congressional
Budget O¢ ce, 2013.

Afendulis, C., Chernew, M., and Kessler, D. "The E¤ect of Medicare Advantage on Hospital
Admissions and Mortality." Working Paper, 2013.

Baicker, K., Chernew, M., and Robbins, J. "The Spillover E¤ects of Medicare Managed
Care: Medicare Advantage and Hospital Utilization." Working Paper, 2013.

Baker, L. "Managed Care and Technology Adoption in Health Care: Evidence from Mag-
netic Resonance Imaging," NBER Working Paper #8020, 2000.

Biles, B., Casillas, G., Arnold, G., and Guterman, S. "The Impact of Health Reform on
the Medicare Advantage Program." The Commonwealth Fund, 2012.

Brown, J., Duggan, M., Kuziemko, I, and Woolston, W. "How does risk selection respond
to risk adjustment? New evidence from the Medicare Advantage Program." American Eco-
nomic Review, Vol. 104, (2014), pp. 3335-3364.

Cabral, M., Geruso, M., and Mahoney, N. "Does Medicare Advantage Bene…t Patients or
Insurance Providers? Evidence from the Bene…ts Improvement and Protection Act." Work-
ing Paper, 2014.

Cawley, J., Chernew, M., McLaughlin, C. "HMO Participation in Medicare + Choice."
Journal of Economics & Management Strategy, Vol. 14, (2005), pp. 543-574.

Chaikind, H. and Morgan, P. "Medicare Advantage Payments." CRS Report to Congress,
2004.

Cutler, D., McClellan, M., and Newhouse, J. "How Does Managed Care Do It?." RAND
Journal of Economics, Vol. 31, (2000), pp. 526-548.

Davis, K., Schoen, C, and Bandeali, F. "Medicare: 50 Years of Ensuring Coverage and
Care." The Commonwealth Fund, April 2015.

Duggan, M., Starc, A., and Vabson, B. "Who Bene…ts when the Government Pays More?
Pass-Through in the Medicare Advantage Program." Working Paper, 2014.

Glied, S., and Gra¤ Zivin, J. "How do doctors behave when some (but not all) of their
patients are in managed care?" Journal of Health Economics, Vol. 21, (2002), pp. 337-353.

"Guide to Prevention Quality Indicators." Department of Health and Human Services,

                                           23
Agency for Healthcare Research and Quality, 2001.

Landon, B, Zaslavsky, A., Saunders, R., Pawlson, L., Newhouse, J., and Ayanian, J. "Analy-
sis Of Medicare Advantage HMOs compared with traditional Medicare shows lower use of
many services during 2003-09." Health A¤airs, Vol. 31, (2012), pp. 2609-2617.

Manning, W., Leibowitz, A., Goldberg, G., Rogers, W., Newhouse, J. "A Controlled Trial
of the E¤ect of a Prepaid Group Practice on the Utilization of Medical Services." RAND
Corporation, 1985.

Manning, W., Newhouse J., Duan, N., Keeler E., and Leibowitz, A. "Health Insurance
and the Demand for Medical Care: Evidence from a Randomized Experiment." American
Economic Review, Vol. 77, (1987), pp. 251-277.

McGuire, T., Newhouse, J., and Sinaiko, A. "An Economic History of Medicare Part C."
The Millbank Quarterly, Vol. 89, (2011), pp. 289-323.

"Medicare at a Glance." Kaiser Family Foundation, 2014. Available at http://k¤.org/medicare/fact-
sheet/medicare-at-a-glance-fact-sheet/

"Medicare: Monthly Summary Report-June 2015." CMS, 2015.

Mello, M., Stearns, S., and Norton, E. "Do Medicare HMOs still reduce health services
use after controlling for selection bias?" Health Economics, Vol 11, (2002), pp. 323-40.

Mello, M., Stearns, S., Norton, E., and Ricketts, T. "Understanding biased selection in
Medicare HMOs." Health Services Research, Vol. 38, (2003), pp. 961-92.

Morrisey, M. A., Kilgore, M. L., Becker, D. J., Smith, W. and Delzell, E. "Favorable Selec-
tion, Risk Adjustment, and the Medicare Advantage Program." Health Services Research,
2012.

Neal Axon, R., and Williams, M. "Hospital Readmission as an Accountability Measure",
Journal of the American Medical Association, 2011, pp. 304-305.

Parente, S., Evans, W., Schoenman, J., and Finch, M. "Health Care Use and Expendi-
tures of Medicare HMO Disenrollees." Health Care Finance Review, 2005, pp. 31-43.

Pope, G., Greenwald, L., Healy, D., Kauter, J., Olmsted, E., West, N. "Impact of Increased
Financial Incentives to Medicare Advantage Plans." RTI International, 2006.

Riley, G, Tudor, Y, and Ingber, M. "Health Status of Medicare Enrollees in HMOs and
Fee-for-Service in 1994." Health Care Financing Review, Vol. 17, (1996), pp. 65-76.

"Risk Selection and Risk Adjustment in Medicare." Physician Payment Review Commis-

                                            24
sion, 1996.

"Total Medicare Advantage Enrollment: 1992 -2014." Kaiser Family Foundation, 2014.
Available at http://k¤.org/medicare/slide/total-medicare-advantage-enrollment-1992-2014/

Vabson, Boris. "The Magnitude and Incidence of E¢ ciency Gains from Contracting: Evi-
dence from Medicaid." University of Pennsylvania, mimeo, 2015.




                                          25
                Figure 1: E¤ect of Plan Exit on Annualized Hosp Visits




Blue: Initially MA in Plan-Exit Counties (Treatment)
Red: Initially MA in Non-Plan Exit Counties (Control)




                                         26
                             Table 1: Summary Statistics
                                          Initially MA                   Initially FFS

                             Utilization:
                                    Visits           0.177                     0.288
                                                    (0.782)                   (1.041)
                        Tot Days Stayed              1.349                     2.333
                                                    (8.462)                  (11.606)
                                Tot Procs            0.391                     0.635
                                                    (2.395)                   (3.309)
                             Tot Charges             4,159                     5,427
                                                   (29,320)                  (31,654)
                               Quality:
                         Mortality (perc)            4.193                     5.844
                                                   (20.045)                  (23.458)

                                  N                1,367,730                8,564,475
          Other Quality Measures:
            Conditional Readmissions                 0.202                     0.235
                                                    (0.402)                   (0.424)
       Conditional Preventable Visits                0.186                     0.178
                                                    (0.389)                   (0.383)
              Driving Time to Hospital               17.83                     20.31
                                                    (17.83)                   (24.18)
         Driving Distance to Hospital                 6.32                      8.36
                                                    (10.46)                   (14.91)
CMS Compare Hospital Rating (Ov)                      0.86                      0.85
                                                     (0.05)                    (0.05)

                                          N        223,324                  2,206,923
Notes: Table presents summary statistics for those in MA and FFS (as of 1998, respec-
tively). The unit of observation is at the person-year level for the top 2 panels, and at the
hospitalization-level for the bottom panel. The sample covers the 1998-2003 period. In ad-
dition, the sample is restricted to those over 65, who are also actively enrolled in Medicare.
This data was constructed using discharge-level hospital data from New York State and
person-month level Medicare enrollment records from CMS; these two datasets were linked
using SSN and other …elds.




                                              27
                                   Table 2: E¤ect of Plan Exit on Utilization
                                   (1)            (2)              (3)                            (4)
                                  Visits Tot Days Stayed Tot Procs                          Log Tot Charges

               Mean Value          0.177              1.349                 0.391                    0.939

     Exit Cnty*Post-Exit 0.105***                   0.654***               0.129*                  0.533***
                          (0.017)                    (0.146)               (0.075)                  (0.082)

                     N                                              1,367,730
      Sample & Controls:                          Baseline: Initially MA in all NY Counties
     Notes: Table presents linear regression models, where outcome variables are annualized measures of individual
     inpatient utilization. The key variable of interest is Exit Cnty*Post-Exit, which captures the e¤ect of involuntary
     switching from MA to FFS Medicare. Year, gender, age, and county …xed e¤ects are included as part of the
     analysis, and standard errors are clustered at the county level. The unit of observation is at the person-year
     level, for the 1998-2003 period. The sample is restricted to those over 65, who are also actively enrolled in
     Medicare. In addition, the sample is restricted to those enrolled in Medicare Advantage, as of the start of the




28
     study period (1998). This data was constructed using discharge-level hospital data from New York State and
     person-month level Medicare enrollment records from CMS; these two datasets were linked using SSN and other
     …elds, and subsequently aggregated to a person-year level. Sample inclusion is not conditional on utilization.
                                   Table 3: Utilization E¤ect: Speci…cation Checks
                                         (1)             (2)              (3)                           (4)
                                       Visits Tot Days Stayed Tot Procs                           Log Tot Charges

                      Mean Value          0.177              1.349                0.391                   0.939

                 Exit Cnty*Pre-2         -0.004              0.129               -0.014                   -0.008
                                        (0.029)             (0.211)             (0.065)                  (0.161)
                 Exit Cnty*Pre-1                                             Baseline

     Exit Cnty*First Yr of Exit 0.097***                   0.711***               0.106                 0.444***
                                 (0.026)                    (0.184)              (0.087)                 (0.152)
             Exit Cnty*Post-1 0.113***                     0.826***               0.124                 0.529***
                                 (0.025)                    (0.259)              (0.077)                 (0.115)
            Exit Cnty*Post-2+ 0.100***                     0.635***               0.130                 0.579***




29
                                 (0.031)                    (0.217)              (0.109)                 (0.125)

                            N                                          1,367,730
             Sample & Controls:                   Robustness Check: Baseline Sample, with Leads & Lags

             ExitCnty*Post-Exit          -0.005              -0.068               0.121                   0.000
                                        (0.009)             (0.082)              (0.082)                 (0.048)

                            N                                            8,564,476
             Sample & Controls:                       Placebo Test: Initially FFS in all NY Counties
     Notes: Table presents linear regression models, where outcome variables are annualized measures of individual inpatient
     utilization. The key variable of interest is Exit Cnty*Post-Exit. Year, gender, age, and county …xed e¤ects are included
     as part of the analysis, while standard errors are clustered at the county level. The unit of observation is at the
     person-year level, for the 1998-2003 period. The sample is restricted to those over 65, who are also actively enrolled
     in Medicare. In addition, the sample is restricted to those enrolled in Medicare Advantage (or FFS-as speci…ed), as
     of the start of the study period (1998). This data was constructed using discharge-level hospital data from New York
     State and person-month level Medicare enrollment records from CMS; these two datasets were linked using SSN and
     other …elds, and subsequently aggregated to a person-year level. Sample inclusion is not conditional on utilization.
                           Table 4: Mechanisms for Utilization Impact
                                     Exit   Mean Percentage                                 N
                                    E¤ect                E¤ ect

     Cohort Restriction:                                   Initially MA
     County Restriction:               All NY Full-Exit or Non-Exit Cnties (Excl Part Exit)

Distance to Hospital: Miles         -4.780***      6.323         -75.6%                  223,324
                                     (1.357)                    (21.5%)
Distance to Hospital: Time          -6.915***     17.825         -38.8%                  223,324
                                     (2.334)                    (13.1%)

             Emergency Hosp         0.036***       0.132         27.3%                  1,367,730
                                     (0.013)                     (9.8%)
       Non-Emergency Hosp             0.068        0.045        151.1%                  1,367,730
                                     (0.010)                    (22.2%)

                 Elective Hosp      0.038***       0.029        131.0%                  1,367,730
                                     (0.006)                    (20.7%)
          Non-Elective Hosp         0.067***       0.147         45.6%                  1,367,730
                                     (0.017)                    (11.6%)
                Elective Procs      0.072***       0.076         94.7%                  1,367,730
                                     (0.015)                    (19.7%)
          Non-Elective Procs          0.057        0.315         18.1%                  1,367,730
                                     (0.070)                    (22.2%)
Notes: Table presents linear regression models, where outcome variables are various measures of individual
inpatient utilization. The key variable of interest is Exit Cnty*Post-Exit, which captures the e¤ect of
involuntary switching from MA to FFS Medicare. Year, gender, age, and county …xed e¤ects are included
as part of the analysis, while standard errors are clustered at the county level. The unit of observation is
at the hospitalization level for the top panel, and at the person-year level for all the other panels. The
data spans the 1998-2003 period. The sample is restricted to those over 65, who are also actively enrolled
in Medicare. In addition, the sample is restricted to those enrolled in Medicare Advantage, as of the start
of the study period (1998). This data was constructed using discharge-level hospital data from New York
State and person-month level Medicare enrollment records from CMS; these two datasets were linked
using SSN and other …elds. For the person-year level sample, inclusion in the sample is not conditional
on utilization.




                                                    30
                             Table 5: Exit E¤ect, Based on Distance from In-Network Hospital
                          (1)         (2)           (3)            (4)           (5)         (6)                                              (7)
             VARIABLES Hosp Dist    Visits   Tot Days Stayed Tot Procs Log Tot Charges Elect. Visits                                      Emerg. Visits

     Exit Cnty*Post-Exit        -2.884***     0.129***          0.841***           0.157*            0.634***            0.040***            0.054***
                                  (.953)       (0.017)           (0.143)           (0.087)            (0.083)             (0.005)             (0.015)

                      Mean        5.059         0.189             1.459             0.409              0.999               0.030              0.143
                         N       112,154       686,981           686,981           686,981            686,981             686,981            686,981

      Sample & Controls:                                           Closest 50% from In-Network MA Hospitals

     Exit Cnty*Post-Exit        -6.101***     0.078***          0.442***            0.097            0.419***            0.036***              0.018




31
                                 (1.885)       (0.022)           (0.158)           (0.067)            (0.096)             (0.007)             (0.014)

                      Mean        7.587         0.165             1.239             0.375              0.880               0.029              0.121
                         N       111,054       680,720           680,720           680,720            680,720             680,720            680,720

      Sample & Controls:                                           Furthest 50% from In-Network MA Hospitals
     Notes: Table presents linear regression models, where outcome variables are various measures of individual inpatient utilization. The key variable of
     interest is Exit Cnty*Post-Exit, which captures the e¤ect of involuntary switching from MA to FFS Medicare. Year, gender, age, and county …xed
     e¤ects are included as part of the analysis, while standard errors are clustered at the county level. The unit of observation is at the hospitalization
     level for the distance measure, and at the person-year level for all other outcome measures. The top panel is restricted to individuals whose distance
     to the NEAREST in-network MA hospital was in the closest 50 %; note that this refers to distance, preceding the exit of MA plans. The bottom
     panel, meanwhile, is restricted to individuals in the furthest 50%. The data spans the 1998-2003 period. The sample is restricted to those over 65,
     who are also actively enrolled in Medicare. In addition, the sample is restricted to those enrolled in Medicare Advantage, as of the start of the study
     period (1998). This data was constructed using discharge-level hospital data from New York State and person-month level Medicare enrollment records
     from CMS; these two datasets were linked using SSN and other …elds. For the person-year level sample, inclusion in the sample is not conditional on
     utilization.
                              Table 6: E¤ect of Plan Exit on Quality
                                       Exit     Mean Percentage                              N
                                      E¤ect                E¤ ect

        Cohort Restriction:                                 Initially MA
        County Restriction:            All NY Full-Exit or Non-Exit Cnties (Excl Partial Exit)

  Outcome Ratings: CMS
                MI Mort                  0.158      13.804          1.1%                  166,960
                                        (0.172)                    (1.2%)
                         HF Mort       0.236***     10.433          2.3%                  168,397
                                        (0.061)                    (0.6%)
                         PN Mort         0.030      10.873          0.3%                  168,512
                                        (0.109)                    (1.0%)
                       MI Readm          0.067      19.300          0.3%                  164,155
                                        (0.093)                    (0.5%)
                       HF Readm          0.158      24.788          0.6%                  168,505
                                        (0.102)                    (0.4%)
     Process Rating: CMS
                   Overall                0.007      0.859          0.8%                  172,286
                                        (0.005)                    (0.6%)
                    Heart Attack         -0.002      0.928          -0.2%                 172,286
                                        (0.006)                    (0.6%)
                   Heart Failure          0.000      0.877          0.0%                  172,286
                                        (0.005)                    (0.6%)
                      Pneumonia        0.024***      0.752          3.2%                  172,286
                                        (0.008)                    (1.1%)
  Disch Based Measures:
          Conditional Readm 0.029***                 0.202         14.3%                  228,283
                              (0.009)                              (4.4%)
Conditional Preventable Hosp 0.019***                0.185         10.3%                 1,367,730
                              (0.006)                              (2.7%)
 Mortality Results (perc)
             New York Only     0.048                 4.084          1.2%                  235,288
                              (0.194)                              (4.8%)
                    National   0.021                 4.413          0.5%                 4,001,263
                              (0.061)                              (1.4%)
Notes: Table presents linear regression models, where outcome variables are various measures of individual
inpatient utilization. The key variable of interest is Exit Cnty*Post-Exit, which captures the e¤ect of
involuntary switching from MA to FFS Medicare. Year, gender, age, and county …xed e¤ects are included
as part of the analysis, while standard errors are clustered at the county level. The unit of observation is
at the hospitalization level for the top two panels, and at the person-year level for the bottom two panels.
The data spans the 1998-2003 period. The sample is restricted to those over 65, who are also actively
enrolled in Medicare. In addition, the sample is restricted to those enrolled in Medicare Advantage, as
of the start of the study period (1998). This data was constructed using discharge-level hospital data
from New York State and person-month level Medicare enrollment records from CMS; these two datasets
were linked using SSN and other …elds. For the person-year level sample, inclusion in the sample is not
conditional on utilization.
                                                    32
   Appendix
   In Appendix Table I, we consider the e¤ect of MA reimbursement rates on Medicare
Advantage’s penetration of the Medicare market, for the 1998-2003 time period. More
speci…cally, we investigate a possible mechanism for this e¤ect, the exit of MA plans, and
the sensitivity of exit to MA reimbursement rates.
   Reimbursement amounts to MA plans, per enrollee, are linked to administratively set MA
benchmarks, which vary based on an enrollee’s county of residence. These reimbursement
amounts are also linked to the demographic and health characteristics of each enrollee, since
county-level benchmarks are risk-adjusted (based on each enrollee’s characteristics) to arrive
at the …nal payment rate.
   Incidentally, MA county-level benchmarks are largely a function of each county’s per
capita FFS costs. Given this, it is necessary to construct an instrument for MA reimburse-
ment, which would be uncorrelated with other factors that could also be a¤ecting plan exit.
To do so, we make use of policy-driven variation in county-level MA benchmarks, resulting
from the Bene…ts Improvement and Protection Act of 2000.
   One change legislated by the act, which we make use of, is an increase in the MA bench-
mark ‡oor, from $401 to $475; benchmarks were set to the ‡oor level across counties with
per capita FFS costs under that ‡oor. We make use of an additional change from the act:
the introduction of a di¤erentiated ‡oor, which was set at $525 and which applied to ur-
ban counties only; for this purpose, counties were classi…ed as urban if they were part of
metropolitan areas with populations exceeding 250,000. Our instrument is at a county-year
level, and is de…ned as the di¤erence between the actual benchmarks and the counterfactual
benchmark that would have prevailed in the absence of these two changes; as such, the in-
strument e¤ectively corresponds to the bump in benchmarks that certain counties received,
from this legislation. Given this, the instrument is mechanically set to $0 for all years pre-
ceding 2001. It is also set to $0 for all counties for which the ‡oor was not binding at any
point, either pre or post 2001.


                                             A.1
   First, we examine the e¤ect of MA reimbursement, using this instrument, on MA enroll-
ment levels, as a fraction of all those in Medicare. The observation-level throughout these
analyses is at a county-year level. Consistent with the existing literature (Afendulis et al
2013, Cawley et al 2005, Pope et al 2006), we …nd that an additional $100, per person-
month, in MA reimbursement (or about a 20% increase, relative to average reimbursement)
is associated with a 5.1% increase in the share of nationwide Medicare recipients in MA.
This result, which is shown in Table A.1, remains unchanged when restricting to New York
State only.
   We then examine the e¤ect of MA reimbursement on rates of plan exit, based on the share
of all Medicare recipients in exiting MA plans (as of the time of plan exit). This plan exit
measure is cumulative in nature, meaning that the measure for 2003 will re‡ect the cumula-
tive number in exiting plans, from 1998 to 2003, as a fraction of 2003 Medicare enrollment
levels. Altogether, the results suggest that plan exit is highly sensitive to MA reimbursement
levels, with a $100 increase in MA reimbursement levels reducing the cumulative number in
exiting plans-as a fraction of all those in Medicare-by between 3% and 6%.
   Note that individuals in exiting MA plans will automatically drop out of MA if no other
MA plans remain in their county (we focus on such counties in our main study). However,
if other MA plans remain in their county of residence, which is often the case, some of those
in exiting plans may switch to MA plans that didn’t exit, instead of switching into FFS.
To get at the rate at which individuals in exiting MA plans switch to other MA plans, we
examine the relationship between the fraction of Medicare recipients in exiting plans, and
MA penetration for a given county-year. Our estimates, which are presented in Table A.2,
suggest that about half of those in exiting MA plans switch to other MA plans, while the
other half drops out of MA entirely and goes into FFS.




                                             A.2
                          Table A.1: E¤ect of MA Reimbursement on MA Enrollment and Plan Exit
                                                               (1)             (2)
                                                           Nationwide   New York Only                                                 Mean
                                                                                          National                                      New York
      Coe¢ cient on MA Benchmark Rate ($100/month):
                                   Share of Medicare in MA   .051***        .054**          0.155                                           0.172
                                                             (0.006)        (0.022)        (0.152)                                         (0.103)
                     Share of Medicare in Exiting MA Plans  -.064***         -0.032         0.058                                           0.043
                                                             (0.014)        (0.030)        (0.088)                                         (0.069)
      Notes: Table presents linear regression models, where outcome variables correspond to the share of Medicare in MA, and the share of Medicare in
      exiting MA plans. The exit measure is a cumulative one, meaning that it represents the sum of enrollment in all exiting plans from 1998 through
      the year of observation, as a fraction of Medicare enrollment. The independent variable of interest, for which coe¢ cient estimates are displayed, is
      an instrumented MA Reimbursement Rate (for plans), in hundreds of dollars per enrollee-month. County and year …xed e¤ects are included, while
      standard errors are clustered at the county level. The unit of observation is at the county-year level. The data spans the 1998-2003 period, and is
      taken from publicly available CMS data.




A.3
          Table A.2: E¤ect of MA Plan Exit on MA Enrollment
                                        MA Enrollment Levels
                                          As Percent of Medicare

 Exiting Plans (Cumulative)                   -0.382***           -0.629***
As Share of Overall Medicare                   (0.008)             (0.037)

                      Set of Cnties           National     NY State
                                                     County, Year
                                              County Medicare Population

                                 Mean           0.191               0.164
                                               (0.139)             (0.069)

                                   N            5,478                255
                                 R-Sq           0.960               0.927
Notes: Table presents linear regression models, where outcome variables correspond
to the share of Medicare in MA. The key independent variable correspond to the share
of Medicare in exiting MA plans; the exit measure is a cumulative one, meaning that
it represents the sum of enrollment in all exiting plans from 1998 through the year
of observation, as a fraction of Medicare enrollment. County and year …xed e¤ects
are included, while standard errors are clustered at the county level. The unit of
observation is at the county-year level. The data spans the 1998-2003 period, and is
taken from publicly available CMS data.




                                        A.4
Data Appendix:
Inpatient Panel Data Construction:

   Much of this study relies on an individual-year level panel that tracks inpatient hospital uti-

lization, for private as well as FFS Medicare recipients.

   This individual-level panel is constructed through the linking of two distinct datasets: individual-

year level Medicare denominator data (obtained from CMS) and discharge-level hospital data (ob-

tained from New York State’s Department of Health). This linking is conducted using several

identifying …elds that are found in both data: the last four digits of SSN, full birth dates, gender,

and county of residence. The combination of these …elds uniquely identi…es Medicare recipients

over 99.9% of the time. Those Medicare recipients that are not uniquely identi…ed are dropped

from the sample.

   Subsequently, these data are aggregated to a person-year level; given the nature of this data,

sample inclusion is not conditional on utilization. To this end, we retain person-year level obser-

vations even in the absence of inpatient utilization; for person-year combos for which a Medicare

enrollment record exists, but an inpatient utilization record does not, we mechanically set inpatient

utilization to zero.



Sample Restrictions; Treatment and Control Group Construction:

   The sample is restricted to New York State; it is further restricted to those qualifying for

Medicare on the basis of age, and excludes those qualifying by virtue of disability. For most of

our analyses (and in the construction of treatment/control groups), we focus on those enrolled in

Medicare, as of January 1998. As such, those who aged into Medicare at a later point in our study

period would not be included as part of our study sample. In addition, for each Medicare recipient,

the sample is restricted to those years during which they were in Medicare in NY State for at least

one month; hence, some individuals may drop out of the sample as a result of death or change of

residence.

   Our primary treatment and control groups are further restricted to those in PRIVATE Medicare



                                                A.5
as of January 1998; for these purposes, we de…ne private Medicare enrollment status based on

information in the CMS Medicare denominator data; this allows our analyses to be robust to

possible miscoding of private Medicare status in the discharge …les (such miscoding appears to be

common).

   We de…ne county of residence (and by implication, whether an individual is in an ‘exit county’

and is assigned to the treatment or control group) based on their original county of residence as of

January 1998. We exclude partial-exit counties from all of our results, which we de…ne as counties

that by 2003 lost between 25 and 90% of their original 1998 MA enrollment. In New York State,

there are two such counties altogether (Nassau and Su¤olk), whereas nationwide there are 430 such

counties (out of over 3,000 in total).



Outcome Measures, From Individual Inpatient Panel:

Total Procs: This measure re‡ects the number of procedures performed across all inpatient visits

for a given person, over the course of a year; given that New York’s discharge data can only track

up to 15 procedures associated with a given inpatient visit, this measure should be considered a

‡oor (although only a tiny fraction of all inpatient hospitalizations involve 15+ procedures).

Total Charges: De…ned as raw inpatient charges; note that this does not re‡ect the amount

actually paid to hospitals (or the negotiated rate), but is instead an accounting based measure

that is uniform across payers. Note that when looking at the non-logged form of this measure, we

winsorize the data at the 98th percentile, meaning that all person-year charge amounts in excess

of that percentile would get set to the 98th percentile.

Log Total Charges: De…ned as the log of (charges+1); as such, even observations with zero raw

charges will still get included as part of the analysis.

Distance to Hospital, Miles/Minutes: This is calculated as the driving distance between the

center of a patient’s zip code of residence, and the center of the zip code in which a given hospital

is located. These driving distances, in terms of minutes as well as miles, are calculated using Mi-

crosoft’s MapPoint program; they re‡ect driving, rather than crow ‡ies distances.



                                                  A.6
Elective: Hospital visits that are de…ned in the type of admission …eld in New York State’s data

as follows: ‘The patient’s condition permits adequate time to schedule the admission based on the

availability of a suitable accommodation.’

Emergency: Hospital visits that are de…ned in the type of admission …eld in New York State’s

data as follows: ‘The patient requires immediate medical intervention as a result of severe, life

threatening, or potentially disabling conditions.’



Outcome Measures, From CMS Compare Data:

CMS Outcome Ratings: Outcome measures are at a hospital-level and are taken from CMS’s

2014 Hospital Compare Data. They focus on visits involving heart attacks (MI), heart failure

(HF), and pneumonia (PN). The rates shown re‡ect odds of death or readmission within 30-days,

in percentage terms; these rates are conditional on initial hospitalization for the listed condition.

For example, a heart attack mortality rate of 15% implies that if an individual is hospitalized for

a heart attack, they have a 15% likelihood of death within 30 days of that hospitalization (at that

particular hospital). In addition, these rates are risk-adjusted for hospital case-mix. Altogether,

these rates are inversely related to quality, as higher rates correspond to greater numbers of mor-

tality and readmissions.

CMS Process Ratings: Process measures are at a hospital-level and are taken from CMS’s

2014 Hospital Compare Data. They gauge the degree of adherence to medical guidelines for treat-

ment of heart attacks, heart failure, and pneumonia. Among the subset of hospitalizations for

which each process is applicable (i.e.-heart attacks), these rates re‡ect the share of hospitalizations

among which process was followed. For example, a rate of .85 for heart attacks implies that for

a particular hospital, process was adhered to 85% of the time. Such medical guidelines include,

for example, the timely and appropriate administering of Aspirin, antibiotics, beta-blockers, and

vaccines. Altogether, these rates are directly proportional to quality, as higher rates correspond to

greater process adherence.




                                                 A.7
Outcome Measures, From CMS Denominator Data

Mortality: These measures are at an individual-year level, and are taken from CMS’s Medicare

Denominator data. They indicate whether a Medicare recipient died over the course of a given year.



Outcome Measures, from CMS Public Use Data

MA Enrollment Levels: These measures are at a county-year level, are national in scope, and

are taken from CMS Public Use Files. They denote the number enrolled in Medicare Advantage

for that county and year, as a fraction of all those in Medicare.




                                                A.8
