                                NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                        STREAMING REACHES FLOOD STAGE:
                 DOES SPOTIFY STIMULATE OR DEPRESS MUSIC SALES?

                                            Luis Aguiar
                                           Joel Waldfogel

                                        Working Paper 21653
                                http://www.nber.org/papers/w21653


                      NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                               1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                 Cambridge, MA 02138
                                     October 2015




Thanks to seminar participants at IPTS, the SEEK Digital Economy Workshop at the Collegio Carlo
Alberto in Turin, and Zurich/ETH. Joel Waldfogel has served as a consultant to Pandora. The views
expressed in the paper are those of the authors' and should not in any circumstances be regarded as
stating an official position of the European Commission, the EC Joint Research Center, the IPTS, or
the National Bureau of Economic Research.

At least one co-author has disclosed a financial relationship of potential relevance for this research.
Further information is available online at http://www.nber.org/papers/w21653.ack

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.

© 2015 by Luis Aguiar and Joel Waldfogel. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed
two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice,
is given to the source.
Streaming Reaches Flood Stage: Does Spotify Stimulate or Depress Music Sales?
Luis Aguiar and Joel Waldfogel
NBER Working Paper No. 21653
October 2015
JEL No. L11,L82

                                             ABSTRACT

Streaming music services have exploded in popularity in the past few years, variously raising optimism
and concern about their impacts on recorded music revenue. On the one hand, streaming services allow
sellers to engage in bundling with the promise of increasing revenues, profits, and consumer surplus.
Successful bundling would indeed translate some of the interest in music not generating revenue through
individual track sales - unpaid consumption and deadweight loss - into willingness to pay for the bundled
offering. On the other hand, streaming may displace traditional individual track sales. Even if they
displace sales, streams may however still raise overall revenue if the streaming payment is large enough
in relation to the extent of sales displacement. We make use of the growth in Spotify use during the
years 2013-2015 to measure its impact on unpaid consumption and on the sales of recorded music.
We find that Spotify use displaces permanent downloads. In particular, 137 Spotify streams appear
to reduce track sales by 1 unit. Consistent with the existing literature, our analysis also shows that
Spotify displaces music piracy. Given the current industry’s revenue from track sales ($0.82 per sale)
and the average payment received per stream ($0.007 per stream), our sales displacement estimates
show that the losses from displaced sales are roughly outweighed by the gains in streaming revenue.
In other words, our analysis shows that interactive streaming appears to be revenue-neutral for the
recorded music industry.


Luis Aguiar
IPTS - Edificio Expo
calle Inca Garcilaso 3
41092 Sevilla (Spain)
luis.aguiar@ec.europa.eu

Joel Waldfogel
Frederick R. Kappel Chair in Applied Economics
3-177 Carlson School of Management
University of Minnesota
321 19th Avenue South
Minneapolis, MN 55455
and NBER
jwaldfog@umn.edu
1       Introduction

Interactive streaming music distribution is growing rapidly around the world, raising questions
about its impact on the revenue to rights holders generated by recorded music. Since 2010, the
number of active Spotify users has grown from 15 to 60 million worldwide. While some observers
hail streaming as the salvation of a recorded music industry dogged by piracy, others raise
alarm about low payments from streaming services and displacement of permanent downloads.
Musician disclosures of royalty statements from streaming services led the New York Times to
question “whether these micropayments can add up to anything substantial.”1

Anecdotes aside, economics offers two broad ways to think about streaming. First, streaming
offerings are bundles of zero-marginal cost products. Given that different consumers’ valuations
of songs are not perfectly positively correlated, streaming bundles hold the possibility of raising
revenue, consumer surplus, or possibly both, depending on how they are priced.2 Successful
bundling would translate some of the interest in music not generating a la carte sales - unpaid
consumption and deadweight loss - into willingness to pay for the bundled offering.3

Understanding whether streaming stimulates or displaces the sales of recorded music is vital to
our understanding of its impact on the fortunes of the recorded music industry. Some argue that
streaming functions as music promotion, much like traditional terrestrial radio. If this is true,
then this demand stimulation - combined with greater appropriability made possible by bundling
- would give streaming an unambiguously positive impact on recorded music revenue. Others
believe that streaming functions as a substitute for the permanent downloads of digital music,
muting the benefits. But even if streaming displaces sales, it does not necessarily depress music
revenue; that depends on whether the streaming payment is high enough to offset and potentially
overcome the reduction in revenue from forgone permanent downloads. Digital revenue is the
sum of revenue from permanent downloads and streams. That is, rev = pd qd + ps S, where qd is
the number of paid digital downloads, S is the number of streams, and pd and ps are the revenues
    1
      Sisario, Ben. “As Music Streaming Grows, Royalties Slow to a Trickle.” New York Times, Jan. 28,
2013. http://www.nytimes.com/2013/01/29/business/media/streaming-shakes-up-music-industrys-model
-for-royalties.html. The article describes the payments to cellist Zoe Keating. Musician David Lowery
complained that Pandora paid him $16.89 for playing his famous song “Low” a million times, “less than what
[he] make[s] from a single t-shirt sale!” See Hogan (2013) (http://www.spin.com/articles/pandora-david-
lowery-cracker-low-royalties-debate-streaming/?fullsite=true). Finally, Radiohead’s Thom Yorke has
colorfully called Spotify “the last desperate fart of a dying corpse.” (http://www.theguardian.com/technolog
y/2013/oct/07/spotify-thom-yorke-dying-corpse).
    2
      See the literature on bundling in general (Stigler, 2007; Adams and Yellen, 1976; Schmalensee, 1984) and
music bundling in particular (Shiller and Waldfogel, 2011).
    3
      Streaming also represents a business strategy of renting, as opposed to selling, access to recorded music,
which can be advantageous for producers by eliminating resale, among other mechanisms (Varian, 2000).



                                                       2
generated per digital download and stream, respectively. If downloads depend on streams, then
qd = qd (S), and the change in revenue with an additional stream is       ∂rev
                                                                           ∂S    = pd ∂q
                                                                                      ∂S + ps . An
                                                                                         d


increase in streaming therefore raises revenue if a negative impact of streaming on sales is
                               ∂qd
sufficiently small, i.e. if    ∂S    > − ppds .

Hence, it is of substantial interest to know not only whether streaming displaces sales but, if so,
at what rate. In addition, we need to compare the rate of sales displacement with the relative
payments to rights holders for streaming and a la carte permanent sales in order to determine
whether streaming raises or reduces recorded music industry revenue.

The goal of this paper is to analyze data on streaming, sales, and unpaid consumption to
determine how streaming is affecting revenue to the recorded music industry. The first - and
main - empirical task is to measure the impact of streaming on sales, as well as the impact of
streaming on piracy. To measure the impact of these services on these consumption outcomes,
we might ideally launch services in some countries and not others, then monitor what happens
to sales and unpaid downloads. Recent experience bears some resemblance to this experimental
ideal. Spotify, founded in 2006, has grown at different rates in different countries and has grown
very quickly since 2011. While its entry and growth is not literally an experiment, the growth
is sufficiently abrupt that examining the co-movement of streaming and recorded music sales
holds the promise of revealing the potential impact of streaming on sales.

Beyond the obvious challenges of finding exogenous variation in the volume of streaming, there
is the more mundane challenge of simply obtaining data on the volumes of music sales, stream-
ing, and piracy. Data on the volume of streams has until recently been entirely unavailable.
Beginning in April 2013, however, Spotify began releasing the number of weekly streams for the
top 50 songs, by country.4 Thus, by aggregating the streams of the top 50 songs by country and
week, we have a country-specific index of Spotify use for roughly two years (April 2013-March
2015). Data on the volumes of sales and piracy are also hard to find, but we have obtained
weekly data on song-level digital sales in each of 21 countries, 2012-2013, along with the weekly
levels of piracy via torrents for 8,000 artists over the same period. Hence, we can ask how music
sales and piracy evolve with the growth of Spotify during a period of fairly substantial growth
in this interactive streaming channel. Because we have song-level sales data and artist-level
piracy data, we can merge these with our Spotify streaming dataset. We can therefore attempt
to measure sales and piracy displacement at the micro and aggregate levels for a particular
subset of songs and artists. Finally, for one of the countries - the US - we have music sales data
   4
       In October, 2014 they extended this list to the top 200 songs.



                                                         3
for 2012-early 2015, covering a period of more substantial growth in Spotify use.

This paper proceeds in five sections after the introduction. Section 2 provides background on
two issues related to streaming, sales displacement and bundling, as well as evidence on the
recent growth in interactive streaming that we can use to document its impact. Section 3 turns
to our data sources. Section 4 describes our various identification strategies for measuring the
effects of streaming on sales and unpaid consumption, given the data at hand. Section 5 presents
our results. Song-level regressions of sales on streaming yield consistently positive coefficients,
consistent with either song-level sales stimulation or unobserved heterogeneity. Artist-level re-
gressions of unpaid consumption on streaming also yield positive coefficients, again consistent
with either artist-level piracy stimulation or unobserved heterogeneity. Aggregate-level regres-
sions, which treat the growth in Spotify as exogenous to the demand for music, yield consistently
negative coefficients, for both the impacts of streaming on sales and piracy. Our preferred esti-
mate indicates that an additional 137 streams displaces one track sale, while an additional 47
streams displaces one unpaid download. Section 6 uses our estimates of the revenue associated
with track sales and streams to calculate that the recent growth in streaming appears roughly
revenue-neutral for the recorded music industry. Section 7 concludes.



2       Background


2.1       Streaming, Airplay, and Effects on Sales


There are two distinct types of streaming music services, interactive and non-interactive. The
interactive services, such as Spotify, YouTube, and Deezer, allow users to choose which song
they will hear. Of Spotify’s 60 million users, one quarter pay $10 per month for the service.
The others pay nothing but generate “pay” indirectly through their exposure to advertising.
Non-interactive services such as Pandora do not allow users to choose the particular songs they
hear, but Pandora does allow users to create narrowly tailored stations (consisting of songs
similar to a seed song or artist).

Streaming services tend to describe themselves as tools for musical discovery. For example,
Pandora has a “mission to reward the musically curious among us with a never-ending experience
of music discovery.”5 Similarly, “Spotify makes it easier than ever to discover, manage and share
    5
        https://www.pandora.com/about.




                                                4
music with your friends, while making sure that artists get a fair deal.”6 Under this conception
of streaming services, they resemble terrestrial radio stations, which are widely believed to
stimulate sales of recorded music. The basis for this belief is the observation that the particular
songs on the radio tend to sell more when they are being aired. Moreover, and related, songs
on the radio tend to sell better than those not receiving airplay.7

If streaming resembles traditional radio airplay and stimulates demand for recorded music, for
example through permanent digital downloads, then the recent growth in streaming should raise
revenue, all else constant. Even if the analogy to traditional radio is accurate, it is important
to note that understanding the impact of airplay on sales is challenging, for both empirical and
theoretical reasons. First, documenting the impact is empirically challenging: radio airplay of
a song is endogenous, and songs are aired on radio mostly upon release, when consumers are
interested in purchasing the recently-released titles for other reasons.

Liebowitz (2004) articulates a second important challenge, a possible “fallacy of compostition.”
Even if the radio airplay of particular songs stimulates their sales, the airplay of songs generally
need not stimulate overall sales of recorded music. The relevant experiment for measuring the
overall impact is growth in the use of the medium, not change in the airplay of particular songs.
Liebowitz (2004) studies the period surrounding the diffusion of radio broadcasting and its effect
on the already-established recorded music industry in the US during the 1920s. He documents
that the diffusion of radio was accompanied by a collapse of the recorded music industry, which
he interprets as displacement of recorded music sales by radio.

This interpretation of the experience of the 1920s is intriguing, but it is also true that the
experience of the US radio and recorded music industries over the subsequent 50 years suggests
a rather different relationship between radio broadcasting and recorded music sales. As Figure
1 shows, while per capita record sales decreased with radio diffusion during the 1920s, both
grew between 1930 and 1980, raising questions about whether radio airplay displaces sales.

The impact of airplay on recorded music sales has acquired new importance with the recent
growth in Internet radio, or streaming. Unlike traditional radio, which exposes people to a
broad selection of generally unfamiliar music, streaming services tend to provide very narrow
selections of music. The largest non-interactive service, Pandora, allows consumers to seed their
own stations with a song or an artist they like. The station then plays songs and artists similar
   6
     https://press.spotify.com/us/2013/05/29/hello-music-discovery-spotify-here/.
   7
     See Dertouzos (2004), a study undertaken for the National Association of Broadcasters, which found a
positive effect of radio airplay on overall music sales.




                                                   5
to the seed, according to various criteria, including musicological similarity and evidence about
which music is liked in common among consumers. To the extent that Internet radio serves
consumers what they want to hear, it may obviate additional purchases (beyond the possible
purchase of access to Internet radio). In that case, streaming would serve as a substitute rather
than a complement for recorded music purchases.

Spotify takes selection a step further than Pandora. Users choose exactly which songs they
will hear. Premium (paid) users can entirely control what they hear on both fixed and mobile
devices. Free users also have full control over what they want to listen to on their fixed devices,
but they have less control on their mobile devices, where they can only shuffle among and/or
within playlists. Whether Internet radio stimulates or depresses recorded music sales is an open
question. The control that users have over what they hear at least raises the possibility that
Internet radio would exert a less stimulating impact on sales than terrestrial radio.

Some recent research examines the impact of streaming on recorded music sales. First, Hiller and Kim
(2014) study the impact of video availability on YouTube on sales of corresponding albums.
Music released by Warner was unavailable on YouTube during a contract dispute. During
this period, the excluded music experienced better (higher sales) ranks on the Billboard 200
weekly album ranking, relative to albums from other labels. This evidence indicates that the
streaming available at YouTube cannibalizes sales of albums. Second, Kretschmer and Peukert
(2014) undertake a similar exercise, studying the impact of videos excluded from YouTube in
Germany. They find that availability of an artist’s video on YouTube stimulates sales of the
artist’s albums but not the individual song. Third, data scientists at Pandora have undertaken
A/B experiments, turning off songs in random geographic areas, then asking whether sales of
those songs are higher or lower in places where the songs continue to play. McBride (2014)
finds that song sales are 2 percent lower in DMAs where the songs are not played. It is worth
noting, however, that these are all song-level studies, which are therefore potentially vulnerable
to Leibowitz’s concern about a fallacy of composition that a relationship holding for individual
works may not hold for music as a whole.

Finally, while there is no corresponding study of Spotify, founder Daniel Ek has publicly argued
that it is a “myth” that “Spotify hurts sales, both download and physical. This is classic
correlation without causation.”8 Spotify chief economist Will Page presents evidence from case
studies that artists who withhold their music from Spotify do not sell more copies. This suggests
   8
       https://news.spotify.com/us/2014/11/11/2-billion-and-counting/.




                                                  6
that Spotify does not cannibalize sales at the artist level.9



2.2    Streaming as Bundled Selling


While sales stimulation is sufficient to demonstrate a positive impact of streaming on revenue,
a negative impact of streaming on permanent sales - sales displacement - is not sufficient to
demonstrate that streaming reduces revenue. Because Internet radio services pay rights holders
for streams, the effect of streaming on revenue depends on the rate of sales displacement.

To say this another way, streaming services present bundled offerings that allow the seller to
collect revenue in circumstances that generated no revenue under a la carte selling. It is well
known that bundling creates opportunities to raise revenue, particularly when the products have
zero marginal costs.10 Consumers’ decisions to purchase a bundle depend on the sum of their
valuations across songs. Hence the valuation coming from songs that a consumer values too
little to purchase a la carte will not raise revenue under a la carte selling, while it can contribute
to revenue under bundling.

The most salient example of this kind of revenue reclamation arises from streaming as an
alternative to piracy. Spotify’s Daniel Ek argues that while “piracy doesn’t pay artists a penny,”
“Spotify has paid more than two billion dollars. . . . . . that’s two billion dollars’ worth of listening
that would have happened with zero or little compensation to artists. . . . . . if there was no
Spotify.”11 Academic studies have also documented that appealing licensed alternatives can
depress piracy (Danaher et al., 2010, 2013). Ek’s point that bundled sales through Spotify can
harvest as revenue interest in music that would otherwise have animated piracy is correct, but
that possibility alone does not imply that revenue to recorded music would.



2.3    A Simple Model of a la Carte and Bundle Music Purchase


It is helpful to articulate a simple model of music purchase under a la carte and bundled options
to characterize the possible impacts of streaming on sales. In the absence of a streaming bundled
offering, consumers have three choices with each song. They can purchase it at its a la carte
price, they can obtain an unauthorized copy without payment (piracy), or they can forgo its
   9
       See Page (2013) (https://press.spotify.com/us/2013/07/17/adventures-in-netherlands/). But David
Lowery is characteristically blunt about the opposite conclusion, arguing that “Spotify doesn’t kill music sales
like smoking doesn’t cause cancer. . . ”
    10
       See Bakos and Brynjolfsson (1999).
    11
       https://news.spotify.com/us/2014/11/11/2-billion-and-counting/.



                                                       7
consumption (“suffering in silence”). For concreteness, suppose that each consumer i has a
valuation of the song vis , along with a non-monetary cost of piracy that is specific to the person
and song, gis . The song has an a la carte price p.

The consumer purchases the song if his valuation of the song exceeds the price and the price is
lower than the non-monetary cost he would experience from obtaining the song, i.e. if vis > p
and p < gis . The consumer pirates the song if his non-monetary cost is lower than the price and
his valuation exceeds the non-monetary cost, i.e. if vis > gis and p > gis .

There are two ways for a consumer to fail to consume a song he values positively under a la carte.
First, if the price is below the individual’s non-monetary cost of obtaining the song (p < gis ), so
that purchase would be the preferred mode for obtaining this song, then the individual forgoes
consumption if the value falls short of the price. Second, if unpaid consumption would be the
individual’s preferred mode of acquisition for this song, then the non-monetary cost falls short
of the price (gis < p), and the individual forgoes consumption if the value falls short of the
non-monetary cost of obtaining the song.

With this setup the consumer surplus that individual i experiences from songs s = 1, . . . , N
is vis − p for each of the songs he buys and vis − gis for each of the songs he obtains without
payment. Formally:


                      X
              CSi =       [(vis − p)1{ vis ≥ p; p < gis }+(vis − gis )1{ vis ≥ gis ; p > gis }] .   (1)
                      s


The revenue that the sellers derive from the consumer is the number of instances in which he
purchases, times the price:


                                                X
                                    Revi = p         1{vis ≥ p; p < gis }.                          (2)
                                                 s


The deadweight loss associated with the consumer arises from the instances in which the valu-
ations exceed the (zero) marginal cost but no consumption occurs:


                             X
                    dwli =        [vis 1{ vis < p; p < gis }+vis 1{ vis < gis ; p > gis }] .        (3)
                              s


The advent of streaming allows different consumption possibilities and, importantly, different



                                                       8
revenue opportunities. In particular, streaming allows the possibility of revenue generation from
circumstances generating no revenue under a la carte sales. When streaming replaces piracy,
this revenue is new; and when streamed consumption replaces situations in which non-pirates
would have forgone consumption, the revenue is new. However, when streaming replaces a
la carte purchase, the streaming revenue comes at the expense of a previous revenue stream.
Hence, generating revenue from instances which formerly did not generate revenue - such as
piracy - is not sufficient for streaming to raise revenue.

To see how streaming might affect revenue, it is useful to articulate a model of the decision to
purchase the streaming service. Define pB as the price of the bundle. Consumer i purchases the
bundle if the surplus he obtains from the bundle is positive and exceeds the surplus he obtains
from his chosen combination of purchase and stealing. CS under streaming is


                                                           X
                                       CSiStreaming =          vis − pB .                                  (4)
                                                           s


Hence, consumer i purchases the bundle if his surplus under streaming exceeds his surplus under
a la carte purchase, or if:


        X                 X
             vis − pB >       [(vis − p)1{ vis ≥ p; p < gis }+(vis − gis )1{ vis ≥ gis ; p > gis }] > 0.   (5)
         s                s


A figure helps to explain this. Figure 2a shows a consumer’s valuation of all songs he values
positively. We can represent these valuations as a demand curve, where we order the songs from
most highly valued to least. The gray area under this demand curve is the consumer surplus
he would experience if all songs were free. This area less the bundle price pB is the surplus
experienced under bundling if he chooses the bundled option.

Songs can be divided for this individual into those he would be willing to steal (with gis < p)
and those he would not steal (p < gis ). His valuation distributions are represented under the
second (Figure 2b) and third (Figure 2c) demand curves (note that the area under the second
and third demand curves sums to the area under the first). Revenue under the a la carte regime
is the dark gray rectangle under the buy (p < gis ) curve, while consumer surplus under a la
carte is the sum of CS1 for songs with gis < p and the CS2 for songs with gis > p.

Suppose that the streaming option were available at a price pB equal to the amount that the
individual formerly spent on a la carte music (the revenue under the “buy” demand curve).


                                                       9
Then he would clearly prefer the bundled option because the bundled option would deliver
more CS than a la carte (the bundled CS would equal to the full area under the demand curve
less the a la carte revenue). Hence, all of the other regions under both demand curves would
become consumer surplus.

While the consumer described above - and illustrated in Figure 2 - would prefer the bundle if
priced appropriately, not all consumers would prefer the bundle. For example a consumer for
whom gis = 0 for all songs would obtain the full area under the demand curve in Figure 2a
as CS by stealing everything a la carte. This would exceed his surplus from purchasing the
bundle.

In our model, if pB is equal to a la carte revenue, then the consumer chooses the bundle. It’s
worth noting that revenue from streaming is not literally pB . Instead, rights holders are paid a
per-stream rate times the number of times their songs stream. We are implicitly assuming that
ps S is related to pB , for example that the streaming payments equal the subscriber revenue
less administrative fees. How bundle revenues are shared among rights holders is the topic of a
small economic literature. See Ginsburgh and Zang (2003) and Shiller and Waldfogel (2013).

Assuming that individuals not adopting streaming do not steal different amounts when the
bundled option becomes available, whether streaming raises revenue depends entirely on the
revenue gains and losses from those adopting streaming. All of the revenue from consumers
who formerly specialized in piracy is gain. Similarly, the revenue from the units that paying
consumers failed to consume (because vis < p) is a gain. But the revenue from units formerly
purchased at p per unit by a la carte buyers is now gone, replaced by the revenue from the
streaming subscription fee.

It is clear from this simple model that the change in revenue under bundled sales comes from
four conceptually distinct sources. The first three are gains under streaming, while the fourth is
a loss. The first source of revenue is the units that were formerly consumed without payment.
The second source consists of units that were formerly not consumed, despite that fact that
the non-monetary cost is below the price (gis < p), because the valuation falls short of even
the non-monetary cost of acquisition (vis < gis ). A third source of revenue is units that were
formerly not purchased, despite the fact that the price falls short of the non-monetary cost
(p < gis ), because the value falls short of the price (vis < p). The final source of changed revenue
is the reduction in a la carte revenue for units which were formerly purchased at p (where vis > p
and p < gis ), but now generate revenue only as part of the payment for streaming. For revenue



                                                 10
to rise, it is necessary that the additional revenue collected for units not formerly generating
revenue offset any reduction in revenue from the songs formerly purchased a la carte.

This setup points to various possible impacts of bundled sales through streaming. First, it is
possible that streaming would reduce unpaid consumption. Second, it is possible that streaming
would reduce the instances of failure to consume songs whose value exceeds zero to their potential
users. Finally, it is also possible that streaming would displace paid a la carte sales. Of these
three, two are observable to us, the volume of unpaid consumption and the volume of paid a la
carte permanent downloads.



2.4    Recent Growth of Internet Radio as an “Experiment”


Pandora was founded in 2000.12 As the top-right panel in Figure 3 shows, Pandora grew quickly
from 2008 to 2012: annual listening hours rose from 0.9 billion on 2008 to 14 in 2012, roughly
doubling each year. In 2014, annual listening hours stood at 20 billion. Growth in Pandora’s
use continues, but it is steady. YouTube has been a significant provider of music streams since
2009. Its worldwide growth during 2013 is steady, as the bottom-right panel of Figure 3 shows.13

Spotify was founded in 2006. It too has grown quickly, particularly since 2013. Between January
2012 and January 2015, total global users quadrupled; paid users rose by a factor of five over
that period. As of late 2014 Spotify had 15 million paid users. See top-left panel in Figure 3.
By early 2015 Spotify had 60 million users overall. See bottom-left panel in Figure 3.

The growth of streaming is also visible in the US recorded music industry’s revenue data. The
Recording Industry Association of America (RIAA) reports data on revenue from the sales of
recorded music as well as streaming.14 In 2010 US streaming revenue stood at $0.5 billion.
By 2012 streaming revenue reached $1.0 billion, and by 2013, streaming revenue rose to $1.4
billion. US streaming revenue reached $1.9 billion in 2014. Streaming revenue is broken into
three components, SoundExchange distributions (which are largely payments from Pandora),
revenue from subscription services (which is largely Spotify), and payments from “on-demand
ad supported” streaming services such as YouTube. In 2014, SoundExchange revenue made up
41 percent of total streaming revenue, subscription revenue made up 42 percent, and on-demand
ad supported revenue made up the remaining 17 percent.
  12
     http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Pandora_Radio.
  13
     We obtained weekly aggregate video views on YouTube for 2012-2013 from Musicmetric.
  14
     See Joshua P. Friedlander, News and Notes on 2014 RIAA Music Industry Shipment and Revenue Statistics,
RIAA http://riaa.com/media/D1F4E3E8-D3E0-FCEE-BB55-FD8B35BC8785.pdf.




                                                    11
It seems clear that the music industry is living through a large-scale “experiment” as Spo-
tify’s streaming service diffuses rapidly, particularly during 2014. This raises the possibility of
studying the impact of this diffusion on the sales of recorded music. Given that our sales data
cover 2012-2013 (and through early 2015 for the US), Spotify growth is the streaming growth
“experiment” that we can study.



3         Data

Historical circumstances dictate the data that would be most suitable for documenting the
impact of streaming on sales. We have seen rapid growth of streaming at Spotify in 2013 and
especially during 2014. Ideally, then, we would observe volumes of Spotify streams over time
for separate groups of consumers differing in their timing or extents of Spotify adoption. We
would also observe their volumes of recorded music purchase as well as their volume of piracy
consumption. Importantly, we would need to observe all of these factors for the period of the
“experiment,” the rapid Spotify adoption period of 2012-2014.

The actual data available to us fall short of the ideal but nevertheless offer some promise of
identification of the effect of interest. Rather than total Spotify streams, we observe the volume
of streams for each of the top 50 songs by week and by country during the period covering April
2013 - March 2015 (top 200 beginning in October 2014).15 If the volume of streams at the
top of the distribution mirrors that of the whole distribution, then we have a reasonable index
of total streaming. We are not able to check the correlation of the top 50 streams with total
streams, but we can compare it to the top 200 (for the period October 26, 2014-March 8, 2015).
If we aggregate weekly top 50 and top 200 streams across sample countries, the correlations for
the 21-week overlap period is 0.99, suggesting that the top-50 index is a valid measure of total
Spotify use.

To see how the top 50 relates to the unobserved total number of streams we need a quick
forensic detour into Spotify’s publicly announced payouts and payout rates per stream. See
Table 1. According to Spotify, their per-stream payout to rights holders is “between $0.006 and
$0.0084.”16 Given that Spotify paid out $1 billion to rights holders in 2014, one can calculate
that they delivered between 119 and 167 billion streams worldwide in 2014, where a stream is
a performance of a song for an individual listener). Dividing by 52, this translates to between
    15
         As of March 8, 2015 Spotify has discontinued the release of these data.
    16
         See “Spotify explained,” at http://www.spotifyartists.com/spotify-explained/.




                                                      12
2.3 and 3.2 billion streams per week. Spotify reported weekly top 50 worldwide streams of
247 million in November 2014.17 The top 200 worldwide streams totaled 469 million in the
same week. Hence, the top 50 worldwide streams account for between 7.7 and 10.8 percent of
total streams, and we can roughly translate the top-50 streaming index into total streams by
multiplying it by 11.2 (the midpoint between 1/.077 and 1/.108). Figure 4 shows our Spotify
top 50 streaming index by country, normalized to show growth. The graphs also include a
vertical line at the start of 2014. It is clear that much of the growth occurs after 2013.

We have weekly data on digital recorded music sales for 21 countries for 2012-2013 from Nielsen.
This is useful in that it allows us to compare Spotify use and recorded music sales in places
with different Spotify use growth patterns. Unfortunately, the overlap period is only about 8
months. Moreover, it predates the period of most rapid growth in Spotify use during 2014.
The digital music sales data however include both song-level and aggregate information for the
years 2012-2013. We can therefore merge these data, by country and week, with song-level
Spotify streams of popular songs appearing on the top 50 or top 200 lists to attempt measure
sales displacement at the song level. We also have access to data on weekly aggregate sales of
recorded music from the US from Billboard Magazine, in its weekly charts section. Fortunately,
this data extends beyond the end of 2013 through the end of the Spotify coverage in March
2015. Reported measures include digital track sales, digital album sales, and physical album
sales. Separate data on digital tracks vs digital or physical albums may be useful for identifying
impacts of streaming on sales. It is plausible to think that users of streaming would otherwise
be purchasers of digital music, particularly singles. If so, then streaming would be a better
substitute for digital single sales than, say, the sales of physical albums.

Finally, we have data on music piracy from Musicmetric. These data cover the weekly volumes
of piracy via torrents for 8,000 top artists in all of our sample countries, 2012-2013. Hence, as
with the music sales data, we have overlap with Spotify for the period April-December 2013.
We can match these data with artist-level Spotify streams, by country and week, and attempt
to estimate piracy displacement at the artist level for the most popular artists.

Summarizing, we have drawn data for this study from four sources. First, we have two sources
of data on music sales. We have Nielsen weekly digital sales data for 21 counties for the period
2012-13. These countries include the US, Canada, and 19 European countries. Second, we
have aggregate US weekly physical and digital sales data for 2013 through March, 2015. Third,
   17
      See http://charts.spotify.com/?object=tracks&rank=most_streamed&country=global&windowtype=we
ekly&date=latest.




                                                13
we have weekly streaming data for the top 50 songs at Spotify, by country and week, for the
matched set of countries, for the weeks April 28, 2013 - March 8, 2015. Fourth, we have data
on the volume of unpaid consumption via torrents for 8,000 top artists from Musicmetric.



4     Estimation Approaches

The challenges in estimating the impact of streaming on the sales of recorded music or piracy
recall the challenges in measuring the sales-displacing impact of piracy on music sales.



4.1   Song and Artist-level approaches


Using song-level data by country and week, we can attempt to identify the sales displacement
coefficients in a variety of ways. We bear in mind even at the outset that the song-level approach
faces two substantial challenges. First, streaming of particular songs is endogenous. Second,
even if one were to uncover a credible causal impact at the song level, it would not necessarily
reflect the effect of interest, the overall impact of streaming on sales.

Define qsct as the sales of song s in country c and week t. Define streams ssct analogously. It is
instructive to consider the sequence of possible approaches, including those with little promise
of credibly identifying the causal impact of streams on sales, to understand the possible promise
of other approaches. The generic endogeneity challenge is that streaming and sales may both
be driven by the time-varying interest in a song. Consider, first, the simplest approach:



                                     qsct = α0 + α1 ssct + εsct                                 (6)


This approach has little promise of identifying possibly displacing effects of streaming on sales,
for three clear reasons. First, streaming and sales will both be higher in larger countries. Second,
they will both be higher for songs that are more popular. Third, both may be higher at times
of high sales (e.g. holidays).

Taking one step at a time, if we add country fixed effects to this specification, yielding: qsct =
α0 + α1 ssct + µc + εsct , then we will have dealt with the problem that some countries are
larger than others. We can include fixed effects for country, song, and calendar weeks. The
identification strategy is then, in words, to ask whether songs that stream more in this country



                                                 14
and week, relative to the average levels for this country, song, and week, sell more during this
week.

This approach is still vulnerable to the concern that interest in a song has a song-specific
temporal component. For example, a few weeks after release, a particular song may be of
interest to consumers via both channels (purchase and streaming). We can attempt to address
this by including song-specific time effects:



                               qsct = α0 + α1 ssct + µc + θst + εsct .                        (7)


This approach allows for a song-specific time pattern of sales that is common across countries,
then asks whether song-country-weeks with more streaming have higher or lower sales.

The song-specific approach recalls the approaches of Oberholzer-Gee and Strumpf (2007) and
Blackburn (2004) in the file-sharing literature. Both of those studies relate the volume of unpaid
consumption for particular works over time to the volume of recorded music sales for the same
works. Oberholzer-Gee and Strumpf (2007) also employ an instrumental variables approach,
based on the number of German school children on vacation, to generate exogenous variation
in the volume of unpaid activity.

We attempt to identify the piracy displacement using artist-level data on unpaid consumption
and streaming by country and week. We can go as far as introducing artist-specific time effects
(along with country fixed effects) in a regression of unpaid consumption on streams. We can
therefore ask whether artist-country-weeks with more streaming have higher or lower levels of
unpaid consumption, after controlling for artist-specific time patterns of piracy.



4.2     Aggregate Approaches


It is arguable that the aggregate approach holds more promise than the song-specific approach.
Suppose that streaming is growing because it is new and has not yet diffused. Then the change
in streaming is not related to the appeal of music. Rather, the change in streaming is effec-
tively exogenous. Its diffusion effectively acts as an experiment, and we can measure its effect
by looking at what happens to sales during the diffusion. Contrast that with the song-level
approach. Ideally, the song level approach would be driven by the possibility that some songs
are heavily streamed while others are not, for reasons unrelated to the appeal of the songs.
This would work, for example, if there some set of songs appealed to consumers who do not use

                                                 15
streaming, while another set of songs appealed to consumers who use streaming. Given that
we only observe streaming volumes for the most popular songs, we cannot implement this ap-
proach, even if we had a notion of which songs do and do not stream extensively. This leaves us
with the impression that the aggregate approach holds more promise of identifying the impact
of streaming on sales.

Our basic approach to measuring the impact of Spotify streaming on sales and piracy, using the
multi-country dataset, is to regress weekly measures of sales (and piracy) on country dummies,
week dummies, and a measure of Spotify streaming in the country:



                                     qct = γc + γt + αsct + εct ,                             (8)


where qct is a measure of consumption (sales or piracy) in country c during week t, sct is a
measure of Spotify streaming in country c in year t , γc and γt are country and week fixed
effects, respectively, and εct is an error term.

The basic approach to measuring sales displacement in the Billboard US-only data for 2013
through March 2015 is slightly different, since the data are weekly for a single country. We
cannot employ an arbitrary week dummy. We can, however, use a week of the year dummy to
adjust for seasonality, since we have weekly observations for more than two years. With this
approach, we are asking whether sales this week in the US move with the volume of streaming,
after accounting for seasonality.

We have a second possible approach to identification using the Billboard US aggregate data.
We observe aggregate sales separately for three modes of selling recorded music: digital singles,
digital albums, and physical albums. Roughly speaking, digital track sales average 22 millions
per week during the sample, compared with 5 million and 2 million for physical and digital
albums, respectively (see Table 3). Keeping in mind that albums contain about 10 tracks,
the track-equivalent volume of sales through these modes are 22 million for digital singles, 50
million for physical album tracks, and 20 million for digital album tracks. If consumers of
physical albums did not use streaming music, then we could view physical album sales as very
effective proxy for digital track sales.




                                                   16
5     Results


5.1   Song and Artist-level Results


The Spotify data for April-December 2013 contain a total of 1,241 songs. We are able to match
the appearances of these songs in Spotify with their appearances in Nielsen sales data for the
same country weeks. Of these, we matched the 714 songs with the most song-week observations,
resulting in a dataset with 24,538 country-week-song observations on sales and streaming.

The first panel in Table 4 reports results of regressions using the song-level data. Regardless of
which set of fixed effects we include, we find a positive coefficient on streams, in the neighborhood
of 0.07. This coefficient indicates that songs that stream an additional 14 times sell one more
copy. Note that this result obtains even when we use song-specific time dummies. So the result
means that after accounting for the temporal popularity of this song (in a common way across
countries), as well as the different tendencies to purchase songs in different countries, country
weeks in which a song streams more it also sells more.

There are two possible interpretations. One is that streams stimulate sales. A second possibility
is that the relationship is contaminated by unobserved heterogeneity. Songs that are popular in
particular countries during particular weeks are both streamed and sold at elevated rates. So we
are left with something best described as questionable evidence for song-level sales stimulation.
And even if streaming stimulates sales at the song level, it is not clear that the overall effect of
streaming on sales would be positive.

While we do not have access to song-level piracy data, we can perform artist-level regressions by
matching artists across the streaming and unpaid consumption datasets. We are able to match
279 artists, which overall account for 85% of the streams in our April-December 2013 Spotify
data. The second panel in Table 4 reports artist-level regressions, and we obtain results similar
to the results on purchase. Artists that are streaming more on Spotify this week tend also to
be pirated more this week, after accounting for the various fixed effects.



5.2   Aggregate Results


We have two aggregative approaches to measuring sales and piracy displacement using the 21-
country data for April-December 2013. One approach is to aggregate the sales, piracy, and
streams by country week for the songs and artists we were able to match in the Spotify data,

                                                 17
which we refer to as “matched aggregate” sales, piracy, and streams. A second approach is
to link overall sales and piracy (aggregating across all songs, not just those we can match in
Spotify) with our index of Spotify streaming, the sum of the streams of the top 50 songs by
country week.

We are interested in the rates of sales and piracy displacement, the change in sales and piracy
with a one-unit increase in streaming. It is important to recall that top-50 Spotify streams
represent only a fraction of total Spotify streams, so we need to divide the coefficient from the
aggregate regressions by 11.2 in order to obtain an estimate of the per-stream sales and piracy
displacement rates.

The first panel in Table 5 reports regressions of matched aggregate sales by country week on
matched aggregate streams. When we do not include fixed effects, in column (1), the sales
displacement coefficient is positive. When we include a country fixed effect, in column (2), the
coefficient becomes negative (-0.024, with a standard error of 0.005). The coefficient in the
specification with fixed effects for week as well as country, in column (3), is nearly identical.
When we include only US data (and therefore no country nor time fixed effects), the coefficient
is -0.0363 (0.026) (column (4)). Including a time trend, in column (5), changes the displacement
coefficient to -0.0659 (0.034).

The second panel in Table 5 does an analogous exercise using total weekly digital sales by country
as the dependent variable and the top-50 Spotify index on the right-hand side, again for the
period April - December, 2013. Column (1) includes neither country nor week dummies, and the
displacement coefficient is positive. Column (2) includes country dummies, and the resulting
displacement coefficient is -0.21 (standard error of 0.03). Column (3) adds week dummies, and
the resulting displacement coefficient is -0.23 (0.03). If top-50 Spotify spins are 1/11.2 of total
Spotify spins, then the coefficients indicate that an additional Spotify spin reduces sales by
0.023, or that is takes 43 Spotify spins to reduce digital track sales by 1. The last two columns
of the table report sales displacement coefficients for only the US using the 2013 data. Column
(4) presents a coefficient of -0.38 (0.16), and including a time trend changes the coefficient
to -0.45 (0.199), suggesting that the US variation in the multi-country panel is important for
identifying the displacement coefficient. Indeed, when the US is excluded, the displacement
coefficient is 0.01 (0.004).

The first panel in Table 6 reports regressions of matched aggregate unpaid consumption activity
on matched aggregate Spotify streaming. When no fixed effects are included in column (1),



                                                18
the piracy displacement coefficient is positive and significant. The inclusion of country fixed
effects leads to a negative coefficient, and additionally including weekly fixed effects leaves the
displacement estimate nearly identical. Using only the US data (therefore without country
or week fixed effects), we obtain a much larger coefficient (-0.1237, with a standard error of
0.0328). Including a weekly time trend nevertheless reduces the coefficient by half (-0.0643,
standard error of 0.0331).

The second panel in Table 6 reports regressions of total weekly unpaid consumption on the
top-50 weekly Spotify streaming index. Again, the coefficients from all specifications except
those excluding country fixed effects show clear evidence of piracy displacement. According to
these results, and additional 47 streams reduces by one the number of tracks obtained without
payment. This piracy displacement is consistent with Ek’s claim that Spotify’s bundled offering
harvests revenue from consumers who - or at least from consumption instances - which were
previously not generating revenue. While this evidence is consistent with successful bundling,
it is not sufficient to demonstrate successful bundling. That, instead, depends on the overall
impact of Spotify on revenue, which depends largely on its impact on permanent downloads.

Table 7 turns to the US-only data from Billboard covering both the last 9 months of 2013 along
with 2014 and early 2015. The ex ante appeal of this exercise is that it covers a period of
substantial growth in Spotify use in the US. These regressions relate total track sales to top 50
Spotify streams, so the coefficients must be divided by 11.2 to yield per-stream displacement
rates. The first two columns examine digital track sales and show a displacement coefficient
of -0.0813 (with a standard error of 0.007). This is substantially smaller than the degree of
sales displacement implied by the 2013 relationship. Given that total Spotify streams are 11.2
times top-50 Spotify streams, this coefficient indicates that an additional overall Spotify spin
reduces digital track sales by 0.0072. The remaining columns of Table 7 present the analogous
specifications for physical and digital albums, respectively. One in two of these coefficients is
statistically significant.

The second panel of Table 7 revisits the regressions in the first panel of the table using log-log
specifications. The digital track coefficient is -0.21 (0.01), while the physical and digital album
coefficients are -0.10 (0.03) and -0.07 (0.03), respectively. All three of these coefficients are
significantly different from zero.

Summing up, we see the following patterns. First, when we use aggregate data, we find sales
and piracy displacement by Spotify. Second, when we use data on the US covering the period



                                                19
of substantial change in Spotify use, we find smaller sales displacement than when we use 2013
data. Third, the coefficients relating Spotify use to recorded music sales differ by format. The
coefficients for digital track sales are generally higher than the coefficients for albums, but many
of the album coefficients are also negative and significant. Our best estimate indicates than an
additional 137 streams displaces one track sale.



6     How Large is the Revenue Displacement?


6.1   Impact of Spotify on Rights Holder Revenue


Roughly, rights holders receive 70 percent of revenue from digital track sales. According to the
RIAA, the average revenue per digital track sold was $1.174 in 2014. Given the 70 percent
share that labels obtain from Apple, this is $0.822 per track sold. Considering only digital track
sales and revenue from Spotify, revenue is the sum of revenue from selling digital tracks and the
revenue from Spotify spins. That is, rev = 0.822qd + ps S, where qd is digital track sales, ps is
the payment per stream, and S is Spotify spins. The change in revenue with additional Spotify
spins is thus:   ∂rev
                  ∂S    = 0.822 ∂q
                                ∂S + ps , where
                                   d              ∂qd
                                                  ∂S    is the rate of sales displacement between Spotify
                                                                                                    ∂rev
and digital track sales. Whether Spotify raises or reduces revenue depends on whether                ∂S    >0
                                             ∂qd
which, in turn, depends on the value of      ∂S    relative to ps .

We can summarize the possible effects of streaming on revenue in a picture with the degree of
sales stimulation/displacement ( ∂q
                                 ∂S ) on the horizontal axis and the payment per-stream (ps ) on
                                    d


the vertical. Figure 6 graphs the revenue-neutral line, i.e. the combination of sales displacement
rates and streaming payments that make bundling revenue-neutral:                 ∂rev
                                                                                  ∂S    = 0.822 ∂q
                                                                                                ∂S + ps = 0.
                                                                                                   d


                                                        ∂qd         ps
Revenue will therefore rise with streaming if           ∂S    > − 0.822 . If streaming stimulates permanent
sales, then we could classify streaming as promotion, and overall revenue would rise. If streaming
displaces sales, but the per-stream rate is sufficiently high, then streaming is successful bundling.
Finally, if streaming displaces sales but the per-stream rate is low, then streaming is unsuccessful
bundling as it decreases overall revenue.

Spotify pays between $0.006 and $0.0084 per spin, or about $0.007 per spin. Given our preferred
estimate of the rate of sales displacement (-0.0072) and a payout per stream of ps =$0.007, the
growth in Spotify appears to be essentially revenue-neutral for rights holders. This result
puts Spotify on the border between successful and unsuccessful bundling. However, given the
potentially large value of bundled offerings to consumers, it is not clear that revenue neutrality


                                                        20
is an indication of success. One might instead expect a valuable new offering to allow additional
revenue appropriation for rights holders.

The magnitude of sales displacement is both of general academic and industry interest for
understanding the evolution of revenue in the music industry. It is also of specific potential
relevance to the licensing rates paid by Internet radio concerns to music labels. Music streaming
on Internet radio is subject to two payments, a songwriting royalty as well as a sound recording
royalty. In most of the world, terrestrial radio is also required to pay for the use of both rights,
but US radio stations pay only the songwriting royalty. For example, Pandora pays 1.85% of
its revenue to ASCAP and another 2.5% to BMI for songwriters.

The sound recording royalty is administered separately. Labels or their representatives may
negotiate rates directly with streaming services such as Spotify or Pandora. And indeed, Merlin
(an organization representing independent labels) and Pandora have a voluntary arrangement.
By default, however, the rate that Pandora pays in the US for sound recording royalties is
determined by a compulsory license administered by the Copyright Royalty Board. Currently,
Pandora paid 0.11 cent per stream in 2012 and 0.14 cent in 2015.18 As presented above, Spotify’s
songwriting royalty rate is not publicly known, but it can be estimated from public data to be
about 0.7 cent per stream.

The rates that labels would negotiate with streaming services presumably depend on streaming’s
impact on sales. The more that streaming cannibalizes sales, the higher the rates that songwrit-
ers and owners of sound recordings would presumably require. Hence, again, the importance of
understanding the impact of streaming on sales.



6.2      Bargaining over Licensing Fees in the Shadow of Piracy


Whether the growth in streaming - and apparently concomitant decline in recorded music sales
- would reduce revenue for creators and intermediaries depends on the revenues associated
with individual sales and streams. While non-interactive streaming rates are determined by a
compulsory license in the US, rates for interactive services are negotiated individually between
labels and services.

Bundled services offer a wide variety of music and potentially high value to consumers, but
appropriating this value is challenging. If the labels were to negotiate collectively, they could
presumably capture much of consumers’ willingness to pay as revenue. Two concerns remain,
  18
       http://www.bloomberg.com/bw/articles/2012-12-20/pandora-is-boxed-in-by-high-royalty-fees.


                                                 21
however. First, even if the labels were to negotiate as a monopolist, they face competition from
piracy as an outside good. If the labels were to insist on fee requiring Spotify to charge, say
$25 per month, then perhaps its potential users would revert to piracy.

There is a second concern for the industry arising from the fact that music rights holders do
not negotiate royalty rates collectively. Even if piracy were eliminated, the competition among
labels would tend to reduce rates. Evidence above is at least suggestive that when particular
songs are aired, they sell more than when they do not, even if music as a whole sells less when
streaming exists. In such an environment it is easy to envision a prisoner’s dilemma in which
rights holders are better off charging low rates and getting their particular songs aired, even
though they would be better off still if they all withheld their music from streaming services.
Pandora’s recent deal with Merlin, the representative of a large number of independent labels,
provides an interesting example. Under the deal, Pandora “will recommend Merlin artists over
those not affiliated with the consortium in exchange for paying Merlin’s musicians a lower royalty
rate.”19

A third possibility for the industry - the Taylor Swift option - is that rights holders might
withhold their music from streaming services during periods of high demand. After an initial
burst of a la carte sales around release, artists might make their works available to streaming
services. This is a form of inter-temporal price discrimination. The viability of all of these
approaches require first some understanding of the relationship between streaming and sales.



7    Conclusion

While song-level evidence, including a controlled experiment elsewhere on non-interactive stream-
ing, show positive relationships between streaming and track sales, aggregate-level evidence
indicates the opposite relationship, that interactive streaming at Spotify displaces track sales.
Hence Spotify is better viewed as a form of bundled sales than as a promotional channel. Bun-
dled sales of zero marginal cost products hold the promise of raising revenue, consumer surplus,
or possibly both. Whether Spotify raises music-industry revenue depends on whether the ad-
ditional revenues from streaming offset the reductions in revenues from permanent downloads.
While we find evidence that Spotify displaces piracy, the new revenue generated through stream-
ing payments (coming from formerly pirate consumers, buyers, or individuals that used to forgo
   19
      Laura Sydell. “Pandora’s New Deal: Different Pay, Different Play.” NPR.org. November 26, 2014. http:/
/www.npr.org/2014/11/26/366339553/pandoras-new-deal-different-pay-different-play.




                                                    22
consumption) is roughly offset by revenue reductions from the sale of permanent downloads.

This study provides a first step toward measuring the impact of interactive streaming’s growth
on music sales during 2014. Additional work would be helpful to provide more confidence in
the answer. First, it would be desirable to conduct experimental studies at the song level for
interactive streaming services to see whether they stimulate or depress track sales. Second, and
perhaps more important, it would be desirable to find ways to study the impact of aggregate
usage of non-interactive services on the overall sales of music, as a complement to this study’s
estimate of the impact of aggregate interactive streaming via Spotify on overall track sales.

Revenue generation from recorded music is shifting rapidly from the sales of individual tracks
(and albums) to bundled sales of streams. As this transition continues, understanding the
relationship between streaming and sales will be crucial to both our understanding, as well as
the operation, of the recorded music industry.




                                                 23
References

Adams, W. J. and J. L. Yellen (1976): “Commodity Bundling and the Burden of
  Monopoly,” The Quarterly Journal of Economics, 90, 475–98.

Bakos, Y. and E. Brynjolfsson (1999): “Bundling information goods: pricing, profits and
  efficiency,” Management Science, 1613–1630.

Blackburn, D. (2004): “Online Piracy and Recorded Music Sales,” Unpublished manuscript,
  Harvard University.

Danaher, B., S. Dhanasobhon, M. D. Smith, and R. Telang (2010): “Converting Pirates
  Without Cannibalizing Purchasers: The Impact of Digital Distribution on Physical Sales and
  Internet Piracy,” Marketing Science, 29, 1138–1151.

Danaher, B., M. D. Smith, and R. Telang (2013): “Piracy and Copyright Enforcement
  Mechanisms,” in Innovation Policy and the Economy, Volume 14, National Bureau of Eco-
  nomic Research, Inc, NBER Chapters, 25–61.

Dertouzos, J. (2004): “Radio Airplay and the Recorded Music Industry: An Economic Anal-
  ysis,” National association of broadcasters, https://www.nab.org/documents/resources/
  061008_Dertouzos_Ptax.pdf.

Ginsburgh, V. and I. Zang (2003): “The museum pass game and its value,” Games and
  Economic Behavior, 43, 322 – 325.

Hiller, R. S. and J.-H. Kim (2014): “Online Music, Sales Displacement, and Internet Search:
  Evidence from YouTube,” Working Paper.

Kretschmer, T. and C. Peukert (2014): “Video Killed the Radio Star? Online Music
  Videos and Digital Music Sales,” CEP Discussion Papers dp1265, Centre for Economic Per-
  formance, LSE.

Liebowitz, S. J. (2004): “The elusive symbiosis: The impact of radio on the record industry,”
  Review of Economic Research on Copyright Issues, 93–118.

McBride, S. (2014): “WRITTEN DIRECT TESTIMONY OF STEPHAN MCBRIDE (On
  behalf of Pandora Media, Inc),” http://www.loc.gov/crb/rate/14-CRB-0001-WR/sta
  tements/Pandora/13_Written_Direct_Testimony_of_Stephan_McBride_with_Figure



                                             24
  s_and_Tables_and_Appendices_PUBLIC_pdf.pdf, Filed with Copyright Royalty Board,
  Washington, DC.

Oberholzer-Gee, F. and K. Strumpf (2007): “The Effect of File Sharing on Record Sales:
  An Empirical Analysis,” Journal of Political Economy, 115, 1 – 42.

Page, W. (2013): “Adventures in the Netherlands: Spotify, Piracy and the new Dutch expe-
  rience,” https://press.spotify.com/ar/2013/07/17/adventures-in-netherlands/.

Schmalensee, R. (1984): “Gaussian Demand and Commodity Bundling,” The Journal of
  Business, 57, S211–30.

Shiller, B. and J. Waldfogel (2011): “Music for a Song: An Empirical Look at Uniform
  Pricing and Its Alternatives,” The Journal of Industrial Economics, 59, 630–660.

——— (2013): “The Challenge Of Revenue Sharing With Bundled Pricing: An Application To
  Music,” Economic Inquiry, 51, 1155–1165.

Stigler, G. J. (2007): “United States v. Loew’s Inc. : a note on block-booking,” Aus: Supreme
  court review ; 1 (1963), pp. 152 - 157.

Varian, H. R. (2000): “Buying, Sharing and Renting Information Goods,” The Journal of
  Industrial Economics, 48, 473–488.




                                             25
A           Figures and Tables




                                         Figure 1: Radio Diffusion and Record Sales.


                  Figure 2: A Comparison of Bundle Purchase with a la Carte Consumption
Valuation                                         Valuation                                             Valuation

  10                                                10                                                    10




   8                                                 8                                                     8

                                                             CS1
   6                                                 6                                                     6       CS2


   4                                                 4                                                     4
                                                             REV
           CS = area − PB
   2                                                 2                                                     2       “Guilt”
                                                                       dwl1
                                                                                                                             dwl2
   0
       0      2      4      6   8   10
                                          Songs      0
                                                         0         2          4   6    8   10
                                                                                                Songs      0
                                                                                                               0         2    4     6   8   10
                                                                                                                                                 Songs

                   (a) Bundle                        (b) A la Carte Buying: p < g                          (c) A la Carte Stealing: p > g




                                                                                  26
                                                     Number of Paying Spotify Subscribers Worldwide                                                                                                                                                             Pandora’s Annual Listening Hours
                                15                                                                                                                                                                                              20

                               13.5

                                12




                                                                                                                                                                                                  Hours (in billions)
   Subscribers (in millions)
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                15

                               10.5

                                    9
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                10
                                7.5

                                    6
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 5
                                4.5

                                    3
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 0




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              09




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                10




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    11




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         12




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             13




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                13




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   14
                                1.5




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           20




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              20




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   20




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      20




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            20




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            20




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               20
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          n




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            n




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               n




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     n




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        n




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           ec




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              ec
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      Ja




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         Ja




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              Ja




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 Ja




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       Ja
                                    0




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       D




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          D
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      −




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        −




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          −




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 −




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   −




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       −




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          −
                                                 10

                                                          10

                                                                   10

                                                                            10

                                                                                     11

                                                                                              11

                                                                                                       11

                                                                                                                11

                                                                                                                         12

                                                                                                                                  12

                                                                                                                                           12

                                                                                                                                                    12

                                                                                                                                                             13

                                                                                                                                                                      14

                                                                                                                                                                               14

                                                                                                                                                                                        14




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 08




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    09




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         10




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            11




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  12




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   b




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      n
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  Fe




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     Ja
                                                20

                                                         20

                                                                  20

                                                                           20

                                                                                    20

                                                                                             20

                                                                                                      20

                                                                                                               20

                                                                                                                        20

                                                                                                                                 20

                                                                                                                                          20

                                                                                                                                                   20

                                                                                                                                                            20

                                                                                                                                                                     20

                                                                                                                                                                              20

                                                                                                                                                                                       20




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                20




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   20




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     20




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         20




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              20
                                         −

                                                     −

                                                              −

                                                                       −

                                                                                −

                                                                                         −

                                                                                                  −

                                                                                                           −

                                                                                                                    −

                                                                                                                             −

                                                                                                                                      −

                                                                                                                                               −

                                                                                                                                                        −

                                                                                                                                                                 −

                                                                                                                                                                          −

                                                                                                                                                                                   −




                                                                                                                                                                                                                          b




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                b




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     b




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        b




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              b
                                                                                                                                                                                                       Fe




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              Fe




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                Fe




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    Fe




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         Fe
                                     1

                                                     2

                                                              3

                                                                       4

                                                                                1

                                                                                         2

                                                                                                  3

                                                                                                           4

                                                                                                                    1

                                                                                                                             2

                                                                                                                                      3

                                                                                                                                               4

                                                                                                                                                        1

                                                                                                                                                                 1

                                                                                                                                                                          2

                                                                                                                                                                                   3
                                    Q

                                                 Q

                                                          Q

                                                                   Q

                                                                            Q

                                                                                     Q

                                                                                              Q

                                                                                                       Q

                                                                                                                Q

                                                                                                                         Q

                                                                                                                                  Q

                                                                                                                                           Q

                                                                                                                                                    Q

                                                                                                                                                             Q

                                                                                                                                                                      Q

                                                                                                                                                                               Q
                                            Source: Statista                                                                                                                                                                          Source: Statista



                                                                  Number of Global Monthly Spotify Users                                                                                                                              Weekly YouTube Consumption Worldwide (2012−2013)
                               60                                                                                                                                                                                               650


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                600
                               50




                                                                                                                                                                                                  YouTube Plays (in millions)
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                550
   Users (in millions)




                               40                                                                                                                                                                                               500


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                450
                               30

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                400

                               20
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                350


                               10                                                                                                                                                                                               300


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                250
                                0
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      1




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   11




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                21




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              31




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            41




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         51




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       61




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  71




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                81




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          91




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         1
                                             Jul ’12                        Dec ’12                   Mar ’13                 May ’14                   Nov ’14                Jan ’15




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        10
                                        Source: Statista                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 Week




                                                Figure 3: Evolution of Spotify’s, Pandora’s, and YouTube’s Usage




                                                                                                      Top 50 Streaming per capita Growth
                                                                                                      on Spotify, April 2013 − March 2015
                                                                                    AT                                                                               AU                                                                                       BE                                                                           CH
                                    1 2 3 4 5




                                                                                    DE                                                                               DK                                                                                       ES                                                                            FI
                                    1 2 3 4 5
Streaming Index




                                                                                    FR                                                                               GB                                                                                         IE                                                                          IT
                                    1 2 3 4 5




                                                                                    NL                                                                               NO                                                                                       SE                                                                           US
                                    1 2 3 4 5
                                                 17
                                                 26
                                                 35
                                                 44
                                                 53
                                                 62
                                                 71
                                                 80
                                                 89
                                                 98
                                                   7
                                                   6

                                                                                                                                   17
                                                                                                                                   26
                                                                                                                                   35
                                                                                                                                   44
                                                                                                                                   53
                                                                                                                                   62
                                                                                                                                   71
                                                                                                                                   80
                                                                                                                                   89
                                                                                                                                   98
                                                                                                                                     7
                                                                                                                                     6

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 17
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 26
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 35
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 44
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 53
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 62
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 71
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 80
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 89
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 98
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   7
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   6

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            17
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            26
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            35
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            44
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            53
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            62
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            71
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            80
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            89
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            98
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              7
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              6
                                                10
                                                11




                                                                                                                                  10
                                                                                                                                  11




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                10
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                11




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           10
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           11




                                                                                                                                                                                             Week
                                Note: Graphs by country. Vertical line represents the start of 2014.



                                                                                    Figure 4: Spotify’s Per Capita Streaming Growth.




                                                                                                                                                                                             27
                            US Weekly Digital Single Sales and Streams
                               Digital Albums                                   Digital Tracks
                   3500                                    110000                                110000
                                                           100000    35000                       100000
                   3000                                    90000     30000                       90000
                                                           80000                                 80000
                   2500                                    70000     25000                       70000
                                                           60000                                 60000
                   2000                                    50000     20000                       50000
                                                           40000                                 40000
                   1500                                    30000     15000                       30000
                            1
                           11
                           21
                           31
                           41
                           51
                           61
                           71
                           81

                          101
                          111
                          121
                          131
                          141
                          151
                          161
                          171
                             1




                                                                               1
                                                                              11
                                                                              21
                                                                              31
                                                                              41
                                                                              51
                                                                              61
                                                                              71
                                                                              81

                                                                             101
                                                                             111
                                                                             121
                                                                             131
                                                                             141
                                                                             151
                                                                             161
                                                                             171
                                                                                1
         Sales




                           9




                                                                              9
                              Physical Albums
                  10000                                    110000
                   9000                                    100000
                                                           90000
                   8000                                    80000
                   7000                                    70000
                                                           60000
                   6000                                    50000
                   5000                                    40000
                   4000                                    30000
                            1
                           11
                           21
                           31
                           41
                           51
                           61
                           71
                           81

                          101
                          111
                          121
                          131
                          141
                          151
                          161
                          171
                             1
                           9




                                                               Week
                                             Sales (000)                     Streams (000)
                 Graphs by format



                                    Figure 5: US Streams and Sales, by Format.




                             Figure 6: Displacement Rate and Price per Stream


                                                   PS

                                             0.012
                      SUCCESSFUL
                                                0.01
                       BUNDLING
                                             0.008
                                                           0.007
                                                                        PROMOTION
                                             0.006
     UNSUCCESSFUL
                                             0.004
       BUNDLING
                                             0.002
                                                                                                  Sales
                                                  0                                               Displacement
−0.015                −0.0085 −0.005                   0             0.005        0.01            Rate




                                                                28
                            Table 1: Spotify’s Payout

Spotify’s 2014 payout†                                    $1,000,000,000

Payout per spin                                                  $0.006     High
                                                                $0.0084     Low

Yearly stream estimate                                   166,666,666,667    High
                                                         119,047,619,048    Low

Weekly stream estimate=yearly/52                           3,205,128,205    High
                                                           2,289,377,289    Low

Global weekly spins at head of distribution (Nov 2014)      246,533,109     top 50
                                                            469,448,264    top 200
† http://www.spotifyartists.com/spotify-explained/




                                        29
                         Table 2: Sales and Streaming (April-December 2013).†

                                                           Mean
Country    Weekly Sales      Weekly Spotify          Weekly          Weekly Sales          Spotify Top 50
                             Top 50 Streams       Streams/Sales      per 1000 pop       Streams per 1000 pop
AT              117.9               386.2                3.3                5.1                 16.7
AU             1,637.1             2,808.4               1.7               193.2               331.4
BE              174.5              1,315.9               7.6               15.6                117.5
CH              311.2               627.2                2.0               38.5                 77.6
DE             1,347.8            10,496.7               7.8               16.7                130.2
DK              118.1              6,768.0               58.4              21.0               1,205.6
ES              141.2              7,410.2               53.0               3.0                158.9
FI               26.4              3,869.7              147.1               4.9                711.4
FR              687.2              2,251.3               3.3               10.4                 34.1
GB             3,144.0             9,872.7               3.2               49.1                154.0
GR               12.1               137.6                11.5               1.1                 12.5
IE              101.1               520.7                5.3               22.0                113.3
IT              339.5              1,747.4               5.2                5.7                 29.2
LU               16.8                3.0                 0.2               30.9                  5.5
NL              160.4              7,229.4               45.5               9.5                430.2
NO              106.2             11,505.8              109.4              20.9               2,263.1
NZ              171.3               878.8                5.2               38.3                196.6
PL                1.9               970.8               519.7               0.0                 25.2
PT               20.8               544.0                26.3               2.0                 52.0
SE               59.9             21,819.8              366.5               6.2               2,274.7
US            22,999.5            33,468.1               1.5               72.8                105.9
Total          1,579.5             6,208.2               68.6              27.7                420.5
† Weekly sales and weekly Spotify streams are in thousands units.




               Table 3: US Weekly Sales Values (April 2013 - December 2014)

               Variable            Mean        Std. Dev.         Min.         Max.       N
            Digital Tracks        21732.51       2962.21         16882        36311      86
            Physical Albums         4893.2        892.45          3971        9878       86
            Digital Albums         2081.59        261.06          1694        3486       86
            Spotify Streams       53544.25      20660.14        26108.42    108247.12    86




                                                   30
          Table 4: Song and Artist-level Displacement Estimates.†


                                   Dependent Variable: Sales
                       (1)        (2)        (3)        (4)        (5)
                    Coef./s.e. Coef./s.e. Coef./s.e. Coef./s.e. Coef./s.e.
Streams              0.0707∗∗∗ 0.0694∗∗∗ 0.0700∗∗∗ 0.0697∗∗∗ 0.0714∗∗∗
                    (0.0005)   (0.0007)   (0.0007)   (0.0008)   (0.0009)

Country FE               ✗              X         X       X          X
Week FE                  ✗              ✗         X       X           -
Song FE                  ✗              ✗         ✗       X           -
Song-Week FE             ✗              ✗         ✗       ✗          X

R2                    0.430         0.577        0.582   0.643      0.702
No. of Obs.           24538         24538        24538   24538      24538


                                   Dependent Variable: Piracy
                       (1)        (2)        (3)        (4)        (5)
                    Coef./s.e. Coef./s.e. Coef./s.e. Coef./s.e. Coef./s.e.
Streams              0.0248∗∗∗ 0.0249∗∗∗ 0.0210∗∗∗ 0.0216∗∗∗ 0.0213∗∗∗
                    (0.0004)   (0.0004)   (0.0004)   (0.0004)   (0.0004)

Country FE               ✗              ✗         X       X          X
Week FE                  ✗              X         X       X           -
Artist FE                ✗              ✗         ✗       X           -
Artist-Week FE           ✗              ✗         ✗       ✗          X

R2                    0.175         0.190        0.255   0.403      0.550
No. of Obs.           21324         21324        21324   21324      21324
† Standard errors are in parenthesis.
∗
  Significant at the 10% level.
∗∗
   Significant at the 5% level.
∗∗∗
    Significant at the 1% level.




                                            31
                   Table 5: Aggregate Sales Displacement Estimates.†


                                           Matched Aggregate Dataset
                                 All        All        All     US only      US only
                                 (1)        (2)        (3)        (4)          (5)
                              Coef./s.e. Coef./s.e. Coef./s.e. Coef./s.e.   Coef./s.e.
Streams                        0.0770∗∗∗ -0.0241∗∗∗ -0.0234∗∗∗ -0.0363       -0.0659∗
                              (0.0020)   (0.0049)   (0.0054)   (0.0264)     (0.0342)

Country FE                          ✗        X          X           -           -
Week FE                             ✗        ✗          X           -       Time trend

R2                                 0.682   0.945      0.948       0.053       0.102
No. of Obs.                         719     719        719          36          36


                                           Overall Aggregate Dataset
                                 All        All        All     US only      US only
                                 (1)        (2)        (3)        (4)          (5)
                              Coef./s.e. Coef./s.e. Coef./s.e. Coef./s.e.   Coef./s.e.
Streams                        0.4533∗∗∗ -0.2146∗∗∗ -0.2293∗∗∗ -0.3849∗∗     -0.4455∗∗
                              (0.0151)   (0.0272)   (0.0293)   (0.1577)     (0.1994)

Normalized Coefficient             .0405   -.0192     -.0205     -.0344       -.0398
Reciprocal                          24.7    -52.1      -48.8      -29.1        -25.1

Country FE                          ✗        X          X           -           -
Week FE                             ✗        ✗          X          ✗        Time trend

R2                                 0.556   0.972      0.974       0.149       0.156
No. of Obs.                         722     722        722          36          36
† Standard errors are in parenthesis.
∗
  Significant at the 10% level.
∗∗
   Significant at the 5% level.
∗∗∗
    Significant at the 1% level.




                                            32
                  Table 6: Aggregate Piracy Displacement Estimates.†


                                           Matched Aggregate Dataset
                                 All        All        All     US only    US only
                                 (1)        (2)        (3)        (4)        (5)
                              Coef./s.e. Coef./s.e. Coef./s.e. Coef./s.e. Coef./s.e.
Streams                        0.0317∗∗∗ -0.0791∗∗∗ -0.0761∗∗∗ -0.1237∗∗∗ -0.0643∗
                              (0.0014)   (0.0069)   (0.0069)   (0.0328)   (0.0331)

Country FE                          ✗        X          X          -           -
Week FE                             ✗        ✗          X          -      Time trend

R2                                 0.416   0.733      0.780      0.296       0.486
No. of Obs.                         719     719        719         36          36


                                           Overall Aggregate Dataset
                                 All        All        All     US only    US only
                                 (1)        (2)        (3)        (4)        (5)
                              Coef./s.e. Coef./s.e. Coef./s.e. Coef./s.e. Coef./s.e.
Streams                        0.1584∗∗∗ -0.2771∗∗∗ -0.2378∗∗∗ -0.5228∗∗∗ -0.1484
                              (0.0085)   (0.0367)   (0.0356)   (0.1714)   (0.1886)

Normalized Coefficient             .0141   -.0247     -.0212     -.0467     -.0132
Reciprocal                         70.92    -40.5      -47.2      -21.4      -75.8

Country FE                          ✗        X          X          -           -
Week FE                             ✗        ✗          X          ✗      Time trend

R2                                 0.325   0.754      0.814      0.215       0.410
No. of Obs.                         722     722        722         36          36
† Standard errors are in parenthesis.
∗
  Significant at the 10% level.
∗∗
   Significant at the 5% level.
∗∗∗
    Significant at the 1% level.




                                            33
Table 7: Aggregate Sales Displacement Estimates, US Recorded Music Sales
(April 2013-March 2015).†


                                             Dependent Variable: Sales
                               Digital Tracks      Physical Albums         Digital Albums
                                     (1)                 (2)                     (3)
                                 Coef./s.e.           Coef./s.e.             Coef./s.e.
 Streams                           -0.0813∗∗∗          -0.0068∗∗               -0.0020
                                  (0.0069)            (0.0032)                (0.0013)

 Normalized Coefficient             -.0073                -.0006                 -.0002
 Reciprocal                          -137                -1666.7                 -5000

 R2                                 0.941                 0.864                  0.719
 No. of Obs.                          86                    86                     86


                                        Dependent Variable: log(Sales)
                               Digital Tracks      Physical Albums         Digital Albums
                                     (1)                 (2)                     (3)
                                 Coef./s.e.           Coef./s.e.             Coef./s.e.
 log(Streams)                      -0.2066∗∗∗          -0.0989∗∗∗              -0.0692∗∗
                                  (0.0130)            (0.0320)                (0.0320)

 R2                                 0.960                 0.828                  0.696
 No. of Obs.                          86                    86                     86
 † Digital tracks are total sales of standalone digital tracks, as reported in Billboard. Weekly
    US data for 2013-early2015. Spotify streams are the sum of streams for the Top 50 songs,
    according to Spotify charts. Standard errors are in parenthesis. All specifications include
    week fixed effects.
 ∗
    Significant at the 10% level.
 ∗∗
     Significant at the 5% level.
 ∗∗∗
      Significant at the 1% level.




                                              34
