NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

LOCAL INSTRUMENTS, GLOBAL EXTRAPOLATION:
EXTERNAL VALIDITY OF THE LABOR SUPPLY-FERTILITY LOCAL AVERAGE TREATMENT EFFECT
James Bisbee
Rajeev Dehejia
Cristian Pop-Eleches
Cyrus Samii
Working Paper 21663
http://www.nber.org/papers/w21663

NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
October 2015

We are grateful to Josh Angrist, David Card, John DiNardo, and conference participants at A Festschrift
in Honor of Robert Lalonde for invaluable comments and suggestions. In addition to the cited references,
this paper draws extensively on the framework developed in Dehejia, Pop-Eleches, and Samii (2014),
extending the external validity framework developed there in the context of experiments to instrumental
variables estimates. The views expressed herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect
the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peerreviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.
© 2015 by James Bisbee, Rajeev Dehejia, Cristian Pop-Eleches, and Cyrus Samii. All rights reserved.
Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided
that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.

Local Instruments, Global Extrapolation: External Validity of the Labor Supply-Fertility Local
Average Treatment Effect
James Bisbee, Rajeev Dehejia, Cristian Pop-Eleches, and Cyrus Samii
NBER Working Paper No. 21663
October 2015
JEL No. C26,J01,J1,J13,J22
ABSTRACT
We investigate whether local average treatment effects (LATE’s) can be extrapolated to new settings.
We extend the analysis and framework of Dehejia, Pop-Eleches, and Samii (2015), which examines
the external validity of the Angrist-Evans (1998) reduced-form natural experiment of having two first
children of the same sex on the probability of an incremental child and on mother’s labor supply. We
estimate Angrist and Evans's (1998) same-sex instrumental variable strategy in 139 country-year censuses
using data from the Integrated Public Use Micro Sample International. We compare each country-year's
LATE, as a hypothetical target, to the LATE extrapolated from other country-years (using the approach
suggested by Angrist and Fernandez-Val 2010). Paralleling our findings in Dehejia, Pop-Eleches, and
Samii (2015), we find that with a sufficiently large reference sample, we extrapolate the treatment
effect reasonably well, but the degree of accuracy depends on the extent of covariate similarity between
the target and reference settings. Our results suggest that – at least for our application – there is hope
for external validity.

James Bisbee
Department of Politics
New York University
19 West 4th Street
New York, NY 10012
jameshbisbee@gmail.com
Rajeev Dehejia
Robert F. Wagner Graduate School
of Public Service
New York University
295 Lafayette Street, 2nd floor
New York, NY 10012
and NBER
rajeev@dehejia.net

Cristian Pop-Eleches
The School of International and Public Affairs
Columbia University
1401A International Affairs Building, MC 3308
420 West 118th Street
New York, NY 10027
and NBER
cp2124@columbia.edu
Cyrus Samii
Department of Political Science
New York University
19 West 4th Street, 2nd Floor
New York, NY 10012
cds2083@nyu.edu

1. Introduction
Angrist and Evans (1998) use the sex composition of the first two children as an instrument for
the effect of fertility on labor supply. In light of Imbens and Angrist (1994) and Angrist, Imbens,
and Rubin (1996) and the subsequent local average treatment effect literature, the immediate
empirical relevance of the Angrist-Evans finding is limited not just to the United States in 1980
and 1990 but also to the subpopulation of compliers - i.e. those mothers whose fertility was
increased as a result of having had two first children of the same sex. In this sense, it is doubly
local.
At the same time, it is natural as social scientists to view these results in a more general
light: they hopefully reflect the underlying relationship between family size and a woman’s labor
supply. As an economic issue, the connection between these two variables is of broad interest.
Within the context of developed, low-fertility countries, increases in fertility could lead to
reductions in female labor supply and labor force participation. In developing countries, where
fertility rates are higher but declining, the reverse effect is relevant: reducing fertility could
significantly increase female labor force participation and spur economic growth.
In this paper we address the tension between these two perspectives. Using the Integrated
Public Use Micro Sample International (IPUMS-I) data set, we implement the Angrist-Evans
same-sex instrumental variable strategy in 139 country-year censuses. The censuses span the
world geographically (as listed in Appendix Table A-1) and cover five decades from 1960 to
2010. In particular, we use results from Abadie (2003) and Angrist-Fernadez-Val (2010) to
characterize the complier population in each country-year sample in terms of covariates. We use
these characteristics to extrapolate the treatment effect from a given country-year (the

2

“reference” country) to a country-year of hypothetical interest (the “target” country). We
perform this exercise on each country-year pair and use the resulting 139 × 138 dyads to examine
the extent to which the local average treatment effect (LATE) can be reliably extrapolated from
reference to target. We also conduct the analysis cumulatively, using all available reference
country-years prior to time t to extrapolate to a target country-year at time t.
We think of the complier population in the target country as the population of
hypothetical policy interest. In principle one could extrapolate a reference LATE to various
subpopulations in the target country. But for the complier subpopulation in the target we can
directly identify an internally valid benchmark (namely the target country-year LATE) against
which to compare the extrapolation. Using our approach, we can also extrapolate both the target
and reference LATE’s to average treatment effects (ATEs), hence compare an extrapolated
reference ATE to the target ATE; we consider this approach in Section 8.1 below.
The exercise connects to two interrelated literatures within labor and development
economics. First, it relates to Lalonde (1986) and the papers that followed from it (see Heckman
et al. 1997, 1998, 1999 and Dehejia and Wahba 1998, 2002 inter alia). By using an external
reference sample to estimate the treatment effect in a setting where we already possess a
plausibly internally valid estimate of the treatment effect, we use Lalonde’s basic template. In
addition, we are interested in characterizing when an externally extrapolated result is likely to
provide a reliable estimate of the treatment effect (in the spirit of Heckman, Ichimura, Smith, and
Todd 1998). Furthermore, our exercise represents the first step in an empirical induction in a
setting where general theorems are not possible. For Lalonde, the question was the extent to
which non-experimental estimators could replicate an experimental benchmark. As his paper
showed, even in the context of a single data set, a thoughtful attack on this question could push

3

the literature to replicate and extend his findings and eventually reach a broader understanding.
We hope that, in a modest way, our paper could provoke further investigation into the
relationship between local average treatment effects and their potential to extrapolate treatment
effects globally.
Second, our work also connects to a small but growing literature that has begun to
grapple with issues of external validity in randomized controlled trials (RCT’s); see inter alia
Allcott (2014), Dehejia, Pop-Eleches, and Samii (2015), Gechter (2015), Prichett and Sandefur
(2013), and Vivalt (2015). In no small part spurred by Lalonde (1986) and the ensuing literature,
RCT’s have been used extensively, indeed globally, to estimate the causal impact of a broad
range of policy interventions. A tension similar to that of instrumental variables resonates in this
exercise. Each RCT evaluation of an intervention is also a local average treatment effect, perhaps
in the Imbens-Angrist (1994) sense if issues of non-compliance arise, but also in the broader
sense of evaluating an intervention in a specific time and place and on a specific and not always
representative set of experimental subjects. At the same time, there is an intellectual agenda in
which an accumulation of experimental evidence might allow one to reach more general
conclusions regarding the efficacy of certain policies or the relevance and validity of specific
economic models (an issue which we examine in Dehejia, Pop-Eleches, and Samii 2015 and in
Section 6, below).
In this paper we take up the challenge of examining the extent to which we can
extrapolate a LATE from a quasi-experimental evidence base to new contexts of interest. Using
the Angrist and Fernandez-Val (2010) framework, we assume that heterogeneity in the local
average treatment effect is driven by differences in observable characteristics of the complier
population. By characterizing the complier population in each country-year sample, we can

4

calibrate the local average treatment effect from a reference country to match the complier
population distribution of covariates in a target country of interest. Of course, such an exercise
will succeed in reliably extrapolating the treatment effect only if the identifying assumptions are
approximately true in the application and data we are studying. It is precisely in this sense that
our exercise uses Lalonde (1986) as a motivation. Our data provide internally valid estimates of
the target LATE’s. Most immediately, this allows us to test the validity of the identifying
assumption that LATE heterogeneity is driven by observable covariates. But more substantively,
we are interested in characterizing which differences between an experimental reference and a
target context are most likely to lead to failures in external validity. This latter goal represents a
step toward systematizing the discussion of issues related to external validity.
To preview our findings, our exercise has five steps (which parallel our approach in
Dehejia, Pop-Eleches, and Samii 2015). First, using simulated data, which satisfies our
identifying assumptions by construction, we confirm the basic insight that calibrating the
treatment effect in a reference country does yield a reliable estimate of the treatment effect in a
target country. Indeed, we show that if the identifying assumptions are true, not only is external
validity possible but also “super-external validity”: if only a small sample size is available in the
target, it can be preferable to use an externally extrapolated estimate from a reference country
where the treatment effect is more precisely estimated (i.e., with a larger sample size).
Second, we graphically document that there is considerable heterogeneity both in the
first-stage and in the instrumental variable estimates across our sample. We also find substantial
variation in the characteristics of the complier populations.
Third, we use the dyads described above to run regressions of external prediction error
against differences between the target and reference countries and to characterize empirically

5

which differences significantly drive prediction error. We show that prediction error increases
considerably in covariate differences between the reference and target contexts of interest.
Fourth, we use the timeline of our country-year samples to examine how the
accumulation of evidence from additional samples affects out-of-sample predictive accuracy. We
find that, using all available evidence from reference country-years, extrapolation error is low in
the sense of being statistically indistinguishable from zero while also being bounded quite
tightly.
Fifth, we compare the prediction error from our extrapolation technique to the prediction
error from using OLS within the target site. Our interest here is to understand the extent to which
non-experimental evidence, even if it recovers a treatment effect that is both potentially biased
and different from the complier population, compares to externally extrapolated quasiexperimental evidence from an instrumental variable estimate from another site or sites. In the
development economics literature, Pritchett and Sandefur (2013) have speculated that bias from
a non-experimental estimate within the target site might be smaller than bias due to failure in
external validity. In our application we find the opposite: extrapolation error tends to be lower
than endogeneity bias from within-target OLS estimation.
The paper begins by outlining our identifying assumptions and empirical approach, and
then examines each of these five questions in turn, followed by a series of extensions and
robustness checks.

6

2. Methods
We define the conditions and methods for extrapolating from an instrumental variables estimate
to the causal effect in a target population.1 We focus on the case of using local average treatment
effects estimated from a set of reference contexts to identify and estimate the LATE in a target
context, where the LATE’s are the complier average causal effects in the respective populations
(Angrist et al. 1996). We focus on extrapolating to the LATE in a target context because of the
nature of the data that we have for our benchmarking exercise. The IPUMS-I data allow us to
estimate LATE’s in different populations defined by country and year. As such, we can use
these data to conduct benchmarked comparisons between actual, estimated LATE’s in a given
context and what we would obtain by extrapolation from other contexts. Nonetheless, the
methods that we apply here are straightforward to generalize for extrapolation to other types of
populations. Angrist and Fernandez-Val (2010) and Hartman et al. (2015) provide useful
discussions of defining targets for extrapolating causal effects.
Following Angrist and Fernandez-Val (2010), our setup supposes that a randomly
sampled unit i has two potential outcomes, Yi(1) and Yi(0), that would obtain under assignment of
a treatment Di to the treated (=1) versus control (=0) condition, respectively. In our application,
the treatment is an indicator for whether a mother has more than two children, restricting
consideration to the subpopulation of women with at least two children. Observed outcomes are
given by,
(1)

1

This section and the analysis in this paper draw extensively on Dehejia, Pop-Eleches, and Samii
(2015), where we discuss external validity issues in the context of experiments.
7

where α = E[Y(0)], ηi = Yi(0) – α, and γi = Yi(1) – Yi(0)

is the unit-level causal

effect of Di. We also define an instrument, Zi = 0,1, that affects treatment assignment. Thus, we
have potential treatment assignments, Di(1) and Di(0), corresponding to the treatment values that
would obtain for a unit under Zi = 1 versus Zi = 0, respectively. In our application, the
instrument is an indicator for whether the sexes of the first two children are the same. The
observed treatment is given by,
(2)
where γ = E[D(0)], υi = Di(0)- γ , and pi = Di(1) – Di(0).
Units are characterized by covariates, Xi, which include both unit- and population-level
variables. These covariates play a central role in extrapolation. We assume throughout that
conditions required for identifying the conditional LATE hold (Angrist and Fernandez-Val 2010,
p. 7). These include:

C1(a) Conditional independence and exclusion: (Y(1),Y(0),D(1),D(0)) ╨ Z|X.
C1(b) Valid conditional first stage: E[p|X] ≠ 0 and 0 < P[Z=1|X] < 1.
C1(c) Conditional monotonicity: P[D(1) ≥ D(0)|X] = 1 or P[D(1) ≤ D(0)|X] = 1.

We also define an indicator, W, for whether a population is the target to which we want to
extrapolate, W=1, or whether it is part of the reference set for which we have LATE estimates,
W=0.
The covariate-specific LATE in a target population is defined as
(3)
and in a reference set population as

8

(4)
Given covariate-specific LATE’s for a target population (W = 1), the marginal LATE for the
target context is given by (Froelich 2007):
(5)
We now state the assumptions needed to allow for a LATE from a reference population to be
transported to the target population conditional on covariates, following Hotz et al. (2005).

Proposition 1 (Identification): Suppose C1 holds across all populations. Furthermore, suppose
C2 Unconfounded location: (Y(1),Y(0)) ╨ W|D(1) > D(0),X=x, and
C3 Covariate overlap: 0 < P[W = 0|D(1) > D(0),X = x] <1.
for all x in the support of X in the target population. Finally, suppose we have data to estimate
for all x in the support of X in the target population. Then,

is identified and can

be estimated from the data.

Proof: Under C1-C3, we have
(6)
for all

in the support of

in the target population, in which case
(7)



We adopt an estimation approach based on interacted regressions.

9

Proposition 2 (Complier-centered interaction estimation): Suppose conditions C1-C3 hold
and that

(8)

and

(9)

with

being the value of the covariate

context (

centered on the sample complier mean in the target

), and

for

linear regression of the sample
values. For a sample of

. Let

be the residuals from a

values onto the matrix of sample

units with

,

(10)

Proof: By standard results for centered regression with heterogeneous effects (e.g., Imbens and
Wooldridge 2009, pp. 28-30), we have

(11)

for

. The result then follows from the consistency of the IV estimator for the LATE

(Imbens and Angrist 1994).


10

The key assumption for this estimation strategy is that we can define a linear series in
covariates to account for unit-level heterogeneity in both outcomes and treatment take-up given
variation in the instrument. When the covariates consist of indicators for an exhaustive set of
strata, estimation via a centered interaction regression is algebraically equivalent to the type of
stratification reweighting used by Angrist and Fernandez-Val (2010) (see, e.g., Miratrix et al.
2012).
Proposition 2 shows that we can use 2SLS with interactions centered on the target
population complier means to extrapolate from reference data to the LATE in the target
population.
(

This requires that we can estimate the means of covariates among compliers
. By Theorem 3.1 of Abadie (2003), one can accomplish this task via “kappa

weighting.” Specifically, for our target population with

, we have
(12)

where
(13)
We use the sample analog of expression (12) to compute the
interaction regression. In our applications below, we take the

terms for the complier-centered
terms as fixed and therefore

apply standard 2SLS inference.

3. Illustrative simulation
We use a simulation to demonstrate the properties of IV extrapolation under assumptions C1-C3.
To construct a naturalistic simulation, we start with the covariate, instrument (that is, the “same
11

sex of first two kids” indicator), and treatment data (that is, the “more than two kids” indicator)
from one percent subsamples of the IPUMS census data for Cuba in 2002 (yielding 223
observations) and the United States in 1990 (yielding 3,343 observations). The covariates that we
use include the gender of the first and second born children, the woman’s age coarsened into
three-year bins, the woman’s education level coarsened into four bins (less than primary,
primary, secondary, and university completed), and her spouse’s education level coarsened into
the same four bins. We used these covariates to generate potential outcomes under treatment and
control for women in each simulation replicate sample.2 We generated observed treatments and
outcomes on the basis of the actual instrument and treatment values in the data. As such, we
have realistic potential outcome distributions but we can also compute the actual LATE for each
simulation replicate sample.
Because potential outcomes are defined in terms of the micro-covariates only, C2 holds.
We restrict attention to the portions of the Cuba and United States samples that overlap in their
covariates such that C3 holds. We determine that C1b holds by observation: for the US in 1990,
the first stage coefficient in the sample is 0.060 (robust s.e.=0.015), while for Cuba in 2002, the
first stage coefficient in the sample is 0.090 (robust s.e.=0.048). We then assume assumptions
C1a and C1c based on arguments of Angrist and Evans (1998). To generate the extrapolations,
we use the complier-centered interactions 2SLS model defined above.

We conduct 1,000

simulation runs.
Figures 1 and 2 display results from the simulation exercise. Figure 1 shows results for
simulations where Cuba was the target and the US was the reference sample. We see in Figure 1
that the distribution of extrapolations is centered on the true LATE. The extrapolation

2

The potential outcomes were agnostically generated by a vector of coefficients drawn from a normal distribution.
For a detailed description of the simulation data-generating process, please see Appendix B.

12

distribution (depicted with the dotted lines) is also more precise than the IV estimates fit on the
target population data (depicted with the light gray shading). This is because the reference
sample (3,343 observations) is much larger than the target population sample (223 observations).

[FIGURE 1 ABOUT HERE]

Figure 2 focuses only on the extrapolated estimate distributions as we reduce the size of
the reference population. Again, the target distribution is depicted in light gray in the
background. As we reduce the size of the extrapolation population, we see the distribution widen
until the smallest reference size of 167 observations is even less precise than the target
distribution, simulated using 223 observations. This outcome illustrates the theoretical possibility
of “super-external validity,” whereby extrapolations from an existing evidence base may provide
more accurate estimates of the LATE in a target context than would be the case if one estimated
the LATE using only data from that context.

[FIGURE 2 ABOUT HERE]

In summary, the simulation illustrates our extrapolation strategy, and confirms that when
the identifying assumptions are satisfied, the method indeed works (in the sense that extrapolated
LATE’s on average replicate the target LATE). Note, however, that the quality of the
extrapolation depends on the sample size of the reference context and also on the degree of
reference-target covariate overlap.

13

4. A world of LATE’s: same-sex, more kids, and mothers’ labor
supply
4.1 The same-sex instrumental variable and IPUMS-I data
Angrist and Evans (1998) used two instrumental variables for a mother’s incremental fertility,
the first two children having the same sex (i.e., boy-boy or girl-girl) and a twin birth. In this
paper we focus on the first. They examine the sample of married women between age 18 and 34,
with two or more children from the 1980 and 1990 US IPUMS. A preference for a gender mix of
children encourages mothers with the first two children of the same sex to have an incremental
child. The IV strategy uses that variation to look at the effect of increased fertility on labor
supply. The identified local average treatment effect is the effect of fertility on labor supply for
those women who have an extra child when their first two children are the same sex but would
not otherwise. For the 1980 (1990) sample, same-sex leads to a 0.068 (0.070) increase the
probability of the third child (relative to approximately 0.5 of the sample that has a third child).
The reduced-form effect of same-sex on whether the mother worked for pay is -0.0080 (for
1980) and -0.0053 (for 1990), with an IV estimate of -0.120 (for 1980) and -0.104 (for 1990),
relative to 0.528 of the 1980 sample and 0.667 of the 1990 sample who work.
We use the IPUMS-I data to take the Angrist-Evans strategy to the world. The IPUMS-I
data provided harmonized coding that in principle yields measures of the above variables that are
comparable across countries and years. Data are available for a maximum of 139 country-years,
although accounting for missing data our sample becomes smaller for some specifications.
Individual covariates include the mother’s age, her age at birth of her first child, her education
(coded as 1=illiterate, 2=primary, 3=secondary, and 4=college or higher), and her spouse’s

14

education (coded similarly). Summary statistics are presented in Table 1. The average age of
mothers at the time of the survey in the global sample is 30.05, and the average mother’s
education is 1.92.

[TABLE 1 ABOUT HERE]

As discussed in the introduction, while extrapolating from reference to target country
makes use only of micro covariates, in our investigation of external validity we explore countryyear level differences and whether they explain the pattern of extrapolation error. Our countryyear covariates included GDP per capita, women’s labor force participation, the sex ratio
imbalance (the number of male children divided by the number of female children minus 0.5),
the total fertility rate, and the pairwise geographical and temporal distances between countryyear samples. Summary statistics of these dyadic absolute differences are presented in column 2
of Table 1. We will demonstrate that these differences strongly predict the magnitude of the
extrapolation error.
In our application we focus on the same-sex instrumental variable rather than a twin
birth, because it is more likely that two non-twinned children can be born in the same calendar
year in high-fertility countries than in the US. Same-sex has its own challenges when used as an
instrument on a global scale. The first concern is sex selection. While this is not believed to be
an issue with US data, for some countries in our sample (such as China) it is clearly a concern.
We address this by treating sex-selectivity as a country-year covariate and examining empirically
whether it affects the IV extrapolation from reference to target. In Section 8.4, we also show that
dropping potentially sex-selective countries does not significantly affect the results. A second

15

concern is violation of the exclusion restriction, especially for low-income countries. Butikofer
(2011) has presented suggestive evidence that the gender mix of the first two children in lowincome countries can directly influence a mother’s labor supply through the cost associated with
having a third child (see also Huber (2015) for evidence of instrumental validity for US data).
We address this in a similar fashion, namely by examining the extent to which GDP per capita
affects extrapolation error and in Section 8.5 using the Huber-Mellace (2015) test to detect and
drop country-years unlikely to satisfy instrument validity.

4.2 IPUMS-I data: first stage, compliers, and IV estimates
In this section we provide a graphical summary of the variation in the first stage and IV estimates
from IPUMS-I data. Figure 3, panel a, plots the first-stage effect of same-sex on an incremental
child against the standard error of the estimate. Each point represents a country-year IPUMS-I
sample, and different markers are indicators for geographic regions. Figure 3, panel b, plots the
density of first-stage effects. We note that all but a handful of first stages are positive: the
preference for a gender mix of children seems to be global. From panel b, we note that the
average first-stage effect is approximately 0.04 across countries and years. Both panels highlight
the heterogeneity of the first-stage strength, an issue we return to in the cumulative analysis.

[FIGURE 3 ABOUT HERE]

Figure 4 recreates the analysis of Figure 3 but replaces the first-stage results with the IV
estimates of the effect of an additional child on the mother’s work status. The striking difference
between Figures 3 and 4 is that the IV estimates are both negative and positive. While we can see

16

in Figure 4, panel b, that the average affect across countries and years is negative (-0.129,
compared to -0.120 and -0.104 for the US in 1980 and 1990), there is a genuine mix of positive
and negative coefficients. In panel a, estimates from high labor force participation economies
such as North America, Western Europe, and Eastern Europe tend to be negative, while
estimates from less developed regions are more positive.

[FIGURE 4 ABOUT HERE]

In Figure 5, we examine how the population of individuals who comply with the
instrument differs from the overall population. In the top two panels, we look at mother’s age at
the time of the survey and at the time of the first birth. The top-left panel indicates that, on
average, the complier population is younger than the overall population for most country-years at
the time of the survey. At the same time, there are regions (notably North America and Western
Europe) where these two distributions are similar. This pattern is reversed in the top-right panel,
which charts the comparison for mother’s age at first birth. Here we note that compliers are
consistently older than the overall population across all country-years in our data set. In the
bottom two figures, we find that complier mothers and their spouses are more likely to have
secondary or tertiary education than the overall population although these differences are far less
pronounced.

[FIGURE 5 ABOUT HERE]

17

The above analysis highlights a key aspect of our approach: heterogeneity in differences
between complier and raw populations is the dimension along which we calibrate the IV
treatment effects in the reference country to extrapolate to the target of interest. While discussed
formally in the methodology section above, it bears emphasis that this heterogeneity lies at the
heart of what external validity means in an IV context. If differences in complier populations
affect the relationship of interest, external validity may be compromised. By calibrating our
reference estimates to approximate the target complier population, we remove this threat to
external validity. The efficacy of this technique hinges crucially on whether the observable
covariates that we can measure fully capture the latent characteristics that would otherwise
reduce external validity.

5. Dyadic regressions
In this section, we examine the extent to which extrapolation error from reference to target
country-year can be explained by covariate differences between the two contexts. As noted in the
introduction, our strategy is to create all possible pairwise combinations of the country-year
samples, with one country serving as the target and the other as the reference. We use the
complier characteristics in the target country to calibrate the conditional-on-X LATE’s in the
reference country. Since, as in our US-Cuba example, for any two country-years the
extrapolation differs depending on which is the target country and which the reference country,
our dyads consist of all n×(n-1) pairwise permutations. For each dyad, we record the
extrapolation error, Eij (the target country-year i LATE estimate minus the extrapolated treatment
effect from the reference country-year j), its standard error, and covariate differences between

18

reference and target (which for simplicity we assume these can be summarized simply as
).
As in Dehejia, Pop-Eleches, and Samii (2015) we use this setup to estimate the external
validity (or X) function:
,
where we weight the regression by the inverse of the variance of the extrapolation error. In the
spirit of the Heckman, Ichimura, Smith, and Todd (1998) bias function, which characterizes
selection bias as a function of covariates, our interest is to characterize reference-to-target
country-year extrapolation error, while maintaining the assumption of a valid instrumental
variables strategy (hence an internally valid target country-year LATE). Note that in addition to
within country-year micro covariates, Dij includes country-year level macro covariates as well,
including GDP per capita, labor force participation, and total fertility rate.
Results are presented in Tables 2 and 3. We begin in Table 2 by examining the univariate
relationship between covariate differences and extrapolation error. We find that the differences
in all covariates save for mother’ age at first child’s birth, the labor force participation rate, and
temporal and geographic distances, are significant predictors in the expected direction: greater
reference-target differences are associated with increased extrapolation error. The magnitude of
the bias is considerable for each covariate. Since the significant covariates are in logs, the
coefficients can be directly compared in terms of percent changes; this suggests that a ten percent
increase in the difference between reference and target in mother’s education, spouse’s
education, mother’s age at the time of the survey, per capita GDP, the gender ratio, and total
fertility rate is associated with a 0.017, 0.02, 0.009, 0.013, 0.006, or 0.01 increase in
extrapolation error respectively (relative to an average world LATE of -0.129).

19

Temporal and geographic distances are presented in standardized measures, implying that
a 1 standard deviation increase in geographic distance (substantively an increase of roughly
4,650km) corresponds to a 5 percent increase in extrapolation error although this is not
significant at conventional levels. Similarly, the effect of time is noisily measured but, again,
pointing in a positive direction.

[TABLE 2 ABOUT HERE]

When we include all covariates simultaneously, we find in Table 3 that differences in the
spouse’s education, differences in mother’s age at the time of the survey, and differences in the
gender ratio remain significant in the full sample. The coefficients on spouse’s education and
mother’s age at the time of the survey are robust to restricting the analysis to country-years
where first-stage t-statistics are greater than 2, 5, and 10 although the estimate for mother’s age
becomes less precisely estimated. As in Table 2, the magnitudes are considerable for spouse’s
education. A ten percent increase in the difference in spouse’s education corresponds to a 0.018
increase in the absolute difference between the target and extrapolated estimates (again relative
to an average world LATE of -0.129). It is worth noting that these coefficients decline both in
significance and in magnitude as we restrict the sample to stronger first stage targets. This
suggests that the accuracy of our extrapolation technique is less susceptible to differences in the
covariate profile when our target estimate is more precisely estimated. However, certain
covariates remain significant, particularly differences in spouse’s education.

[TABLE 3 ABOUT HERE]

20

Overall the results underline an intuitive but important result: when the target and
reference countries are close together in the covariate space, extrapolation error tends to be
smaller. As will be demonstrated in Section 7, this intuition motivates our use of minimized
Mahalanobis distance to predict the optimal dyad for extrapolation.

6. Accumulation of evidence
While the dyadic regressions in Tables 2 and 3 highlight the importance of covariate differences
between reference and target countries, they do not allow us to deduce how close the
extrapolation comes to the target country LATE. Furthermore, while the dyadic setup is useful to
explore the external validity function, it uses only a single country-year reference to predict the
target, whereas in fact the available pool of reference countries is much larger in all but the first
time period of our data set. We address both issues in Figures 6 to 11.
In Figures 6 to 9, we depict the extrapolation error for specific target country-years
(Greece-1971, Colombia-1985, Belarus-1999, Colombia-2005), and show how the prediction
error changes as additional reference country-years become available at each point in time. Note
that in any given year, we use all of the available reference country-years available up to that
point in time (excluding the target country in earlier periods) to predict the target country-year.
Our exclusion of the target country data in earlier periods constitutes a more difficult test of our
extrapolation technique by removing the (presumably) most similar reference data from the
accumulated pool of observations.

21

[FIGURES 6 – 9 ABOUT HERE]

Several patterns become evident. First, as more evidence becomes available through an
increased reference set, prediction error typically decreases. Second, although there are counterexamples, the pattern that extrapolation error is not statistically significant when using the
maximal reference set does usually hold. Third, there are instances in which the target LATE
itself is not precisely estimated, and in these cases extrapolation error, although not statistically
significant, can be large in terms of magnitude. Fourth, for target countries later in the sample for
which a larger reference set is available, prediction error tends to converge to zero.
Figures 10 and 11 average the extrapolation error across all target countries with the dots
color-coded by the number of observations in the accumulated reference data and the vertical
bars representing the standard deviation of the averaged estimates. Figure 10 averages with
respect to years relative to the target country-year (so for example, 1970 is -4 with respect to
Ecuador 1974). Figure 11 averages by calendar year. In Figure 10, predictions by t=0 combine
some country-years early in the sample with few reference countries and those later in the
sample with more country-years available. Conversely, Figure 11 presents an unbalanced panel,
with country-years rotating out as targets for years after their own year (so for example US 1980
does not enter the average as a target country beyond 1980, but remains in use as a reference
country). Both figures confirm the pattern that bias tends to be smaller for country-years later in
the sample although Figure 10 exhibits greater variance in the estimates, owing to the inclusion
of early target-years for which larger reference sizes are unavailable.

[FIGURES 10 & 11 ABOUT HERE]

22

Overall, Figures 6 to 11 show that with a sufficiently large reference set, the extrapolated
LATE is able to systematically replicate the actual country-year LATE with considerable
precision. Given the validity of the IV strategy, this in turn serves as a test of the validity of our
key identifying assumption of uncounfounded location.

7. Extrapolation vs. interpolation
This section presents a series of comparisons between the extrapolated LATE estimates
measured using different criteria and the OLS estimates within the target country. The thought
experiment is trading off two possible biases: extrapolation error from the extrapolated LATE
versus endogeneity bias from regressing a women’s labor force status on an endogenous
indicator of incremental fertility. In other words, is there any reason to believe that errors
associated with extrapolation are systematically larger or smaller than biases associated with
endogeneity? It is worth noting the artificiality of the exercise at the outset. We know that OLS,
whether biased or not, is estimating the average treatment effect, whereas the extrapolated LATE
is replicating the LATE for the target country. So even without bias, we would not expect these
two to be the same. Nonetheless, we argue that the choice is not entirely artificial: a policy maker
could indeed be faced with the choice of two potential biases. In Section 8.1, we present results
comparing an extrapolated ATE to target country-year OLS estimates.
The results are presented in Figure 12, where the x-axis depicts the mean of the dyadic
extrapolated LATE’s for a given target country-year less the within-country estimated target
country-year LATE and the y-axis depicts within country-year OLS less the estimated LATE.

23

Both values are represented in absolute terms, reflecting that we are agnostic as to whether the
extrapolated estimate is larger or smaller than the target. In addition, we divide the absolute error
by the sum of the squared standard errors of each estimate. Doing so helps account for the
precision of the point estimates of both the target and the reference. For example, a 5 unit
difference between target and extrapolated estimates where the target standard error is 5 should
not be as concerning for our technique as a 5 unit difference where the target standard error is
0.1. By dividing the absolute error by the sum of the target and reference variation, we account
for the first two moments of the results, giving us a more comprehensive understanding of the
efficacy of our technique.

[FIGURE 12 ABOUT HERE]

Points are coded in different shades of grey by the size of the reference sample for the
target country-year. One pattern that again emerges is that, while extrapolation error can be large
when the size of the reference sample is small, much of the data lies close to zero. In this range,
OLS and extrapolated errors are roughly equivalent. However, as we move further away from
the best cases, there is evidence in favor of the extrapolated results over OLS. Note, however,
that the mean extrapolated results are much noisier than the OLS estimates, as evidenced by the
wider horizontal confidence intervals as compared to the vertical lines, which are almost hidden
at the scales presented.
Figures 13 and 14 use the same framework to compare the OLS estimates against the
dyadic prediction error where the reference country-year is chosen to minimize geographical
distance or Mahalanobis covariate distance with the target country-year. As demonstrated above,

24

differences in the covariate profile significantly predict absolute error between target and
extrapolated estimates. By minimizing the Mahalanobis distance, we are effectively reducing the
total impact of these differences in choosing the best dyadic pair. Meanwhile, minimizing
geographic distance is included as a second-best heuristic to follow if additional comparison data
are unavailable. In both figures, there is clear evidence in favor of the extrapolated estimation
technique over OLS. For small-sample reference sets, the extrapolated IV consistently
outperforms OLS; for larger sample sizes this also appears to be the case for minimized
geographic distance.

[FIGURES 13 & 14 ABOUT HERE]

Having demonstrated that extrapolated IV performs well relative to OLS using either a
raw average for each target country-year or choosing the best reference country-year based on
minimized Mahalanobis or geographic distance, we finally turn to a similar comparison using the
cumulative results from Section 6. Given the convergence trends summarized in Section 6, we
choose the most recent cumulative extrapolated results for each target country-year under the
assumption that this represents both the largest reference dataset as well as the most accurate
extrapolated prediction on average. We calculate absolute error in the same fashion as described
above and plot the cumulative error on the x-axis. On the y-axis, we re-plot the OLS errors as
well as the minimized Mahalanobis and geographical distance results.

[FIGURE 15 ABOUT HERE]

25

As depicted in Figure 15, there is strong evidence in favor of the cumulative approach over OLS
estimates and suggestive evidence in favor of cumulative results over the best dyadic
extrapolated estimates.
As a final best practice, we turn to combining the minimum Mahalanobis distance
technique from the dyadic results with the cumulative data, leveraging both the ability to reduce
distance in the covariate profile as well as the larger reference sample sizes afforded by the
cumulative results. Specifically, from each year prior to the target’s year, we select the year
whose reference country-years minimize Mahalanobis covariate distance with the target. As
depicted in Figure 16, this approach even more strongly favors extrapolation over withincountry-year OLS estimation. Almost all prediction errors are above the 45 degree line,
indicating a better fit for the cumulative minimized Mahalanobis distance approach.

[FIGURE 16 ABOUT HERE]

Our results suggest that while extrapolation error remains a concern, at least for this
application, the endogeneity bias of within country-year OLS is generally larger.

8. Robustness checks and extensions
8.1 Extrapolating reference ATE to target ATE
In the extrapolation exercise presented above, we are assuming that the characteristics of the
complier population in the target setting are known and can be used to reweight the local average
treatment effect in the reference country. There is a potential circularity here in the sense that

26

knowledge of the target complier population implies the existence of micro data on the
instrument and treatment variables in the target. Our argument in favor of the exercise is that the
target complier population is simply one possible policy-relevant subpopulation in the target,
specifically the only target subpopulation for which we have an internally valid estimate of the
average treatment effect. An alternative approach is to use our extrapolation procedure to
estimate the target ATE from both the target data and the reference data. We then measure “bias”
as the extrapolated ATE from the reference data minus the extrapolated ATE from the target
data. A snapshot of the results for this approach is presented in Figure 17.

[FIGURE 17 ABOUT HERE]

Figure 17 depicts the average extrapolation error, where the set of reference countries
evolves along the x-axis as they become available in years up to and including the year of
observation of the target. The pattern is similar to Figure 10. Twenty or more years prior to the
target country-year, the extrapolation tends to be noisy. But as additional reference country-years
become available, extrapolation error approaches zero in magnitude and is not significantly
different from zero despite being reasonably stable.
An advantage of extrapolating ATE’s is that these are directly comparable to OLS
estimates within the target. In Figure 18 we revisit our extrapolated reference IV to target OLS
comparison for this case.

[FIGURE 18 ABOUT HERE]

27

In particular, Figure 18 compares extrapolated reference IV average treatment effects to OLS,
where the nearest geographical country is used as the reference. The results are similar to Figure
13. Most of the points lie about the 45-degree line, with a significant concentration of points at
very low values of extrapolation error for IV estimates on the x-axis.
Thus our conclusions regarding the reference LATE to target LATE extrapolation also
carry over to reference ATE to target ATE extrapolation.

8.2 Extrapolating using the number of children as the endogenous variable
Angrist and Evans (1998) present results using both the number of children and an indicator for
more than two children as the endogenous variable. In our main results, we focus on the latter.
Here we present results using the former. Figure 19 presents cumulative extrapolation error
results. The results are again similar to Figure 10. When using reference countries available
twenty or more years prior to the target, estimates are noisy and tend to bounce around from year
to year. But moving closer in time to the target, estimates home in on, and are not statistically
significantly different from, zero extrapolation error.

[FIGURE 19 ABOUT HERE]

8.3 Using prior information to improve predictions
In many evaluation contexts prior information exists that can be used to improve the
extrapolation. For example, one might begin with the prior of a zero treatment effect (perhaps
motivated by Rossi’s [1987] “Iron Law”). In the context of our application, prior information, if
available, can readily be incorporated into the extrapolation by appropriately weighting the

28

reweighted reference LATE with the prior. Here we present the simplest case of taking a convex
combination of the reweighted LATE and the prior of a zero treatment effect.
Figure 20 summarizes the weight on the prior that minimizes the root mean squared error
of the cumulative extrapolation for each reference sample size (where the reference sample size
increases with the increasing availability of reference country-years over time). The optimal
weights range from 0.9 to 0.5. The fact that the optimal weights tend to put substantial weight on
the prior reflects the fact that in this application many IV LATE’s are in fact close to zero, i.e.,
that the prior of zero treatment effect is, ex post, a good one. The optimal weight also reflects the
fact that the zero prior reduces posterior estimation variability. The importance of the latter
diminishes as sample size increases, which is reflected in the downward trend of the optimal
weight toward 0.5 for the full reference sample. In general, of course, the prior cannot be chosen
with the benefit of hindsight, and absent extremely strong prior information weights in this range
are unlikely.

[FIGURE 20 ABOUT HERE]

At the same time, even a small weight put on a prior of a zero treatment effect tends to
improve the root mean squared error of the extrapolation. This is depicted in Figure 21. As
weight on the prior increases, root mean squared error decreases essentially linearly. Again,
while a very high weight on the prior is implausible, even a low weight on a prior of zero is
beneficial. As illustrated in Table 4, a weight of 0.01 on the prior reduces mean prediction error
by 0.031 and root mean squared error by 0.14. These values are statistically significant after
controlling for reference population size and the standard error of the extrapolated estimate. Prior

29

information, if it is available and proves to be correct, is a valuable input to improving external
predictions.

[FIGURE 21 ABOUT HERE]
[TABLE 4 ABOUT HERE]

8.4 Dropping sex-selectors
The most direct challenge to the validity of the IV assumptions in our application is the wellknown practice of sex selection in some of the countries in our sample (most notably China
under the one-child policy). In our main results we control for the degree of sex selection within
country-years. In this section we instead drop countries where sex selection and potential nonexogeneity of the same-sex variable is a concern (in particular, India, China, and Nepal and
Vietnam). Figure 22 presents the cumulative extrapolation error results corresponding to Figure
11. The results are qualitatively and quantitatively similar. After an initial “burn in” period where
average extrapolation error bounces around from year to year, it homes in on, and is not
statistically significantly different from, zero.

[FIGURE 22 ABOUT HERE]

8.5 Dropping country-years with invalid IV’s
As an extension of Section 8.4, we rely on recent work by Kitagawa (2008) and Huber and
Mellace (2014) who exploit the implications of the LATE assumptions to derive systematic tests

30

of IV validity. Unlike Section 8.4, where our rationale for dropping sex selectors is based on
indirect evidence and case study research on cultural determinants of gender heterogeneity (see
Rosenzweig and Wolpin [2000] for evidence from India and Edlund and Lee [2013] for evidence
from South Korea), here we employ a data-driven test for violations of the LATE assumptions.
As described in Huber (2015), the LATE assumptions require that, for all y in the support of Y:

f(y,D=1|Z=1) ≥ f(y,D=1|Z=0), f(y,D=0|Z=0) ≥ f(y,D=0|Z=1),

lest the joint densities of the compliers be less than zero. Violations of these inequalities are not
enough to identify which LATE identifying assumptions fail, but they do constitute smoking-gun
evidence that: Z is not randomly assigned; defiers exist in the data and dominate the compliers;
or both.
We use the procedure outlined by Huber (2015) to identify which country-years fail to
satisfy the identifying assumptions necessary for the same-sex instrument to be valid. 3 One
benefit we enjoy thanks to our large dataset is that our finite sample power is high enough that
we are unlikely to commit Type II errors. Nevertheless, as stressed by Huber (2015), failures to
reject the null cannot be taken as evidence of instrument validity. Table 5 lists the country-years
with partial p-values smaller than 0.4, representing a conservative test for IV validity. We rerun
our cumulative analysis on the restricted data and present the results in Figure 24, represented by
light gray circles. The results are not meaningfully different from those presented above.

[TABLE 5 ABOUT HERE]

3

We are grateful to Martin Huber for graciously providing his original R code.
31

A final check is to stratify the data over coarsened covariates in an attempt to see whether
the IV test fails for any subset of the population. We use three bins for the educational attainment
of the mother and her spouse (0 = less than high school, 1 = high school, 2 = more than high
school) and a binary variable indicating whether the mother is in her 20s or her 30s at the time of
the survey. We then stratify over these covariates and run the IV validity test on each subpopulation in each country-year, yielding as many as 18 separate p-values for evaluation
(although many country-years do not have full coverage for all possible strata). Figure 23 lists
the results for all 139 available country-years in the dataset, ranked by the minimum partial pvalue across all available strata. With 18 possible violations for each country-year, we elevate
our threshold for removal to the 95% level of confidence and drop any country-year with at least
one p-value less than 0.05 from our analysis, resulting in the omission of 29 country-years for
our robustness check, listed in dark font at the top of the y-axis.

[FIGURE 23 ABOUT HERE]

Again, our conclusions are largely robust to the omission of these country-years. Figure
24 overlays the cumulative running counter analysis from the main results with the same results
calculated after dropping the invalid country-years. The convergence is still striking. The
robustness-check results outperform the main analysis in the earliest counters. Although for the
most stringent robustness exercise of dropping country-years that fail the stratified IV validity
test, we note that it takes longer for the extrapolation results to converge to approximately zero
error. This is not surprising given the reduced sample size.

32

[FIGURE 24 ABOUT HERE]

9. Conclusion
In this paper we have investigated the degree to which LATE’s from one context can be
extrapolated to another. Returning to our twofold motivation in pursuing this exercise – namely
informing both the external validity of instrumental variables estimates and of the growing body
of policy-relevant evidence from natural and randomized experiments – our findings are both
optimistic and cautious. We find that external validity improves when the reference data and
target data are from similar settings and that given sufficient data, even with a small set of
covariates, average extrapolation error is close to zero when extrapolating LATE’s from one
country-year to another. Furthermore, the resulting extrapolation error is usually less than the
endogeneity bias of using within-target OLS.
At the same time, extrapolation error increases considerably with reference-target
covariate differences. Covariate differences of 10 percent between reference and target settings
lead to extrapolation error ranging from 5 to 20 percent of the overall treatment effect. While it is
difficult to offer a specific quantitative guideline, our results suggest the importance of a close
match between covariate profiles in reference and target settings. This echoes findings in the
program evaluation literature such as Heckman, Ichimura, Smith, and Todd (1998) and our own
related work on this theme (Dehejia, Pop-Eleches, and Samii 2015).

33

Given the increasing number of internally valid, albeit local estimates that are becoming
available to assess the impact of policy interventions, our results suggest that there is some hope
to reach externally valid, general conclusions from this stream of evidence but also that the
quality of extrapolation depends crucially on a sufficient body of quasi-experimental evidence
from contexts that resemble the policy environment of interest. Finally, we note an important
qualification: our results are narrowly relevant only to the application we have considered.
Further replications of this exercise for other instrumental variables and natural and field
experiments are necessary to develop a more systematic understanding of the opportunities for
and limits to externally valid knowledge.

34

References
Abadie, Alberto. (2003). “Semiparametric Instrumental Variable Estimation of Treatment
Response Models.” Journal of Econometrics 113: 231-263.
Allcott, Hunt (2014), “Site Selection Bias in Program Evaluation,” manuscript, New York
University.
Angrist, Joshua, and William Evans. (1998). “Children and their Parents’ Labor Supply:
Evidence from Exogenous Variation in Family Size.” American Economic Review 99(3):
450-477.
Angrist, Joshua, and Ivan Fernandez-Val. (2010). Extrapolating: External Validity and
Overidentification in the LATE Framework. NBER Working Paper 16566.
Angrist, Joshua, Guido W. Imbens, and Donald B. Rubin. (1996). “Identification of Causal
Effects Using Instrumental Variables.” Journal of the American Statistical Association
91: 444-472.
Butikofer, Aline. (2010). “Sibling Sex Composition and Cost of Children.” Manuscript.
Dehejia, Rajeev, and Sadek Wahba (1999). “Causal Effects in Non-Experimental Studies: ReEvaluating the Evaluation of Training Programs.” Journal of the American Statistical
Association 94(448): 1053-1062.
Dehejia, Rajeev, and Sadek Wahba (2002). “Propensity Score Matching Methods for NonExperiemental Causal Studies.” Review of Economics and Statistics 84: 151-161.
Dehejia, Rajeev, Cristian Pop-Eleches, and Cyrus Samii (2015). “From Local to Global: External
Validity in a Fertility Natural Experiment.” National Bureau of Economic Research,
Working Paper No. 21459.
Edlund, Lena, and Chulhee Lee (2013). “Son Preference, Sex Selection, and Economic
Development: The Case of South Korea.” National Bureau of Economic Research,
Working Paper No. 18679.
Gechter, Michael (2015), “Generalizing the Results from Social Experiments: Theory and
Evidence from Mexico and India,” Manuscript.
Froelich, Markus. (2007). “Nonparametric IV Estimation of Local Average Treatment Effects
with Covariates.” Journal of Econometrics 139(1): 35-75.
Hartman, Erin, Richard Grieve, Roland Ramsahal, and Jasjeet Sekhon. (2015). “From Sample
Average Treatment Effect to Population Average Treatment Effect on the Treated:
Combining Experimental with Observational Studies to Estimate Population Treatment
Effects.” Journal of the Royal Statistical Society, Series A (in press).
Heckman, James, Hidehiko Ichimura, Jeffrey Smith, and Petra Todd. (1998). “Characterizing
Selection Bias Using Experimental Data. Econometrica 66(5): 1017-1098.

35

Heckman, James, Robert LaLonde, and Jeffrey Smith. (1999). “The Economics and
Econometrics of Active Labor Market Programs,” in Orley Ashenfelter and David Card
(eds.), Handbook of Labor Economics, Volume 3A. Amsterdam: North-Holland.
Heckman, James, Jeffrey Smith, and Nancy Clements. (1997). “Making the Most Out of
Program Evaluations and Social Experiments: Accounting for Heterogeneity in Program
Impacts.” Review of Economic Studies 64(4): 487-535.
Hotz, V. Joseph, Susan Williams McElroy, and Seth G. Sanders. "Teenage childbearing and its
life cycle consequences exploiting a natural experiment." Journal of Human Resources
40.3 (2005): 683-715.
Huber, Martin (2015). “Testing the Validity of the Sibling Sex Ratio Instrument.” Labour 29(1):
1-14.
Humber, Martin, and G. Mellace (2015). “Testing Instrument Validity for LATE identification
based on inequality moment constraints.” Review of Economics and Statistics 98(2): 398411.
Imbens, Guido W., and Joshua Angrist. (1994). “Identification and Estimation of Local Average
Treatment Effects.” Econometrica 62(2): 467-475.
Imbens, Guido W., and Jeffrey Wooldridge. (2009). “Recent Developments in the Econometrics
of Program Evaluation.” Journal of Econometric Literature 47(1):5-86.
Kitagawa, T. (2008). “A Bootstrap Test for Instrument Validity in the Heterogeneous Treatment
Effect Model.” Manuscript.
Lalonde, Robert. (1986). “Evaluating the Econometric Evaluation of Training Programs with
Experimental Data.” American Economic Review 76(4): 604-620.
Miratrix, Luke, Jasjeet S. Sekhon, and Bin Yu. (2013). “Adjusting Treatment Effect Estimates by
Post-Stratification in Randomized Experiments.” Journal of the Royal Statistical Society
75(2): 369-396.
Pritchett, Lant, and Justin Sandefur. (2013). “Context Matters for Size: Why External Validity
Claims and Development Practice Don’t Mix.” Center for Global Development Working
Paper No. 336.
Rosenzweig, Mark, and Kenneth Wolpin (2000). “Natural ‘Natural Experiments’ in Economics.”
Journal of Economic Literature 38(4): 827-874.
Rossi, Peter (1987). “The Iron Law of Evaluation and Other Metallic Rules.” Research in Social
Problems and Public Policy (4): 3-20.
Vivalt, Eva (2015), “How Much Can We Generalize from Impact Evaluation Results?”,
manuscript, New York University.

36

Appendix A: Full Summary Statistics
[TABLE A-1 ABOUT HERE]

37

Appendix B: Simulations
The simulations were run on a 1% random sample of the full IPUMS data in which we generated
potential outcomes conditional on the covariate profile and observation “type”. In this context,
observation type refers to whether the unit was a complier, an always-taker, or a never-taker. We
deterministically set half of the population to compliers and a quarter each to always- and nevertakers. By construction, defiers are removed, thus ensuring we meet the conditional monotonicity
assumption (C1(c)) discussed in Section 2. Combining the covariate profile with type yielded an
extended covariate vector
which has length and, when stacked on observations, yields
matrix

.

To generate the potential outcomes, we multiplied
yield

.

by a -length vector of coefficients

to

was drawn from a multivariate normal distribution. Without loss of generality, we set

.
Having defined our potential outcomes as such – and in so doing, guaranteeing compliance with
the necessary assumptions – we simulated the instrument assignment in a manner that varied
with the covariate profile . (Note that instrument assignment varies with and not
since
the latter would violate the conditional random assignment assumption of the instrument.)
Specifically, we used a logit specification to determine the probability that the instrument
conditional on
covariates and

using the following specification (as above, let

be a stacked matrix of

observations):
(B.1)

where

is a

length vector of coefficients, again drawn from a multivariate normal distribution

for the sake of simplicity. Note that

to account for the removal of unit type (again,

compliers, always-, and never-takers) from the extended covariate vector

.

The simulation was run 1,000 times, using the centered-interactions technique specified above to
extrapolate the target estimate from the reference population. The code (in both Stata and R) is
available upon request.

38

Table 1: Main variables summarized by observations and dyadic absolute differences.
Variable Name

Country-Year Level

Dyadic Level

Raw statistics

Abs. Differences

Average Education (mother)
N = 132 / 13,539

1.92
(0.56) [0.63]

0.64
(0.467)

Average Education (spouse)
N = 132 / 13,539

2.05
(0.51) [0.85]

0.59
(0.434)

Average Age (mother @ survey)
N = 139 / 15,205

30.05
(0.80) [3.49]

0.93
(0.689)

Average Age (mother @ 1st birth)
N = 139 / 15,205

20.73
(0.95) [3.00]

1.09
(0.861)

GDP per capita
N = 139 / 15,205

9,806
(9,591) [ - ]

10,464
(9,383)

0.012
(0.008) [0.30]

0.008
(0.008)

Total Fertility Rate (children per mother)
N = 139 / 15,205

2.68
(0.65) [ - ]

0.73
(0.541)

Labor Force Participation Rate
N = 125 / 15,205

0.52
(0.21) [ - ]

0.24
(0.17)

Year
N = 139 / 15,205

1989
(11.8) [ - ]

11.7
(10.2)

-

7,942
(4,656)

Economically active mother (Y )
N = 125 / 15,205

0.44
(0.24) [0.44]

0.27
(0.20)

More Kids (D)
N = 139 / 15,205

0.57
(0.19) [0.46]

0.22
(0.16)

Number of Children (D)
N = 139 / 15,205

3.05
(0.52) [1.11]

0.59
(0.43)

Two children of same sex (Z )
N = 139 / 15,205

0.51
(0.008) [0.50]

0.008
(0.008)

Two Girls (Z )
N = 139 / 15,205

0.24
(0.009) [0.43]

0.009
(0.008)

Two Boys (Z )
N = 139 / 15,205

0.26
(0.009) [0.44]

0.009
(0.008)

Gender Ratio (male::female)
N = 139 / 15,205

Geographical Distance (km)
N = - / 15,205
2SLS Variables

Notes: Standard deviations calculated on country year means presented in parentheses. Average
household standard deviations presented in brackets. The three 2SLS variables are dummies. More
kids is coded zero if the mother has only 2 children and one if the mother has more than 2 children.
Same sex is coded zero if the first two children are of different genders and coded one if the first
two children are of the same gender. Economically active mother is coded zero if the mother is not
economically active and coded one if the mother works for pay.

1

2

13539
.03

N
R2

13539
.05

-2.40***
(.05)

.20***
(.04)

II

15205
.01

-2.55***
(.04)

.09***
(.03)

III

15205
.00

-2.60***
(.04)

.04
(.04)

IV

15205
.02

-3.79***
(.29)

.13***
(.03)

V

15205
.00

-2.27***
(.20)

.06*
(.03)

VI

15205
.00

-2.53***
(.09)

.05
(.04)

VII

15205
.01

-2.52***
(.06)

.10***
(.04)

VIII

15205
.00

-2.62***
(.04)

.01
(.03)

IX

15205
.00

.05
(.04)
-2.62***
(.04)

X

Notes: Heteroskedastic-robust standard errors presented in parentheses. Explanatory variables are measured by the log of the absolute difference between the target
value and the reference. Gender ratio calculated as the ratio of boys to girls. Mother’s education level coded as 1 = less than primary completed, 2 = primary completed,
3 = secondary completed, 4 = university completed. Temporal and geographic distances presented in standardized units. * p < 0.10; ** p < 0.05; *** p < 0.01.

-2.48***
(.04)

.17***
(.03)

Constant

Geographic Dist. (1SD = 4,650km)

Temporal Dist. (1SD = 10yrs)

Total Fert. Rate (log)

Labor Force Part. Rate (log)

Gender Ratio (log)

GDP pc (log)

Mother’s Age @ First Birth (log)

Mother’s Age @ Survey (log)

Spouse’s Education (log)

Mother’s Education (log)

I

Table 2: Univariate regression of absolute extrapolation error on absolute covariate differences in dyadic data.

Table 3: Multivariate regression of absolute extrapolation error on absolute covariate differences in
dyadic data.

Mother’s Education (log)
Spouse’s Education (log)
Mother’s Age @ Survey (log)
Mother’s Age @ First Birth (log)
GDP pc (log)
Gender Ratio (log)
Labor Force Part. Rate (log)
Total Fert. Rate (log)
Temporal Dist. (1SD = 10yrs)
Geographic Dist. (1SD = 4,650km)
Constant
N
R2

(1)
Full Sample

(2)
FS t-stat > 2

(3)
FS t-stat > 5

(4)
FS t-stat > 10

.02
(.05)
.18***
(.06)
.06**
(.03)
.02
(.03)
.03
(.03)
.05*
(.03)
-.02
(.03)
.04
(.03)
-.01
(.03)
-.02
(.03)
-2.31***
(.31)

.02
(.05)
.18***
(.06)
.06**
(.03)
.02
(.03)
.03
(.03)
.05
(.03)
-.02
(.03)
.04
(.03)
-.01
(.03)
-.02
(.03)
-2.32***
(.31)

.01
(.05)
.18***
(.06)
.06*
(.03)
.02
(.03)
.03
(.03)
.05
(.03)
-.02
(.03)
.04
(.03)
-.01
(.03)
-.02
(.03)
-2.37***
(.31)

.01
(.06)
.18***
(.06)
.05
(.03)
.03
(.03)
.05*
(.03)
.05
(.03)
-.02
(.03)
.03
(.04)
-.03
(.04)
-.03
(.03)
-2.61***
(.33)

13539
.06

10861
.06

7832
.06

4089
.06

Notes: Heteroskedastic-robust standard errors presented in parentheses. Explanatory variables are measured
by the log of the absolute difference between the target value and the reference. Gender ratio calculated as
the ratio of boys to girls. Mother’s education level coded as 1 = less than primary completed, 2 = primary completed, 3 = secondary completed, 4 = university completed. Temporal and geographic distances presented in
standardized units. * p < 0.10; ** p < 0.05; *** p < 0.01.

3

Table 4: Shrinkage weights on measures of extrapolation error in dyadic data.
Root Mean Squared Error (RMSE)
(1)

Mean Prediction Error
(2)

Weight on Prior

-0.142§§§
(0.004)

-0.031§§§
(0.001)

Reference Size
(1SD = 73,160)

0.04
(0.11)

-0.07§§§
(0.023)

3.56§§§
(0.11)
12,624
0.16

1.03§§§
(0.023)
12,624
0.22

Extrapolated SE
(1SD = 6,394)
N
R2

q P
1 N
Notes: Dependent variables given in column headers. RMSE calculated as N
(Ø
° Øexti )2
i =1 t ar
for each target country-year. Mean prediction error (MPE) calculated as average of absolute difference
between target estimate and each reference extrapolated estimate. Reference sample size and standard
error of extrapolated estimate standardized to facilitate coefficient comparisons.

Table 5: List of country-years with partial P-values less than 0.40.
Country

Year

Partial P-value

St. Diff0

St. Diff1

Egypt
France
France
Uganda
India
Portugal
Panama
Malaysia
Israel
Malaysia
Chile
India
Greece
India
Mali
Rwanda
Guinea
Costa Rica

1996
1990
1999
2002
1987
2001
1960
1980
1995
1991
1970
1993
2001
1983
1998
1991
1996
1973

0.001
0.011
0.055
0.112
0.122
0.147
0.158
0.205
0.243
0.245
0.28
0.329
0.365
0.37
0.37
0.375
0.383
0.389

-0.063
-0.124
-0.121
0.017
-0.052
0.024
-0.157
-0.058
0.004
-0.057
0.018
-0.014
-0.061
0.002
-0.005
0.019
-0.014
-0.015

-0.142
-0.112
-0.12
0.002
0.016
-0.203
0.046
0.024
0.021
0.014
-0.097
0.009
-0.206
0.011
0.008
-0.004
0.007
0.009

Notes: Invalid country-years ranked by partial P-values from Huber-Mellace (2014) test
of IV validity, column 3. The p-values test whether f (y, D = 1|Z = 1) ∏ f (y, D = 1|Z = 0)
and, similarly, f (y, D = 0|Z = 0) ∏ f (y, D = 0|Z = 1). These constraints can be rewritten
as four point estimates (µ̂1 , . . . , µ̂4 ) which must fall between the bounds of the mixed
population. The fourth and fifth columns give the standardized point estimates in the
max(µ̂ ,µ̂ )

form of SD(Y1 ) 2 for the treated (St. Diff1 ) and non-treated (St. Diff0 ) subpopulations.
Violations of the null are therefore positive values. Inference is applied to the test statistics using two-stage bootstrapping, the details of which can be found in Huber and Mellace (2014).

4

Target: Cuba (2002)
Reference: US (1990)

0.4
0.3
0.0

0.1

0.2

Density

0.5

0.6

0.7

Target: 24.69
Reference: 20.73
Extrapolated: 24.64

20

22

24

26

28

30

32

Simulated Estimates

Figure 1: Simulated results of recovering Cuba (2002) LATE using data from US (1990). 1,000 simulations
run to generate distributions. The light-gray shaded polygon depicts the distribution of the simulated
estimates using the Cuban (2002) data while the vertical light-gray line represents the mean estimate. The
solid unshaded polygon depicts the unadjusted simulated estimates using the US (1990) data. The dashed
distribution represents the extrapolated simulations using the same US (1990) data after calibrating to the
complier covariate profile from the target country-year.

Target Size:223
Reference Size:3343
75%: 2507
25%: 835
5%: 167

0.4
0.3
0.0

0.1

0.2

Density

0.5

0.6

0.7

Target: Cuba (2002)
Reference: US (1990)

20

22

24

26

28

30

32

Simulated Estimates

Figure 2: Simulation results reducing size of reference population for US (1990) to extrapolate to Cuba
(2002). The light-gray shaded polygon depicts the distribution of the simulated estimates using the Cuban
(2002) data. The solid lines depict the extrapolated estimates calculated using the US (1990) data, dropping increasingly large fractions of the reference population at random.

5

Density of FS Coefs

0.15

First Stage
EAP
ECA
LAC
MENA
NA
SA
SSA
WE
● World
t−stat < 2

World: 0.041

10

Density

●

0.05

First Stage Coef

0.10

15

●

●

●
●

●

5

●

0

0.00

●

0.00

0.01

0.02

0.03

0.04

0.05

First Stage SE

0.00

0.05

0.10

0.15

First Stage Coef
REGIONS LEGEND

East Asia Pacific (EAP)
Eastern Europe / Central Asia (ECA)
Latin America Carribean (LAC)

Middle East North Africa (MENA)
North America (NA)
South America (SA)

Sub−Saharan Africa (SSA)
Western Europe (WE)

Figure 3: Summary of first-stage results of morekids on samesex in full data. The left-panel is a scatter of
all available country-years by region with the world coefficient indicated by a light gray circle. The lightgray cone covers the area in which the first-stage t-statistic is less than 2. The right-panel plots the density
of the first-stage coefficients.

6

Density of IV Coefs

1.0

IV
EAP
ECA
LAC
MENA
NA
SA
SSA
WE
● World
t−stat < 2

●

●

2.0
1.0

Density

1.5

0.5

●

0.0

IV Coef

World: −0.129

●

●

●

●

0.0

−1.0

0.5

−0.5

●

0.0

0.2

0.4

0.6

0.8

1.0

−1.0

IV SE

−0.5

0.0

0.5

1.0

1.5

IV Coef
REGIONS LEGEND

East Asia Pacific (EAP)
Eastern Europe / Central Asia (ECA)
Latin America Carribean (LAC)

Middle East North Africa (MENA)
North America (NA)
South America (SA)

Sub−Saharan Africa (SSA)
Western Europe (WE)

Figure 4: Summary of 2SLS results of econactivem on morekids in full data. The left-panel is a scatter of all
available country-years by region with the world coefficient indicated by a light gray circle. The light-gray
cone covers the area in which the 2SLS t-statistic is less than 2. The right-panel plots the density of the 2SLS
coefficients.

7

Mother's Age @ First Birth
24

32

Mother's Age @ Survey

●

●

23
22

●
●
●●
● ●
●
●

20

●

19

26

28

●

21

●

Compliers

Compliers

30

●
●

●
●

●

26

28

30

32

19

21

22

23

24

Mother's Educational Attainment

Spouse's Educational Attainment

3.5
3.0

●●

Compliers

●
● ●
●
●

1.5
1.0

1.0

1.5

●

●
● ●
●●

● ●

2.0

2.0

●

●
●

2.5

3.0

3.5

4.0

Raw

4.0

Raw

2.5

Compliers

20

1.0

1.5

2.0

2.5

3.0

3.5

4.0

1.0

Raw

1.5

2.0

2.5

3.0

3.5

4.0

Raw

REGIONS LEGEND
●

East Asia Pacific (EAP)
Eastern Europe / Central Asia (ECA)
Latin America Carribean (LAC)

Middle East North Africa (MENA)
North America (NA)
South America (SA)

Sub−Saharan Africa (SSA)
Western Europe (WE)

Figure 5: Scatter of complier means (y-axis) versus raw means (x-axis) of mother’s age at survey (top-left),
mother’s age at first birth (top-right), mother’s educational attainment (bottom-left), and spouse’s educational attainment (bottom-right), by region. Points falling above (below) the 45± line indicate compliers
who are older (younger) or more (less) educated than the full population.

8

0
−2

●

−4

●

−6

●

−8

Observations
●
●
●

−10

IV Actual − IV Extrapolation

2

Raw Convergence
Target: Greece−1971

●

●
●
●

1960

1962

1964

1966

0.2m
0.3m
0.4m
0.5m
0.7m
0.8m

1968

1970

Year

Figure 6: Convergence of accumulated data on Greek (1971) IV estimate. The dashed line represents the
target IV estimate while the shaded area charts the 2 standard error confidence intervals. The dots are
shaded according to accumulated sample size while the vertical bars represent 2 standard errors.

Raw Convergence
Target: Colombia−1985
Observations
●

3

●
●
●
●

0.2m
0.7m
1.2m
1.7m
2.1m
2.6m

2

●

1

●

●
●

●

●

●

●

●

●
●

●

0

IV Actual − IV Extrapolation

●
●

1960

1965

1970

1975

●

●

●

1980

Year

Figure 7: Convergence of accumulated data on Colombian (1985) IV estimate. The dashed line represents
the target IV estimate while the shaded area charts the 2 standard error confidence intervals. The dots are
shaded according to accumulated sample size while the vertical bars represent 2 standard errors.

9

20

Raw Convergence
Target: Belarus−1999
Observations
●

15

●
●
●
●

10

●

0.1m
1m
1.9m
2.8m
3.7m
4.6m

5

●

●
● ● ● ● ●
● ● ●

0

● ●

● ● ● ● ● ● ●

● ● ● ●

● ● ●

−5

IV Actual − IV Extrapolation

●

1960

1970

1980

1990

Year

Figure 8: Convergence of accumulated data on Belarusian (1999) IV estimate. The dashed line represents
the target IV estimate while the shaded area charts the 2 standard error confidence intervals. The dots are
shaded according to accumulated sample size while the vertical bars represent 2 standard errors.

1

Raw Convergence
Target: Colombia−2005
●
●●●

●●●

0

●

●●
●●●

●

●

●

●●●

●●●●●●●●

●

−1

●

−3

−2

●

−4

Observations
●
●

−5

IV Actual − IV Extrapolation

●
●

●
●

●

−6

●
●

1960

1970

1980

1990

0.2m
2m
3.7m
5.5m
7.2m
9m

2000

Year

Figure 9: Convergence of accumulated data on Colombian (2005) IV estimate. The dashed line represents
the target IV estimate while the shaded area charts the 2 standard error confidence intervals. The dots are
shaded according to accumulated sample size while the vertical bars represent 2 standard errors.

10

Mean Absolute Error Against Counter:
Accumulating Data
Observations
●
●

15

●
●

10
●

5

Mean Absolute Error

●

0.2m
1.4m
2.7m
3.9m
5.1m

●

●

●
●●

●
●●

●
●
●●

●●

●
●

●●●●

●

●
●

●

0

●
●●

−40

−30

●●●● ●
●●●●
● ●●●●●●●●

−20

−10

0

Years Prior

Figure 10: Average cumulative predictions across all target country-years. Averaging with t=0 being year of
observation. The dots are shaded according to accumulated sample size while the vertical bars represent 2
standard errors.

Mean Absolute Error Against Calendar Year
Observations
●

8

●
●
●

6
4

●

●

●

2

Mean Absolute Error

●

0.2m
2.5m
4.8m
7.1m
9.4m

●
●●● ●●●

0

●

1960

1970

●
●●●●●●

1980

●

●●
●●●

1990

●●●●●●●●

●●

●

2000

Calendar Year

Figure 11: Average cumulative predictions across all targets. Averaging by calendar year. The dots are
shaded according to accumulated sample size while the vertical bars represent 2 standard errors.

11

OLS vs. Extrapolated Estimates:
Mean Error
●
●

30

●

●

25

●
●

20

●●

●

●

15

●
●
●

●

●

●

●

●

●
●

●
●

10

OLS Error

●

●
●

●

●

Observations

●

5

●

●

●●
●●
●
●
●● ●
●
●
●● ●

●
●

●● ●
●
● ●●
●
● ●
● ●
●
●
●
●●
●●
● ● ●
●●
●
●
●●
●
●●
●
●

0

●

0

●
●
●

●

5

10

15

20

25

0.4m
0.5m
0.6m
0.7m
0.8m

30

Mean Extrapolated Error

Figure 12: Scatter plot of weighted absolute error of OLS estimate versus mean error averaged across all
possible dyads for each target country-year. Weighted absolute error given by

|Øext r ap. °Øt ar g et |
.
2
2
(se ext
r ap. +se t ar g et )

Each dot

represents a target country year. Two standard errors depicted by horizontal (for extrapolated error) and
vertical (for OLS error) bars.

OLS vs. Extrapolated Estimates:
Min. Geographic Dist.
●
●

30

●

●

25

●
●

20

●

15

●
●
●

●

5

●

●

●
●
●

●
●
●
●
●

0

●

●

●
●

10

OLS Error

●
●
● ●

●

●
●

●
●
●● ●
●●
●
●
●●●
●
●
●
●●●
●
●
●●
●
●
●
●
●
●
● ●
● ●●● ●
●
●
●
●
●

0

●

Observations

●

●

●
●

●
●
●
●

5

10

15

20

25

0.1m
1.1m
2.1m
3.1m
4.2m

30

Extrapolated Error

Figure 13: Scatter plot of weighted absolute error of OLS estimate versus the extrapolated error associated
with the dyad that minimizes geographical distance to the target country year. Weighted absolute error
given by

|Øext r ap. °Øt ar g et |
.
2
2
(se ext
r ap. +se t ar g et )

Each dot represents a target country year. Two standard errors depicted by hori-

zontal (for extrapolated error) and vertical (for OLS error) bars.

12

OLS vs. Extrapolated Estimates:
Min. Mahalanobis Distance
●
●

30

●

25

●
●
●

20

●

●
●

15

●
●
●
●

5
0

●

●

●
●

10

OLS Error

●
●

●

●

●
●
● ●
●
●
●
●
●
●●
●
●●
●
●
●
●
●● ●
●
● ● ●●
●
●
● ● ●
●
●
●● ●
●
●
●
●
●
●●
●
●
● ● ●
●
● ●
●
●

0

Observations
●

●

●
●

●

●
●

5

10

15

20

25

0.1m
1.1m
2.1m
3.1m
4.2m

30

Extrapolated Error

Figure 14: Scatter plot of weighted absolute error of OLS estimate versus the extrapolated error associated
with the dyad that minimizes the Mahalanobis distance to the target country year. Weighted absolute error
given by

|Øext r ap. °Øt ar g et |
.
2
2
(se ext
r ap. +se t ar g et )

Mahalanobis distance calculated on mother’s age at survey, mother’s age at first

birth, mother’s educational attainment, spouse’s educational attainment, labor force participation rate,
total fertility rate, and per capita GDP.

●

●

Cumulative Error Against Best Dyadic Error
14

●

●

●

12

●
●
●
●

●

●

8

●

●●

6

●
●
●

●
● ●

●

4

Best Dyadic Error

10

●

●
●

0

2

●●
●

●●

●
●

●
●

●
●
●
●
●
● ●
●●
●
●

●
●
● ● ● ●●
●
●
● ●
●
●●●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●●
●●
● ●
●●
●●
●●●●
●●
●
●
●●
●
●●
●●
●
●●
●
●
●
●
●
●●
●
●●
●
●
●●
●●●
●
●
●●
●●

0

2

●
●

4

6

8

10

Best MD
Best Geo
OLS

12

14

Cumulative Error

Figure 15: Scatter plot of weighted absolute error of OLS (X’s), minimized dyadic Mahalanobis distance
(solid circles), and minimized geographic distance (hollow circles) versus most recent available cumulative extrapolated estimate. Weighted absolute error given by
country year.

|Øext r ap. °Øt ar g et |
.
2
2
(se ext
r ap. +se t ar g et )

Each dot represents a target

13

●

●

MD Cumulative Error Against Best Dyadic Error
14

●

●

●

12

●
●
●
●

●

●

8

●

●

6

●
●

●
●

●
● ●

4

Best Dyadic Error

10

●

●

●
●
●

●

0

2

●
●
●●

●
●
● ●
●
●

●

● ●
●
● ●
●
●
●
●
●● ● ●●
●
●●●
●
● ● ●
●
●
●
●● ● ●
●
●
● ●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●●
● ●
●●
●●
●●
●
●
●
●
●
●●
●
●
●
●●
●●

0

●
●

●
●

2

●
●

4

6

8

10

Best MD
Best Geo
OLS

12

●
●

14

Cumulative Error

Figure 16: Scatter plot of weighted absolute error of OLS (X’s), minimized dyadic Mahalanobis distance (solid circles), and minimized geographic distance (hollow circles) versus minimized Mahalanobis
distance for cumulative extrapolated estimate, where accumulated reference covariates are population
weighted in household sample data. Weighted absolute error given by
a target country year.

|Øext r ap. °Øt ar g et |
.
2
2
(se ext
r ap. +se t ar g et )

Each dot represents

Mean Absolute Error Against Counter:
Accumulating Data
Observations
●
●

15

●
●

10
●

5

Mean Absolute Error

●

0.2m
1.4m
2.7m
3.9m
5.1m

●

●

●
●●

●
●●

●
●
●●

●●

●
●

●●●●

●

●
●

●

0

●
●●

−40

−30

−20

●●●● ●
●●●●
● ●●●●●●●●

−10

0

Years Prior

Figure 17: Average cumulative predictions across all target country-years. Averaging with t=0 being year of
observation. The dots are shaded according to accumulated sample size while the vertical bars represent 2
standard errors. Extrapolation technique reweighted to target ATE.

14

OLS vs. Extrapolated Estimates:
Min. Geographic Dist.
●
●

30

●

●

25

●
●

20

●
●

15

●
●

5
0

●

●
●
●

10

OLS Error

●
●
●

●

●
●

●

●
●
●

●
●
●
●

●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●● ●
●
●
●
●●
●
●●
●
●
●
●
●
●●
●
●
●
●
●●● ●
●
●
●
● ●● ●
●
●●
●
●

0

●

Observations

●

●●●

●

●

●
●

●
●
●

5

10

15

20

25

0m
1m
2.1m
3.1m
4.2m

30

Extrapolated Error

Figure 18: Scatter plot of weighted absolute error of OLS versus minimized geographical distance dyad
pair. Weighted absolute error given by

|Øext r ap. °Øt ar g et |
.
2
2
(se ext
r ap. +se t ar g et )

Each dot represents a target country year. Two stan-

dard errors depicted by horizontal (for extrapolated error) and vertical (for OLS error) bars. Extrapolation
technique reweighted to target ATE.

Mean Absolute Error Against Counter:
Accumulating Data
Observations
●
●

15

●
●

10
5

Mean Absolute Error

●

0.2m
1.4m
2.7m
3.9m
5.1m

●
●
●

●

●●

●

●
●

●
●

0

●●

−40

●

●

●

●
●

−30

●●●●●●

●

●

●
●●●●●●●● ●●●●●●●●●●●

−20

−10

0

Years Prior

Figure 19: Average cumulative predictions across all target country-years. Averaging with t=0 being year of
observation. The dots are shaded according to accumulated sample size while the vertical bars represent 2
standard errors. Treatment measured by number of children.

15

Wstar Versus Reference Size

0.9

●
●
●
●

●

0.8

●

●
●

●
●
●
●

●
●

●
●

●

●

●

0.7

●
●

●

●
●
●
●

●

●
●

●
● ●●●

0.6

Weight on Zero Prior

●

●
●
●

●
●

●

●
●

●

●●

●

●
●

0.5

●

●
●

●

●

●

0e+00

2e+06

4e+06

6e+06

8e+06

Reference Sample Size

Figure 20: Optimal weights on zero prior in full data on y-axis, calculated as binned averages over range
of reference sample sizes. Dotted line represents loess smoother with Æ parameter of 0.9.

Cumulative Shrinkage Results

0.360

0.365

RMSE

0.370

0.375

Optimal w = 0.87

0.355

●

0.0

0.2

0.4

0.6

0.8

1.0

Weight on Zero Prior

Figure 21: Cumulative shrinkage results for all data, calculated on most recent cumulative reference
population for each target country-year. Weight on zero prior (w) that minimizes RMSE for all target country-years across all targets measured on x-axis, such that higher values on x-axis reflect greater
weight on zero prior. RMSE on y-axis. w is a function of extrapolated estimate
q P variance as follows:
≥
¥
(1°w)§V ar [Øext ]
1
1
2
Øsh =
§ Øext for w 2 [0, 1]. RMSE is calculated as follows:
i =0 (Øt ar ° Øsh i ) where
V ar [Øext ]
N
i indexes shrinkage weights for the full data. Minimizing shrinkage value given by gray circle.

16

Mean Absolute Error Against Counter:
Accumulating Data
Observations
●
●

15

●
●

10
5

Mean Absolute Error

●

0.2m
1.2m
2.2m
3.2m
4.2m

●
●
●

●

●●●●●● ●
●
● ●●●●●●●● ●
● ●●●●● ●● ●
● ●●●●●●●●

●

0

●

●●●

●

−40

−30

−20

−10

0

Years Prior

Figure 22: Average cumulative predictions across all target country-years. Averaging with t=0 being year of
observation. The dots are shaded according to accumulated sample size while the vertical bars represent 2
standard errors. Sex selectors dropped from sample include China, India, Nepal, and Vietnam.

Figure 23 appears on the next page.
Mean Absolute Error Against Counter:
Accumulating Data
●
●
●

10

●
●

5

Mean Absolute Error

15

●

Main
Sex Selectors
IV−Test (Simp.)
IV−Test (Strat.)

●

●

●

●

0

●
●

●
●

●

●●

●●●●
●
●
●●●
●

●

●

●
●
●●
●●
●●
●● ●
●
● ●●●
●
●●●
●●●●● ●
●●●●

−40

●

●

●
●
●
● ●
●
● ●
●
● ●
●● ●
●
●
●
● ●
●●●●● ●
●
●
●
●
●●● ●
●
●
● ●●
●●●●●
●●
●
●●●●●
●● ●●●
●●●●●
●●
●● ●●●
●●● ●
●●
●●
●●●●●●
●●● ●●●●
●

−30

−20

−10

0

Years Prior

Figure 24: Average cumulative predictions across all target country-years. Averaging with t=0 being year
of observation. Dots represent different robustness checks as indicated in the legend.

17

Stratified IV−Test Results
Spain−2001
Spain−1991
Mexico−1990
Costa Rica−2000
Colombia−1985
Israel−1972
Argentina−2001
Venezuela−1990
Venezuela−1971
Panama−1960
France−1968
Argentina−1970
Brazil−1960
Guinea−1996
Greece−1971
Chile−1982
Cambodia−1998
Argentina−1991
Mongolia−2000
Brazil−1970
India−1987
Guinea−1983
Chile−1970
Malaysia−1991
Hungary−2001
Rwanda−2002
Malaysia−1980
Ghana−2000
Iraq−1997
Mexico−2000
Mexico−1995
Costa Rica−1973
Bolivia−1976
Kyrgyz Republic−1999
Switzerland−1980
Vietnam−1999
Puerto Rico−2000
Kenya−1989
United States−1990
Puerto Rico−1990
Senegal−1988
Panama−1990
Bolivia−1992
United States−1970
Colombia−1993
France−1975
South Africa−1996
Ecuador−1974
Portugal−1981
Slovenia−2002
Senegal−2002
Mexico−1970
Panama−1970
Panama−2000
Venezuela−1981
Tanzania−2002
Colombia−2005
India−1999
Greece−2001
Tanzania−1988
Ecuador−1982
Brazil−1991
South Africa−2007
Ecuador−2001
Costa Rica−1984
Italy−2001
South Africa−2001
Belarus−1999
Greece−1991
Uganda−2002
Mali−1998
France−1962
Puerto Rico−2005
United States−1960
Chile−1992
Colombia−1973
India−1983
Romania−2002
Portugal−1991
Nepal−2001
India−1993
Cuba−2002
China−1982
Romania−1992
Philippines−1990
Uganda−1991
United States−2000
Panama−1980
Switzerland−1990
Portugal−2001
United States−2005
Malaysia−2000
Switzerland−2000
Israel−1995
France−1982
Brazil−2000
France−1999
Peru−1993
Hungary−1990
Malaysia−1970
Bolivia−2001
Rwanda−1991
Peru−2007
United States−1980
Jordan−2004
Greece−1981
Armenia−2001
Mali−1987
France−1990
Chile−2002
Switzerland−1970
Ecuador−1990
Austria−1991
Argentina−1980
Vietnam−1989
Brazil−1980
Venezuela−2001
Austria−2001
China−1990
Egypt−1996
Saint Lucia−1991
Austria−1971
Austria−1981
United Kingdom−1991
Saint Lucia−1980

●
●

● ●
● ● ●
●

●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●

●

●
●
●

●
● ●●

●

●
●
●●● ● ●
●
●●
●● ●●●
●
● ●
●
● ●●
●●
●
●●
●
●
●
● ●
●

● ● ●
● ●● ●
● ●●
● ●

●
●

●

●

●

●

● ●

● ●

●

●● ●

●

●

●●

●

●

●

●
●

●

●

●

●

●

●●
●

●●

●

●
●

●●

● ●

●
●

●

●

●

●

●

●
●●
●

●● ● ● ●

●

●

●

●

●●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

● ●

●

●

● ●

●

●

● ●

●

●● ● ●●

●

●

●

●

●
●

●

●

● ●

●●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

● ●●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●●

●

● ●

●

●

●

●

●
●

●●

●

●

●

●●

●

●

● ● ●

●
●
●

●

●

● ●

● ●

●
●

●

●●

●
●

●
●

●

●●
● ●

●

●

●
●

●

●

●
●

●

●

●

●

●

●

● ●

●●
●

● ●
●

●

●

●

●

●●

●

●

●
●

●●

●

●

●
●

●

●●

● ●

●●
●

● ●
●

●●

●●

●●

●

●●

●

●

●

●●
●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

● ● ● ●●

●

●

●

● ●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●●

●●

●

●

●

●
●

●

●●

●

●
●

●

●

● ●

●

●

●

● ● ●

● ●
●

●

●

●
●
●● ●

●

●

●

●

●●

●●

●
●

●

●

●

●
●

● ●●
●●

●

●

●

● ●
●

●
●

●

●

●
●

●

●

●

●●

●

●

●

●

Partial P−value
95% Threshold
Invalid IV

●

●

●

●

●
●

●●

●

●

●
●

●● ●
●

●

●

●

●●

●
●
●●

●

●

●

●● ● ●●

●
●

●
●

●

●

●
●

●

●

●●

●
●

●

●●●

●●
● ●●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

● ●

●
●

●
●●●●

●

●
●

●●

●

●

●
●

●

●

●
●
●

●●

●

●

●

●

●

●
●
●

●●

●

● ●

●

●

●

●
●●

● ● ● ●●

●

●

●

●

●
●●

●

●

●
●

●●

● ●●● ●
●● ●

●
●
●

●

●

●

●●

●●

● ●
●

●

●

●
●

●

●

●

● ●● ●
●

●

●
●

●

●

●●

●

●
●
●

●

● ●

●

●

●

●●
●

●

●

●

●

●
●●
●

● ● ●●
●

●

●●
●

●

●
●

●

●

● ● ●
●

●

●
●

●●

●

●
●

●
●

●

●●● ●

●

● ●

●●

●●

●
●

●
●

●

●
●

●

●
●●

●

●

●

●
●● ●
●●
●●

●●

● ●

●

●

●● ●
●●

●

●

●

●

●

●
●

●

●
●

●

●
●
●

●

●●

●

● ●●

●

●●
●

●

●●

●●

●●

●

●

●

●●

●

●
●

●

●

●

●

● ●

●

●
●

●

● ●

●● ●
●

●

●
●

●

●

●

●

●
●

●

●

●
●

●

●●

●

●●
●

●

●

●

●

●●

●

●

●●

●

●

●

●

●
●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●● ●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●
●●

●

●● ● ●

●
●

●●

●

●

●

●● ●
●●

●
●

●

● ●

●

●
●

●

●

●

●

●
●
●

●

●

●

●

●
●

●

●

●

● ●●

●

●

●

●

●●

●

●
●● ●
●

●

●

●

● ●

●

● ●

●

●

●●

●

●

●

●●

●

●●

●

●●●

●

● ●
●●

●●

●

●●

●●

●

●
● ●

●
●

●
●

●

●
●

●

●● ● ●

●
●

●

●●

●
●

●

●

●

●
●

●

●

●
●

● ●

●● ●

●

● ●

●

●

●
●
●

●
●● ●

●
●

●

●

●

●

●

●
●

●●

●

●

●

●
●

●
●

● ●
●

●

●

●

●

● ●
●

●
●

●
●●

●

●
●

●
●

●

●
●
●

●

●
●

●

●

●
●

●
●

●
●

●●

●

●

●

●●
●

●

●

●

●
●

● ●●

●
●

●

●
●

●
●

●

●

●

●

● ●●

●●

●●

●

●

●

●●

●● ●

●

●●

●

●

●

● ● ●

●
● ● ●

●

●●

●

●

●●
●

●

●

●

●●
●

● ●●●

●● ●

●

●
●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●●

●

0.0

●

●

●●

●
●

●
●●●
●

●

●

●

● ● ●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●● ●

● ●

●

●
●
●

●

●●

●
●

●

●
●

●

●●

●●

●

●●

●
●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●
● ●
●
●●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●

●
●
● ●

●

●
●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

● ●
●
●
● ●●●
●
●
●
●
●
●
● ●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
● ●
●
● ●●
●
●
●● ●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●●
●
●●
●
●●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●●
●● ● ●●
● ●
●
●
●
●
●
● ●
●
●● ●● ●
●
●
●
●●
●
●
●
● ●
● ●● ●
●
●
● ●
● ●
●
●
●
●
●
●
● ●
●
●
●
● ●
●
●
●
●
● ●
●
●●
●
●
●
●●
● ●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
● ● ●
●
●
●
●
●●
●
●
●
●
●
● ●
●●
●
●
● ●
●
● ● ●●
●
●
●
●●
●

●

●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●

●

●
●● ●
●

●

●

●

●

●

●
●

0.2

0.4

0.6

0.8

1.0

Confidence Level for Rejection

Figure 23: Partial p-values for each of 18 possible strata, ranked by maximum confidence level for rejection
of IV validity. Country-years with at least one strata failing the validity test at the 95% level of confidence
(depicted by hollow-circles) are dropped.

18

Table A-1: All country year statistics
Country

Year

GDPpc

Sex Ratio

Educ.

Age

LFP

TFR

FS Ø

IV Ø

Argentina

1970

7615

.011 (.342)

1.62 (.87)

34.8 (7.7)

.31

2.48

.043 (.005)

.023 (.093)

1980

8487

.008 (.333)

1.65 (.63)

33.7 (7.9)

.28

2.67

.036 (.002)

-.020 (.047)

1991

7423

.008 (.330)

2.04 (.80)

34.4 (7.5)

.51

2.59

.036 (.002)

-.118 (.046)

2001

8552

.009 (.339)

2.30 (.75)

34.4 (7.6)

.58

2.52

.028 (.002)

-.136 (.068)

2001

2837

.028 (.327)

3.12 (.55)

33.6 (6.4)

.76

2.24

.111 (.005)

-.080 (.045)

Armenia
Austria

1971

16527

.013 (.397)

.00 (.00)

34.2 (8.2)

.60

2.08

.024 (.003)

-.323 (.144)

1981

22437

.013 (.353)

.00 (.00)

34.8 (7.4)

.65

2.22

.042 (.004)

-.160 (.106)

1991

27956

.015 (.357)

.00 (.00)

34.4 (6.6)

.67

2.07

.034 (.004)

-.394 (.138)

2001

33839

.015 (.355)

.00 (.00)

35.9 (6.1)

.79

2.07

.038 (.004)

-.128 (.103)

Belarus

1999

5678

.014 (.380)

3.02 (.59)

36.1 (6.4)

.82

1.76

.022 (.002)

.057 (.106)

Bolivia

1976

3255

.006 (.330)

1.35 (1.14)

33.7 (8.6)

.22

3.06

.013 (.005)

.000 (.267)

1992

2755

.008 (.320)

2.17 (2.03)

33.7 (8.2)

.52

3.14

.013 (.004)

.421 (.355)
-.058 (.201)

Brazil

2001

3134

.014 (.338)

1.88 (1.14)

34.0 (8.4)

.49

2.84

.018 (.004)

1960

2469

.010 (.307)

1.11 (.66)

32.0 (7.4)

.14

3.83

.014 (.002)

.021 (.083)

1970

3845

.009 (.304)

1.12 (.47)

32.5 (7.7)

.19

3.71

.020 (.001)

-.016 (.053)

1980

6943

.009 (.316)

1.29 (.71)

32.7 (7.8)

.30

3.31

.027 (.001)

-.012 (.044)

1991

6117

.010 (.328)

1.52 (.84)

33.3 (7.5)

.43

2.85

.031 (.001)

.015 (.035)
.005 (.034)

2000

6834

.012 (.344)

1.66 (.87)

33.7 (7.6)

.58

2.37

.031 (.001)

Cambodia

1998

888

.007 (.312)

1.20 (.47)

34.2 (7.7)

.83

3.57

.018 (.003)

.055 (.122)

Chile

1970

4465

.005 (.319)

1.59 (.66)

33.5 (7.9)

.25

3.42

.020 (.004)

.103 (.131)

1982

4308

.009 (.341)

1.85 (.72)

33.3 (7.5)

.27

2.67

.026 (.003)

.053 (.102)

1992

6527

.010 (.351)

2.14 (.74)

33.7 (7.0)

.28

2.27

.036 (.003)

.079 (.071)

2002

9664

.007 (.365)

2.35 (.73)

35.6 (7.0)

.43

2.09

.027 (.003)

.144 (.102)

1982

624

.025 (.313)

1.55 (.58)

33.8 (6.7)

.88

2.90

.066 (.001)

.009 (.011)

1990

1157

.030 (.321)

1.65 (.59)

33.6 (6.6)

.90

2.26

.122 (.001)

.002 (.005)

1973

4089

.006 (.310)

1.51 (1.25)

32.5 (7.8)

.31

3.77

.015 (.002)

.131 (.123)

1985

4962

.009 (.332)

1.83 (1.23)

32.0 (7.4)

.45

2.91

.031 (.002)

-.047 (.066)

1993

5785

.009 (.344)

1.96 (1.18)

32.9 (7.2)

.41

2.56

.034 (.002)

.036 (.052)

2005

6491

.014 (.350)

2.13 (1.36)

34.1 (7.9)

.32

2.31

.031 (.002)

.224 (.054)

1973

7067

.010 (.293)

1.45 (.69)

32.2 (7.6)

.22

4.12

.006 (.008)

-.840 (1.370)

1984

7075

.010 (.321)

1.79 (.72)

31.5 (7.0)

.27

2.98

.049 (.007)

.044 (.112)

2000

8870

.013 (.338)

2.11 (.80)

33.6 (7.1)

.38

2.44

.034 (.005)

.105 (.146)

Cuba

2002

7624

.014 (.442)

2.68 (.80)

33.7 (6.7)

.47

1.44

.016 (.001)

.124 (.168)

Ecuador

1974

4067

.010 (.310)

1.40 (1.02)

32.3 (8.0)

.17

3.74

.005 (.004)

1.340 (1.363)

1982

5074

.010 (.319)

2.00 (1.88)

32.1 (7.8)

.25

3.39

.013 (.004)

.113 (.230)

1990

4429

.012 (.326)

2.01 (1.31)

32.7 (7.6)

.33

3.03

.028 (.003)

-.004 (.109)

China
Colombia

Costa Rica

2001

4824

.008 (.348)

2.04 (.92)

33.4 (7.8)

.36

2.49

.025 (.003)

-.058 (.118)

Egypt

1996

3233

.027 (.337)

.00 (.00)

31.6 (7.0)

.21

3.16

.049 (.001)

-.012 (.019)

France

1962

11116

.011 (.388)

1.56 (.65)

35.2 (7.8)

.47

2.21

.027 (.002)

-.201 (.067)

1968

14312

.010 (.387)

1.74 (.69)

34.6 (7.7)

.55

2.24

.027 (.002)

-.216 (.069)

1975

18472

.013 (.396)

1.91 (.81)

34.1 (8.0)

.71

2.13

.027 (.002)

-.142 (.068)

1982

21910

.013 (.401)

1.99 (.87)

34.0 (7.5)

.79

1.93

.031 (.002)

-.189 (.057)

1990

25766

.013 (.400)

2.24 (.94)

34.6 (6.7)

.85

1.88

.033 (.002)

-.169 (.053)

1999

28716

.011 (.403)

2.48 (1.02)

36.1 (6.7)

.89

1.87

.030 (.001)

-.156 (.050)

Ghana

2000

1478

-.003 (.367)

1.44 (.64)

34.1 (8.3)

.85

2.67

-.003 (.003)

.514 (.735)

Greece

1971

13129

.015 (.393)

2.03 (1.53)

35.8 (7.7)

.25

1.95

.041 (.002)

-.206 (.067)

1981

16555

.018 (.389)

2.14 (.73)

35.3 (8.1)

.33

1.86

.047 (.002)

-.055 (.055)

1991

17768

.020 (.357)

2.43 (.72)

35.3 (7.0)

.44

2.00

.055 (.003)

-.105 (.064)

2001

21887

.018 (.359)

2.79 (.77)

36.0 (6.1)

.50

2.01

.035 (.003)

.042 (.117)

1983

740

.024 (.418)

1.08 (.50)

31.8 (8.9)

.52

2.21

.031 (.004)

-.127 (.140)

1996

727

.022 (.342)

1.12 (.77)

31.7 (8.3)

.73

2.72

.013 (.004)

-.054 (.222)

Guinea

Notes: Standard deviations presented in parentheses. Standard deviations unavailable for per capita GDP, total
fertility rate, and labor force participation rate due to measurement at higher levels of aggregation than the household.

19

Table A-1: All country year statistics (cont’d)
Country

Year

GDPpc

Sex Ratio

Educ.

Age

LFP

TFR

FS Ø

IV Ø

Hungary

1970

7779

.010 (.377)

1.98 (.53)

35.6 (7.7)

.00

1.88

.021 (.004)

.000 (.000)

1980

11255

.014 (.368)

2.36 (.63)

33.0 (6.9)

.00

1.78

.038 (.004)

.000 (.000)

1990

12489

.009 (.376)

2.59 (.60)

34.7 (6.5)

.75

1.76

.035 (.004)

-.283 (.121)

2001

13732

.015 (.365)

2.82 (.73)

35.0 (6.6)

.62

1.88

.028 (.005)

-.240 (.190)

1983

1107

.039 (.352)

1.35 (.70)

30.8 (7.5)

.32

2.78

.039 (.004)

-.052 (.089)

1987

1261

.043 (.353)

1.44 (.78)

30.7 (7.2)

.30

2.75

.045 (.004)

-.165 (.074)

1993

1434

.047 (.361)

1.58 (.86)

30.8 (6.9)

.33

2.63

.052 (.004)

-.078 (.070)

1999

1910

.043 (.358)

1.69 (.93)

31.1 (6.6)

.30

2.64

.050 (.004)

-.005 (.071)

Iraq

1997

2755

.010 (.284)

1.71 (.82)

31.2 (6.6)

.13

4.63

.007 (.002)

.015 (.222)

Israel

1972

13991

.020 (.330)

2.53 (1.32)

35.0 (8.3)

.32

3.07

.021 (.006)

-.025 (.240)

1983

16123

.010 (.327)

2.90 (2.05)

33.3 (6.9)

.00

2.88

.020 (.005)

.000 (.000)

1995

20790

.012 (.334)

2.64 (.95)

34.8 (6.9)

.59

2.78

.014 (.005)

.415 (.380)
-.035 (.090)

India

Italy

2001

29146

.013 (.420)

2.57 (.67)

37.1 (6.9)

.66

1.72

.020 (.001)

Jordan

2004

3947

.023 (.311)

2.61 (.84)

31.7 (6.2)

.27

4.12

.023 (.004)

-.031 (.160)

Kenya

1989

1172

.007 (.317)

1.48 (.72)

30.8 (7.9)

.76

3.55

.007 (.003)

-.387 (.408)

Kyrgyz Republic

1999

1597

.013 (.319)

3.02 (.51)

33.0 (6.7)

.78

2.89

.058 (.005)

-.009 (.062)

Malaysia

1970

2065

.008 (.306)

1.21 (.43)

32.9 (8.1)

.43

3.55

.013 (.007)

.418 (.625)

1980

4250

.012 (.315)

1.51 (.56)

32.7 (7.4)

.53

3.28

.030 (.008)

-.034 (.257)

1991

6272

.016 (.347)

1.87 (.84)

33.1 (7.1)

.47

2.91

.034 (.005)

-.355 (.149)

2000

9474

.015 (.349)

2.07 (1.36)

34.5 (7.2)

.50

2.85

.032 (.005)

-.375 (.145)

1987

628

.013 (.341)

1.33 (1.42)

32.4 (8.7)

.50

3.03

.006 (.004)

.088 (.531)

1998

768

.015 (.328)

1.28 (1.35)

32.0 (8.5)

.39

3.33

.011 (.003)

.235 (.311)

1970

6848

.015 (.303)

1.23 (.48)

31.9 (8.0)

.17

3.94

.024 (.004)

.098 (.129)

1990

9427

.009 (.314)

1.71 (.74)

32.5 (7.5)

.27

3.18

.028 (.001)

-.015 (.032)

Mali
Mexico

Mongolia

1995

9158

.008 (.360)

1.78 (.92)

31.7 (7.5)

.45

2.69

.022 (.005)

-.024 (.223)

2000

11380

.010 (.327)

2.19 (1.64)

32.9 (7.5)

.35

2.74

.030 (.001)

.003 (.031)

1989

2740

.010 (.318)

2.16 (.88)

32.7 (7.8)

.00

3.38

.011 (.007)

.000 (.000)

2000

2219

.007 (.382)

2.63 (.79)

31.9 (6.7)

.78

2.59

.028 (.005)

.073 (.161)
-.117 (.060)

Nepal

2001

918

.032 (.313)

1.32 (.86)

32.3 (7.6)

.64

2.87

.033 (.002)

Pakistan

1998

1732

.024 (.332)

1.28 (.66)

31.2 (7.8)

.00

3.66

.031 (.001)

.000 (.000)

Panama

1960

2142

.008 (.342)

1.40 (.75)

31.6 (8.0)

.38

2.98

.015 (.013)

.492 (.614)

1970

3419

.017 (.307)

1.56 (.70)

31.8 (7.6)

.34

3.39

.028 (.008)

.044 (.277)

1980

5200

.015 (.318)

1.84 (.89)

32.0 (7.4)

.41

3.20

.015 (.008)

-.031 (.470)

1990

5531

.017 (.334)

2.19 (1.08)

32.3 (7.2)

.37

2.59

.048 (.007)

.101 (.143)

2000

6950

.013 (.340)

2.27 (.91)

33.0 (7.2)

.45

2.42

.035 (.006)

.210 (.191)

1993

3855

.006 (.330)

1.97 (1.27)

33.4 (7.7)

.33

2.93

.026 (.002)

.126 (.079)

2007

6374

.009 (.351)

2.22 (.97)

34.7 (7.7)

.41

2.39

.028 (.002)

-.006 (.073)

Peru
Philippines

Portugal

Puerto Rico

1990

2334

.015 (.307)

2.34 (1.19)

32.8 (7.4)

.49

3.43

.028 (.001)

-.088 (.047)

1995

2365

.017 (.342)

2.48 (1.04)

32.7 (7.5)

.00

3.12

.035 (.001)

.000 (.000)

2000

2464

.020 (.356)

2.74 (1.59)

32.9 (7.4)

.00

2.99

.039 (.001)

.000 (.000)

1981

11369

.010 (.405)

1.30 (.67)

34.3 (8.2)

.64

2.09

.028 (.003)

.179 (.153)

1991

15661

.010 (.417)

1.62 (.86)

34.6 (7.4)

.76

1.80

.020 (.003)

.085 (.201)

2001

20095

.011 (.432)

2.07 (.97)

35.0 (6.8)

.86

1.63

.015 (.003)

-.408 (.249)

1970

10418

.010 (.320)

2.06 (.89)

32.9 (7.9)

.00

3.05

.042 (.020)

.000 (.000)

1980

12556

.010 (.327)

2.45 (.83)

33.1 (7.2)

.00

2.76

.033 (.008)

.000 (.000)

1990

17870

.010 (.343)

2.78 (.75)

34.1 (7.3)

.50

2.26

.063 (.008)

-.018 (.126)

2000

25284

.013 (.392)

3.03 (.67)

33.7 (7.7)

.56

1.89

.044 (.006)

-.233 (.160)

2005

26054

.005 (.408)

3.12 (.68)

35.2 (8.0)

.68

1.77

.024 (.014)

-.791 (.808)

Notes: Standard deviations presented in parentheses. Standard deviations unavailable for per capita GDP, total fertility rate, and labor force participation rate due to measurement at higher levels of aggregation than the household.

20

Table A-1: All country year statistics (cont’d)
Country

Year

GDPpc

Sex Ratio

Educ.

Age

LFP

TFR

FS Ø

IV Ø

Romania

1977

5622

.010 (.355)

1.70 (.83)

33.8 (7.4)

.00

2.19

.034 (.002)

.000 (.000)

1992

5005

.012 (.352)

2.45 (.83)

34.0 (7.0)

.77

2.12

.035 (.002)

-.054 (.059)

2002

6575

.012 (.365)

2.52 (.73)

34.4 (6.9)

.56

1.90

.031 (.002)

.064 (.094)
.603 (3.071)

Rwanda

1991

768

-.004 (.311)

.00 (.00)

33.1 (7.4)

.97

3.98

-.001 (.004)

2002

732

-.004 (.332)

1.29 (.74)

33.4 (7.9)

.92

3.39

.004 (.004)

-.427 (.394)

1980

5432

.005 (.338)

1.27 (.93)

32.3 (8.6)

.53

3.90

.031 (.033)

-.166 (1.876)

1991

9052

-.008 (.337)

1.85 (1.37)

31.4 (7.0)

.54

3.05

-.039 (.031)

-.240 (.856)

1988

1251

-.008 (.344)

1.23 (.94)

30.4 (7.5)

.24

3.20

-.008 (.004)

.079 (.400)

2002

1276

-.001 (.332)

1.18 (.46)

31.6 (7.7)

.33

3.25

-.009 (.004)

.333 (.387)

Slovenia

2002

20432

.015 (.368)

3.09 (1.24)

36.9 (6.0)

.92

1.94

.022 (.006)

.020 (.214)

South Africa

1996

5477

-.002 (.354)

2.21 (1.45)

33.7 (7.4)

.72

2.60

.017 (.002)

.185 (.114)

2001

5996

-.003 (.357)

2.05 (.80)

34.5 (7.3)

.78

2.44

.018 (.002)

.181 (.105)

2007

7442

.001 (.363)

2.30 (1.10)

34.9 (7.7)

.84

2.29

.023 (.004)

.083 (.142)

1991

20715

.014 (.344)

2.12 (.76)

36.2 (6.3)

.49

2.30

.049 (.003)

-.065 (.055)

2001

26714

.013 (.417)

2.48 (.72)

36.5 (6.1)

.64

1.73

.026 (.001)

-.132 (.094)

1970

29439

.014 (.388)

3.24 (1.16)

35.0 (7.7)

.41

2.22

.021 (.005)

.156 (.245)

1980

30010

.011 (.396)

3.20 (1.06)

35.8 (7.2)

.44

1.92

.033 (.004)

-.166 (.163)

1990

34296

.016 (.397)

3.08 (.72)

35.6 (6.7)

.57

1.86

.036 (.004)

-.238 (.158)

2000

35788

.010 (.351)

3.38 (1.49)

37.6 (6.0)

.64

2.19

.036 (.006)

-.054 (.171)

1988

687

.000 (.344)

1.35 (.55)

31.9 (8.3)

.88

3.13

.003 (.002)

.752 (.757)

2002

790

.004 (.348)

1.68 (.57)

32.2 (8.1)

.76

2.91

.012 (.002)

-.071 (.119)

Saint Lucia
Senegal

Spain
Switzerland

Tanzania
Thailand

Uganda

1970

1570

.008 (.306)

1.35 (1.29)

33.0 (7.4)

.00

3.82

.012 (.004)

.000 (.000)

1980

2413

.010 (.321)

1.14 (.63)

32.8 (7.7)

.00

3.28

.029 (.005)

.000 (.000)

1990

4379

.009 (.351)

1.42 (.92)

33.8 (7.2)

.00

2.33

.057 (.005)

.000 (.000)

2000

5651

.009 (.372)

1.77 (.98)

34.7 (6.7)

.00

1.97

.043 (.004)

.000 (.000)

1991

582

.006 (.339)

1.28 (.54)

30.8 (7.9)

.68

3.09

.005 (.003)

-.439 (.501)

2002

884

.001 (.322)

1.37 (.55)

31.2 (8.3)

.59

3.40

.002 (.002)

1.575 (2.143)

United Kingdom

1991

22766

.011 (.393)

.00 (.00)

34.6 (7.1)

.58

1.88

.050 (.004)

-.246 (.086)

United States

1960

15388

.007 (.336)

2.56 (.67)

34.7 (8.0)

.44

2.49

.033 (.002)

-.116 (.065)

1970

20436

.009 (.340)

2.70 (.65)

35.1 (8.2)

.50

2.53

.032 (.002)

.016 (.072)

1980

24985

.011 (.352)

2.86 (.63)

34.5 (7.6)

.63

2.17

.045 (.001)

-.106 (.023)

1990

31452

.011 (.356)

3.01 (.60)

34.8 (6.8)

.68

2.06

.049 (.001)

-.101 (.019)

2000

39643

.010 (.400)

3.11 (.61)

35.7 (7.6)

.73

1.86

.037 (.001)

-.099 (.020)

2005

42482

.010 (.401)

3.21 (.61)

37.0 (7.8)

.74

1.85

.038 (.002)

-.033 (.045)

1971

9369

.009 (.306)

1.79 (1.82)

31.9 (7.9)

.25

3.60

.019 (.003)

.181 (.137)

1981

9643

.012 (.355)

1.70 (.65)

30.9 (7.4)

.44

3.05

.028 (.003)

-.003 (.085)

1990

8125

.013 (.322)

2.14 (1.87)

32.2 (7.3)

.36

2.99

.036 (.003)

-.048 (.064)

2001

8681

.011 (.344)

2.00 (.73)

33.4 (7.4)

.41

2.40

.075 (.002)

-.034 (.029)

1989

855

.016 (.313)

1.71 (.82)

33.4 (7.3)

.87

3.23

.036 (.002)

-.018 (.039)

Venezuela

Vietnam

Notes: Standard deviations presented in parentheses. Standard deviations unavailable for per capita GDP, total fertility
rate, and labor force participation rate due to measurement at higher levels of aggregation than the household.

21

