                                 NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                       POLITICAL ECONOMY OF DEBT AND GROWTH

                                            Marco Battaglini
                                           Levon Barseghyan

                                         Working Paper 21660
                                 http://www.nber.org/papers/w21660


                       NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                                1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                  Cambridge, MA 02138
                                      October 2015




We are grateful to an anonymous referee for very useful comments and suggestions. We thank the
participants to the 2012 Nemmers prize conference, the 8th CSEF-IGIER Symposium on Economics
and Institutions, and 2012 NBER Summer Institute for comments and feedback. The views expressed
herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic
Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.

© 2015 by Marco Battaglini and Levon Barseghyan. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not
to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including
© notice, is given to the source.
Political Economy of Debt and Growth
Marco Battaglini and Levon Barseghyan
NBER Working Paper No. 21660
October 2015
JEL No. D72,E6,E62,H6,H72

                                              ABSTRACT

We present a theory of endogenous fiscal policy and growth. Fiscal policy — debt, income tax, spending
on local public goods and public investment — is determined through legislative bargaining. Economic
growth depends directly on public investment, private investment in human capital and, via learning-by-doing,
labor supply. The model predicts that the economy converges to a balanced growth path in which consumption,
private investment, public investment, public goods provision, public debt and productivity grow at
the same constant rate. The transition to the balanced growth path is characterized by what we call
the shrinking government effect: public debt grows faster than GDP, provisions of public goods and
infrastructure grow slower than GDP and the tax rate declines. We use the model to study the impact
of austerity programs which impose a ceiling on the amount of public debt a country can issue.


Marco Battaglini
Department of Economics
Uris Hall
Cornell University
Ithaca, NY 14850
EIEF and NBER
battaglini@cornell.edu

Levon Barseghyan
Department of Economics
Cornell University
456 Uris Hall
Ithaca, NY 14853
lb247@cornell.edu
1         Introduction

The rapid deterioration of the fiscal position of many western countries in the aftermath of the
great recession of 2008 has brought the spotlight on the long-term eﬀect of public debt on the
real economy. Federal debt in the U.S. and in many European countries is currently its highest
level since the decade following World War II.1             Concerns over the growth of public debt has led
in 2014 to the so-called Fiscal Compact in Europe, an intergovernmental treaty that tightens the
budget rules previously set in the Stability and Growth Pact of 2012;2 and to the Budget Control
Act of 2011 in the U.S., which triggers across-the-board automatic cuts in spending in the absence
of specified deficit reductions in the following fiscal years.3         In this context, a few key questions
have dominated the public debate: To what extent do high levels of public debt reduce the growth
potential of the economy?           Are austerity programs, which target debt reduction, eﬀective in
increasing growth and welfare? How should they be designed?
        To answer these questions we need a theory in which growth and fiscal policy are jointly de-
termined in equilibrium. The literature on growth, however, has traditionally been more focused
on the private sector, emphasizing the role of entrepreneurial innovation and technological ad-
vancement. With few notable exceptions, fiscal policy has been ignored or assumed as exogenous.
Even in the research that has explicitly considered a role for the government, public policy is as-
sumed to balance the budget in every period and public debt is not studied. Yet, fiscal policy has
changed in important ways during the last four decades, with potentially significant implications
for macroeconomic outcomes.4
        In this paper we present a political economy theory of endogenous growth in which the gov-
ernment can issue debt to finance expenditures. In our theory the growth rate of the economy
depends on public investment, on private investment in human capital and, because of learning-by-
doing, private citizens’ labor supply. Fiscal policy aﬀects citizens’ incentives in two ways: taxation

   1 Public debt is over 100% of GDP in the U.S., over 60% of GDP in more than a half of the 17 Eurozone

countries, and over 80% in five of them.
    2   Formally, the Treaty on Stability, Coordination and Governance in the Economic and Monetary Union.
   3 The Bipartisan Budget Act of 2013 later relaxed the sequestration caps, but it extended their imposition into

2022 and 2023.
   4 In the post WWII era, after bottoming at around 25% of GDP during the seventies, the debt level in the U.S.

has been steadily increasing over time, surpassing 60% by the end of 2010. During this period, both the tax revenue
and the provision of public goods and infrastructure have declined as shares of GDP, with public investment falling
rather dramatically.




                                                        1
distorts labor supply and investment in human capital; deficits distort the consumption/savings
decision through their eﬀect on the interest rate. Policy choices are made by a legislature consist-
ing of elected representatives. Political conflict arises because representatives in the legislature
have incentives to vote for policies that favor their own constituencies, and citizens benefit only
partially from local public goods provided to constituencies to which they do not belong. The
level of public debt and the level of productivity in the economy are state variables and create a
dynamic linkage across policymaking periods.
   We start our analysis by characterizing the conditions under which the economy converges to a
balanced growth path in which consumption, private investment, public investment, public goods
provision, public debt and productivity grow at the same constant rate. Two forces shape the
debt-to-GDP ratio on the balanced growth path: first, the political distortions, pushing politicians
to increase debt to finance politically motivated transfers today; second, policy makers’ desire to
keep the equilibrium interest rate low, leading them to moderate the growth of debt. While both
forces have been previously independently studied in the literature, our work is the first to provide
a theoretical framework that combines them as building blocks for an equilibrium theory of public
debt and growth.
   The transition to the balanced growth path is characterized by a novel eﬀect that we call
the shrinking government eﬀect: starting from a low level, public debt grows faster than GDP,
provision of public goods and infrastructure grows slower than GDP and the tax rate declines.
Eﬀectively, as the economy converges to its balanced growth path, a decreasing share of output
is devoted to providing public services.     The shrinking government eﬀect is a consequence of
the political distortion and its eﬀect on the interest rate. Political distortions induce the ruling
coalition—the coalition in the legislature that controls fiscal policy—to use debt to shift the burden
of taxation to the future. In every period the ruling coalition trades oﬀ an extra increase in public
goods today for their own districts, with a more than proportional reduction in public goods in
the following period for all districts.   The former option is always more appealing because the
ruling coalition can better target current expenditures to their own districts rather than the future
expenditure. Consequently, debt increases, forcing legislators to increase the primary surplus to
service its cost.   The key observation is that legislators find it optimal to do this by reducing
expenditures rather than increasing taxes: When expenditures are reduced, disposable income
and savings increase, and so the interest rate is held down. To the contrary, when taxes are


                                                  2
increased, disposable income and savings decline, so the interest rate goes up.
   Next, we employ our model to study the eﬀects of simple but plausible austerity programs on
the economy. An austerity program is characterized by two features, a target level for debt and a
time horizon: the country is required to bring down debt to a given target level in a given number
of years. We find that austerity programs typically increase welfare if they are not excessively
ambitious.    Interestingly and perhaps counterintuitively the austerity program is not beneficial
because it reduces taxes and spending. Conversely, by forcing debt to go down, the austerity
program reduces the government incentives to bias the policy in favor of tax cuts and reduction in
public goods provision and investment. Eﬀectively, the austerity program reverses the shrinking
government eﬀect described above.
   Three additional lessons emerge from our analysis. First, there is no “one-size-fits-all” austerity
program: The optimal plan depends on the fundamentals and on the initial state of the economy.
The higher is the accumulated level of debt, the less aggressive the programs should be, both in
terms of the debt target and in terms of its duration. Second, on the transition path of the optimal
austerity program, growth is below the pre-austerity level, but welfare is increasing. Finally, an
austerity program may work even in the absence of long-term commitment power. However, the
lack of commitment can significantly limit the program’s eﬀectiveness. Typically, the weaker is
the ability to commit, the less ambitious the austerity program should be.
   Our paper is related to two strands of literature. First, the literature on endogenous growth.
Most of this research is normative and is focused on evaluating the eﬀects of taxation on the capital
accumulation process rather than at explicitly modelling policymaking (Rebelo [1990], King and
Rebelo [1991], Barro [1991], Stokey and Rebelo [1993], Jaimovich and Rebelo [2013]). Positive
theories of growth have been presented in the context of the research studying the political economy
of redistribution. The basic idea developed in these papers is that income inequality determines
tax policy and therefore growth (Bertola [1993], Perotti [1993], Saint-Paul and Verdier [1993],
Alesina and Rodrik [1994], Persson and Tabellini [1994], Krusell and Rios-Rull [1999], Benabou
[2000], Saint Paul [2001]). A common trait of these theories (both normative and positive) is that
fiscal policy is assumed to balance the budget in every period and so public debt is ruled out by
assumption.5      Our paper contributes to this literature in two ways. First, by introducing debt

  5 An exception is Saint-Paul [1992]. The main result of this paper is that debt is not welfare improving. The

paper is normative and does not present a theory of public debt.



                                                      3
we allow for a richer policy space. Second, we oﬀer an explicit dynamic model of political decision
making in which rational forward looking policymakers bargain for the policy outcome. To do
this, we analyze a symmetric model in which there is no wealth redistribution across citizens. Our
focus is on the eﬃciency of the fiscal policy.
    The second strand is the literature on the political economy of public debt (e.g., Persson and
Svensson [1989], Alesina and Tabellini [1990], Battaglini and Coate [2008]).                  These models are
specifically aimed at modelling public debt, but they do not allow for growth and make assumptions
that simplify the determination of the equilibrium interest rate. These two issues are intimately
connected.     The key assumption in this literature is that preferences are quasi-linear: in this
case the equilibrium interest rate is constant and independent of the chosen policies.6 Balanced
growth, however, is not consistent with these preferences. This is why modelling endogenous
growth requires endogenous interest rates. As we show in this paper, the endogeneity of interest
rates is crucial to understanding the dynamics of fiscal policy in closed economies. A neoclassical
growth model in which the government can expropriate capital in the presence of political economy
frictions is presented by Aguiar and Amador [2011, 2012]. Diﬀerently from our work, this research
focuses on the case of a small open economy for which the interest rate is exogenous: because of
this it does not study the interaction between fiscal policy, interest rates and political distortions
that is the primary objective of our work. Finally, there is a significant literature studying the
political economy of deficit reduction programs both theoretically and empirically.7 None of the
papers explicitly studies the link between debt, fiscal policy and the endogenous growth process.
    The organization of the remainder of the paper is as follows. Section 2 outlines the model.
Section 3 characterizes the political equilibrium. In Section 4 we study the dynamics of the model
using parameters calibrated to the U.S. economy. In Section 5 we use the model to analyze the
eﬀect of austerity programs and we study how the optimal austerity program depends on the
environment.      In Section 6 we discuss the results and some questions open for future research.

   6 In the context of normative models in which policies are chosen by a benevolent planner, the strategic interac-

tion between fiscal policy and interest rates has been first studied by Stokey and Lucas [1983] and then extended
to a variety of environments by, among others, Martin [2009] who allows for the presence of money, Rogers [1989],
Occhino [2012] and Debortoli and Nunes [2013] who allow for endogenous public spending, and Aiyagari et al [2002]
and Shin [2006] who consider stochastic economies.
   7 Among theoretical contributions we have Alesina and Drazen [1991], Grilli and Drazen [1993], Drazen [2001]).

More than on studying the eﬀects of deficit reduction, this literature is focused on studying when deficit reduction
program are chosen. The eﬀects of a balanced budget rule has been studied by Azzimonti, Battaglini and Coate
[2011]. Among empirical contributions in this literature we have Giavazzi and Pagano [1990], McDermott and
Wescott [1996], Alesina and Ardagna [1998], Alesina, Perotti and Tavares [1998], Ardagna [2004].



                                                         4
Section 7 concludes.


2     Model

The economy A continuum of infinitely-lived citizens live in  identical districts indexed by
 = 1  . The size of the population in each district is normalized to be one. There is a
single non-storable consumption good, denoted by , that is produced using a single factor, labor,
                                                                         © ª
denoted by . There is also a set of  local public goods, denoted by  =   =1: , which can be
produced from the consumption good. The variables at time  will be denoted with a subscript .
    The citizens enjoy the consumption good, invest into their future productivity/human capital,
benefit from the local public goods and supply labor. We assume that each citizen’s preferences
in district  are represented by the following per period utility function:
                                                                     ⎡     ⎛       ⎞1− ⎤
                                                                            X
                                                                     ⎢¡ ¢              ⎥
                    (     ) = log ( (1 −  ) ) +  log ⎣  ⎝    ⎠    ⎦                  (1)
                                                                                  =1


where   0,   0 and  ∈ [0 1]. This utility function describes a situation in which district
 enjoys a direct benefit from public good , but there may also be an externality from (the sum
of) public goods provided to all districts. The parameter  measures the size of this externality:
the closer  is to one, the smaller are the externalities and the more   benefits only the citizens
in district . Since (1) is a variation of the standard King, Plosser, Rebelo [1988] utility function
augmented for public goods, we will refer to it as KPR preferences. Citizens discount future per
period utilities at rate .
    All local public goods are produced from the consumption good according to a linear tech-
nology with a unitary marginal rate of transformation.                        The consumption good at time  is
produced with a linear technology  =    where the product   determines the economy’s
overall labor productivity and  is the labor input. The variable  is interpreted as an economy
wide productivity factor, which is taken by the citizens as given. In our model it captures two
sources of productivity growth: learning-by-doing externalities and public investment, I (such as
expenditure on research and development, education, public infrastructure, and other productivity
enhancing investment). Specifically, we assume:
                                                           µ           ¶
                                                                I
                                         +1 = (¯ )                                                 (2)
                                                                


                                                      5
                  
                  X
where ¯ =   1
                        is the average labor supply; and (¯ ) = 0 · (̄ )1 and ( I  ) = 0 · ( I  )1
                  =1
are concave increasing functions:  ,   0 for  = 0 1 and 1 , 1  1. The function  describes
the process of learning-by-doing: The more citizens work, the more they learn from each other
and more productive they will be in the future. The function  describes the benefits of public
investment: The higher is public investment, the higher the next period productivity is. We note
                            1
that the scaling by            is standard to ensure that public investment as a fraction of output does
not shrink to zero over time: In a growing economy, the higher is productivity, the more expensive
it should be in absolute terms to improve it.
   The variable  is the level of citizens’ labor productivity/human capital. In each period,
citizens endogenously determine the next period level of human capital:
                                                                 µ           ¶
                                                                      S
                                                      +1 = ∆                                                     (3)
                                                                      

by choosing private investment level S  which translates into human capital growth according to
an increasing concave function ∆ () = ∆0 ∆1  where ∆  0 for  = 0 1 and ∆1  1.
   There is a competitive labor market. Hence, the wage rate in period  is equal to   . There
is also a market in risk-free, one period bonds. Both citizens and the government have access to
this market.       The assets held by an agent in district  in period  are denoted  .                    The gross
interest rate is denoted  : a dollar worth of bonds at time  yields  at time  + 1.
   For a given sequence of government policies, citizens’ maximization problem in period 0 can
be written as:
                                         ⎧                             ⎡     ⎛        ⎞1− ⎤⎫
                                   ∞
                                   X     ⎪
                                         ⎨                                                 ⎪
                                                                                            ⎬
                                                                       ⎢¡ ¢ X  ⎠         ⎥
                      max               log ( (1 −  ) ) +  log ⎣  ⎝           ⎦
                    {   }        ⎪
                                         ⎩                                                  ⎪
                                                                                            ⎭
                                  =0                                          =1

                                            +1
                                              +  + S = (1 −  )   +  + T 
                                             
                                                µ       ¶                       µ       ¶
                                                   S                     ¯        I
                                   +1    =∆              and +1 = ( )            
                                                                               

where  is the tax rate on labor income, and T is the lump-sum transfers from the government.


Public Policies The government provides local public goods, public infrastructure and can
make direct lump-sum monetary transfers to the districts.                               Monetary transfers are uniform
across districts and are interpreted as a welfare program symmetrically targeted to all regions.


                                                                 6
Revenues are raised by levying a proportional tax on labor income and can be supplemented
by borrowing and lending in the bond market. Government policy in period  is described by
{  0  1     I  T }, where  is the income tax rate; 0 is the amount of bonds sold;  is the
amount of public good provided to district ; I is the level of infrastructure investment; and T is
the uniform cash transfer. When 0 is negative, the government is buying bonds. In each period,
the government must also repay the bonds sold in the previous period, which are denoted by  .
                                                                                                          0
The government’s initial debt level in period 0 is 0 ; agents initial assets are 0 = 0 =               .

    Government policies must satisfy three feasibility constraints.                First, tax revenues and net
borrowing must be suﬃcient to cover public expenditures. To see what this implies, consider
a period in which the initial level of government debt is  and the interest rate is  . Total
               
               X                                              
                                                              X
                   
expenditure is     + I + T +  , tax revenue is       , and revenue from bond sales is
                  =1                                                 =1
0  . So the government budget constraint is:
                                "                               
                                                                      #
                                      X                          X
                          0                                        
                          −   +     + I + T −       ≥ 0                                       (4)
                                             =1                            =1

Second, to keep the policy space compact in the legislator’s maximization problem, we assume that
local public goods, public investment and transfers as fractions of GDP can not be smaller than
some minimal levels:   ≥  I  ≥ , and T  ≥  for all , where   0   0, and  ≥ 0.
The lower bound  is interpreted as commitments on transfers made by previous legislations that
are not directly modelled here (as for example Social Security, Medicare and Medicaid). Third,
                                           £ ¤
debt, relative to GDP, is bounded:   ∈   .8


Market equilibrium and political decision making We will study a symmetric equilibrium
in which  =  as well as  =    =  , and  =  for all ’s.                Since for any given
government policy the interest rate must clear the bond market, in such an equilibrium we have
                   1
 − +1  =       ( − +1  ). Using (4) and households’ optimality conditions with respect
to labor, consumption, and private investment, we can express the citizens’ choices as functions
of current public policies only.       It is useful to express some variables in terms of GDP. Define
                                                      © © ª                  ª
 =   ,  = I    = T   and  =    =1:     . Labor supply can then be

     8 The upper bound on debt is a standard requirement ruling out Ponzi schemes. As we show later, setting the

lower bound on debt to zero is without loss of generality. Since taxes are distortionary, uniform cash transfers are
welfare reducing. Hence, the lower bound on the transfers is binding. Of the constraints on the local public goods,
  ≥ , only those associated to the districts that are excluded from the coalition in charge of the policy are
binding. The identity of these districts changes in every period.


                                                         7
written as:

                                                                    1 − 
                                  ( ) =       "           Ã         
                                                                              !#                                         (5)
                                                                      X
                                                         1                  
                                             0 1 −              +          + 1 − 
                                                                         =1

                     
where 0 =        
              1+ 1− ∆1 (1+)
                                 Consumption can be written as (     ) =   ( ), where
                                                                 "           Ã           
                                                                                                     !#
                                                                                         X
                                                                         1
                                                 (1 −  ) 1 −                 +            
                                                                                        =1
                               ( ) =              "           Ã           
                                                                                         !#                              (6)
                                        0                                   X
                                                             1
                                               0 1 −                +                  + 1 − 
                                                                             =1

Private investment can be written as S (     ) =   ( ), where
                                                             "         Ã       
                                                                                     !#
                                                                              X
                                                                    1              
                                                  (1 −  ) 1 −   +            
                                                                            =1
                 ( ) =     ∆1 (1 + )            "        Ã          
                                                                             !#                                          (7)
                          1−             0                          X
                                                           1               
                                               0 1 −   +                   + 1 − 
                                                                                          =1

These expressions allow us to write citizen ’s utility function as a function of only current public
policies and the level of overall productivity:
                                                                        ⎡       ⎛       ⎞1− ⎤
                                                                                 X
                                                                        ⎢¡   ¢              ⎥
                (     ) = (1 + ) log   +  ( ) +  log ⎣  ⎝      ⎠    ⎦                           (8)
                                                                                                          =1


where  ( ) derived in Lemma A.1 of the Appendix, can be interpreted as the indirect per period
utility function, scaled by productivity   .                 We can also write the resource constraint of the
economy as:                            "                                       Ã                       !#
                                                                                          
                                                                                          X
                                           ( ) + ( ) 1
                           ( ) 1 −                −                         +                  ≥ 0
                                                ( )                                   =1

Note that since the evolution of the economy’s overall productivity  is fully described by
the function () ≡ (()) ( · ()) ∆ (()), we have that +1 +1 = ()  .                            Using this
expression, the inter-temporal Euler equation can we written as:

                                              (+1  +1  +1 )       ( )
                               −1
                                 =                                  =                                                 (9)
                                                  (     )      ( )(+1 )

From (5)-(7) it is clear that the districts are heterogeneous only with respect to the amount of
                    © ª
local public goods  =1: they receive. These are the variables over which there is political
conflict in the legislature.

                                                                     8
    Government policy decisions are made by a legislature consisting of representatives from each
of the  districts. One citizen from each district is selected to be that district’s representative.
Since all citizens have the same policy preferences, the identity of the representative is immaterial
and, hence, the selection process can be ignored. The legislature meets at the beginning of each
period. To describe how legislative decision-making works, suppose the legislature is meeting at
the beginning of a period in which the current level of public debt is  .                 The process has two
                                                                               9
phases: government formation and bargaining in the government.                     In the first phase, one of the
legislators is randomly selected to form a government, with each representative having an equal
chance of being recognized. A government is a cabinet of G representatives and a policy platform
{+1      I  T } where  is the aggregate amount of public goods. In the second phase, the
cabinet members allocate the local public goods. The initial government formateur proposes a
                                                  © ª
provisional distribution of the local public goods  =1: . If the first proposal is accepted by
 ≤ G cabinet members, then it is implemented and the legislature adjourns until the beginning
of the next period. At that time, the legislature meets again with the diﬀerence being that the
initial level of public debt is +1 and productivity is given by (2). If, on the other hand, the first
proposal is not accepted, another member of the government is chosen to propose an alternative
                  © ª
redistribution of  =1: . The process continues until a proposal is approved by the cabinet.
We assume that each proposal round takes a negligible amount of time.10


3     The political equilibrium

Before we characterize the political equilibrium in the economy described in the previous section,
it is useful to highlight the key determinants of growth in our economy. On a balanced growth
path we should expect income, consumption, and private investment, as well as public expenditure
and tax revenue, to grow at the same constant rate . In an economy with a non trivial public
sector we should also expect public expenditure to grow at the same rate as the private economy,

   9 A similar bargaining process in which first a formateur selects the government and then the cabinet members

bargain over the allocation of targetable transfers is presented by Baron and Diermeier [2001]. In Baron and
Diermeier [2001] the bargaining phase consists in a take it or leave it oﬀer with a status quo policy in case a
qualified majority in the government is not reached.
  10 Our bargaining process gives as special cases many bargaining processes used in the political economy literature.

When G = 1 the policy is chosen by a randomly selected dictator who maximizes his own utility as in Alesina and
Tabellini [1990]. As we will show, when G  1 and  = G the policy is chosen to maximize the aggregate utility of
a coalition of size G as in Battaglini and Coate [2014]. When G =  = , the policy coincide with the utilitarian
optimal policy.



                                                          9
and tax revenues to be a constant fraction of income:11

                                ∆   ∆   ∆   ∆I   ∆T
                                   =    =    =    =    = , ∆ = 0                                                 (10)
                                             I   T

It is easy to see that in our economy the growth rate of all key variables is determined by the
                                                   ∆ ∆
growth rate of overall productivity:  =              .     Even before we start studying political decision
making, we can see the role of fiscal policy on . From (2), on the balanced growth path we have:

                                                  ∆ ∆
                                            =       ·   = () − 1                                                (11)
                                                      

The growth rate is a function of the primitives of the economy and of public policies. This is not
in itself a new observation, since it has been long recognized that in endogenous growth models
public policies have a long-term eﬀect on the growth rate (see Rebelo [1991]).                        The interesting
point is that, in our model, explaining fiscal policy is necessary to obtain an endogenous theory of
growth.
    Condition (11) leaves two open questions. First, what determines the long-run fiscal policy, and
hence the economy’s growth rate on the balanced growth path? Second, what are the dynamics
of the policy variables?        An economy may reach the balanced growth path with an increasing
or decreasing growth rate, increasing or decreasing public goods provision, etc...                       Studying the
path of the economy towards the balanced growth path is one way to shed light on the long-run
trends of fiscal policy variables. To answer these questions we need an explicit theory of public
policymaking. We address these issues in the next two sections. In Section 3.1 we characterize
equilibrium behavior. In Section 3.2 we derive the model’s implications for the balanced growth
path and for the transition path converging to it.

3.1     Equilibrium behavior

To characterize behavior when policies are chosen by a legislature, we look for a symmetric Markov
perfect equilibrium (SME) in which players’ strategies depend only on the level of public debt
scaled by productivity, i.e.  =  (  ). As we formally show below there is no loss of generality
in adopting  as the state variable.12           A symmetric Markov equilibrium can be formally defined

  11 Obviously these conditions need not be satisfied on the path of convergence.         The predictions of the model
for the convergence path will be discussed in Section 3.2. in greater detail.
  12 Strategies cannot depend on the current level of debt relative to GDP since GDP is itself a function of current

policies. The debt-to-GDP ratio at time  is   (  ( )). While   (  ) is a state inherited from the past,
 is a control vector chosen at .


                                                           10
by a collection of policy functions () ≡ { () ()  () 0 () ()   ()}. Here  (), () and
 () are the tax rate and the share of GDP spent on public investment and transfers proposed
in state .         The function 0 () is the new level of debt normalized by the future productivity,
i.e.  0  ( 0  0 )    13
                               The remaining two functions describe how local public goods are distributed
in the economy.                In a SME the proposer randomly selects G − 1 legislators to form a cabinet,
choosing them from the remaining  − 1 legislators with equal probability. The proposer provides
suﬃcient local public goods to  cabinet members to guarantee their vote, and as little as possible
to the others (in the cabinet or outside).              The functions () and   () are the shares of GDP
of the public good proposed for, respectively, the proposer’s district and the other districts in
the minimal winning coalition. All the other representatives excluded from the minimal winning
coalition receive the minimal share of GDP possible, .
     As standard in the theory of legislative voting, we focus on weakly stage undominated strate-
gies, which implies that legislators vote for a proposal if they prefer it (weakly) to continuing on
to the next proposal round. We focus, without loss of generality, on equilibria in which, at each
round, proposals are immediately accepted by at least  legislators so that, on the equilibrium
path, no meeting lasts more than one proposal round. We say that an equilibrium is smooth if
the policy functions are continuously diﬀerentiable in . In the reminder of the paper we focus
the analysis on smooth equilibria.               This property is satisfied by construction in all equilibria
computed in Section 4.
     To characterize the equilibrium strategies consider the problem faced by the proposer. The
proposer chooses the policies to maximize the utility of his own district under two sets of con-
straints: First, the budget constraint and the feasibility constraints that we have described in the
previous section. Second, an incentive compatibility constraint that guarantees that the proposal
is voted by a qualified majority. To be approved, the policies must be such that:
                               ⎡        ⎛      ⎞1− ⎤
                                         X
                               ⎢                   ⎥
                  () +  log ⎣(  ) ⎝     ⎠            0 0 0
                                                    ⎦ + (     ) = G (  )                   (12)
                                                  =1


where  0 and  0 are the next period productivity factor and human capital level after policy  is
implemented, (0   0   0 ) is the citizens’ continuation value, and G (  ) is the outside option of
a cabinet member. The left hand side of this constraint is the expected utility of accepting the

 13 The future level of debt in absolute terms can therefore be expressed in terms of the current policies as

(()) · 0 ().


                                                           11
proposal for a member of the minimal winning coalition who receives a level   () of local public
good.      The outside option of a cabinet member, G (  ), is the expected utility of voting no
and therefore moving to the stage of the bargaining game in which a new government member is
randomly selected.14          The next result shows that (12) imposes a precise relationship between
() and   ():

Lemma 1. In equilibrium, the incentive compatibility constraint (12) is satisfied if and only if
                                                             1
  () = ()(G) ·  (1−(G)) , where (G ) =      G−+1   ∈ (0 1]

       Lemma 1 shows that the bargaining process forces the proposer to provide a level of local public
good to the members of the minimal winning coalition equal to a geometric average of the level he
assigns to his own district and the level he assigns to the districts outside the coalition, . Total
public goods expenditure is a function of () only: () = () + ( − 1)()(G)  (1−(G)) +
( − ). It should be noted that the weight on () is an increasing function of : The larger
is , the more the proposer is forced to internalize the welfare of the other government members.
Indeed, when the voting rule is unanimous and so  = G, we have   = .15
       As shown in Section 2, the citizens’ per period indirect utility function is separable in  and 
(see expression (8)). The value function has a similar representation. As shown in the Appendix,
we can express the value function as  (  ) = A log  + V() with V() defined recursively as:

                                    G
                 V() = U (()) +  (G ) log () + (1 − ) log () + V(0 ()),                          (13)
                                    

where A is a constant and U() is specified in closed form in the Appendix.16                      Using Lemma 1,

  14Of course, the incentive constraint needs to be satisfied as a weak inequality, requiring the left hand side to
be no smaller than the right hand side. In equilibrium, however, the proposer minimizes the cost of obtaining a
minimal winning coalition, so (12) is always satisfied as an equality.
  15 When the government deliberates by unanimous rule (i.e.  = G), all the government members are treated in

the same way and the policy is chosen to maximize the aggregate utility of government members.
  16 The function U() can be interpreted as the indirect utility function given policy () from consumption and

labor, augmented by the (permanent) eﬀect of current policy () on future productivity. We represent the indirect
utility function as in (13) to highlight the diﬀerence with the objective function of the proposer in (14), as discussed
below.




                                                          12
moreover, the proposer’s problem can be written as:
                             ⎧                                                         ⎫
                             ⎪
                             ⎪                                                         ⎪
                                                                                       ⎪
                             ⎪
                             ⎪     U () +  log  + (1 − ) log  + V(0 )         ⎪
                                                                                       ⎪
                             ⎪
                             ⎪                                                         ⎪
                                                                                       ⎪
                             ⎪
                             ⎪                                                         ⎪
                                                                                       ⎪
                             ⎪
                             ⎪             0                                          ⎪
                                                                                       ⎪
                             ⎨  () (0 ) − [ + () +  +  −  ()] = 0   ⎬
                    max                                                                                (14)
               0  ⎪
                             ⎪                                                         ⎪
                                                                                       ⎪
                             ⎪
                             ⎪  =  + ( − 1) (G) ·  (1−(G)) + ( − )       ⎪
                                                                                       ⎪
                             ⎪
                             ⎪                                                         ⎪
                                                                                       ⎪
                             ⎪
                             ⎪                                                         ⎪
                                                                                       ⎪
                             ⎪
                             ⎪                                                         ⎪
                                                                                       ⎪
                             ⎩       0 ≤ ,  ≥ ,  ≥ ,  ≥    ∈ [0 1]          ⎭

The representation in (13)-(14) highlights the role of the political process on how policies are
chosen in equilibrium. When  = 0 policies have a uniform eﬀect on the citizens’ welfare. In this
case there is no political conflict and the proposer chooses policies to maximize the welfare of the
representative citizen. When   0, districts value local public goods diﬀerently. In this case
the proposer overestimates the welfare eﬀect of . The magnitude of the overestimation depends
     G
on    (G ).   When  = G = , we have (G ) = 1 and full alignment of interest across districts
                                                    G
is re-established. When G   or   G then          (G )    1 and we have political conflict.
     Using (13)-(14) we have the following characterization of a political equilibrium:

Proposition 1. Under KPR preferences:

     • If  = {   0     } solves (14) given V, and V satisfies (13) given , then  is an
       equilibrium policy function and  = A log  + V is the associated equilibrium value function.

     • If  = {   0     } is a political equilibrium with value function , then  is a function
       only of  and there are a function V of  only and a constant A such that the value function
       can be represented as  = A log  + V. Moreover,  solves (14) given V, and V satisfies
       (13) given .


     The first bullet of Proposition 1 shows that to characterize an equilibrium we can simply
study (13) and (14), where the state variable is .             Once we have solved for the fixed-point
implied by these two conditions, the value function can be immediately found with the formula
 =  log  + V. The second bullet shows that there is no loss of generality in considering the
representation (13) and (14), since all equilibria can be expressed in this way.




                                                     13
3.2     Balanced growth and transition dynamics

To study the dynamic properties of a political equilibrium, it is useful to introduce a key concept
in public finance, the marginal cost of public funds (MCPF). The marginal cost of public funds is
the compensating variation for a marginal increase in tax revenues.17 It is, therefore, a measure
of the distortion introduced by the government into the economy. To see the importance of this
concept, consider the marginal cost of public funds associated with policies {∗  ∗0   ∗    ∗ ∗
                                                                                            }

that would be chosen by a benevolent planner who can commit to the optimal policy plan. Under
standard assumptions, the planner aims at smoothing the cost of taxation over time as much as
possible. This implies that polices are chosen so that the marginal cost of public funds is equalized
over time:   ∗ =   +1
                            ∗
                                for any   0.18               A constant marginal cost of public funds
implies that fiscal policy and the growth level of the economy are all constant for any   0. Is
this result still valid in a political equilibrium? If not, what are the implications for the dynamics
of the economy?
   To answer these questions, let us define the elasticity of the interest rate with respect to 0
evaluated at the equilibrium level 0 = 0 () in state  as
                                                    (0  ) 0
                                          () =                                                        (15)
                                                      0 (0  )
This elasticity has a clear interpretation since it measures the relationship between two observable
variables, debt and the interest rate. Let us also define  () as the elasticity of the policy function
                                    () 
 with respect to debt,  () =      () .   We have the following characterization of the evolution
of the marginal cost of public funds in a political equilibrium:

Proposition 2. In equilibrium:
                                   ∙       µ              ¶                    ¸
                                             G·(G )
    [1 −  ( )] ·    ( ) = 1 −              − 1 Φ (+1 )  (+1 ) ·    (+1 )
                                                
                                                                                                          (16)

where Φ () is a nonnegative function of debt.

   As noted above, in the first best, we must have    ( ) =    (+1 ).                Proposition
2 shows that in a political equilibrium this equality does not hold: there is generally a wedge
 17 In intuitive terms, the   is the marginal monetary transfer necessary to compensate an agent for a

marginal increase in tax revenues.
  18 A formal analysis if the planner’s problem is available from the authors upon request. See also Ljungqvist

and Sargent [2004] for the analysis of a similar problem in a model with no endogenous growth.


                                                      14
between the marginal cost of public funds at  and at  + 1. Condition (16) generalizes analogous
representations of the evolution of the “cost of resources” in political system that are typically
referred to as modified or generalized Euler equations.19
      The intuition behind (16) is as follows. The left hand side is the marginal benefit of debt: by
increasing debt by a unit, tax revenues can be reduced by a unit at time , inducing a net welfare
gain equal to    ( ). This term is corrected by (1 −  ( )) to account for the fact that the
government is not a price taker in the bond market. When, for example  ( )  0, an increase
in debt implies an increase in the interest rate and the corresponding reduction in resources limits
the benefit of an increase in . The right hand side can be interpreted as the marginal cost of
debt. An increase in debt generates two eﬀects: it reduces future resources (with a welfare eﬀect
measured by the term    (+1 )), and changes the future policy mix by aﬀecting policies
                                             £      ¡               ¢                     ¤
(this second eﬀect is represented by the term 1 −  G (G ) − 1) Φ (+1 )  (+1 )) ). When
policies are chosen by a utilitarian planner, the second eﬀect is irrelevant: policies are always
optimal, so by the Envelope theorem, a marginal change from the optimal level has no welfare
eﬀect.     Since our model policies are ineﬃcient, however, the change in the policy mix induced
by  has a first order impact that cannot be ignored. Naturally, the ineﬃcient policy mix is a
result of the political distortion. Not surprisingly, the size of the political distortion depends on
         G
 and     (G ):    the larger is , the more severe is political conflict because citizens internalize
less the benefit of local public goods provided to districts to which they do not belong. Similarly,
                   G
the smaller is      (G ),   the less the ruling coalition is forced to internalize the welfare of the
                                                G
remaining districts. When  = 0 or               (G )   = 1, it is as if policies were chosen by a utilitarian
decision maker, so the political distortion is zero.20
      On a balanced growth path debt grows at the same rate as income, so  remains constant
at ∗ . We say that balanced growth path is stable if there is a neighborhood of ∗ such that 
converges to ∗ for any initial state 0 in that neighborhood. We say that a balanced growth path
is regular if it stable and two conditions are met: (1) debt is positive on the path, i.e. ∗  0;
and (2) the interest rate elasticity is positive on the balanced growth path: i.e.,  (∗ )  0 (or

 19   See Battaglini [2011] for a discussion.
  20 We obtain an interesting interpretation of (16) by dividing both sides by 1 −  ( ). The government acts as
                                                                                     
a standard monopolist: debt is chosen to equalize the marginal benefit to the marginal cost of debt weighted by a
standard markup factor that depends on the elasticity of the demand: 1 (1 −  ( )).




                                                            15
(0  )0  0 at ∗ ).21     We say that there is political conflict in the economy if   0 and
  . We have:

Proposition 3. A stable balanced growth path is regular only if there is political conflict.

    The intuition behind Proposition 3 is illustrated by Figure 1. Consider first Figure 1.A where
                                                                                        G
we present an equilibrium in an environment with no political conflict (so               (G )   = 1 or  = 0).
The red dotted line represents the left hand side of the previous equation, (1− ())   (); the
blue solid line represents the right hand side,    (0 ).22          The level of debt corresponding to a
balanced growth path is determined by the intersection of these two curves (where    (+1 ) =
                                                                                        G
   ( )). When there is no political distortion (i.e.  = 0 and/or                  (G )   = 1), the only
point of intersection is ∗ = 0 (See Figure 1.A). Consider now the situation when there are
political distortions. In this case, the solid blue curve corresponding to the right hand side of (16)
                                     ¡               ¢
is shifted downward since 1 −  G (G ) − 1) Φ (+1 )  (+1 )  1. It follows that the only
point of intersection occurs at a ∗  0 (See Figure 1.B), and that is where the economy converges
in the long run.
    It is interesting to note that the positive interior long-run level of debt in the model is the
result of two contrasting forces: on the one hand, political economy distortions push debt up; on
the other hand, the attempt to manipulate the interest rate pushes debt down. We would not
have positive debt on the balanced growth path without the first eﬀect; we would not have an
interior level of debt without the second eﬀect: politicians would always have an incentive to shift
the financing of expenditure to the future and accumulate more debt. On the balanced growth
path the two incentives exactly counterbalance each other.
    The next result characterizes the dynamics of the public sector on the convergence path to a
regular balanced growth path.

Proposition 4. Starting from any 0 in a left neighborhood of a balanced growth path level, both
infrastructure and the expected level of local public goods grow at a slower rate than GDP.

    An interesting implication of Proposition 4 is that despite the fact that in this economy the

  21 We find that these properties hold in all of our numerical analysis in the following sections. From an empirical

stand point, the requirement of a positive level of debt at the steady state seems natural. For evidence on the
interest rate see, for example, Ardagna, Caselli and Lane [2007] and Laubach [2009].
  22 In the Figure,   () intersects the origin, but it is not necessary to have   (0) = 0.      The actual
level of   (0) is irrelevant for the analysis.



                                                         16
policymaker has excessive incentives to spend in local public goods, the expected supply of public
goods declines over time, and so the public sector becomes smaller and smaller as a fraction of
GDP. This phenomenon is a consequence of the political distortion in the presence of endogenous
interest rates.    Faced with a higher level of debt, the proposer finds it optimal to increase the
primary surplus by reducing expenditures rather than by increasing taxes: reducing expenditures
rather than raising taxes forces up disposable income and savings, and so it holds interest rates
down. To the contrary, an increase in taxes forces down disposable income and savings, and,
hence, puts upward pressure on the interest rate. Proposition 4 shows that the legislators always
find it optimal to shrink the provision of public services (both in terms of public goods and
infrastructure). However, the proposition does not establish that they find it optimal to decrease
taxation. This finding will be presented in the next section when we solve numerically a version
of the model calibrated to the U.S. economy.
    What is the implication of this converging path for productivity? When there is no learning-
by-doing or private investment in human capital, this question can be answered analytically.

Proposition 5.        If 1 = 0 and ∆1 = 0, then starting from any 0 in a left neighborhood of a
regular balanced growth path level, the growth rate in productivity ∆  gradually declines on the
convergence path.

    Figure 2 illustrates the last part of Proposition 4 and Proposition 5.                As  converges to ∗
infrastructure declines: in this case the growth rate of productivity  () shifts towards the 45
degree line and  grows at a decreasing pace (or potentially may even decline if  () is lower than
one).
    Proposition 5 does not necessarily hold in the presence of learning-by-doing or private invest-
ment in human capital. The reason is that the tax rate may decline on the transition path. If this
decline implies an increase in labor supply, then we have two forces pushing in opposite directions.
A decline in the tax rate, however, does not generally imply that labor supply increases.                     The
reason is that, as debt increases, agents hold more financial wealth. The wealth increase implies
higher marginal utility of leisure, which may more than counterbalance the eﬀect of the decrease in
taxation. In the next section we show that with KPR preferences labor supply typically declines
on the transition path, so productivity is decreasing also with learning-by-doing.23

  23 Similarly, when there is private investment into productivity, its output share increases along the transition

path, potentially oﬀsetting the decline in overall productivity.


                                                        17
    Finally, we note that the lower bound on lump-sum transfers always binds. Indeed, transfers
are uniform across districts and, hence, are not subject to political conflict over the distribution
of resources. Since taxation is distortionary, as long as the government’s debt is positive, it is
never optimal to tax citizens to simply redistribute the generated revenue back in the form of cash
transfers.


4      A calibrated solution of the model
4.1     Positive analysis

In this section we study the model presented above by numerical methods, calibrating it to the
U.S. economy. As we detail below, most of the parameter values we use are standard choices in
the empirical macroeconomics literature. Those that are key to our approach — the parameters
governing the legislative bargaining procedure and the externality parameter  — are chosen to
minimize the diﬀerences between the balanced growth path values of the fiscal policy variables
predicted by the model and the corresponding average values in the U.S. economy in the 2001-2010
period.24
      We use a log-utility function for consumption as in Jaimovich and Rebelo [2008] and McGrat-
tan and Prescott [2010]. We set  to 137 which yields labor supply elasticity of about 1.5 on the
balanced growth path of the model. It is in a mid-range of the parameters used in the literature.
We set  to 0.954 - with 1.2% growth rate this discount factor implies a real interest rate of 6%
(Jaimovich and Rebelo, [2008]). The literature provides no guidance on the long-run elasticity
of growth via learning-by-doing. We set it to 1 = 0245 That is, we assume that the long-run
elasticity of the learning-by-doing with respect to labor is three quarters of its short run elasticity,
as estimated by Chang, Gomes and Schorfheide [2002]. The transfer parameter,  , is set to its
empirical counterpart, 10% of GDP.
    The legislative bargaining parameters are , G , and . We normalize the number of districts
to 100; we set the government size, G, to 100, the majority required to pass the legislation,  to
51, and lower bound on local public goods, , to .01: 1% of output of a single district. The exact
number of districts, the government size, and the size of the minimal winning coalition are not

  24 Implicit is the assumption that fiscal variables have been, on average, at their balanced growth levels during

this time period. We note that choosing a diﬀerent time period to construct empirical values of the fiscal variables,
would result in qualitatively identical patterns to those described below. The data description is in the Appendix.




                                                         18
                                                                                  G
particularly important in absolute terms, what matters is the factor               (G ).   Our choices above
imply that it is .02.25 Recall, however, that the legislative bargaining alone does determine the
long-run level of debt. The latter also depends on the externality parameter . Ceteris paribus,
the higher is  the higher the steady state level of debt is. This relation is exploited in our
calibration. In essence, we choose  to match the target value of the debt-to-GDP ratio.26                    More
precisely, we choose   1 and ∆1 together to match the empirically observed (i) debt-to-GDP,
(ii) public good-to-GDP, public investment-to-GDP, and private investment-to-GDP ratios. This
yields values of 0.53, 0.505, 0.0018 and 0.000525, respectively.
       Finally, 0  0  and ∆0 are scale parameters and can be set to match the desired level of long-
run growth. Table 1 shows that the model has no diﬃculty in achieving the benchmark calibration
targets.
       Figure 3 describes the dynamics of the model. It shows the transition to the balanced growth
path starting with no debt. A number of features of the equilibrium dynamics emerge.                          First,
in the model debt grows faster than GDP. Second, public expenditure, as a fraction of GDP,
declines. Both of these patterns conform with our theoretical findings. Third, taxes also decline
during the transition. Hence, the shrinking government eﬀect, discussed in Proposition 4, applies
also to the revenue side. As debt increases, the government has to increase the primary surplus by
either increasing taxes or reducing expenditures. Recall that reduction in expenditures increases
citizens’ savings and, hence, reduces the equilibrium interest rate. That is, by reducing expen-
diture the government relaxes the budget constraint both directly and indirectly, by reducing the
equilibrium interest rate. The indirect eﬀect of an increase in taxation is diﬀerent. Higher taxes
reduce disposable income and therefore, ceteris paribus, reduce savings and increase the equilib-
rium interest rate. As the stock of debt increases, the interest rate eﬀect becomes increasingly
significant, making tax increases even less attractive.
       The fourth feature regards labor supply and provides some insight about the mechanics of the
model. Despite the reduction in taxation, labor supply declines over time. This phenomenon is
due to the fact that as debt increases, citizens hold more wealth: the wealth eﬀect increases the

  25                                                                                                  G
    Of course, there are alternative combinations of G and  that are consistent with this value of   
                                                                                                        (G ).   The
behavior of the economy will be very similar under these alternatives.
  26 We note that diﬀerent values of G ( ) would change the implied value of  but as long as there is political
                                       
conflict, an increase in G
                         
                           ( ) will simply translate into an increase in  and vice versa.




                                                         19
marginal utility of leisure, and reduces labor supply.27
   The fifth feature of the equilibrium shown by Figure 3 regards the growth rate: productivity
growth declines as the economy converges to the balanced growth path. This finding also extends
the results of the previous section by showing that productivity and output growth decline as
the economy approaches the balanced growth path even in the presence of learning-by-doing and
private investment. The decline in growth is due to two factors: the decrease in the investment in
infrastructure by the government and the decrease in learning-by-doing triggered by the declining
labor supply. In addition, the decline in labor supply oﬀsets the rising share of private investment
in GDP, countering its positive eﬀect on productivity growth.
   Finally, the interest rate declines as the economy converges to the balanced growth path. This
decline only partially reflects the falling growth rate of the economy. It is mostly driven by the
rise in debt. The higher is debt, the bigger the incentive to reduce spending (as we established in
Proposition 4) and to manipulate the interest rate is.

4.2     Robustness

In this section we study the robustness of the model’s dynamics with respect to the parameter
choices. We change one parameter at a time, keeping others at their benchmark values. In Table
2, for each parameter perturbation we report (i) its benchmark value, (ii) the magnitude and
the direction of the change, (iii) the resulting long-run debt-to-GDP, public good-to-GDP, public
investment-to-GDP, and private investment-to-GDP ratios. In addition, in the On-line Appendix
we provide figures that describe the dynamics of the economy starting from zero debt, just as
Figure 3 does it for the benchmark case. In all of these cases, we find qualitatively the same
patterns as in the benchmark case: the shrinking government eﬀect, declining labor, declining
productivity growth and a declining interest rate.
   First (see first two rows), we change the discount factor. Naturally, the closer is the discount
factor to one, the more the decision makers take the future into account and, consequently, the
lower the long-run debt is.
   Second (see third and forth rows), we change the parameter  which governs labor supply

  27 If, instead KPR preferences, we use Greenwood, Hercowitz and Huﬀman [GHH, 1988] preferences, all of our

results remain qualitatively unchanged and qualitatively very similar to the reported above with the exception of
labor supply. Since GHH preferences do not allow for wealth eﬀects, labor supply increases as the debt-to-GDP
ratio converged from below to its balanced growth level. These results are available from authors upon request.




                                                       20
elasticity. The lower  implies that the labor supply is less responsive to taxes, and hence it is
less costly to “distort” future allocations, leading to more debt accumulation.
      Third (see fifth row), we increase the growth elasticity with respect to private investment by
tenfold. The purpose of such a dramatic increase is to see whether the decline in TFP growth
that we saw in the benchmark calibration will also hold if the share of private investment were
significantly larger. Naturally, we find that the balanced growth share of private investment
increases dramatically, almost tenfold. Labor supply increases relative to the benchmark level.
The fiscal policy variables are little aﬀected.
      Sixth and seventh rows report what happens if we dramatically decrease the share of public
investment and the importance of learning-by-doing externality, respectively. Recall that both
public investment and labor supply decline as the economy converges to the balanced growth
path from below. Hence both of these forces drive the decline in TFP growth. Shutting them
down allows us to assess how general the result about the declining TFP is. In both cases, the
balanced growth debt-to-GDP ratio increases significantly. In the first case this follows from the
fact that the decision makers are less concerned about providing public investment and can at the
margin channel more resources to their own districts. In the second case, as the learning-by-doing
externality disappears, it is less costly to tax labor, both contemporaneously and in the future.
Consequently, taxation increases dramatically, labor supply falls, more public goods are provided,
leading to a higher level of the debt-to-GDP ratio.
      Eighth and ninth rows report changes implied by increasing/decreasing the weight of public
goods in the citizens’ utility. The long-run share of public goods changes with the parameter 
and so do the taxes. The long-run debt-to-GDP ratio moves in the opposite direction, suggesting
that the more important pubic goods become, the less misaligned the preferences of legislators
are.
      The next two exercises concern the parameters governing the degree of political conflict,  and
. As we discussed previously, the larger is  — the majority needed to pass the allocation of public
goods — the less is the degree of political conflict. We find that around our benchmark value of
51, the long-run debt-to-GDP ratio does not vary much with . In fact increasing the majority
from 51 to 71, implies only about a percentage point of GDP decrease in debt.28         We also find
that the long-run level of debt is much more responsive to the degree of public good externalities.

 28    Though, of course, when  = 100 debt collapses to zero.


                                                         21
As discussed earlier, the higher is  the more self-interested the legislators become, pushing up
the debt-to-GDP ratio. In fact, the highest value of  at which an interior equilibrium exists is
0.61.29 In the next section, we discuss in more detail how the long-run behavior of the economy
changes with the parameter .
   Finally, we ask how the economy would change in the long run, if the amount of transfers
increased or decreased. As the last two rows of Table 2 show, an increase in social transfers is
compensated both by an increase in taxes and reduction in public goods provision. Also, there is
more debt accumulation, suggesting that the legislators become more inclined to rely on future
tax revenue to finance current expenditure.

4.3     Political conflict and long-run outcomes

In this section we study in detail how the long-run predictions of the model change with the
degree of the political conflict in the economy, as measured by the externality parameter . As 
rises, the conflict between districts increases because citizens become less sensitive to public goods
provided to the constituencies to which they do not belong.
   Figure 4 illustrates the eﬀect of changes in  from its benchmark value of 0.53 in our calibration
to 0 on the balanced growth path values of the variables of interest.
   Three findings are worth noting. First, the figure reiterates that in the model a lower level
of political conflict induces a lower long-run level of debt.          The level of debt relative to GDP
indeed converges to zero as  converges to zero, as discussed in Section 3. Second, as expected, a
decrease in political conflict induces a higher level of investment in public infrastructure and local
public goods.
   The third eﬀect is perhaps more surprising: a decrease in political conflict induces an increase
in the tax rate and it has a non-monotonic eﬀect on labor supply and growth. As  decreases,
the tax rate increases to finance higher provision of public goods without increasing debt.                 As
 decreases, labor supply initially increases. This phenomenon is due to the wealth eﬀect: the
decrease in  induces a decline in public debt and, hence, in privately held wealth, so it induces
a decline in the marginal utility of leisure as well. For lower levels of , however, the higher tax
rate tends to counterbalance the wealth eﬀect, and labor supply decreases in response to a decline

  29 Above this value the debt-to-GDP ratio explodes, and the economy converges to its highest sustainable level

of debt, public good provision collapses and tax rates increase to the peak of the Laﬀer curve.




                                                      22
in . Nonetheless, the eﬀects of taxation and wealth roughly oﬀset each other—the diﬀerences in
labor supply across diﬀerent ’s do not exceed 0.25 percent.
    The non-monotonicity in labor supply explains why the growth rate is non-monotonic in . It
is important to stress, however, that welfare is monotonically increasing in . Hence, the growth
rate is not necessarily a good measure of welfare in this model.               As political distortions are
reduced, the public goods’ share of output increases: public goods increase welfare, but they do
not necessarily increase growth.       That is, though the economy grows at a slower rate, it has a
superior balance between the private and the public sector.
    Since debt is monotonically decreasing in , the non-monotonicity of the growth rate with
respect to  may explain why there is evidence suggesting a non-monotonic relation between debt
and growth.30 Figure 4 suggests that we should expect the relationship between growth and debt
to be negative for countries with a high , and positive for countries with low .


5     Growth and austerity programs

As the analysis of the previous section has highlighted, the political equilibrium is ineﬃcient. It
leads to an excessive accumulation of debt relative to GDP and may result in a subpar growth
rate. It is, therefore, natural to ask whether and how welfare can be improved by changing the
institutional setting. Two sets of variables are of interest: First, the variables determining the
“political environment” such as the voting rule and the variables determining legislative bargain-
ing. Second, economic variables such as, for example, self-imposed constitutional constraints on
deficit spending, or debt limits.
    Regarding the first set of variables, we have already discussed in the previous section the
impact of changes in .       We note here that in our model even if within-each-period political
conflict is eliminated (by imposing a unanimity rule or, equivalently, imposing a new rule that
all districts must receive the same amount of public goods) the economy will not move to its
Ramsey allocation. This is because the decision makers today cannot commit to the future policy
choices since endogenous interest rates give rise to the standard time inconsistency problem. In
fact, starting with a positive level of debt the Ramsey solution implies that the fiscal policy will
be constant from next period onward, with some positive level of debt, while the egalitarian

  30 For evidence on the relationship between debt and growth see, for example, Kumar and Wo [2010], Checherita

and Rother [2010] and Reinhart and Rogoﬀ [2010].



                                                      23
policymakers, without a commitment device, will slowly drive the debt level to zero. Nevertheless,
we find that  = 100 is the optimal majority rule even if the economy starts at the level of debt
twice the balanced growth level: The higher  first and foremost implies a better distribution of
local public goods across districts. The implied expected welfare gains mute the short-term pain
associated with higher taxes necessary to pay down the debt. In the long run, there is also a
better balance between private and public expenditure.
    To better understand the impact of self imposed constraints on deficit spending, we study
here a simple class of austerity programs which are characterized by three features: the debt
target, the number of periods allowed to reach the target and, finally, whether the target level
shall be sustained forever or not (permanent versus temporary debt reduction). Eﬀectively, we are
capturing scenarios in which the legislature passes a law that establishes a new, lower, debt ceiling
that goes into eﬀect at a certain date in the future. Analyzing these scenarios may help to better
understand the likely welfare impact of austerity measures like the Fiscal Compact in Europe or
the Budget Control Act of 2011 in the U.S. In what follows, we use our political economy model
to assess the eﬀects of these types of programs and the way they should be designed.
    We consider two scenarios. In the first scenario the government can permanently commit to
the debt ceiling. In the second the government can only commit to bring the debt below a certain
level over a certain period of time. The second scenario is, perhaps, a more realistic description
of situations in which a country is forced to adopt austerity measures as a pre-condition, .e.g., for
international help.

The eﬀects of an austerity plan with commitment. Suppose a country’s debt is at its
balanced growth path level. Consider the following type of austerity programs: the country is
required to run a surplus to permanently reduce its debt by a certain fraction in  years.31 Figure
5 illustrates the evolution of the equilibrium studied in the previous section when the economy is
forced to reduce the level of debt relative to GDP by 50% of its current level in seven years, and
keep it there forever.      We consider this plan because, as we will show below, it is the optimal
austerity plan for the economy with our benchmark parameter values.

  31 In particular we assume that the legislators are forced to reduce  by a constant amount in every period until

the new target is reached. Note that here we define debt reduction in terms of  - that is the debt level (scaled by
productivity). We do this to ease comparison with the robustness exercises that we report later. For the benchmark
case we discuss below it is virtually identical to formulating the austerity program in terms of the reduction in the
debt-to-GDP ratio.




                                                         24
      After the introduction of the program the tax rate and government expenditure in public goods
and infrastructure spike up and down, respectively. There is, however, a key diﬀerence in their
reaction: the tax rate keeps increasing for the entire period of the program and it settles at a
permanently higher level; by contrast, public goods provision dips below the pre-program period
level for two years, recovers afterwards and keeps increasing until the new balanced growth level is
reached. In the seven years of the program, the tax rate increases by 4 percentage points and total
public expenditure as a share of GDP increases by 5 percentage points.32                    During the austerity
program, the growth rate of GDP remains below the pre-program level by about 0.5%. Because
of the fall in the GDP growth, the debt-to-GDP ratio initially increases, but then it gradually
falls until it reaches the target level.
      Public investment, except for the initial dip, rises. Private investment shows exactly the
opposite pattern. Overall productivity growth is low until the economy reaches its new balanced
growth path. This is mostly due to the decline in labor during the transition process. The growth
rate, however, is a poor measure of welfare and, hence, a poor way to measure the success of
the program.        The last panel of Figure 5 illustrates the dynamics of the per period expected
indirect utility (augmented with future utility gains stemming from current investment decisions
and learning-by-doing).         This measure of citizens’ welfare initially falls and remains below the
pre-austerity level for the first 4 years. After three years, however, the per-period indirect utility
starts increasing, and it continues to increase until the end of the program.
      An important feature of the transition is that although the program imposes to run a fiscal
surplus, the size of the public sector over GDP increases over time. This is the shrinking govern-
ment eﬀect in reverse. As the debt declines, so do the reasons to manipulate the interest rates.
This, in turn, reduces the pressure to keep expenditure and taxes low. Consequently, the economy
gears to a better policy mix and, through it, a better balance between the private and the public
sectors.

The optimal austerity plan with commitment. We now discuss how to chose the optimal
austerity plan, and how it changes with the environment. Table 3 compares the welfare eﬀects
of alternative austerity programs for the benchmark calibration.                    The rows of the table list
alternative target reductions in the debt. The columns of the table list alternative horizons of

 32   The latter rises more than the former because the government has to pay less interest on debt after the change.




                                                         25
the program. The entry  in column  and row  is the equivalence variation associated to the
austerity program expressed as a percentage of consumption in each period.33                                 Two interesting
observations can be drawn from this table. First, except for the cases in which the program is
extremely ambitious (both in terms of debt reduction and/or in terms of time horizon), austerity
is welfare improving. Second, the eﬀect of a program is neither monotonic in its size nor in its
time horizon. If, for example, we fix the time horizon at  = 7 periods, austerity implies a gain
of 0.83% in per period consumption for the target level of 35% of GDP; as we reduce the target
to 20% of GDP, the benefit increases to 2.17%; but for targets below 20%, the benefit declines,
reaching a negative value of -2.00% for the complete elimination of debt. Similarly, if we target
a debt reduction of 50%, achieving the goal in one period is equivalent to a permanent reduction
in consumption of -3.09%; achieving it in 7 periods induces a permanent increase in consumption
by 2.17%; achieving it in 20 years induces an increase by 1.90%.
    The fact that an austerity program forcing fast debt repayment improves welfare may appear
surprising at first sight. Although the debt level is ineﬃciently high at the equilibrium balanced
growth path, it may appear that the best way to pay it back is just to evenly spread its cost
over time by servicing its cost and keeping the principal constant. To see where the problem
with this reasoning is, we should note that although at the balanced growth path the legislators
keep policies constant, the policy mix is ineﬃcient. The lack of commitment induces legislators
to use fiscal policy to influence the interest rate. Forcing legislators to run a primary surplus is
not directly beneficial because it reduces public debt; it is beneficial because it induces them to
change the policy mix. This can be seen by comparing the equilibrium balanced growth ∗ with
the one that would be reached by a benevolent planner with commitment (the first best) and with
the balanced growth level reached after the austerity plan, in both cases starting from 0 = ∗ .34
The benevolent planner would increase the tax rate from 21% to 35%, and public goods from 9%
to 23%. Imposing the austerity plan at ∗ does not induce such a large long-term change in the
policy mix, but it brings it closer to this optimal levels, inducing the intermediate levels of 25%
and 14%, respectively.

   33 In particular, let  ,  ,  and 
                                      ,      be the path of consumption, labor and public
                                              ,                                            goods    provided before and
after austerity program  implemented at 0 . The variable  is is chosen so that ∞                
                                                                                                =0  [( (1 +  )    )]
                       
is equal to ∞  =0  (          ).
                              

 34 The computation of the steady state when policies are chosen by a benevolent planner with commitment is

omitted to save space. The details are available from the authors.



                                                               26
     How does the design of the optimal austerity program depend on the level of debt before the
plan is implemented? In the benchmark calibration presented above the parameters are chosen
so that the balanced growth level of the debt-to-GDP ratio is 40.5%. Table 4 presents optimal
austerity for alternative calibrations. For completeness we report what happens for each set of
parameters considered in the robustness section. The first five columns are from Table 3. The
last two columns describe the associated optimal austerity program in terms of its time horizon
and the percent reduction in debt. Table 4 illustrates that there is no “one-size-fits-all” optimal
austerity program. For example, as  increases, and therefore debt relative to GDP increases as
well, the time horizon of the optimal program becomes longer and the target level less demanding.
     Across alternative calibrations one case stands out - the case with dramatically lower learning-
by-doing externality. In this case, the economy is so overburdened by debt, that over even 20 years
horizon it is not worthwhile to incur the additional pain of raising taxes to move to a permanently
lower level of debt.

Austerity with limited commitment.                  The assumption that the austerity plan can impose
a permanent reduction in debt is, perhaps, extreme. Below we assume that austerity can be
imposed only for a limited period of time, after which legislators are free to choose policies with
no constraints. Figure 6 illustrates the eﬀect of reducing debt by 62% in 5 years; at the end of
the 5th year the program is terminated and so legislators return to the political equilibrium.35
    Naturally, the program induces only a temporary eﬀect on policies. Note, however, that even
after the end of the program, the economy converges to the (ineﬃcient) balanced growth path
only gradually, so policies remain closer to the first best for a period that is much longer than the
length of the program.        Table 5 illustrates the welfare eﬀects of alternative austerity programs
of this type.    It is interesting that even with a limited commitment of 2-5 years, an austerity
program that is not too ambitious can improve welfare.


6      A discussion
6.1     On the relationship with Battaglini and Coate [2008] framework

The model presented above finds its inspiration in the political economy model of debt by Battaglini
and Coate [2008] (henceforth BC), but it departs from it in many significant ways. Apart from

  35 We assume that the length of the program is rationally anticipated by the legislators, who therefore take into

account the temporary nature of the program in choosing the policies.


                                                        27
the fact that BC never considered growth, the main diﬀerence is in the way the policy space is
modelled. While in BC politicians gain political power by distributing lump-sum transfers, in the
model presented above politicians distribute local public goods.              It is important to understand
why, and the extent to which, this change aﬀects the results.
    The first implication of considering local public goods is that they may generate externalities:
a bridge constructed in county  will aﬀect neighboring county , even if the bridge was provided
to  as a form of pork. While this expands the scope of the model, it does not change the essence
of the political conflict, and, hence, it is not crucial for our analytical results.              The presence
of the externality is important from a quantitative point of view, as discussed in Section 4.2: a
reduction in  implies an increase in the externality and a decrease in the political conflict. Tables
2 and 4 show that diﬀerences in  translate into significant diﬀerences in political and economic
outcomes.36
    The feature of local public goods that changes the nature of the problem is the fact that
they enter in the citizens’ utilities in a non-linear way (transfers in BC enter the utility functions
linearly). This small change has important implications for the analysis. To see why this is the
case note first that as debt increases, the marginal cost of public funds increases. The marginal
cost of public funds is a convex function of  and converges to infinity as debt approaches the
upper bound .       When the marginal utility of transfers is linear, this implies that above some
(high) level of debt, there are no pork transfers. That is, the economy enters what BC call the
Responsible Policy Making regime (RPM): the debt level does not rise even when the policy is
decided by self-interested politicians.37         When, as in the model presented here, the marginal
utility of transfers (public goods) is non-linear and satisfies the Inada conditions, the economy
never reaches the RPM regime because the lower is the level of public goods the higher their
marginal benefit is.38      The only reason why debt does not converge to  is that the politicians
want to keep interest rates low, a phenomenon that is absent in BC. In the On-line Appendix

  36 We stress that the ultimate determinant of the political conflict is not , but  G (G ). To this end, the
                                                                                       
externality can be disposed oﬀ by setting  to 1 and re-calibrating the remaining parameters, including  and G
which are fixed in the benchmark calibration, to match the targeted moments in the data.
  37 In fact, in BC and in the closely related model of Barseghyan, Battaglini and Coate (2013) and Battaglini

[2014], debt in RPM regime may decline due to the precautionary savings motive arising from random shocks.
  38 Technically, this statement requires the lower bound on public goods, , to be small. However, our upper

bound on debt  is defined taking into account that at least  amount of public goods should be provided to all
districts. Hence, the statement is true for all interior 




                                                       28
we formalize this point by presenting a version of our model in which citizens’ utility is linear in
consumption, but non-linear in the local public goods. As in BC, this utility implies a constant
interest rate, and hence there is no interest rate manipulation channel. As a result, the debt level
is ever-growing, converging to its upper bound.

6.2       Closed versus open economies

In the previous analysis, we have focused on a closed economy. In this context, the government
has the monopoly on government bonds and so changes in debt have the maximal eﬀect on the
interest rate. In an open economy the government competes for funds with other countries: it
is reasonable to assume that the elasticity of the interest rate to debt would be lower in these
cases.     The analysis presented above suggests that in these environments the government has
lower incentives to keep debt small.          If the elasticity of the interest rate to debt is lower (but
still positive), then we should expect a higher level of debt accumulation;39 in the limit case in
which by opening the economy to the world capital markets the elasticity becomes zero, we should
expect debt to converge to . In the On-line Appendix we formalize this point by presenting a
variation of the basic model in which interest rates are completely insensitive to domestic policies.
As expected, public debt converges to .
       We should however stress that for the existence of an interior balanced growth level of debt,
Proposition 2 only requires positive elasticity at the steady state, not globally. Even if for low
levels of debt the elasticity is zero (as it may be for some countries, at least at a given point in
time), it could become positive when public debt grows. There is evidence that seems to confirm
that the sensitivity of the interest rate to debt plays an important role in shaping fiscal policy
even for an economy fully integrated into the world capital markets and small risk of default such
as the U.S.40

6.3       Towards an empirical analysis at high and medium frequencies

In this paper we abstracted from shocks, and, hence, our model cannot be immediately used in
standard empirical macroeconomic research. However, we view it as a fundamental “ready-to-use”

  39 Azzimonti, de Francisco, and Quadrini [2014] argue that the liberalization of financial markets of the past

thirty years has contributed to the rise in public debt across OECD countries as well as the decline in public debt
elasticity of the interest rate. They also provide evidence of a positive correlation between public debt and some
indices of capital market liberalization.
  40   For evidence on this see the memories of former Treasury Secretary Robert Rubin (Rubin [2003]).


                                                        29
block for applied DSGE models that allows for endogenous fiscal policy — something that, to our
knowledge, has been missing from these models. Consider, for example, a standard approach
of comparing/fitting impulse response functions generated by the model to those estimated in
the data (e.g., Chirstiano, Eichanbaum and Evans [2005]). A crucial step in this literature is to
translate a DSGE model into a system of linear diﬀerence equations describing the evolution of
the variables of interest by linearizing the system of the equations implied by the model around
the non-stochastic steady state. Importantly, our solution procedure — constructing global policy
functions — automatically determines what the non-stochastic steady state is. Moreover, when
exogenous stochastic state variables are i.i.d., the entire impulse response functions, up to a scale
parameter, are described by the linearized policy functions, (), except of course for the period
of the initial shock.
    In sum, our model oﬀers an endogenous theory of fiscal policy that can be further enriched to
allow for temporary shocks. It can be easily adopted to carry out empirical analysis at high and
medium frequencies.


7     Conclusion

This paper develops a political economy theory of growth and fiscal policy.       In our theory, the
growth rate of the economy depends on public investment, private investment in human capital
and, through learning-by-doing, labor supply.      Fiscal policy aﬀects citizens’ incentives in two
ways: taxation distorts labor supply and deficits distort consumption/savings decision through
their eﬀect on the interest rate.   Policy choices are made by a legislature consisting of elected
representatives. Political conflict arises because representatives in the legislature have incentives
to vote for policies that favor their own constituencies and citizens benefit only partially from
local public goods provided to constituencies to which they do not belong.
    The model predicts that the economy converges to a balanced growth path in which consump-
tion, public investment, public goods provision, public debt and productivity grow at the same
constant rate. The transition to the balanced growth path is characterized by what we call the
shrinking government eﬀect: public debt grows faster than GDP, provisions of public goods and
infrastructure grow slower than GDP and the tax rate declines.
    We use the model as a laboratory to study the impact of austerity programs in which a country
is required to bring down its debt-to-GDP ratio. We show that austerity programs may be used to

                                                 30
limit political distortions and increase welfare. The analysis also shows that there is no “one-size-
fits-all” optimal austerity program: the higher is the accumulated level of debt, the less aggressive
the optimal program should be (both in terms of the debt target to reach and timing).           The
growth rate of the economy is a poor measure welfare and, hence, of the program’s success. On
the transition path of the optimal austerity program, growth is below the pre-austerity level, but
welfare is increasing.
   There are many diﬀerent directions in which the ideas presented here might usefully be devel-
oped. To focus on public policies, we have made a number of simplifying assumptions both on
the description of the economy and on the political process: there is no private capital, no shocks,
we are restricting attention to a symmetric economy with no redistribution, and with a relatively
simple political decision making process. Extending the model to relax these assumption would
certainly provide a richer framework for analysis and improve the model’s predictive ability. We
are confident that these assumptions can be relaxed in future research.




                                                 31
References
   Aguiar, M. and M. Amador, 2011. “Growth under the Shadow of Expropriation,” The Quar-
   terly Journal of Economics. 126(2), pp. 651-697.
   Aguiar, M. and M. Amador, 2012. “Fiscal Policy in Debt-Constrained Economies,” Mimeo.
   Aiyagari, R., A. Marcet, A., T. J. Sargent, and J. Seppala, 2002. “Optimal Taxation without
   State-Contingent Debt,” Journal of Political Economy 110, pp. 1220—1254.
   Alesina, A. and S. Ardagna, 1998. “Tales of Fiscal Adjustment,” Economic Policy, CEPR
   & CES & MSH, vol. 13(27), pp. 487-545.
   Alesina, A. and A. Drazen, 1991. “Why Are Stabilizations Delayed?” American Economic
   Review, vol. 81(5), pp. 1170-88.
   Alesina, A. and D. Rodrik, 1994. “Distributive Politics and Economic Growth,” The Quar-
   terly Journal of Economics, vol. 109(2), pp. 465-90.
   Alesina, A. and G. Tabellini, 1990. “A Positive Theory of Fiscal Deficits and Government
   Debt,” Review of Economic Studies 57, pp. 403-414.
   Alesina, A., R. Perotti and J. Tavares, 1998. “The Political Economy of Fiscal Adjustments,”
   Brookings Papers on Economic Activity, vol. 29(1), pp. 197-266.
   Ardagna, S., 2004. “Fiscal Stabilizations: When Do They Work and Why,” European Eco-
   nomic Review, vol. 48(5), pp. 1047-1074.
   Ardagna, S., F. Caselli and T. Lane, 2007. “Fiscal Discipline and the Cost of Public Debt
   Service: Some Estimates for OECD Countries,” The B.E. Journal of Macroeconomics, vol.
   7: Iss. 1 (Topics), Article 28.
   Azzimonti, M., M. Battaglini and S. Coate, 2007. “Analyzing the Case for a Balanced Budget
   Amendment to the U.S. Constitution,” Mimeo.
   Azzimonti, M., E. de Francisco, and V. Quadrini, 2014. “Financial Globalization, Inequality,
   and the Rising Public Debt”, American Economic Review, 104(8), pp. 2267-23.
   Barro, R. J., 1979. “On the Determination of the Public Debt,” Journal of Political Economy,
   87, 940-971.
   Barro, R. J., 1991. “Economic Growth in a Cross Section of Countries,” The Quarterly
   Journal of Economics, vol. 106(2), pp. 407-43.
   Barseghyan, L., M. Battaglini, and S. Coate, 2013. “Fiscal policy over the real business
   cycle: A positive theory”, Journal of Economic Theory 148(6), pp. 2223-2265.
   Battaglini, M, 2011, ”The Political Economy of Public Debt,” Annual Review of Economics,
   Vol. 3, pp. 161-189.
   Battaglini, M, 2014, “A Dynamic Theory of Electoral Competition,” Theoretical Economics,
   9, pp. 515-554.
   Battaglini, M., and S. Coate, 2008. “A Dynamic Theory of Public Spending, Taxation and
   Debt.” American Economic Review, vol. 98, pp. 201-36.


                                            32
Battaglini, M. and S. Coate, 2014. “Fiscal Policy and Unemployment,” Journal of the Eu-
ropean Economic Association, forthcoming.
Baron, D. and D. Diermeier, 2001. “Elections, Governments, and Parliaments in Propor-
tional Representation Systems,” Quarterly Journal of Economics, 116(3), pp. 933-967.
Benabou, R., 2000. “Unequal Societies: Income Distribution and the Social Contract,”
American Economic Review, vol. 90(1), pp. 96-129.
Bertola, G. 1993. “Factor Shares and Savings in Endogenous Growth,” American Economic
Review, vol. 83(5) , pp. 1184-1198.
Chang, Y., J. F. Gomes and F. Schorfheide, 2002. “Learning-by-Doing as a Propagation
Mechanism,” American Economic Review, 92(5), pp. 1498-1520.
Checherita, C. and P. Rother, 2010. “The Impact of High and Growing Debt on Economic
Growth.” European Central Bank Working Paper No. 1237.
Christiano, L. J., M. Eichenbaum, and C. L. Evans, 2005. “Nominal Rigidities and the
Dynamic Eﬀects of a Shock to Monetary Policy”, Journal of Political Economy 113 (1), pp.
1-45.
De Bortoli, D. and F. Nunes, 2013. “Lack of Commitment and the Level of Debt,” Journal
of the European Economic Association, 11 (5), pp. 1053-78.
Drazen, A., 2001, Political Economy in Macroeconomics, Princeton University Press.
Drazen, A. and V. Grilli, 1993. “The Benefit of Crises for Economic Reforms,” American
Economic Review, vol. 83(3), pp. 598-607.
Giavazzi, F. and M. Pagano, 1990. “Can Severe Fiscal Contractions Be Expansionary? Tales
of Two Small European Countries,” in O. J. Blanchard and S. Fischer, editors, NBER
Macroeconomics Annual 1990, Vol.5.
Greenwood, J., Z. Hercowitz, and G. Huﬀman, 1988. “Investment, Capacity Utilization, and
the Real Business Cycle,” American Economic Review, 78(3), pp. 402—17.
Jaimovich, N. and S. T. Rebelo, 2008. “Can News about the Future Drive the Business
Cycle?” American Economic Review, vol. 99, pp. 1097-1118.
Jaimovich, N. and S. T. Rebelo, 2012. “Don’t Cross the Line: Non-Linear Eﬀects of Taxation
on Growth,” mimeo.
King, R. G., C.I. Plosser and S. T. Rebelo, 1988. “Production, Growth and Business Cycles
I. The Basic Neoclassical Model,” Journal of Monetary Economics, vol. 21, pp. 195—232.
King, R. G. and S. T. Rebelo, 1990. “Public Policy and Economic Growth: Developing
Neoclassical Implications,” Journal of Political Economy, vol. 98(5), pp. S126-50.
Krusell, P. and J.-V. Rios-Rull, 1999. “On the Size of U.S. Government: Political Economy
in the Neoclassical Growth Model,” American Economic Review, vol. 89(5), pp. 1156-1181.
Kumar, M. and J. Woo, 2010. “Public Debt and Growth,” IMF Working Paper 10/174.
Laubach, T., 2009. “New Evidence on the Interest Rate Eﬀects of Budget Deficits and Debt,”
Journal of the European Economic Association, vol. 7(4), pp. 858-885.

                                         33
Ljungqvist, L. and T. Sargent, 2004. Recursive Macroeconomic Theory, MIT Press.
Martin, F., 2009. “A positive theory of government debt,” Review of Economic Dynamics,
12 (4), pp. 608—631.
McDermott, C. J. and R. F. Westcott, 1996. “An Empirical Analysis of Fiscal Adjustments,”
IMF Working Papers 96/59.
McGrattan, E. R. and E. C. Prescott, 2010. “Unmeasured Investment and the Puzzling US
Boom in the 1990s,” American Economic Journal: Macroeconomics, 2, pp. 88—123.
Occhino, F. , 2012. “Government Debt Dynamics Under Discretion,” The B.E. Journal of
Macroeconomics, Vol. 12, Iss. 1, July 2012.
Perotti, R., 1993. “Political Equilibrium, Income Distribution, and Growth,” Review of
Economic Studies, vol. 60(4), pp. 755-76.
Persson, T. and S. Svensson. 1989. “Why a Stubborn Conservative Would Run a Deficit:
Policy with Time-Inconsistent Preferences,” The Quarterly Journal of Economics, 104:325-
346.
Persson, T. and G. Tabellini, 1994. “Is Inequality Harmful for Growth?” American Economic
Review, vol. 84(3), pp. 600-621.
Rebelo, S. T., 1991. “Long-Run Policy Analysis and Long-Run Growth,” Journal of Political
Economy, vol. 99(3): pp. 500-521.
Reinhart, C. M. and K. S. Rogoﬀ, 2010. “Growth in a Time of Debt,” NBER Working Paper
No. 15639.
Rogers, C., 1989. “Debt Restructuring with a Public Good,” Scandinavian Journal of Eco-
nomics, 91, pp. 117—130.
Rubin R. with J. Weisberg, 2003. In an Uncertain World: Tough Choices from Wall Street
to Washington, Random House.
Saint-Paul, G. 2001. “The Dynamics of Exclusion and Fiscal Conservatism,” Review of
Economic Dynamics, vol. 4(2), pp. 275-302.
Saint-Paul, G. and T. Verdier, 1993. “Education, democracy and growth,” Journal of De-
velopment Economics, vol. 42(2), pp. 399-407.
Shin, Y., 2006. “Ramsey Meets Bewley: Optimal Government Financing with Incomplete
Markets,” Mimeo.
Stokey, N. L. and R. E. Lucas, Jr., 1983. “Optimal Fiscal and Monetary Policy in an Economy
without Capital,” Journal of Monetary Economics, 12, pp. 55-93.
Stokey, N. L. and S. T. Rebelo, 1995. “Growth Eﬀects of Flat-Rate Taxes,” Journal of
Political Economy, University of Chicago Press, vol. 103(3), pp. 519-50.




                                         34
8       Appendix

In this appendix we first detail the statements and propositions presented in Sections 2 and 3. We
then describe our data sources used for calibration in Section 4.

8.1       Citizens’ Problem

For a given sequence of government policies, citizens’ maximization problem in period 0 is:
                                     ⎧                          ⎡       ⎛        ⎞1− ⎤⎫
                              X∞     ⎪
                                     ⎨                                   X            ⎪
                                                                                       ⎬
                                                              ⎢¡  ¢ ⎝      ⎠     ⎥
                  max              log ( (1 −  ) ) +  log ⎣                 ⎦
                {   }        ⎪
                                     ⎩                                                 ⎪
                                                                                       ⎭
                              =0                                         =1

                                        +1
                                         +  + S = (1 −  )   +  + T 
                                         
                                                        µ       ¶∆1
                                                           S
                                              +1 = ∆0               
                                                           

Denote
                                                                S           
                                           ̂ =          ̂ =        ̂ =  
                                                                       
The problem above becomes:41
                                               ⎧                                  ⎡      ⎛       ⎞1− ⎤    ⎫
                                               ⎪
                                               ⎪                                                          ⎪
                                                                                                           ⎪
                                               ⎪
                                               ⎪
                                               ⎪                                  ⎢¡ ¢ X  ⎠         ⎥    ⎪
                                                                                                           ⎪
                                                                                                           ⎪
    1+                                 X∞     ⎨ log ̂ +  log(1 −  ) +  log ⎣ ̂ ⎝   ̂      ⎦+   ⎬
        log(  ) + max∞                                                                     =1           
    1−              (̂ ̂  )=0        ⎪
                                               ⎪                                                           ⎪
                                                                                                           ⎪
                                        =0    ⎪
                                               ⎪                                                           ⎪
                                                                                                           ⎪
                                               ⎪
                                               ⎩                         
                                                                      + 1− ∆1 (1 + ) log ̂             ⎪
                                                                                                           ⎭

                                    +1
                                         +  + S = (1 −  )   +  + T 
                                     
                                                                      ∆1
                                                    +1 = ∆0 ( )         

Using the citizens’ FOC with respect to consumption, investment and labor we have that:

                                                ̂
                                                        = 1 −  
                                              1 − 
                                                              
                                                   ̂   =       ∆1 (1 + )̂ 
                                                             1−

which implies that
                                                    ∙                      ¸
                                                              
                                         ̂ + ̂ = 1 +         ∆1 (1 + ) ̂ 
                                                             1−

  41 Note that at any period 0 ≥  both the citizens’ and the policy makers decisions are independent of   and
                                                                                                              
hence of any investment decisions that are made by the households in the previous periods. That is, it is without
                                                                                                       0
loss of generality to assume that households take 0 ’s as invariant to their choice of ̂  for all  ≥ 


                                                              35
Next, we use the resource constraint and the definitions of  and  to get that
                                            "      Ã      
                                                                !#
                                                 1       X
                                                              
                              ̂ + ̂ =  1 −     +         
                                                        =1

Going back to the citizens’ intra-temporal Euler equation and substituting consumption out, we
have that                                              "            Ã                         !#
                                                                               
                                                                               X
                                                                1
                                                   1 −                +            
                                                                              =1
                             
                                                                                                    = 1 −  
                        1 + 1− ∆1 (1 + )                          1 − 
It follows that
                                                                  1 − 
                               ( ) =       "            Ã         
                                                                            !#          
                                                                    X
                                                       1                  
                                          0 1 −               +          + 1 − 
                                                                        =1
                    
where 0 ≡       
             1+ 1− ∆1 (1+)
                               as stated in (5). Note that,
                                                           "            Ã         
                                                                                                !#
                                                                                  X
                                                                    1
                                                      0 1 −             +             
                                                                                   =1
                            1 − ( ) =          "            Ã            
                                                                                        !#               
                                                                            X
                                                           1
                                              0 1 −             +                      + 1 − 
                                                                            =1

and, hence, consumption and private investment can now be written as in (6) and (7), respectively.
Next, we define + (     ) as the citizens’ utility scaled by overall productivity and augmented
by the permanent future utility gains from current investment into productivity:

                                                                                
                    + (̂  ̂   ) ≡ log ̂ +  log(1 −  ) +             ∆1 (1 + ) log ̂ 
                                                                               1−

It follows from above that
                                          ⎛            ⎛                 "              ⎞1+ ⎞
                                                                                        Ã                    !#
                                                                                                     
                                                                                                     X
                                            ⎜             0 1 − 1  +                  ⎟
                                            ⎜1 −  ⎜⎜
                                                                                        ⎟
                                                                                        ⎟    ⎟
                                           ⎜      ⎜
                                                        "      Ã         =1
                                                                            !#          ⎟    ⎟
         + (     ) = (1 + 0 ) log ⎜                                                ⎟
                                            ⎜  ⎜   ⎝               X                  ⎟
                                                                                        ⎠    ⎟
                                            ⎝                1
                                                      0 1 −   +         + 1 −       ⎠
                                                                                              =1

where
                                                        
                                              0 ≡         ∆1 (1 + )
                                                       1−
Finally, note that since ̂ =   , we have that
      ⎡      ⎛         ⎞1− ⎤                                                          ⎡     ⎛        ⎞1− ⎤
                                                                                               
      ⎢¡ ¢ X  ⎠            ⎥                         (1 −  )                      ⎢¡ ¢ X  ⎠         ⎥
 log ⎣ ̂ ⎝     ̂       ⎦ =  log       "       Ã      
                                                                    !#          + log ⎣  ⎝           ⎦
               =1
                                                           X                                   =1
                                                   1              
                                           0 1 −   +             + 1 − 
                                                                         =1


                                                               36
In essence, the utility from public goods can be decomposed into two components: (i) the utility
from output, and (ii) the output share of public goods.
     Combining the two lines from above and collecting terms we have that

      (     ) = (1 + ) log   + + (     ) +
                                                                                                   ⎡     ⎛       ⎞1− ⎤
                                                                                                          X
                                                      (1 −  )                                   ⎢¡ ¢              ⎥
                           + log       "           Ã      
                                                                  !#                       +  log ⎣  ⎝    ⎠    ⎦
                                                          X                                                    =1
                                                1
                                     0 1 −          +         + 1 − 
                                                              =1
or                                                                         ⎡     ⎛      ⎞1− ⎤
                                                                                   
                                                                           ⎢¡ ¢ X  ⎠       ⎥
                   (     ) = (1 + ) log   +  ( ) +  log ⎣  ⎝         ⎦
                                                                                                   =1

where
                                                                                      (1 −  )
                       ( ) ≡ + (     ) +  log         "          Ã           
                                                                                                   !#          
                                                                                          X
                                                                           1                     
                                                              0 1 −                 +           + 1 − 
                                                                                          =1
is the citizens’ indirect per-period utility function scaled by overall productivity and augmented
by (i) the permanent future utility from current private investment and (ii) by the “output part”
of the utility from public goods. We summarize this as
Lemma A1. The per-period indirect utility function is given by (8) where
                               ⎛                   "       Ã      
                                                                        !#1+                                      ⎞
                                     1+                         X
                                   0         1+       1            
                               ⎜   (1 −  )       1 −   +             ·                                    ⎟
                               ⎜                                                                                   ⎟
                               ⎜       ⎡                         =1
                                                                 ⎤1++                                            ⎟
                               ⎜                                                                                   ⎟
        ( ) = (1 + 0 ) log ⎜
                               ⎜
                                                                                                                   ⎟
                                                                                                                   ⎟   (17)
                               ⎜       ⎢                         ⎥                                                 ⎟
                               ⎜       ⎢          1             ⎥                                                 ⎟
                                       ⎢                      ⎥
                               ⎝       ⎣  1  X                                                                ⎠
                                                    
                                                                 ⎦
                                                        0 1−           +             +1−
                                                                               =1


     We next provide the proof of Lemma 1.

8.2      Proof of Lemma 1

A citizen, whose district is in the government, has the following expected continuation value:
                                               ⎡     ⎛       ⎞1− ⎤
                                                      X
                                               ⎢¡ ¢              ⎥
                 G (  ) =  () +  log ⎣   ⎝     ⎠            0 0
                                                                  ⎦ + (    )
                                                                          =1


Hence, the incentive compatibility constraint holds with equality iﬀ  log   = log   . Since
                                                 1¡                                       ¢
                          log   |∈{1:G} =      log  + ( − 1) log   + (G − ) log  
                                                 G

                                                                37
                                         1           1
it must be the case that   =  G−+1  1− G−+1  as stated.             ¥


8.3       Proof of Proposition 1
             P∞
Write  =       =  − (     ) as:
                               ⎧                                     ⎡       ⎛        ⎞1− ⎤⎫
                  X∞           ⎪
                               ⎨                                                           ⎪
                                                                                            ⎬
                           −                                       ⎢¡  ¢ ⎝X  ⎠        ⎥
              =              (1 + ) log   +  ( ) +  log ⎣                 ⎦ 
                   =
                               ⎪
                               ⎩                                                            ⎪
                                                                                            ⎭
                                                                               =1


Since log(+1 +1 ) = log(  ) + 1 log ( ·  ) + ∆1 log  + 1 log  + log ∆0 0 0 1 , we have:
                                  X+ −1 £                                                               ¤
log(+ + ) = log(  ) +            1 log ( ) + ∆1 log  + (1 + 1 ) log  + log ∆0 0 0 1 
                                        =


Using this formula and (5)-(9), we can express  as



          1+
    =           log(  ) +
          1−           ⎧                                                                                            ⎫
                        ⎪
                        ⎪              (1+)   £                                                                ¤   ⎪
                                                                                                                     ⎪
                        ⎪
                        ⎪   ( ) +             1 log ( ) + ∆1 log  + (1 + 1 ) log  + log ∆0 0 0 1     ⎪
                                                                                                                     ⎪
                        ⎪
                        ⎨                1−
                                                                ⎡                                                    ⎪
                                                                                                                     ⎬
            X∞
                                                                         ⎛        ⎞1− ⎤
          +        −                                                   X                                             
                        ⎪
                        ⎪                                       ⎢¡ ¢                   ⎥                            ⎪
                                                                                                                     ⎪
             =        ⎪
                        ⎪                             + log ⎣  ⎝          ⎠     ⎦                            ⎪
                                                                                                                     ⎪
                        ⎪
                        ⎩                                                                                            ⎪
                                                                                                                     ⎭
                                                                           =1


which, in turn, using the expression for  log   can be written as
                              X∞        ∙                                                ¸
                                                      G
          = A log(  ) +       − U( ) +  (G ) log  +  (1 − ) log ( ) 
                               =                    
           ⎛       ⎞1−
            X
                                       (G) (1−(G))
where  ≡ ⎝    ⎠    =  + ( − 1)                + ( − ) A =                  1+
                                                                                          1−   and
                 =1


                                    (1 + ) 
              U( ) = 0 +  ( ) +         [1 log ( ) + ∆1 log  + (1 + 1 ) log  ]    (18)
                                      1−
                      ¡           ¢       ³                  ´
with 0 = (1+)
             1−  log  ∆   
                        0 0 0 1
                                    +     G G−
                                             G−+1  +  −G
                                                              log .
                    P∞  − £                                                        ¤
   If we define V =  =      U( ) +  G (G ) log  +  (1 − ) log ( ) or, in a recursive
form,

                                       G
                       V = U( ) +  (G ) log  +  (1 − ) log ( ) + V+1                         (19)
                                       




                                                           38
condition (18) can be written as  = A log(  ) + V . The expected value of a citizen who is
the government formateur,   can be represented in the same. The only diﬀerence is that the
                                                  ∙               ¸
                                                   ¡ ¢ ³P  ´1−
proposer receives log  for sure instead of  log       
                                                                 . We have:


                       = A log(  ) + U ( ) +  log  +  (1 − ) log ( ) + V+1                (20)

where V+1 is defined by (19).
    The proof of the proposition now follows immediately. Since A log() is a constant, if ()
solves (14) given V(), then it must be an optimal reaction function given the true value function
A log()+U ()+ log  + (1 − ) log (())+V(0 ); moreover if V() satisfies (13) given (),
then (  ) = A log  + V() is the expected value in the bargaining game. On the contrary, if
() is an equilibrium, then we must have () = A log  + V() and the proposer must maximize
(14).          ¥

8.4      Proof of Proposition 2

It is first convenient to formally define the marginal cost of public funds. Let

                                 ( ) =  ( ) [ + () +  +  −  ()] 

From the proposer’s budget constraint in (14), we have  0 = ( ). In order to reduce nominal
debt  0 by one marginal unit the required increase in taxes must be  = − [ ( )]−1 . The
net marginal reduction in utility from an increase in taxes is given by V ( ), where V is the
indirect utility function defined in (13).42           The reduction in utility in absolute value is therefore
 V ()                                                                  1
 () .   Moreover the marginal utility of consumption is         (()) .   The marginal cost of public
                      ()V ()
funds, then is:          () .    Note that the Lagrangian multiplier  from (14) can be written as:
         V ()
() =    () .   We conclude that the marginal cost of public funds when policies are  and the
Lagrangian multiplier is  is    () = ()().
    We now prove (16). Consider the first order condition with respect to 0 of (14):
                                              ∙                 ¸
                                     ()()       0 ( )
                                               1−                 = − · V 0 (0 )
                                      ( )     ( ) 0

  42 The indirect utility is evaluated at the equilibrium policy (), where  is the state. For simplicity we omit

the state form the expression of the policy when it does not create confusion.




                                                          39
We have

                                       ()()
                                                (1 −  ()) = − · V 0 (0 )                                            (21)
                                        ( )

where  () is the elasticity of the interest rate as defined in (15).                              Let V () be the objec-
tive function of (14). Adding and subtracting  log (()), we can write: V() = V () +
    ¡             ¢
 G (G ) − 1) log (). From the Envelope theorem applied to (14), at any point of diﬀer-
entiability we have V0 () = − (), so we can write:
                                                             µ                     ¶
                                                                 G                      ()
                            V 0 () = − () +                   (G ) − 1)                                          (22)
                                                                                         ()

Using (21) and we have:
                                                                      µ                    ¶
                                     ()                                G                    (0 )0
                     (1 −  ())          =  (0 ) −                    (G ) − 1)                                 (23)
                                     ()                                                      (0 )

Observe now that (9) can be written as: ( ) = ((0 ))()(). We can therefore write:
                                                    ∙                              µ                 ¶             ¸
                                              0          0              1              G               (0 )0
       (1 −  ()) () ·  () = (( )) ·  ( ) 1 −                               (G ) − 1)                
                                                                       (0 )                           (0 )
                                                                                                                          (24)

                                                                 (0 ) 0
Define: Φ (0 ) = 1 (0 ·  (0 )), and let  (0 ) =           0 (0 )   be the elasticity of (0 ) with respect to
0 . Using the fact that    () = ()(), we obtain (16).                             ¥

8.5     Proof of Proposition 3
                                    ¡               ¢
If G =  =  and/or  = 0, we have  1 − G (G )) = 0.                                    In this case, at the balanced
                                      0   ∗        ∗
                                  (  )    
growth ∗ we must have:             0     (∗ ∗ )   = 0, where the derivative is evaluated at ∗ .                  Since
                              0
                          ( )
   (∗ )  0 and        0       0 at  = ∗ , a balanced growth path is possible only if ∗ = 0.
¥

8.6     Proof of Proposition 4

In a regular balanced growth ∗ we have:
                                       µ            ¶
                                           G
                          (∗ ) = − 1 − (G )) Φ (∗ )  (∗ )                                                    (25)
                                           

where  (∗ )  0 and Φ (∗ )  0.               We conclude that  (∗ )  0 and so () is decreasing in 
in a neighborhood of the balanced growth level in any smooth equilibrium. Since the balanced

                                                                 40
growth path is stable, starting from 0 in a left neighborhood, +1   , and so +1   +1 
                                         
for any   0. By Lemma 1, we must have +1   +1  , where  =   is the dollar value
of public goods allocated to the districts in the minimal winning coalition. From the first order
conditions of (14) it is also easy to show that  is monotone in  , so we have I+1 I  +1 
as well.      ¥

8.7       Data

Data on output is obtained from BEA’s National Income and Product Accounts (NIPA, Tables
7.1).43    Data on debt is taken from the U.S. Oﬃce of Management and Budget (Table 7.1).44                   For
public goods we use the U.S. Oﬃce of Management and Budget (Table 3.1).45                     Our definition of
public investment comes from Federal Outlays, NIPA, Table 9.1. We have looked at two measures:
“Research and Development,” and “Total Investment Outlays for Major Public Physical Capital,
Research and Development, and Education and Training.” We conservatively use the former in
our benchmark calibration.          Using the latter leaves the results qualitatively unchanged. For
private investment in productivity we use private sector’s “Research and Development” measures
from NIPA Table 5.3.
 43   Available at http://www.bea.gov/iTable/index nipa.cfm
 44   Available at http://www.whitehouse.gov/omb/budget/Historicals)
 45   We use the following classification of Federal Outlays, as reported by the Oﬃce of Management and Budget:
Public Goods: (i) National Deference; (ii) Education, Training, Employment and Social Services; (iii) Health, (iv)
Energy; (v) National Resources and Environment; (vi) Transportation; (vii) Community and Regional Development;
(viii) International Aﬀairs; (ix) General Science, Space and Technology, (x) Agriculture; (xi) Administration of
Justice; (xii) General Government; (xiii) Veterans Benefits and Services. Transfers: (i) Medicare; (ii) Income
Security; (iii) Social Security; (iv) Commerse and Housing Credit. Other: Net Interest.




                                                       41
        Federal Debt   Public Goods        Public Investment   Private Investment
           GDP            GDP                    GDP                  GDP

Data       40.4            9.4                   0.9                  1.5

Model      40.5            9.4                   0.9                  1.5

                        Table 1. Calibration.




                                      42
 Parameter        Role       Benchmark   Change      S.S.      S.S.        S.S.        S.S.       S.S.    S.S.     change. in


                                                     debt    public G.   public I.   private I.
                               Value                                                              taxes   labor   growth, % p.
                                                     GDP       GDP        GDP          GDP



         benchmark                                   40.4         9.4      0.9          1.5       21.3    100          0



               discount       0.954     + .02       24.9      10.0        1.6          2.6       20.6    101.7       0.5



                 factor                   — .02      60.0         7.6      0.5          1.0       21.6    98.2        -0.6



                labor         1.37       x 2        38.9         7.9      0.7          1.5       19.7    62.0       -11.1



                 supply                    : 2       44.53     11.5        1.1          1.4       23.6    143.3       9.3



   ∆1         private inv.    .000525     x 10       44.2         8.7      0.9         13.0       20.7    108.4



    1         public inv.    0.0018      : 10       64.9         5.4      0.0          1.5       18.4    99.6



    1        LBD extern.      0.245      : 10       77.8      12.6        1.2          1.4       26.2    98.3



             public good      0.505     + .20       34.5      12.3        1.0          1.6       23.9    100.0       0.0



               provision                  — .20      55.2         5.5      0.7          1.3        18     99.7        -0.1



             majority in       51        + 20       39.3         9.7      0.9          1.5       21.5    100.0       0.0



              government                  — 20       41.0         9.3      0.9          1.5       21.2    100.0       0.0



             public good      0.53      + .08       68.3         5.5      0.5          1.5       18.6    99.4        -0.3



              externality                 — .08      27.4      12.2        1.2          1.4       23.5    100.2       0.1



              social sec.      10        + 5        51.8      6.4         0.6         1.5        23.8    96.1        -1.1



                transfers                 — 5        31.4      13.0        1.2          1.4       19.5    103.9       1.0




                                                 Table 2. Robustness.46


  46 For the experiments regarding    and  we do not report the changes in productivity growth, as the
                                    1   1     1
changes in these parameters change the nature of the growth process and, hence, do not allow for meaningful
comparisons.




                                                             43
Reduction        Target                                                 Duration
                  debt
in %            GDP
                             1          2       3      4           5     6       7       8       9      10      15      20



      12.5          35      0.52      0.81    0.84    0.85     0.85    0.84    0.83    0.82    0.80    0.79    0.72    0.66



      25            30      0.47      1.34    1.45    1.50     1.51     1.5    1.49    1.47    1.45    1.43    1.31    1.20



      37.5          25      -0.45     1.56    1.81    1.91     1.95    1.96    1.95    1.94    1.92    1.89    1.76    1.63



      50            20      -3.09     1.38    1.84    2.03     2.11    2.15    2.17    2.17    2.16    2.14    2.03    1.90



      62.5          15                0.69    1.45    1.77     1.92    2.01    2.06    2.09    2.10    2.10    2.06    1.97



      75            10                -0.70   0.49    0.98     1.24    1.40    1.51    1.58    1.63    1.67    1.76    1.77



      87.5          5                 -3.12   -1.31   -0.57    -0.16   0.10    0.29    0.44    0.56    0.66    0.98    1.17



      100           0                 -7.15   -4.45   -3.37    -2.75   -2.32   -2.00   -1.73   -1.50   -1.31   -0.58   -0.08




                                    Table 3. Long-term austerity programs.47

47   No entry implies that the austerity program is not feasible.




                                                              44
Parameter        Role       Benchmark   Change   S.S.    Optimal Austerity Measure.


                                                 debt
                              Value                      years     reduction in %
                                                 GDP



        benchmark                                40.4     7              50



              discount       0.954     + .02    24.9     7             62.5



                factor                   — .02   60.0     8              50



               labor         1.37       x 2     38.9     15             25



                supply                    : 2    44.53    10             75



  ∆1         private inv.    .000525     x 10    44.2     9              50



   1         public inv.    0.0018      : 10    64.9     8             37.5



  1         LBD extern.      0.245      : 10    77.8    NA             NA



            public good      0.505     + .20    34.5     8             62.5



              provision                  — .20   55.2     10             50



            majority in       51        + 20    39.3     7              50



             government                  — 20    41.0     8              50



            public good      0.53      + .08    68.3     9             37.5



             externality                 — .08   27.4     7             62.5



             social sec.      10        + 5     51.8     9              50



              transfers                  — 5     31.4     8             62.5




Table 4. Optimal austerity measures for alternative calibrations.




                                        45
                            Reduction      Target                    Duration
                                             debt
                            in %           GDP
                                                        1      2        3        4      5



                                12.5          35      -0.04   0.28     0.34     0.37   0.39



                                 25           30      -0.57   0.38     0.53     0.62   0.67



                                37.5          25      -1.85   0.28     0.58     0.75   0.84



                                 50           20      -4.73   -0.02    0.49     0.75   0.90



                                62.5          15              -0.56    0.25     0.84   0.63



                                 75           10              -1.38    -0.16   0.37    0.66



                                87.5          5               -2.54    -0.76   -0.05   0.34



                                100           0               -4.17    -1.6    -0.65   -0.16




                            Table 5. Short term term austerity programs.48

48   No entry implies that the austerity program is not feasible.




                                                        46
               MCPF (bt 1 )
MCPF(b)                                                                     MCPF(b)                G                                         
                                                                                          1   0  n Q  q   1    bt 1   g ( bt 1 )  MCPF (bt 1 )
                                                                                                                                             

                               1        (bt )  MCPF (bt )                                                                 1        (bt )  MCPF (bt )




                                                                          MCPF (b* )


                                                       bt ,bt+1                                        b*                                              bt ,bt+1



          A                                                                                                             B


          Figure 1: The Euler equation for G =  =  and   




          z’
                                                                            I   45o
                                                            I t 1 
                                   It 




                     zt                          zt+1              zt+T                    z



                                 Figure 2: Growth Dynamics.




                                                                 47
                   Debt, % of GDP                                         Taxes, in %
40
                                                         28
20                                                       26
                                                         24
                                                         22
 0
              20         40        60         80                   20         40         60         80
               Public good, % of GDP                              Labor supply, in % from SS
25
                                                          4
20
15                                                        2

10                                                        0
              20         40         60        80                   20          40        60         80
            Public Investment, % of GDP                          Private Investment, % of GDP

 2                                                       1.4

1.5                                                      1.3
 1                                                       1.2
              20        40         60          80                   20         40          60       80
      Productivity Growth, in % points from SS                 Interest Rate, in % points from SS
 1
                                                          4
0.5
                                                          2

 0                                                        0
              20        40          60        80                   20         40         60         80
                    Time period                                           Time period


                            Figure 3: Dynamics starting with zero debt.




                                                    48
                   Debt, % of GDP                                                 Taxes, in %
40
                                                           31
20                                                         28
                                                           25
                                                           22
      0   0.1       0.2       0.3   0.4      0.5                 0    0.1       0.2        0.3    0.4   0.5

                Public good, % of GDP                                Labor supply, in % of benchmark

20                                                      100.2
15                                                      100.1
10                                                        100
      0   0.1       0.2       0.3   0.4      0.5                 0    0.1       0.2        0.3    0.4   0.5

          Public investment, % of GDP                                 Private investment, % of GDP

 2                                                         1.4
1.5
                                                           1.3
 1
      0   0.1       0.2   0.3      0.4    0.5                    0    0.1       0.2  0.3      0.4    0.5
                        α                                                          α
Productivity growth, in % points from benchmark            Productivity growth, in % points from benchmark
0.3                                                      0.15
0.2             Cumulative                                0.1               Due to public inv.
0.1             Due to LBD                               0.05               Due to private inv.
  0                                                         0
      0   0.1       0.2       0.3   0.4      0.5                 0    0.1       0.2        0.3    0.4   0.5
                          α                                                            α


                Figure 4: Political Conflict, Fiscal Policy and Economic Outcomes.




                                               49
                Debt, % of GDP                                             Taxes, in %
 60                                                    30

 40
                                                       25
 20

  0                                                    20
       0           2        4         6                        0        2           4        6
             Public Good, % of GDP                             Labor Supply, in % of benchmark
 15                                                  102

                                                     100
 10
                                                       98

  5                                                    96
       0            2         4        6                       0            2          4        6
           Public Investment, % of GDP                             Private Investment, % of GDP
 1.5                                                  1.5

                                                     1.45
  1
                                                      1.4

 0.5                                                 1.35
       0          2         4         6                        0            2         4        6
               Growth Rate, in %                                   Utility + Gains from Growth
 0.5                                                 0.05

  0
                                                        0
−0.5

 −1                                                 −0.05
       0          2         4         6                        0           2         4         6
                  Time Period                                              Time Period


       Figure 5: Evolution of the economy during the optimal austerity program.




                                           50
                    Debt, % of GDP                                             Taxes, in %
 60                                                        26

 40                                                        24

 20                                                        22

  0                                                        20
       0       5       10     15    20        25                 0      5      10       15      20     25
                Public Good, % of GDP                                Labor Supply, in % of benchmark
 14                                                       102

 12                                                       100

 10                                                        98

  8                                                        96
       0      5       10      15      20      25                 0      5       10     15      20      25
             Public Investment, % of GDP                              Private Investment, % of GDP
 1.5                                                     1.55

                                                           1.5
  1
                                                         1.45

 0.5                                                       1.4
       0       5      10     15      20       25                 0      5       10       15    20      25
                   Growth Rate, in %                                   Utility + Gains from Growth
 0.5
                                                         0.05
  0
                                                             0
−0.5
                                                        −0.05
 −1
       0       5      10     15       20      25                 0      5      10     15      20       25
                     Time Period                                              Time Period


           Figure 6: Evolution of the economy during the temporary austerity program.




                                              51
