NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

DO EMPLOYER PENSION CONTRIBUTIONS REFLECT EMPLOYEE PREFERENCES?
EVIDENCE FROM A RETIREMENT SAVINGS REFORM IN DENMARK
Itzik Fadlon
Jessica A. Laird
Torben Heien Nielsen
Working Paper 21665
http://www.nber.org/papers/w21665
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
October 2015

We thank Raj Chetty, David Cutler, Matthew Gentzkow, Nathan Hendren, Lawrence Katz, David
Laibson, Daniel LeMaire, Søren Leth-Petersen, Christian Schultz, and numerous participants at the
Harvard Labor/Public Finance Lunch and the Zeuthen Workshop for helpful comments and discussions.
This research was supported by the Danish Council for Independent Research (grant number 11-104234).
The views expressed herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the
National Bureau of Economic Research.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peerreviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.
© 2015 by Itzik Fadlon, Jessica A. Laird, and Torben Heien Nielsen. All rights reserved. Short sections
of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full
credit, including © notice, is given to the source.

Do Employer Pension Contributions Reflect Employee Preferences? Evidence from a Retirement
Savings Reform in Denmark
Itzik Fadlon, Jessica A. Laird, and Torben Heien Nielsen
NBER Working Paper No. 21665
October 2015
JEL No. J30,J32,J33
ABSTRACT
This paper studies how firms set contributions to employer-provided 401(k)-type pension plans. Using
a reform that decreased the subsidy for contributions to capital pension accounts for Danish workers
in the top income tax bracket, we provide strong evidence that employers' contributions are based
on their employees' savings preferences. We find an immediate decrease in employer contributions
to capital accounts, whose magnitude increased in the share of employees directly affected by the reform.
This response was large relative to average employee responses within private IRA-type plans and
was accompanied by a similar-magnitude shift of employer contributions to annuity accounts.
Itzik Fadlon
National Bureau of Economic Research
1050 Massachusetts Ave.
Cambridge, MA 02138
fadlon@fas.harvard.edu
Jessica A. Laird
Harvard University
Department of Economics
Littauer Center
1805 Cambridge Street
Cambridge, MA 02138
laird@fas.harvard.edu

Torben Heien Nielsen
University of Copenhagen
Department of Economics
Øster Farimagsgade 5, Building 25
DK-1353 Copenhagen K
torben.heien.nielsen@econ.ku.dk

1

Introduction

With the decline in the prevalence of defined-benefit pension plans, individual savings in defined-contribution accounts are becoming an increasingly important income source for post-retirement consumption. A large and
growing portion of savings balances in defined-contribution accounts is within
employer-sponsored pension plans, such as 401(k)s.1 Recent research has underlined the important role that employers’ decisions play in determining employees’ actual savings within employer-sponsored accounts, since most workers do not actively deviate from the default options which are set by their employer (Madrian and Shea 2001; Choi et al. 2004; Choi et al. 2007; Beshears
et al. 2009; Gelber 2011). The impact of employers’ decisions has also been
found to translate into large effects on individuals’ overall level of savings,
taking into account other savings vehicles outside of the workplace (Chetty et
al. 2014). This research has led policymakers to consider introducing policies
that encourage employer contributions to pension accounts in order to increase
individuals’ retirement savings (Beshears et al. 2010).
But how, in practice, do private firms set contributions to employer-sponsored
401(k)-like pension plans, and, specifically, are employers’ choices based on
their employees’ savings preferences?
From a theoretical standpoint there is no one definite answer. Standard
models of efficient compensation arrangements by competitive firms, all the
way back to Rosen (1974), predict that employers will provide benefits when
firms can purchase goods or services more cost-effectively than employees, and
will provide the optimal package that their workers will value most highly.2
In our application, provision of pension benefits may be less costly for the
employer if there are economies of scale with respect to the purchasing and
1

In 2014, 35% ($8.3 trillion) of retirement assets in the U.S. were held in defined-benefit
plans, while a much larger share of 58% ($13.8 trillion) was held in defined-contribution
accounts: 30% in Individual Retirement Accounts (IRAs) and 28% in employer-sponsored
plans, mostly 401(k)s (Choi 2015).
2
Both Rice (1966) and Phelps (1973) put a particular emphasis on the advantages of
group purchases as a reason for the provision of benefits. For a review of the efficient
compensation literature see Oyer (2005).

1

managing of the pension product (e.g., in terms of average fees to the financial service provider per saver), or if it is costly for individual households to
optimally choose complex financial products.3 However, the standard model
assumes that individuals value their employer optimally setting pension contributions on their behalf. Given evidence that most employees are inattentive
with regards to their own savings and may have only imperfect knowledge
about their employer pension plans (Mitchell 1988; Gustman et al. 2009), it
is not obvious that this assumption holds.
Some non-standard models, which assume that firms are rational benevolent planners but that some households are not fully rational, will have similar
ambiguous predictions. Purely paternalistic firms will provide their employees with optimal retirement packages, taking into account their employees’
misoptimization (Choi et al. 2003; Carroll et al. 2009, Cremer et al. 2008;
Cremer and Pestieau 2011; Goda and Manchester 2013; Roeder 2014; Fadlon
and Laibson 2015). However, if firms compete for employees, this prediction
will hold only if the non-rational agents are aware of their biases and hence
value the firm’s paternalism. In our context, this would require employees to
acknowledge they would save too little on their own, so that they will value
ex-ante mandated savings by their firm. If some workers are naive with respect to their imperfect optimization, then they will not appreciate employer
contributions to savings accounts at the cost of lower wages today. In that
case, there will be reduced incentives for competitive firms to engage in the
costly effort of providing pension plans and tailoring them to their employees’
hypothesized preferences.4
3

Both of these conditions are likely to be satisfied in our setting given the general prevalence of low levels of financial literacy (Brobeck 1990; Bernheim 1998; Hilgert et al. 2003;
Lusardi and Mitchell 2007; Hastings et al. 2013) and given that in Denmark administrative and account managing costs paid to the financial service provider are on average lower
in group accounts through the employer than in private accounts. In employer-sponsored
accounts these costs are on the order of 1%-1.5% of the deposits annually, where the lowest costs are found in unionized mandatory funds (Økonomi- og Erhvervsministieriet et
al. 2003). Reports by consumer organizations suggest that these costs are about 40%
lower than those in private accounts (see, e.g., http://penge.dk/pension-skat/tjek-om-dinpension-bliver-rippet).
4
This would be exacerbated by any direct costs of providing or updating pension plans

2

Beyond the question of whether firms tailor pension plans to employees’
saving preferences, it is important for policy design to study the nature of firm
responses to changes in these preferences. The increased reliance on employerbased savings as a source of consumption after retirement necessitates understanding empirically how fast and to what extent employers respond to shocks
to the economic environment that can alter employees’ savings incentives.
In this paper we empirically analyze how firms set characteristics of their
contributions to employer-sponsored pension plans in practice.5 To do so,
we exploit a reform to the Danish retirement savings system. This reform
differentially affected employees according to their exact location on the laborincome tax schedule and differentially changed tax deductions for contributions
to two types of savings accounts: “capital” savings accounts, which are paid
out in full at retirement, and “annuity” savings accounts, which are paid out
as an annuity. Specifically, in 1999, the Danish government decreased the
subsidy to contributions to capital pension accounts for workers in the top
income tax bracket, while the subsidies to capital pension contributions for
workers in lower tax brackets and for annuity pension contributions remained
unchanged.
We find that immediately following the reform, employers significantly decreased their annual contributions to capital pension accounts. The average
decrease was on the order of 27% – 0.76 percentage points (pp) on a baseline
contribution rate of 2.81 pp. This decrease was entirely driven by firms in
which some share of the workforce was directly affected by the reform, with
no responses in workplaces in which all employees had earnings below the
top income tax bracket. Moreover, the response strongly and continuously
increased in the share of employees above the top tax threshold. We find that
by the employer.
5
To our knowledge, this is the first paper that studies this specific topic. Some papers
analyze firms’ choice of whether to offer a pension plan (or the choice between defined-benefit
or defined-contribution plans), but these papers usually focus on supply-side factors that
affect firms’ cost of providing the plan, e.g. the size of the firm (Aaronson and Coronado
2005; Dummann 2008; Hernæs et al. 2011). Papers that do analyze demand-side factors,
relate these to the individual take-up of plans rather than the firms’ decision to offer them
(Aaronson and Coronado 2005; Dummann 2008).

3

an additional 10% of workers at the top bracket led to an additional decrease
of more than 0.2 pp in employer contributions, so that workplaces in which all
employees were at the top bracket experienced a significant drop of more than
2 pp on a base of 3.5 pp.
In order to put the employers’ responses and their magnitude in context, the Danish setting allows us to compare contributions within employerprovided 401(k)-like accounts to individual contributions within private IRAlike accounts, which were equally affected by the reform. We find that for
individuals at the top bracket almost the entire change in overall capital retirement savings was attributable to employer responses. We also show that
the clear gradient of changes in employer-provided accounts with respect to
the share of directly affected individuals in the workplace disappears in the
analysis of changes in private accounts, suggesting that employer responses
were not crowded out by individual responses in other closely substitutable
accounts.
By changing the relative prices of contributions to capital and annuity accounts, the reform rendered contributions to annuity account more financially
attractive through a substitution effect, but also led to an income effect that
would push toward an overall decrease in pension contributions. Studying
employer contributions to annuity accounts, we find that employers compensated for the decrease in capital contributions with an equally-large increase in
annuity contributions, with no decrease in total pension contributions.6 This
suggests that at the employer-level the effect was driven by a substitution effect. In fact, annuity accounts serving as a close substitute is likely the reason
there was such a large response in capital accounts. We also show that the
potential income effect of the reform had no effect on other means of employee
compensation, namely, labor income.
The paper proceeds as follows. In Section 2, we discuss the institutional
setting of the policy change and the data that we use. In Section 3, we pro6

These employer responses are in contrast to individual responses in private accounts,
for which Chetty et al. (2014) find a shift of 57 cents to annuity accounts for each DKr that
individuals would have contributed to capital accounts.

4

vide the empirical analysis of employers’ responses to the reform and their
heterogeneity with respect to workplace composition. We focus on changes
in employers’ contributions to capital pension accounts and their timing, but
also analyze shifts to contributions to annuity accounts. To put the magnitude of the responses in context, we compare these changes in contributions
to employer-provided accounts to individuals’ responses within their private
accounts. Section 4 concludes.

2

Institutional Details and Summary of Data

2.1

Institutions
This section provides the necessary background on Danish retirement in-

stitutions that is important for our empirical analysis.7 In Denmark, there are
two types of defined-contribution (DC) pension savings accounts similar to the
US – employer-sponsored accounts, similar to 401(k)s, and private accounts,
similar to IRAs. Employer and private DC accounts have equivalent tax properties but are completely independent, which makes them close substitutes.
Within both the employer and the private DC pension plans, there are two
types of tax-preferred accounts: capital pension accounts and annuity pension
accounts. Capital pension accounts are paid out as a lump sum and taxed at
40% on payout, while annuity pension accounts are paid out over several years
and are taxed as personal income. Balances in capital pension accounts can
be converted to annuity pensions when they become liquid, but the reverse
is not allowed. Contributions to both types of accounts are tax deductible at
the time of contribution (as in traditional non-Roth 401(k)s and IRAs), and
capital gains are taxed at 15%, compared to approximately 29% for assets in
taxable accounts.
Our empirical research design exploits a 1999 tax reform, which aimed at
reducing the generosity of capital accounts and incentivizing a shift to annuity
accounts. To do so, the reform reduced the average deduction for contributions
to capital pensions from 59 cents per DKr to 45 cents per DKr for individuals
7

For additional information see OECD (2009) or Bingley et al. (2007).

5

in the top income tax bracket. The deduction for those in the lower tax bracket
remained the same at 45 cents per DKr. While there were additional changes
associated with this reform, they were orthogonal to whether a person was
just above or below the top threshold.8
Most jobs in Denmark (roughly 80%) are covered by collective bargaining
agreements between worker unions and employer associations. These agreements often have a pension plan in which a fixed proportion of an individual’s
earnings is paid into a retirement account. For the 20% of jobs that are outside
the common agreements, employers set contribution rates to capital and/or annuity accounts for their workers.9 While individuals cannot change the total
contribution rate, they can choose a different allocation across capital and annuity accounts, but only if their pension fund allows both types of accounts.
2.2

Data Sources, Sample Selection, and Variable Definitions

We merge data from several administrative registers of the Danish population – the income tax register, the population register, and the Danish
Integrated Database for Labor Market Research (IDA) – to obtain annual information on Danish employees and their matched firms from 1996 to 2001.
These registers include data on taxable labor earnings, contributions to pension accounts, occupation, industry, and employees’ demographics (such as
age and educational attainment). All income and savings variables used in the
analysis are based on third-party reports: earnings and pension contributions
are reported directly by employers and pension funds to the tax authority.
Starting from the population data-set, we impose four restrictions to obtain our primary analysis sample. First, we exclude individuals under age 20
8

Other changes that were associated with the reform include a reduction in the deduction
value of negative capital income, the possibility to initiate a private rate pension plan (a
special type of annuity pension plans) after age 55, a reduction in the bottom bracket tax
rate, a move to equalize taxation on all liquid assets (i.e., stocks vs. bonds), and a decrease
in the value of the Voluntary Early Retirement Plan.
9
The contributions rates, default portfolio allocations, and administration fees are set by
bargaining between the pension fund and the employer, which is usually represented by the
heads of HR departments, CFOs, and pension brokers. Updates to the employees’ plans,
e.g., in response to taxation changes, are made by the pension fund and the employer.

6

or over age 60, at which the majority of the Danish workforce is eligible for
early retirement benefits and retirement savings are eligible for withdrawal.
Second, we focus our analysis on the 20% of workers who are outside collective
bargaining agreements for which contribution rates are set by the firm (rather
than within collective bargaining agreements).10 To isolate the jobs that are
not covered by collective bargaining, we exclude workers in the public sector
or in blue-collar occupations, since they are likely covered by collective agreements.11 Therefore, our analysis sample consists of workers in private firms
with white-collar occupations.12 Third, we exclude observations of workers
with self-employment income because their “employer” contributions are not
set by a firm. Finally, we exclude occupation-firm cells with fewer than five
employees in order to decrease measurement error, as such small cells are unlikely to be treated as an independent unit by employers.13 Overall, our sample
choice allows us to study how private firms in competitive markets design their
employees’ pension plans.
Since firms often set contribution rates separately by occupation, we run
our analysis at the occupation-firm level, and differentiate occupations at the
2-digit occupation code level.14 We measure contribution rates to employersponsored accounts as contribution levels divided by taxable labor income.
This measure of contribution rates may vary within an occupation-firm cell
since employers may set pension contributions at a finer level within the firm
10
While it would be interesting to additionally analyze how pension plans are designed
within a collective bargaining setting, the data do not allow us to match workers to unions
and firms to employer associations.
11
See Appendix E for a complete description of occupations that we define as white- or
blue-collar.
12
Still, some white-collar jobs in the private sector are covered by collective bargaining.
Therefore, in Appendix D, we assess how inadvertently including workers covered by collective agreements may affect the results, and show that it likely attenuates our estimates.
13
Our results are not sensitive to this choice – see Appendix A for analyses that vary this
minimal cell-size restriction.
14
Due to measurement error in many-digit occupation codes, our choice for the analysis
is the 2-digit code level. However, actual employer contributions may be set at a higher- (or
lower-) digit occupation code level. This causes some measurement error in our identified
decision unit. Our results stay similar if we aggregate occupations at the 1-digit level, or
even at the firm level.

7

than the 2-digit code that we use, and since individuals can choose a different
distribution of contributions between capital and annuity accounts than the
employer’s default when employers offer both accounts. Therefore, to identify
the default contribution rates chosen by employers, we use the median contribution rate within an occupation-firm cell as our measure. In Appendix A,
we assess the sensitivity of our results to other measures of defaults (namely,
modes) and find very similar results. We also conduct various tests which
verify that our results are driven by firm responses rather than by individual
responses. For ease of discussion, we refer in the remainder of the paper to a
2-digit occupation-firm cell as a “workplace” and to the median contribution
rate within a workplace (in a given year) as the “employer contribution rate”
(or the “default”).
2.3

Summary Statistics

Table 1 presents summary statistics for the sample of private white-collar
wage earners between ages 20-60, in workplaces with at least five employees.15 Our sample contains 2,020,705 worker-year observations from 19962001. These amount to 84,764 workplace-year observations with a total of
26,775 unique workplaces.
To provide an overview of contributions to retirement savings accounts in
Denmark prior to the reform, Table 1 reports information on individual-level
pension contributions for the year 1998.16 Before the reform in 1999, contributions to employer-sponsored capital accounts were on average 3.6% of annual
earnings, where 66% of workers had positive contributions to these accounts.
The average of contributions to employer-sponsored annuity accounts was similarly at 3.7% of labor income, where 77% had positive contributions to these
accounts. In contrast, individual contributions to both capital and annuity
private pension accounts were much lower, with average contribution rates of
1.1% and 0.4%, respectively.
15

During our sample period, 57% of wage earners were in the private sector, and 70% had
white-collar occupations.
16
All monetary values are reported in nominal Danish Kroner (DKr), where the exchange
rate during this time period was approximately DKr 6.5 per US $1.

8

Importantly for our design, 49% of workers were above the top labor-income
tax threshold, with a sizable standard deviation of the fraction of workers above
the threshold across workplaces on the order of 35%. Given the restriction to
at least five workers per occupation-firm cell, the average workforce size is 22,
while the median cell size is 9.

3

Empirical Evidence

In this section, we analyze how employer contributions to pension accounts
responded to the reform, namely, to the decrease in subsidies for capital pension contributions for workers with labor income in the top tax bracket. We
begin by analyzing changes in employer contributions to capital accounts and
their sensitivity to the share of workers who were directly affected by the reform. We then assess the magnitude of these responses to the reform by comparing employer responses to individual responses within private retirement
accounts. Finally, we explore other potential margins of firm responses, in
particular, whether changes in capital contributions translate into changes in
overall savings or whether firms substitute contributions to annuity accounts.
3.1

Employer Responses in Contributions to Capital Pension Accounts

In the years preceding the reform, employer capital contributions steadily
increased, such that they were on average 2.81% in 1998 (see Panel A of
Appendix Figure 1).17 In contrast, in 1999, when the capital subsidy decreased
for workers above the top threshold, the average employer capital contribution
rate decreased by 0.76 percentage points (pp). However, this average drop of
27% aggregates the responses of all the employers in our sample of private firms
and white-collar occupations. Since the reform changed the savings incentives
only for employees in the top labor-income tax bracket, our analysis focuses on
the heterogeneity of firm responses with respect to the share of the workforce
17
Note that these are employer contributions (measured by workplace-level medians) as
opposed to individual-level contributions to employer-sponsored accounts that are reported
in Table 1.

9

that was directly affected by the reform.
Graphical Analysis. To test whether and to what extent employers’ capital
contribution responses to the reform increased in the share of workers above
the top income threshold, we divide workplaces into equal-sized groups by the
fraction of employees above the threshold within a workplace. We begin by
plotting in Figure 1 the mean employer capital contribution rate against the
mean fraction of employees above the top threshold for each group in years
1996-2001. Panel A shows that before the reform, employer capital contributions were increasing in the fraction of workers above the threshold and that
the slopes of this relationship were similar across years.18 However, immediately following the reform – that took effect in 1999 – there is a significant
change in this relationship, such that employer capital contribution rates became largely decreasing in the fraction of workers above the threshold. The
decrease in employer capital contributions after the reform, i.e., the vertical
distance between the lines of years 1998 and 1999, is noticeably larger for
workplaces with a higher fraction of directly affected workers.
To clearly see these changes, Panel B of Figure 1 displays the year-to-year
differences in employer capital contributions as a function of the fraction of employees above the threshold for each year from 1996 to 2001. This figure shows
that annual changes in contributions were uniform across different shares of
workers above the top tax threshold in the years prior to the reform. However, between years 1998 and 1999, the year of the reform, workplaces with no
affected workers did not change their contributions, while those with a larger
share of affected employees decreased their contribution rates in larger magnitudes. This change continuously increased in the share of the workforce at
the top bracket, with about a 1.9 pp decrease for workplaces with the highest
share of affected employees. This is a large response, since completely exiting
capital accounts in workplaces with the highest share of affected employees –
which is an upper bound to their response – would imply a 3.5pp reduction
18

This is consistent with the fact that top-bracket workers enjoyed a larger subsidy for
capital contributions on the margin, but as it is a cross-sectional relationship, there is a
variety of other reasons for this pattern such as different preferences for savings across
individuals with different labor income levels.

10

in contributions. In the subsequent years (2000 and 2001) there were some
delayed responses to the reform, but the gradient with respect to the share of
affected workers in those years is much smaller.
Overall, the graphical evidence clearly reveals that employers with a greater
share of affected workers had larger capital contribution reductions in response to the reform. This suggests that employers are indeed responsive to
changes in their employees’ saving incentives, consistent with the hypothesis
that employer-provided pension plans reflect the savings preferences of their
particular workforce composition.
Regression Analysis. To quantify the firms’ responses to the reform, we
estimate regressions of the relationship between the change in employer capital
contributions and the fraction of workers above the threshold. This also allows
us to test the sensitivity of our results to a flexible set of controls. Our baseline
estimating equation is of the form:

y f t = β0 + β1 abovef t +

2001
X

[βs (It=s × abovef t ) + µs ] + Xf t + εf t . (1)

s=1996,s6=1998

The outcome variable y f t is workplace f ’s behavior in time t , i.e., annual
outcomes grouped at the occupation-firm level. Our first and main outcome
variable is the change in employer capital contribution rates from year t − 1
to year t. The right-hand side variables include the fraction of employees
above the threshold in an occupation-firm-year cell (abovef t ), year fixed effects
(µs ), and year dummies interacted with the fraction of employees above the
threshold (It=s × abovef t ). In this specification, we omit 1998 as the baseline
year, so that all the coefficients βs are estimated relative to 1998. We choose
a specification linear in the fraction of affected employees, since Panel B of
Figure 1 revealed an approximately linear relationship between the change
in employer capital contributions and the share of the workforce above the
threshold. The main coefficient of interest is β1999 . This coefficient captures
the relationship between the change in annual employer capital contributions

11

and the fraction of workers above the threshold in 1999 compared to that
in 1998, thus estimating the effect of the reform on this relationship. The
vector Xf t includes various sets of controls, which we add in order to verify
the robustness of the estimated effect, as the share of employees above the
threshold may be correlated with other characteristics of the firm that may
affect the change in contribution rates.
Panel A of Table 2 reports the coefficients on the share of employees above
the threshold and the interaction of this share with indicators for years 1996
through 2001 (omitting 1998) in regressions that include various sets of controls. In all columns, we include year fixed effects and cluster standard errors
at the workplace level. We multiply the coefficients by 100 to convert them
into percentage-point units. Column (1) estimates the baseline regression and
in columns (2) to (4) we successively add controls to the vector Xf t . Importantly, we add high-order polynomials of the mean workplace-level income,
separately for workers below and above the top tax threshold, as well as their
interactions with the year dummies.19 This allows us to further isolate the
relationship between employer responses and whether employees are exactly
above or below the threshold, by adding an underlying flexible continuous
relationship between employer behavior and average labor income.20 The additional controls that we include are the number of workers in a workplace and
its square, as well as their interactions with year indicators, workplace (i.e.,
2-digit occupation-firm) fixed effects, and 2-digit occupation-year fixed effects.
Across all specifications the results are very stable and are in accordance
with the graphical results. There is no meaningful relationship between changes
in employer capital contributions and the share of employees above the top
19
The reported estimates are for polynomials of degree five, but the results are robust to
higher- and lower-degree polynomials and are available from the authors on request. The
decline in the number of observations from specification (1) to (2) is due to the inclusion
of controls for average income separately for employees above and below the top bracket,
which excludes observations in which all employees are either above or below.
20
These controls alleviate concerns, for example, that “good” firms with higher wages
may be more likely to respond to the reform and also have a higher fraction of workers
above the top tax threshold. We estimated regressions that add controls for percentiles of
the workplace’s distribution of employee income and found similar results. The analysis is
available from the authors on request.

12

threshold prior to the reform in years 1996-1998. However, the coefficient
on the fraction of employees above the top threshold interacted with 1999
is approximately -2.2 pp and statistically significant at any conventional significance level. Focusing on the specification of column (4) with the full set
of controls, this implies that in 1999 employers in workplaces with 100% of
employees above the top-income tax threshold decreased their capital contribution rate by an average of 2.18 pp more than employers in workplaces
with 0% of employees above the threshold. For years 2000 and 2001, the coefficients on the fraction of employees above the top threshold are -0.59 and
-0.55, respectively, and statistically significant. These patterns are consistent
with firms responding substantially just after the reform took place, with a
small degree of delayed or gradual responses by some firms.21
The stability of the estimated effect across the different specifications suggests that the estimated relationship is not driven by omitted variables. Additionally, in Appendix A, we show that the results are robust to using modes
instead of medians as our measure of defaults, and that the results are unlikely
to be driven by individual responses. We also show that the results stay similar
when we vary the minimal size of workplaces that we include in the analysis.
In Appendix C, we demonstrate that the employer responses in contribution
rates were attributable to changes in capital contributions (that is, the numerator) rather than changes in labor income (the denominator). Finally, in
Appendix D, we show that inadvertently including workers who were covered
by collective bargaining likely only attenuates our results.
In sum, our analysis is consistent with the notion that employers design
pension plans to reflect the savings preferences of their workforce, and that
they respond immediately to changes in their employees’ incentives. In the
next section, we gauge the magnitude of the employer responses that we estimated.
21

We find that for workplaces with more than 50% of workers above the top threshold,
approximately one half of the decrease in employer capital contributions after 1999 is delayed
and attributable to firms that did not respond in 1999, and the other half is gradual and
attributable to additional responses by firms that responded in 1999.

13

3.2

Employer vs. Individual Responses

In the analysis above, we showed that the average response of employers
was large relative to their baseline contribution rates to capital accounts. In
this section we assess the magnitudes of the employer responses to the reform by comparing them to the responses of individuals within their private
accounts.
The ideal experiment that compares individuals’ savings behavior and employers’ savings behavior on the individuals’ behalf would randomly assign savings decisions to either individuals or their respective employers. To mimic this
experiment we exploit the Danish setting that provides us with administrative
records of employee-level savings contributions to both employer-sponsored
401(k)-like accounts and private IRA-like accounts that are managed by the
individuals themselves. We focus the analysis only on those who were directly
affected by the reform – that is, employees at the top bracket of the labor income tax schedule – and compare their responses in private accounts to those
of their employers in their employer-sponsored accounts.
In Figure 2, we divide the sample of affected workers into equal-sized
groups according to the share of workers above the top threshold in their workplace. Panel A plots the change in the default contribution rate to employersponsored capital accounts, while Panel B plots the change in the average
contribution rate to private capital accounts.
One key difference between employer and individual responses is that for
any fraction of employees at the top bracket, the decrease in employer contributions to capital accounts was larger than the individuals’ responses. The
latter is at most a decrease of 0.75 pp, while the smallest decrease in employer
contributions is more than 1 pp. This suggests that most of the overall decrease in capital contributions due to the reform was attributable to employer,
rather than individual, responses. It is, in part, due to the fact that baseline
contributions to capital accounts in the years prior to the reform were much
smaller in individual accounts compared to employer-sponsored accounts (see
Table 1). Another noticeable difference between the two panels of Figure 2
is that there is no gradient in private accounts with respect to the share of
14

employees above the top threshold, while there is a pronounced gradient in
employer-sponsored accounts. This suggests that the response of employers in
capital pension plans was not crowded out by individual responses in private
plans.
To account for differential baseline contribution rates to private vs. employersponsored accounts and to understand better what underlies the aggregate
responses, we analyze in Appendix B the changes in the two types of accounts
at the employee level by studying their respective distributions.
Altogether, the comparison of responses between employer-sponsored accounts and private accounts reveals that, at the aggregate, the effect of the
reform on overall savings for retirement was mostly driven by employer-level responses, underlining the large relative magnitude of employer responses. Next,
we study whether the decrease in employer contributions to capital accounts
translated into a decline in overall savings or into increased contributions to
other substitutable accounts.
3.3

Substitution into Annuity Accounts
The empirical analysis of employer responses to the reform has focused

so far on capital contributions. To understand the effects of the reform on
the overall employer-sponsored savings portfolios of employees, we proceed by
analyzing how employer contributions to annuity accounts may have changed.
The reform’s decrease in subsidies to capital accounts had two main effects
on employees’ savings incentives for workers in the top income tax bracket. As
it made contributions to savings accounts less attractive, the reform caused a
negative income effect that pushed toward lower levels of total pension savings. At the same time, the reform created a substitution effect due to the
decrease in the relative price of contributions to annuity accounts. The relative
forces of these two effects determine whether and to what extent employers
responded in their contributions to annuity accounts and in their employees’
total compensation.
Figure 3 plots changes in employers’ contributions to annuity accounts.
We begin with Panel A, which plots changes in employer contribution rates to
15

annuity vs. capital accounts by year. This graph shows that the time series
of changes in employer contributions to annuity accounts essentially mirrored
the changes in capital contributions. Moreover, Panel B of Figure 3, which
replicates Panel B of Figure 1 but with changes in employer annuity contributions as the outcome variable, reveals that employer responses in annuity
accounts also mirrored the responses in capital accounts as a function of the
share of employees above the top threshold. Before the reform, annual changes
in both annuity and capital accounts were uniform across workplaces with different fractions of workers above the top tax threshold. In 1999, in response
to the reform, employers decreased their capital contributions and increased
their annuity contributions as a function of the share of their affected employees and in similar magnitudes. Panel B of Table 2 estimates equation (1)
with a full set of controls and with changes in employer annuity contributions
as the outcome variable. We find that in 1999 employers in workplaces with
100% of employees above the top-income tax threshold increased their annuity
contribution rate by an average of 1.96 pp more than employers in workplaces
with 0% of employees above the threshold, alongside the decrease of 2.18 pp
in capital contributions. In fact, studying the sum of these responses in Panel
C of Table 2, the evidence is consistent with full compensation of the decrease
in capital contributions by an increase in annuity contributions, so that the
change in overall employer contributions is not statistically different from zero.
In sum, the results suggest that the response at the employer-level was
driven by a substitution effect, so that the decrease in capital contributions
was almost-fully compensated for by an increase in annuity contributions, with
no statistically significant effect on overall employer contributions. These employer responses are in contrast to individual responses in private accounts,
for which Chetty et al. (2014) find a shift of 57 cents to annuity accounts
for each DKr that individuals would have contributed to capital accounts. In
Appendix C, we additionally show that there was no average effect on labor
income, so that we do not find evidence that the potential income effect of the
reform was offset by higher wages.

16

4

Conclusion

This paper provides evidence that employers set contributions to pension
savings accounts in accordance with the savings preferences of their workforce,
and that they respond immediately and significantly to changes in their employees’ savings incentives. In particular, we find that the change in employer
capital contributions in response to an increase in their relative price within
the 1999 reform was strongly related to the fraction of workers who were above
the top tax threshold and were directly affected by the reform. We also find
that employers adjusted their employees’ overall savings portfolios by significant shifts into the more subsidized annuity accounts, with almost no leakage
of overall savings.
Since employer contributions and defaults are extremely effective at increasing individuals’ total level of savings, some governments are considering
implementing policies that incentivize employer-based savings accounts and
default contribution rates. Given the increasing reliance of individual retirement savings on employers’ contributions, our findings are promising and encouraging preliminary evidence that they are set carefully and in accordance
with workers’ savings preferences.
However, there are other important aspects of firm responses that we did
not address in this paper. For example, our results do not reveal whether
firms’ behavior is attributable to benevolence or to competition, and, since our
analysis is strictly positive, we do not know how far firms’ responses were from
the optimal changes in their contribution rates. We believe that addressing
these issues is a fruitful direction for future research, as they have potentially
important implications for the optimal design of employer-based retirement
savings policies.

17

References
Aaronson, S., and J. L. Coronado (2005): “Are Firms or Workers Behind
the Shift Away from DB Pension Plans?,” FEDS paper, (2005-17).
Bernheim, B. D. (1998): “Financial Illiteracy, Education, and Retirement
Saving,” in Living with Defined Contribution Pensions: Remaking Responsibility for Retirement, ed. by O. Mitchell, and S. Schieber, pp. 38–68. Philadelphia: Univ. Pennsylvania Press.
Beshears, J., J. Choi, D. Laibson, B. Madrian, and B. Weller
(2010): “Public Policy and Saving for Retirement: The ”Autosave” Features
of the Pension Protection Act of 2006,” in Better Living Through Economics,
ed. by J. Siegried, pp. 274–290.
Beshears, J., J. J. Choi, D. Laibson, and B. C. Madrian (2009): “The
Importance of Default Options for Retirement Saving Outcomes: Evidence
from the United States,” in Social security policy in a changing environment,
pp. 167–195. University of Chicago Press.
Bingley, P., N. D. Gupta, and P. J. Pedersen (2007): “Fiscal Implications of Reforms in Retirement Systems in Denmark,” in Social Security
Programs and Retirement around the World: Fiscal Implications of Reform,
pp. 119–154. University of Chicago Press.
Brobeck, S. (1990): U.S. Consumer Knowledge: Results of a Nationwide
Test, Washington, DC: Consum. Fed. Am.
Carroll, G. D., J. J. Choi, D. Laibson, B. C. Madrian, and A. Metrick (2009): “Optimal Defaults and Active Decisions,” Quarterly Journal
of Economics, 124(4), 1639–1674.
Chetty, R., J. N. Friedman, S. Leth-Petersen, T. H. Nielsen, and
T. Olsen (2014): “Active vs. Passive Decisions and Crowd-Out in Retirement Savings Accounts: Evidence from Denmark,” Quarterly Journal of
Economics, 129(3), 1141–1219.
18

Choi, J. J. (2015): “Contributions to Defined Contribution Pension Plans,”
Annual Review of Financial Economics, 7(1).
Choi, J. J., D. Laibson, and B. C. Madrian (2007): “Mental Accounting
in Portfolio Choice: Evidence from A Flypaper Effect,” Discussion paper,
National Bureau of Economic Research.
Choi, J. J., D. Laibson, B. C. Madrian, and A. Metrick (2003):
“Optimal Defaults,” American Economic Review, pp. 180–185.
(2004): “For Better or for Worse: Default Effects and 401 (k) Savings
Behavior,” in Perspectives on the Economics of Aging, pp. 81–126. University of Chicago Press.
Cremer, H., P. De Donder, D. Maldonado, and P. Pestieau (2008):
“Designing a Linear Pension Scheme with Forced Savings and Wage Heterogeneity,” International Tax and Public Finance, 15(5), 547–562.
Cremer, H., and P. Pestieau (2011): “Myopia, Redistribution and Pensions,” European Economic Review, 55(2), 165–175.
Dummann, K. (2008): “What Determines Supply and Demand for Occupational Pensions in Germany?,” Journal of Pension Economics and Finance,
7(02), 131–156.
Fadlon, I., and D. Laibson (2015): “Endogenous Paternalism and PseudoRationality,” Unpublished manuscript.
Gelber, A. (2011): “How Do 401(k)s Affect Saving? Evidence from Changes
in 401(k) Eligibility,” American Economic Journal: Economic Policy, 3(4),
103–122.
Goda, G. S., and C. F. Manchester (2013): “Incorporating Employee
Heterogeneity into Default Rules for Retirement Plan Selection,” Journal of
Human Resources, 48(1), 198–235.

19

Gustman, A. L., T. L. Steinmeier, and N. Tabatabai (2009): “Do
Workers Know about Their Pension Plan Type? Comparing Workers’ and
Employers’ Pension Information,” Overcoming the Savings Slump: How to
Increase the Effectiveness of Financial Education and Saving Programs, pp.
47–81.
Hastings, J. S., B. C. Madrian, and W. L. Skimmyhorn (2013): “Financial Literacy, Financial Education, and Economic Outcomes,” Annual
Review of Economics, 5, 347–73.
Hernæs, E., J. Piggott, T. Zhang, and S. Strøm (2011): “Occupational Pensions, Tenure, and Taxes,” Journal of Pension Economics and
Finance, 10(03), 435–456.
Hilgert, M. A., J. M. Hogarth, and S. G. Beverly (2003): “Household Financial Management: The Connection Between Knowledge and Behavior,” Fed. Res. Bull., 89, 309.
Lusardi, A., and O. S. Mitchell (2007): “Baby Boomer Retirement Security: The Roles of Planning, Financial Literacy, and Housing Wealth,”
Journal of Monetary Economics, 54(1), 205–224.
Madrian, B. C., and D. F. Shea (2001): “The Power of Suggestion: Inertia in 401(k) Participation and Savings Behavior,” Quarterly Journal of
Economics, 116(4), 1149–1187.
Mitchell, O. S. (1988): “Worker Knowledge of Pension Provisions,” Journal
of Labor Economics, 6(1), 21–39.
OECD (2009): “Pension Country Profile: Denmark,” in OECD Private Pensions Outlook 2008. Paris: OECD Publishing.
Økonomi-og erhversministeriet, B., and Finansministeriet (2003):
“Større valgfrihed I pensionsopsparingen,” Commisioned report.
Oyer, P. (2005): “Salary or Benefits?,” Discussion paper, National Bureau
of Economic Research.
20

Phelps, C. (1973): “The Demand for Health Insurance: a Theoretical and
Empirical Investigation,” .
Rice, R. G. (1966): “Skill, Earnings, and the Growth of Wage Supplements,”
American Economic Review, pp. 583–593.
Roeder, K. (2014): “Optimal Taxes and Pensions with Myopic Agents,”
Social Choice and Welfare, 42(3), 597–618.
Rosen, S. (1974): “Hedonic Prices and Implicit Markets: Product Differentiation in Pure Competition,” Journal of Political Economy, pp. 34–55.

21

Online Appendix A: Verification of Employer Responses
Recall that contribution rates within a workplace, defined by all employees
with the same 2-digit occupation code in the same firm, can vary since employers may set pension contributions at a finer level within the firm (i.e., higherdigit occupation codes), and since individuals have some ability to choose a
different distribution of contributions between capital and annuity accounts
than the default set by the employer. Our main analysis identifies employer
default contribution rates using workplace-level medians.
To validate our measure of choice and to verify that our results are not
driven by employees’ responses within their employer-sponsored accounts, but
rather by the employers themselves, we augment the analysis in the following
ways:
1. Analysis of Modes: Instead of workplace-level medians we calculate
workplace-level modes for identifying employer contribution rates. Panel
A.1 of Appendix Figure 2 replicates Panel B of Figure 1, but with changes
in workplace-level modes of contribution rates instead of medians, and
shows that our results persist with this choice of the outcome variable.
To further show that the patterns are very similar to those provided by
medians, Panel A.2 of Appendix Figure 2 replicates Panel B of Figure
1 that uses medians, but for the same sample that is included in Panel
A.1 of Appendix Figure 2. This sample includes only workplaces with
unique mode values. Due to rounding issues and multiplicity of possible
modes we are left with 59,956 workplace-year observations, compared
to 84,764 workplace-year observations in the main analysis of medians,
which is the reason for our choice of medians over modes.
2. Deviation from Aggregates: Panels B.1 and B.2 of Appendix Figure
2 plot the distribution of the distance between employee-level capital
contribution rates and workplace-level aggregates, for modes and medians, respectively. The analysis verifies that most employee contributions
bunch exactly at these aggregates, supporting our design and choice of
measures for identifying employer behavior.
22

3. Workplace Size: Statistically, medians are more likely to accurately
identify default contribution rates in large workplaces. Conceptually, the
firm decision making process is more likely to be tailoring defaults to
groups of employees of similar occupations in larger workplaces. Therefore, we study the sensitivity of our analysis to the size of workplaces
that are included in our sample. Appendix Figure 3 plots changes in medians for the samples of workplaces with more than ten, twenty, and fifty
employees. While the sample size substantially decreases, the patterns
of the results are very similar.
4. Workplaces with No Contributions to Annuity Accounts: To
focus on a sample of employees with less discretion over contributions
to employer-sponsored accounts, we repeat the analysis for employees
who could not have reallocated contributions across different types of
accounts. In particular, Panel C of Appendix Figure 2 constrains the
sample to workplaces whose median annuity contribution rate in the
years prior to the reform (1996-1998) was zero. In addition, we include
only workplaces whose median capital contribution rate in 1998 was economically meaningful (here we choose having rates larger than 1.5%), to
focus on employers that had non-negligible potential to reduce capital
contributions in response to the reform. These restrictions substantially
reduce the sample size (to a total of 4,056 observations), but reveal the
same patterns.

Online Appendix B: Distribution of Employee-Level Changes
in Contribution Rates
In section 3.2 we compared employer responses to the reform to the responses of individuals within their private accounts by using workplace-level
aggregates. To account for differential baseline contribution rates to private
vs. employer-sponsored accounts, we analyze percent changes in the two types
of accounts at the employee level, by plotting the distribution of employeelevel year-to-year percent changes in capital contribution rates. In addition,
23

to conduct a within-employee analysis when we compare responses within private vs. employer-sponsored accounts, we balance the sample such that we
keep only employees that had positive contributions to both type of accounts
in a previous year.
In Appendix Figure 4 we plot histograms of individual-level percent changes
in contributions to capital accounts for employer-sponsored capital accounts
(Panel A) and private capital accounts (Panel B). In each panel we plot the
distributions for the two years prior to the reform (so that we average the
changes from 1996 to 1997 and from 1997 to 1998) and the distribution of
changes following the reform – which captures changes from 1998 to 1999.
Comparing the before and after distributions, we see that in both types of
accounts most of the effect of the reform is driven by exiting capital accounts
altogether (the large differences in the mass points at -100 in both panels). In
fact, in both employer-sponsored and private accounts, there was an increase
of 23 pp in the fraction of employees who exited capital accounts.22
Recall from Section 3.2 that employer responses were much larger than
individual responses in the aggregate. The evidence here, which results from
analyzing the contributions of the special sample of individuals with positive
lagged contributions to both accounts, suggests that at the individual level
percent change responses in private accounts were similar to those in employer
accounts. However, this result is not entirely surprising since the analysis here
diverges from the ideal experiment that we mentioned is Section 3.2 for two
main reasons. First, we analyze only a small share of individuals. While among
those that were at the top tax bracket in 1999 55% had positive contributions
to employer-sponsored accounts and 30% had positive contributions to private accounts, less than 13% had positive contributions to both. Specifically,
these workers are likely to be the most attentive to their pension accounts
22

Note, however, that while the responses to the reform within private accounts were
composed of opting out of capital accounts by almost exclusively those who would otherwise have small increases or no changes in contributions, opting out of employer-sponsored
accounts was also equally driven by workplaces who would have otherwise decreased their
contributions (the decrease in Panel A from 10 pp to 3 pp in the mass point at -4% that
includes changes larger or equal to -4% and smaller than 0%).

24

than a randomly selected individual who does not typically contribute to private pension accounts. Second, the sample includes affected individuals in
workplaces that also had to cater to employees who were not affected by the
reform. Therefore, changes in employer-sponsored accounts do not capture the
full potential extent of employer responses. The average fraction of workers
at the top income tax bracket in these workplaces was 74% in 1999, and given
the linear response we found in Section 3.1, there is a potential attenuation
of the employer responses by approximately 26% compared to the response of
employers with all workers at the top income tax bracket.

Online Appendix C: Capital Contributions vs.

Labor

Income Responses
Since we are analyzing employer capital contributions as a fraction of labor income, the heterogeneous responses of firms by the fraction of workers
above the top threshold could be due to differential changes in the numerator, employer capital contributions, or the denominator, taxable labor income.
Appendix Figure 5 breaks down the responses in capital contribution rates
plotted in Panel A of Figure 1 into annual earnings and capital contribution
levels.
Using different workplace-level measures for annual labor earnings, Panel
A, B, and C show no noticeable differential patterns over the years across
workplaces with different shares of employees above the top tax threshold. In
contrast, Panel D, which plots workplace-level medians of contribution levels,
exhibits exactly the same patterns of Panel A of Figure 1, confirming that our
results are driven by changes in employer contributions to pension accounts.
This analysis also allows us to test an implication of the standard model
of employee compensation. Recall that the decrease in subsidies for capital
contributions potentially led to an income effect, as it reduced the overall
compensation of workers above the top tax threshold. However, Appendix
Figure 5 as well as the time series of the log of labor income in Panel B of
Appendix Figure 1, display no detectable change in compensation through in-

25

creased annual earnings, either in the aggregate or as a function of the share
of employees above the top tax threshold.23

Online Appendix D: Inclusion of Workers Covered by
Collective Agreements
Recall that our analysis aims at isolating workplaces in which default contribution rates are set by the employer. To this end, we excluded workers in
the public sector or with blue-collar occupations (as they are likely covered
by collective agreements), so that we included only workers in private firms
with white-collar occupations. However, some white-collar jobs in the private
sector are covered by collective bargaining.
In this appendix, we assess how inadvertently including workers covered by
collective agreements may have affected our results. Inclusion of such workers
can alter the results in two different ways. First, given that there are union representatives within the collective bargaining process, employer contributions
for these workers may be more closely related to workers’ preferences than employer contributions that are set exclusively by firms. Thus, employer capital
contributions for them may respond more to the reform. In this case, inadvertently including workplaces that are covered by collective bargaining could
increase the magnitude of the coefficients. On the other hand, in such workplaces, employer contributions are set for groups of occupation-level worker
unions and employer associations, not at the finer occupation-firm level. Since
we analyze the occupation-firm cell as the decision cell in our analysis, variation in the share of employees above the top tax threshold across employers
but within the same worker union-employer association unit will not exhibit
differential responses. This will tend to flatten the gradient of responses with
respect to the share of affected employees and to attenuate our results.
23

This is consistent with the required compensation of the loss incurred at the initial
bundle of contributions (on the order of no more than a few thousands of DKr) being
negligible relative to annual labor earnings (on the order of hundred thousands of DKr).
Empirically, such small changes are hard to detect, and, conceptually, some degree of wage
rigidity due to, e.g., re-negotiation costs, would render these small changes non-profitable.

26

In order to empirically quantify how unintentionally including workplaces
covered by collective bargaining affects our estimates, we analyze the relationship between employer capital contributions and the fraction of workers above
the top tax threshold for different groups that are either more or less likely to
be covered by collective bargaining agreements as compared to workers with
white-collar occupations in the private sector.
Specifically, in column (3) of Appendix Table 1 we restrict the analysis to
employees in the public sector or those with blue-collar occupations, who are
more likely to be covered by collective bargaining. The coefficient of interest
– on the interaction of the fraction of workers above the top threshold with
the indicator for year 1999 – is -0.35, which is an order of magnitude smaller
than (and statistically different from) the corresponding coefficient of -2.18 in
our main sample analysis of employees with white-collar occupations in the
private sector (replicated in column (1) of Appendix Table 1). In column (2)
of Appendix Table 1 we restrict the analysis to private-sector workplaces of
white-collar occupations with a highly-educated workforce. In particular, we
focus on workplaces in which more than twenty percent of workers had more
than sixteen years of education, which are even less likely to be covered by
collective bargaining (as compared to all private-sector workplaces of whitecollar occupations). The point estimate of the coefficient of interest in this
case is large, -3.68 pp, and is significantly different from the coefficient for the
remainder sample of private-sector white-collar occupations.
Put together, the results suggest that inadvertently including some workers
who are covered by collective bargaining in our main specification may have
attenuated our results.

Online Appendix E: Occupation Codes
In this appendix, we list 2-digit occupation codes used by Statistics Denmark. In our analysis, white-collar occupations are defined as occupations
with codes whose first digit is between 1 and 5.

27

Occupation Codes:
1 Leadership at the top level of companies, organizations and the public
sector
11 Legislative work and leadership in public administration and interest
groups
12 Senior management of the company
2 Work that requires knowledge at the highest level in the area
21 Work within the non-biological branches of science and computer science, statistics, architecture and engineering sciences
22 Work in medicine, pharmacy, and biological branches of science, as well
as midwives, general nursing work etc.
23 Teaching in primary schools, vocational schools, colleges, universities,
and research organizations
24 Work within the social sciences and humanities
3 Work that requires Intermediate knowledge
31 Technicians in non-biological topics
32 Technicians and other work in biological topics
33 Caring and educational work
34 Work in sales, finance, business, administration, etc.
4 Office jobs
41 Internal office work
42 Office work with customer service
5 Retail sales, service and care work
51 Service and care work
52 Retail and models
6 Work in agriculture, horticulture, forestry, hunting and fishing
61 Work in agriculture, horticulture, forestry, hunting and fishing
7 Craft and related trades workers
71 Work in mining and construction
72 Metal and engineering work
73 Precision craftsmanship, graphic work, etc.
74 Other craft and work in related trades
28

8 Machine operating and work in transportation and civil engineering
81 Stationary plant
82 Operation of industrial machinery
83 Transportation
9 Other work
91 Cleaning and renovation work, messenger and security services, telephone canvassing
92 Assisting in agriculture, horticulture, fisheries and forestry
93 Manual work in the construction sector, manufacturing and transportation

29

FIGURE 1
Employer Contributions to Capital Pension Accounts
by the Share of Workers above the Top Tax Threshold
(a) Contribution Rates

(b) Changes in Contribution Rates

Notes: These figures plot employers’ contributions to capital pension accounts as a function of the share of their employees whose earnings were
above the top labor-income tax threshold, for years 1996-2001. Panel A plots employer capital contribution rates (as a fraction of labor income),
and Panel B plots changes in employer capital contribution rates from the previous year. The observation units are workplaces, defined by all
employees with the same 2-digit occupation code in the same firm, where employer contribution rates are calculated as the median annual
contribution rate within each workplace in a given year. We plot these figures by dividing the sample into equal-sized groups according to the
share of employees above the top tax threshold, and then plotting for each group the mean outcome (on the y-axis) against the mean share of
employees above the top tax threshold (on the x-axis). The sample includes private-sector firms and white-collar occupations, and excludes selfemployed individuals and workplaces with less than five employees.

30

FIGURE 2
Employer vs. Individual Contributions to Capital Pension Accounts of
Workers above the Top Tax Threshold
(a) Changes in Employer Contributions by the Share of Workers above the Top Tax Threshold

(b) Changes in Individual Contributions to Private Accounts by the Share of Workers above the Top Tax Threshold

Notes: These figures plot changes in workplace-level contribution rates to capital pension accounts for employees with labor income at the top
tax bracket as a function of a workplace’s share of employees above the top tax threshold, for years 1996-2001. Panel A plots changes in median
capital contribution rates to employer-sponsored (401(k)-like) accounts, and Panel B plots changes in average capital contribution rates to private
(IRA-like) accounts. The observation units are workplaces, defined by all employees with the same 2-digit occupation code in the same firm. We
plot these figures by dividing the sample into equal-sized groups according to the share of employees above the top tax threshold, and plotting for
each group the mean outcome (on the y-axis) against the mean share of employees above the top tax threshold (on the x-axis). The sample
includes private-sector firms and white-collar occupations, and excludes self-employed individuals, workplaces with less than five employees,
and employees with earnings below the top income threshold.

31

FIGURE 3
Employer Contributions to Annuity Pension Accounts
(a) Changes in Contribution Rates by Year

(b) Changes in Annuity Contributions by the Share of Workers above the Top Tax Threshold

Notes: These figures plot changes in employers’ contributions to annuity pension accounts, for years 1996-2001. Panel A plots changes in
employer contributions by year, comparing annuity contributions (black line and circles) to capital contributions (blue line and triangles). Panel B
plots changes in employers’ contribution rates to annuity pension accounts as a function of the share of their employees whose earnings were
above the top labor-income tax threshold, for years 1996-2001. The observation units are workplaces, defined by all employees with the same 2digit occupation code in the same firm, where employer contribution rates are calculated as the median annual contribution rate within each
workplace in a given year. We plot these figures by dividing the sample into equal-sized groups according to the share of employees above the
top tax threshold, and plotting for each group the mean outcome (on the y-axis) against the mean share of employees above the top tax threshold
(on the x-axis). The sample includes private-sector firms and white-collar occupations, and excludes self-employed individuals and workplaces
with less than five employees.

32

APPENDIX FIGURE 1
Employer Capital Contributions and Labor Income by Year
(a) Workplace-Level Medians of Capital Contribution Rates

(b) Workplace-Level Medians of the Log of Labor Income

Notes: These figures plot means of different workplace-level outcomes by year, for years 1996-2001. The outcome in Panel A is the median
contribution rate to employer-sponsored capital accounts, and the outcome in Panel B is the median of the log of annual labor income. A
workplace is defined as the group of all employees with the same 2-digit occupation code in the same firm. The sample includes employees in
private-sector firms with white-collar occupations, and excludes self-employed individuals and employees in workplaces with less than five
employees.

33

APPENDIX FIGURE 2
Robustness of Employer Responses in Capital Contributions
(a) Changes in Contribution Rates by the Share of Workers above the Top Tax Threshold
(1) Modes
(2) Medians for Same Sample

(b) Distance of Individual-Level Measures from Workplace-Level Aggregates
(1) Modes
(2) Medians

(c) Workplaces with No Annuity Contributions

Notes: The sample for these figures includes private-sector firms and white-collar occupations, and excludes self-employed individuals and
workplaces with less than five employees. Panel A.1 plots changes in workplace-level modes of contribution rates to capital accounts as a
function of a workplace’s share of employees above the top tax threshold, for years 1996-2001, including only workplaces with unique mode
values. Panel A.2 plots workplace-level medians, including only the sample that is included in Panel A.1. These figures are plotted in the same
way as the figure in Panel B of Figure 1. Panels B.1 and B.2 plot the distribution of the distance between employee-level capital contribution
rates and workplace-level modes and medians, respectively. Panel C replicates Panel A.2 for all private-sector firms and white-collar occupations
but constrains the sample to workplaces whose median annuity contribution rate in the years prior to the reform (1996-1998) was zero and whose
median capital contribution rate in 1998 was larger than 1.5% (so that they had non-negligible potential to reduce capital contributions in
response to the reform), with a total of 4,056 observations.

34

APPENDIX FIGURE 3
Employer Capital Contributions Responses by Size of the Workforce
(a) Workforce Larger than 10 Employees

(b) Workforce Larger than 20 Employees

(c) Workforce Larger than 50 Employees

Notes: These figures plot changes in employers’ contribution rates to capital pension accounts as a function of the share of their employees whose
earnings placed them above the top labor-income tax threshold, for years 1996-2001. Panel A excludes workplaces with less than ten employees,
Panel B excludes workplaces with less than twenty employees, and Panel C excludes workplaces with less than fifty employees. In each panel we
indicate the number of included observations, denoted by N. The observation units are workplaces, defined by all employees with the same 2digit occupation code in the same firm, where employer contribution rates are calculated as the median annual contribution rate within each
workplace in a given year. We plot these figures by dividing the sample into equal-sized groups according to the share of employees above the
top tax threshold, and plotting for each group the mean outcome (on the y-axis) against the mean share of employees above the top tax threshold
(on the x-axis). The sample includes private-sector firms and white-collar occupations and excludes self-employed individuals.

35

APPENDIX FIGURE 4
Changes in Employer vs. Individual Contributions to Capital Pension
Accounts of Workers above the Top Tax Threshold
(a) Distribution of Employee-Level Changes in Contributions to Employer-Sponsored Accounts

(b) Distribution of Employee-Level Changes in Contributions to Private Accounts

Notes: These figures plot the distribution of changes in employee-level capital pension contributions in percents relative to lagged contributions
for individuals above the top tax cutoff for the years before the reform (black lines and circles) and from 1998 to 1999 (red lines and triangles).
Panel A plots changes in contributions to employer-sponsored (401(k)-like) accounts, and Panel B plots changes in contributions to private (IRAlike) accounts. The figures include only individuals with positive lagged contributions to both types of accounts. Each point represents the floor
of bins of 4% width, so that the point at 0% represents individuals with changes in the range [0%,4%). The curves for the distribution of annual
changes in the years prior to the reform (in black lines and circles) include changes from 1996 to 1997 and 1997 to 1998. The sample includes
private-sector firms and white-collar occupations, and excludes self-employed individuals, workplaces with less than five employees, and
employees with earnings below the top income threshold.

36

APPENDIX FIGURE 5
Employer Capital Contributions and Labor Income
by the Share of Workers above the Top Tax Threshold
(a) Means of Workplace-Level Labor Income

(b) Medians of Workplace-Level Labor Income

(c) Medians of Workplace-Level Log Labor Income

(d) Medians of Employer Capital Contributions

Notes: These figures plot different workplace-level outcomes as a function of the share of employees whose earnings placed them above the top
labor-income tax threshold, for years 1996-2001. Panel A plots means of annual labor income, Panel B plots medians of annual labor income,
Panel C plots medians of log annual labor income, and Panel D plots median employer contributions to capital pension accounts. The observation
units are workplaces, defined by all employees with the same 2-digit occupation code in the same firm. We plot these figures by dividing the
sample into equal-sized groups according to the share of employees above the top tax threshold, and plotting for each group the mean outcome
(on the y-axis) against the mean share of employees above the top tax threshold (on the x-axis). The sample includes private-sector firms and
white-collar occupations, and excludes self-employed individuals and workplaces with less than five employees.

37

TABLE 1
Summary Statistics of Analysis Sample
Mean
(1)

Median
(2)

SD
(3)

285,740

253,893

214,500

Individual-Level Variables:
Labor Earnings (DKr)
Pension Contributions before the Reform
Employer-Sponsored Accounts
Capital Contributions (DKr)

11,665

6,679

12,490

Capital Contribution Rate

3.6%

2.8%

3.8%

Fraction with Capital Contributions

66%
12,604

5,047

17,830

Annuity Contribution Rate

3.7%

1.8%

4.5%

Fraction with Annuity Contributions

77%

Annuity Contributions (DKr)

Private Accounts
Capital Contributions (DKr)

3,125

0

7,627

Capital Contribution Rate

1.1%

0%

2.6%

Fraction with Capital Contributions

28%

Annuity Contributions (DKr)

1,470

0

5,859

Annuity Contribution Rate

0.4%

0%

1.7%

Fraction with Annuity Contributions

15%
49%

50%

35%

22

9

97

Workplace-Level Variables:
Fraction of Employees above Top Tax Threshold
Number of Employees
Number of Worker-Year Observations

2,020,705

Number of Workplace-Year Observations

84,764

Number of Workplaces

26,775

Notes: This table presents means, medians, and standard deviations of key variables in our analysis sample of white-collar workers in
private-sector firms from 1996 to 2001. The classification of white-collar occupations is described in detail in Appendix E. All monetary
values are reported in nominal Danish Kroner (DKr), where the exchange rate during this time period was approximately DKr 6.5 per US
$1. Labor income is calculated as total pre-tax wage earnings plus employer pension contributions. The values reported in the table for
pension contributions before the reform are based on data from 1998. Pension contribution levels are winsorized at their 99th percentile.

38

TABLE 2
Changes in Employer Contribution Rates to Pension Accounts
by the Share of Workers above the Top Tax Threshold
Panel A
Dependent Variable:
Fraction of Employees Above Top Tax Threshold
(Baseline Year 1998)
Fraction of Employees Above Top Tax Threshold
Interacted with:

(1)
-0.052*
(0.032)

Δ Capital Contributions
(2)
(3)
-0.113*
0.122
(0.0670)
(0.137)

(4)
0.132
(0.145)

Year 1996

0.035
(0.046)

0.101
(0.098)

0.202
(0.139)

0.273
(0.167)

Year 1997

0.061
(0.046)

0.075
(0.096)

0.071
(0.126)

0.096
(0.147)

Year 1999

-2.126***
(0.061)

-2.167***
(0.129)

-2.181***
(0.176)

-2.182***
(0.203)

Year 2000

-0.606***
(0.048)

-0.569***
(0.104)

-0.556***
(0.149)

-0.593***
(0.173)

Year 2001

-0.558***
(0.046)

-0.598***
(0.101)

-0.590***
(0.152)

-0.553***
(0.176)

X

X

X

X

X

X

X

X

X

Year Fixed Effects
Income and Workforce Size Controls
2-Digit Occupation-Firm Fixed Effects
2-Digit Occupation-Year Fixed Effects

X

Number of Observations

84,764

60,643

60,643

60,643

Number of Clusters

26,775

20,642

20,642

20,642

Panel B
Δ Annuity
Contributions
1.962***
(0.195)

Dependent Variable:
Fraction of Employees Above Top Tax Threshold
Interacted with Year 1999
Panel C

Δ Overall
Employer
Contributions
-0.220
(0.217)

Dependent Variable:
Fraction of Employees Above Top Tax Threshold
Interacted with Year 1999

Notes: This table reports estimates of employers’ responses to the reform as a function of the share of their employees whose earnings were
above the top labor-income tax threshold (equation (1)). In Panel A, the outcome variable is the change in employer capital contribution
rates from the previous year. We regress this outcome on the fraction of workers above the top tax threshold, year fixed effects, the fraction
of workers above the top tax threshold interacted with year fixed effects, and different sets of controls as indicated in the table. The baseline
year is 1998, so that the coefficient on the fraction of employees above the top tax threshold refers to that year. The coefficient on the
fraction of employees above the top tax threshold interacted with other year indicators estimates this relationship relative to the relationship
of the baseline year. Income controls include a fifth-order polynomial of the mean workplace-level labor income, separately for workers
above and below the top tax threshold, as well as their interactions with year indicators. Workforce size controls include the number of
workers in a workplace and its square, as well as their interactions with year indicators. In Panels B and C, we replicate the specification
with the full set of controls in column (4) of Panel A, but where the outcome variables are changes in employer annuity contribution rates
and changes in overall employer contribution rates to both capital and annuity accounts, respectively. In all regressions the observation units
are workplaces, defined by all employees with the same 2-digit occupation code in the same firm, where employer contribution rates are
calculated as the median annual contribution rate within each workplace in a given year. The sample includes private-sector firms and
white-collar occupations, and excludes self-employed individuals and workplaces with less than five employees. Standard errors are
clustered at the workplace level. Coefficients are multiplied by 100 so that they are converted to percentage point units.
*** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1

39

APPENDIX TABLE 1
Changes in Employer Contribution Rates to Capital Pension Accounts for Different Samples
Dependent Variable:

Δ Capital Contributions

Sample:

White-Collar in Private Sector
All
Highly-Educated
(1)
(2)
0.132
0.303
(0.145)
(0.611)

Fraction of Employees Above Top Tax Threshold
(Baseline Year 1998)
Fraction of Employees Above Top Tax Threshold
Interacted With:

Blue-Collar or
in Public Sector
(3)
0.138**
(0.074)

Year 1996

0.273
(0.167)

-0.159
(0.752)

-0.093
(0.081)

Year 1997

0.096
(0.147)

-0.234
(0.675)

0.063
(0.076)

Year 1999

-2.182***
(0.203)

-3.681***
(0.861)

-0.347***
(0.084)

Year 2000

-0.593***
(0.173)

-1.467**
(0.747)

-0.129*
(0.077)

Year 2001

-0.553***
(0.176)

-0.178
(0.915)

-0.080
(0.078)

Year Fixed Effects

X

X

X

Income and Workforce Size Controls

X

X

X

2-Digit Occupation-Firm Fixed Effects

X

X

X

2-Digit Occupation-Year Fixed Effects

X

X

X

Number of Observations

60,643

7,989

78,533

Number of Clusters

20,642

3,742

25,932

Notes: This table reports estimates of employers’ responses to the reform, for different samples, as a function of the share of their employees
whose earnings were above the top labor-income tax threshold. The outcome variable is the change in employer capital contribution rates
from the previous year. We regress this outcome on the fraction of workers above the top tax threshold, year fixed effects, the fraction of
workers above the top tax threshold interacted with year fixed effects, and a set of controls as indicated in the table. The baseline year is
1998, so that the coefficient on the fraction of employees above the top tax threshold refers to that year. The coefficient on the fraction of
employees above the top tax threshold interacted with other year indicators estimates this relationship relative to the relationship of the
baseline year. Income controls include a fifth-order polynomial of the mean workplace-level labor income, separately for workers above and
below the top tax threshold, as well as their interactions with year indicators. Workforce size controls include the number of workers in a
workplace and its square, as well as their interactions with year indicators. Column (1) replicates exactly column (4) of Table 2, which
restricts the sample to private-sector firms and white-collar occupations. Column (2) repeats the analysis of column (1) for private-sector
firms and white-collar occupations, but restricts the sample to workplaces with a highly-educated workforce. Specifically, we focus on
workplaces in which more than twenty percent of workers had more than sixteen years of education. Column (3) restricts the estimation of
employer responses to employees in the public sector or those with blue-collar occupations. All the regressions exclude self-employed
individuals and workplaces with less than five employees. The observation units are workplaces, defined by all employees with the same 2digit occupation code in the same firm, where employer contribution rates are calculated as the median annual contribution rate within each
workplace in a given year. Standard errors are clustered at the workplace level. Coefficients are multiplied by 100 so that they are converted
to percentage point units.
*** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1

40

