                                   NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




  USING LINKED SURVEY AND ADMINISTRATIVE DATA TO BETTER MEASURE INCOME:
IMPLICATIONS FOR POVERTY, PROGRAM EFFECTIVENESS AND HOLES IN THE SAFETY NET

                                               Bruce D. Meyer
                                               Nikolas Mittag

                                            Working Paper 21676
                                    http://www.nber.org/papers/w21676


                         NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                                  1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                    Cambridge, MA 02138
                                        October 2015




   Any opinions and conclusions expressed here are those of the authors and do not necessarily represent
   the views of the New York Office of Temporary and Disability Assistance (OTDA) or the U.S. Census
   Bureau. Mittag would like to thank the Upjohn Institute for Employment Research for its support.
   We have greatly benefitted from the comments of Robert Moffitt, Charles Brown and seminar participants
   at the Conference in Honor of Jerry Hausman, 2014 Joint Statistical Meetings, University of Chicago,
   Federal Reserve Bank of Atlanta, 2015 AEA Annual Meetings, University of Wisconsin, Georgia
   State University, UNCE at Charles University and Iowa State University. We are grateful for the assistance
   of many OTDA and Census Bureau employees including George Falco, Dave Dlugolecki, Graton
   Gathright, Amy O’Hara, and Frank Limehouse. The data analysis was conducted at the Chicago Census
   Research Data Center by researchers with Special Sworn Status and the results were reviewed to prevent
   the disclosure of confidential information. Pablo Celhay provided excellent research assistance. The
   views expressed herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National
   Bureau of Economic Research.

   NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
   reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
   NBER publications.

   © 2015 by Bruce D. Meyer and Nikolas Mittag. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed
   two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice,
   is given to the source.
Using Linked Survey and Administrative Data to Better Measure Income: ¸˛Implications for
Poverty, Program Effectiveness and Holes in the Safety Net
Bruce D. Meyer and Nikolas Mittag
NBER Working Paper No. 21676
October 2015
JEL No. C42,C81,I32,I38

                                             ABSTRACT

We examine the consequences of underreporting of transfer programs for prototypical analyses of
low-income populations using the Current Population Survey (CPS), the source of official poverty
and inequality statistics. We link administrative data for food stamps, TANF, General Assistance,
and subsidized housing from New York State to the CPS at the individual level. Program receipt in
the CPS is missed for over one-third of housing assistance recipients, 40 percent of food stamp recipients
and 60 percent of TANF and General Assistance recipients. Dollars of benefits are also undercounted
for reporting recipients, particularly for TANF, General Assistance and housing assistance. We find
that the survey data sharply understate the income of poor households. Underreporting in the survey
data also greatly understates the effects of anti-poverty programs and changes our understanding of
program targeting. Using the combined data rather than survey data alone, the poverty reducing effect
of all programs together is nearly doubled while the effect of housing assistance is tripled. We also
re-examine the coverage of the safety net, specifically the share of people without work or program
receipt. Using the administrative measures of program receipt rather than the survey ones often reduces
the share of single mothers falling through the safety net by one-half or more.


Bruce D. Meyer
Harris School of Public Policy
University of Chicago
1155 E. 60th Street
Chicago, IL 60637
and NBER
bdmeyer@uchicago.edu

Nikolas Mittag
CERGE-EI
Politických vz 7
111 21 Praha 1
Czech Republic
nikolas.mittag@cerge-ei.cz




A data appendix is available at:
http://www.nber.org/data-appendix/w21676
    1. Introduction


        Survey data are used for many purposes and have become one of the most important sources of

information for policy makers and researchers. A large share of the empirical research in economics and

other social sciences relies on survey data as underlined by the hundreds of thousands of citations to

surveys such as the Current Population Survey (CPS). Additionally, many of the statistics that are

frequently used to design and evaluate policies at both the national and state level, such as the rates of

unemployment and health insurance coverage, rely on household survey data. The CPS is the source of

these statistics, as well as official income distribution and poverty statistics.     The survey is also

extensively used to determine the effects of programs on the income distribution, program participation

rates, and the extent to which individuals are missed by specific programs or missed by the safety net

entirely. However, the usefulness of the information in the CPS and other household surveys depends

on its accuracy, which unfortunately, has been declining. In this paper, we examine the implications of

survey errors in the CPS, particularly inaccurate welfare program reporting and imputation, for key

income based statistics. We find that inaccurate survey data badly distort our understanding of the

income distribution, poverty and the effects of government programs.

        We focus on the implications of misreporting and imputation errors for three types of questions

that the government and researchers try to answer using survey data such as the Current Population

Survey. A very large literature examines measures of hardship and the distribution of household income

among those with few resources. These statistics supply us with vital information on the prevalence and

extent of material deprivation among the worst off in the population. Most well‐known is the annual

official income and poverty report, the 2015 version being U.S. Census (2015a). The official poverty rate

is also one of the most cited government statistics in the popular press. Many other scholars have used

these data to calculate poverty or income distribution measures at the bottom including Blank and

Schoeni (2003), Hoynes et al. (2006), and Armour et al. (2013).

                                                    1
        A second prototypical question asks how the addition of the income from specific programs

alters the poverty rate or other measures of material deprivation. These calculations provide estimates

of the poverty reducing effects of policies and which types of individuals benefit. Such analyses for

more than a dozen government programs can be seen in the annual Supplemental Poverty Measure

report, the 2015 version being U.S. Census (2015b). Many researchers have conducted similar analyses

such as the series of papers using the Survey of Income and Program Participation (SIPP) by Scholz,

Moffitt and Cowan (2009), and Ben‐Shalom, Moffitt and Scholz (2012).

        A third important question is who is missed by transfer programs. This information may point to

failings of the safety net to reach many of those it is intended to help. Maybe most well known in this

line of work are the papers by Blank and Kovak (2007, 2009) and related papers by Bitler and Hoynes

(2010), Loprest (2011), and Loprest and Nichols (2011). These papers focus on the share of single

mothers who neither work nor receive income from government transfer programs. These papers often

conclude that a large share of single mothers is missed by our safety net. In each of these prototypical

cases, we find that survey errors, mainly the mis‐reporting of government transfer receipt and amounts,

but also non‐response and inaccurate imputation,1 lead to a greatly distorted view of the situation of

those with the fewest resources and the effects of transfer programs.

        While the problems of measurement error and non‐response are not new, they are two of

several characteristics of household surveys that have been getting worse over time. This decline in

household survey quality is documented in Meyer, Mok and Sullivan (2015a, 2015b), who focus on

several of the most used surveys including the CPS.             Over time, fewer households respond to

interviewers (unit nonresponse) and fewer who respond agree to answer income questions (item

nonresponse). Item non‐response rates have been rising over the past 25 years and are on the order of

20‐30 percent or higher for both earnings (Bollinger and Hirsch 2006) and government transfers (Meyer,

1
 For simplicity, we sometimes refer to both sources of error as misreporting and the problem as program
underreporting below, even though the survey data are a mix of reported and assigned values.

                                                       2
Mok and Sullivan 2015b). For the transfer programs this second paper examines, imputed dollars

account for 24 to 36 percent of total dollars received in the CPS in 2012. Several studies find that non‐

response particularly affects measures of poverty (Hokayem, Bollinger and Ziliak 2015, Turek et al. 2009)

and the tails of the income distribution (Bollinger et al. 2014), i.e. our population of interest. And even

when these households do respond, they are less likely to give accurate answers.

        In light of these problems, some researchers have questioned the accuracy of income data for

the poor and suggested that consumption data would provide a better benchmark. In a series of papers,

Meyer and Sullivan (2003, 2008, 2011, 2012a,b) argue that a major source of the recent large

discrepancy between income and consumption measures of poverty and low incomes is likely to be the

under‐reporting of transfer income. While an issue for many other variables,2 the measurement error

problem is particularly severe for transfer programs, with receipt missed for over one‐third of housing

assistance recipients, forty percent of SNAP recipients, and sixty percent of TANF and General Assistance

recipients. Even among those who correctly report receipt, average amounts received in the CPS fall

short of the true amounts by six percent for SNAP, forty percent for TANF and General Assistance and 74

percent for housing assistance. Only a few studies attempt to correct for program underreporting, but

most do not. While past evidence on this issue has been based on a mix of aggregate and linked

microdata, here we are able to directly calculate the effects of misreporting.

        A major difficulty in evaluating the extent of survey errors and their consequences is that one

needs an external measure of truth to compare to survey responses. Some previous studies have used

re‐interviews, information from other surveys or administrative records to validate survey responses. In

this study, we replace survey responses on the receipt and amount of government transfers with

2
 For example, measurement error has been documented for income (e.g. Bound and Krueger 1991; Bollinger
1998; Dahl, DeLeire and Schwabish 2011; Abowd and Stinson 2013), education (Black, Sanders and Taylor 2003),
employment status (Poterba and Summers 1986; Chua and Fuller 1987) and health insurance coverage (Davern et
al. 2008). Bound, Brown and Mathiowetz (2001) provide an overview of studies of the extent of misreporting for
key economic variables and data sources.


                                                      3
administrative records for four income transfer programs linked to the survey. The administrative

records are extremely accurate (they contain actual payments made, they are validated by the agency

and definitions are comparable to survey definitions). The administrative data are linked to survey data

at the individual level with a high match rate because validated social security numbers are required to

receive three of the programs.

        Overall, correcting for misreporting sharply changes key results from survey data. Using the

administrative variables, poverty and inequality are lower than officially reported, program effects are

larger and fewer individuals have fallen through the safety net. Incomes below the poverty line,

particularly below half the poverty line, are substantially understated in the CPS. While the substantive

importance of underreporting becomes smaller as income rises, correcting for underreporting makes a

larger difference to household resources than including reported non‐cash benefits throughout the

income distribution. Underreporting of transfer receipt also makes government anti‐poverty policies

appear much less effective: in the corrected data the poverty reducing effect of all programs combined

is nearly doubled while the effect of housing assistance is tripled. Both the understatement of

household income and the poverty reducing effect in the survey are even more pronounced for some

subpopulations that are at particular risk of deprivation. The understatement is particularly large for

single mothers: correcting for survey errors increases their overall poverty reduction due to the four

programs by 11 percentage points, amplifying the poverty reducing effect of public assistance more

than 6‐fold and that of housing assistance more than 10‐fold. In addition, we find that the fraction of

non‐working single mothers missed by government transfers is much lower than previously reported.

This underlines that the coverage of the safety net is better than the survey suggests. The extent of

misreporting of transfer programs is higher in the CPS than in other surveys, but none of the major

surveys is without substantial measurement error in program receipt (Meyer, Mok, Sullivan 2015a,




                                                   4
2015b, Meyer, Goerge, Mittag 2015). Thus, our results suggest substantial biases to similar analyses in

alternative datasets.

        In Section 2, we describe our linked survey and administrative data and report on the extent of

misreporting of binary measures of receipt as well as continuous measures of amounts reported by true

recipients.   In the following sections we then use our linked administrative data to re‐examine

prototypical analyses of low‐income populations. We perform each analysis twice, once using the

survey answers and once using the administrative measures of program receipt and amounts received.

In Section 3, we examine the distribution of government transfers across the income distribution. In

Section 4, we examine the poverty reducing effects of the different transfer programs, while in Section 5

we examine the frequency with which families are missed by the programs. Section 6 discusses the

external validity of our results, while Section 7 offers conclusions.



    2. Data, Methods and the Extent of Measurement Error


        We begin with household survey data from the New York State sample of the 2008‐2013

Current Population Survey Annual Social and Economic Supplement (CPS‐ASEC). Early in the survey year,

usually March, the CPS asks about income in the previous calendar year (the reference year). Income is

collected on many sources including earnings and a large set of government transfer programs. Imputed

values for many in‐kind benefits are also available in the survey files including housing assistance.

        We link administrative records from two sources to the CPS. The first set of administrative

records is from the New York State Office of Temporary and Disability Assistance (OTDA). The records

are monthly payments from SNAP (food stamps), TANF and General Assistance for all individuals in New

York State from 2007 through 2012. In the years since the 1996 welfare reform act, General Assistance

has grown relative to federal cash assistance; in recent years total benefit payments have exceed those

of TANF both nationally and in New York. Besides payment amounts and dates, the files include

                                                      5
addresses and payment types. The records are from actual payments, and appear to be accurate. For

SNAP, for example, the overall total from our administrative records differs from official aggregate

outlays by less than a percent in all years. The individual identifiers have been previously checked by NY

OTDA against social security records.

        The second source of administrative data is records on housing assistance from the Department

of Housing and Urban Development (HUD). These data are from the 2009‐2012 PIC and TRACS data files

and include the programs under HUD jurisdiction. The data contain information on all recipients of

these programs including addresses, number and ages of family members, and rent paid by the tenant

from April 2008 to March 2012. While the data include the market rent for most units since they are

part of voucher programs, the data do not include rent amounts for publicly owned housing units. We

impute market rent for these units using conditional mean imputation within cells formed by five‐digit

ZIP code and household size. Further details on the imputation as well as the data and the definitions

discussed in the remainder of this section are provided in the Data Appendix.

        We match the administrative data to the CPS survey data at the individual level using individual

identifiers created by the Person Identification Validation System (PVS) of the U.S. Census Bureau.3 In

short, the PVS uses the person data (such as address, name, gender, and date of birth) from the

administrative records and survey data to search for a matching record in a reference file derived from

the Social Security Administration Numerical Identification file. The reference file contains all

transactions recorded against a social security number. If a matching record is found, the social security

number of the record from the reference file is transformed into a protected identification key (PIK)4

and attached to the corresponding records in our data. A PIK is obtained for over 99 percent of the

administrative records from each source and 86 percent of the individuals in the CPS. Our unit of


3
 NORC (2011) and Wagner and Layne (2012) discuss the PVS in detail.
4
 There is a one‐to‐one correspondence between PIKs and social security numbers; PIKs are used to protect the
anonymity of individuals in the data.

                                                       6
analysis is a household, so we aggregate the data to the household level. We consider a household to

have a PIK if a PIK was obtained for anyone in the household, which is the case for 91 percent of the

households in the CPS. In order to account for the incomplete matching, we multiply the household

weights by the inverse of the predicted probability of any household member having a PIK (see e.g.

Wooldridge 2007). The coefficients of the Probit model we use to predict these probabilities are

reported in Appendix Table A1. As the high rate of PIK‐linking suggests, our results do not appreciably

change when using the adjusted household weights.

        Our main approach is to consider two measures of income or program receipt: first, a measure

that relies only on survey data, and, second, a measure that substitutes some or all of our administrative

data for the survey data on transfer program receipt. We use the household as the unit of analysis

which is logical given the sharing of resources among members, but this decision also insures a high rate

of data linkage. Since the administrative data have records for each recipient person, we are able to link

the information from a program case to the household if anyone in the household who is recorded as

receiving the benefits of the program has a PIK. The CPS questions regarding SNAP, TANF and General

Assistance refer to receipt during the previous calendar year and we define the administrative variables

accordingly. In our analyses below, we aggregate TANF and General Assistance to public assistance (PA)

because the two programs have the same benefits in New York and cases are allocated to the programs

in significant part to satisfy federal rules rather than based on other distinctions.

        The housing data do not include state and city funded programs as well as those funded by non‐

HUD federal agencies, so they do not cover all types of public housing. Thus, individuals who report

housing assistance in the survey data, but cannot be found in the HUD data may very likely be receiving

benefits through a non‐HUD housing program. Therefore, we consider a household to be a recipient of

housing assistance if it is a recipient according to either the survey or the administrative data. In

contrast to the other transfer programs, the CPS questions on housing assistance refer to the current


                                                      7
month rather than any time over the previous year. Thus, we define receipt of housing assistance in the

linked data based on the current month as well. The amount of the housing subsidy in the CPS is not

reported, but imputed by the U.S. Census Bureau using an adjusted conditional mean imputation based

on the American Housing Survey (AHS). Rather than using recent data, the imputation uses predicted

amounts derived from a model estimated in the 1985 AHS (adjusted for inflation). Most of the predictor

and cell variables in the model are imputed themselves (e.g. market rent in the AHS is imputed from

unsubsidized units and unit size in the CPS is imputed based on family size). The cells for the imputation

of the subsidy are based on very sparse criteria (3 income ranges, 3 apartment sizes and 4 geographic

regions). Thus, the CPS contains at most 9 unique values of the subsidy for each of the four regions, and

the same value is assigned to a family of similar composition and income in New York City and Slippery

Rock, PA.5

        We use these imputed CPS market values for those who report receipt of housing assistance in

the survey, but do not receive assistance from any of the programs in the administrative HUD data and

use the administrative amount for households that are recipients according to the administrative data

or both data sources. In both cases, we calculate annual amounts by multiplying the amount for the

current month by 12.6 The validation information for housing is only available for 2008 to 2011.

Consequently, we limit most analyses to this time period, but are able to include 2007 and 2012 when

analyzing SNAP and public assistance. The safety net in New York is more extensive than in other states,

with receipt rates and amounts received above the national average, particularly for housing assistance.




5
  See Johnson, Renwick and Short (2011) for further discussion of the imputation procedure.
6
  This convention overstates the amount for households that only received assistance for part of the previous year.
For households in the administrative data, we could obtain the exact amount from the administrative data, but this
is not possible for recipients of state‐level programs. However, we are mainly interested in aggregate amounts and
doing so would understate them because we would not include housing assistance received by households that
received assistance, but did not do so in the interview month. As long as there are no seasonal trends in housing
assistance, multiplying the monthly amount by 12 assigns some of the benefits to the wrong households, but yields
correct aggregate amounts.

                                                        8
Consequently, we report several results without housing assistance to focus on the more nationally

comparable parts of the safety net.

        Due to the high match rates and the quality of the administrative data, we believe that the

administrative information on program receipt is accurate. We do not mean to claim that linked

administrative data are free of errors or contain fewer errors than survey data in general. Both

administrative data and data linkage vary substantially in quality. Our records are based on actual

payments, which are monitored well and consequently line up very closely with administrative

aggregates. Other linked data, such as many components of tax records, are based on individual reports,

so they may contain errors just as in surveys. In such cases, it may be better to combine administrative

and survey measures as in Abowd and Stinson (2013), Kapteyn and Ypma (2007) or Meijer, Rohwedder

and Wansbeek (2012). While our administrative variables are not perfect due to rare errors in the

administrative data or false matches, such errors should be infrequent enough to be negligible

compared to the extent of misreporting. Therefore, we argue that the results based on the linked

administrative data are close to true values.

        We first summarize the extent of errors in survey data on program receipt and amounts to

document the need for corrected income distribution estimates. The first three columns of Table 1

report error rates for the full New York sample, while the last three columns show similar rates for those

with income below twice the poverty line, given our focus on those with low incomes. The errors arise

from a combination of misreporting and imputation due to item non‐response, or, for housing

assistance amounts, the absence of a survey question. The first row of Table 1 reports for the three

programs, the false negative rate, i.e. the share of true recipients who do not report receipt in the

survey. In the full sample, the false negative rate is 43, 63, and 36 percent for SNAP, public assistance,

and housing assistance, in order. The error rates are still high, but somewhat lower in the sub‐sample of

those with incomes below twice the poverty line. The full sample false negative rates for SNAP and


                                                    9
public assistance are higher than found thirty years ago by Marquis and Moore (1990) in the Survey and

Income and Program Participation, but lower for SNAP than found recently in Meyer, Goerge and Mittag

(2015) in the CPS for Illinois and Maryland.

        Reported in the second row of the table, the false positive rate, i.e. the share of true

nonrecipients who are recorded as recipients, is much lower for these programs. The rates are 1.9, 0.7,

and 2.8 percent for SNAP, public assistance, and housing assistance, in order. While the rates of false

positives are low, they apply to the much larger pool of non‐recipients, so they constitute a substantial

share of households. As a consequence, the reporting rate, the share of dollars paid out that are

reported in the survey, is substantial higher than the share among true recipients. The false positive

rates are high in this table for two additional reasons. First, a substantial share of households does not

answer the receipt questions and have imputed responses. A large share of the false positives is due to

the educated guesses by the Census Bureau. This is particularly severe for SNAP and public assistance

where imputed responses make up 36 and 43 percent of the false positives. Second, as discussed above,

in the case of housing assistance, we cannot be certain that households who report receipt, but are not

recorded in the HUD data do not receive housing assistance from non‐HUD federal, state or local

programs. Given that there are several such programs in New York, it is likely that the majority of the 2.8

percent false positive rate for housing assistance is due to recipients of other programs.7

        There is even less previous evidence on misreporting of amounts than on misreporting of

receipt. However, our results show that it is a substantial problem as well. The third row of Table 1

shows that more than half of those who correctly report receipt of SNAP commit large errors (more than

$500 in absolute value) in reporting annual amounts. This misreporting of amounts is even worse for

public assistance, where only 12 percent of reporting recipients report an amount that lies within $500


7
 Thus, in the analyses below, we treat the reports of housing assistance that are not recorded in the HUD
administrative data as correct reports, but do not include them here in order to illustrate the difference between
the administrative and the survey data.

                                                        10
of their true amount. As discussed above, the value of housing assistance in the CPS is imputed rather

than reported. Our results show that the differences between the imputations and the true values are

large, understating the true average subsidy by a factor of almost 4. At the individual level, 97.5% of

reporting recipients are off by $500 or more and 75% are off by $4000 or more in the annual amount.

This discrepancy is not surprising given the shortcomings of the imputation procedure discussed above.

It is also in line with the differences Johnson, Renwick and Short (2011) find when comparing aggregate

numbers from HUD and the CPS for the entire U.S.8

         The differences in amounts reported by reporting recipients are not as extreme for SNAP and

public assistance. However, the correlations between true and reported amounts are low and the

standard deviations of the errors are on the order of 75 percent of mean amounts received. This pattern

further underlines that even among those who correctly report receipt, few report correct amounts. On

the positive side, the results show that amounts are understated less on average than receipt. While the

results confirm the finding in Meyer, Mok and Sullivan (2015b) that there is only slight net

underreporting of amounts by true SNAP recipients, our results show that there is substantial

underreporting of amounts of public assistance and housing assistance. We suspect that the substantial

under‐reporting of public assistance amounts is at least partly due to a large share of recipients having a

portion of their payment sent directly to their landlord. Taken together, the findings of substantial

errors in both receipt and amounts received suggest that misreporting has the potential to sharply alter

the analyses described above.

         While microdata based false negative rates are not available for the rest of the country, one can

compare the net reporting rate, the share of dollars paid out for a program that is recorded in the

survey, in New York to that of the rest of the U.S. The state level reporting rates as well as national rates

by year can be found in Meyer, Mok and Sullivan (2015a, 2015b). These rates suggest that New York has

8
 The differences they find are smaller, but the actual subsidies are higher in New York than in the U.S. (yet
imputations are not), and we calculate amounts per household rather than family.

                                                         11
worse reporting of public assistance that the rest of the U.S., but better reporting of SNAP than other

states. In Section 6, we discuss the differences between New York and the rest of the U.S. and the

national applicability of our analyses.

        In the analyses below, we rely on reported pre‐tax money income (in 2012 dollars) as our main

measure of income, since it is the official and most commonly used measure of household resources in

the CPS. However, we repeat all analyses using a supplemental poverty measure (SPM) type income

definition, which includes in‐kind transfers (reported food stamps and imputed market values of housing

assistance, school lunch, Medicaid, Medicare and employer health insurance contributions) and

subtracts taxes (state and federal income and payroll taxes after credits). Our measures of poverty use

the official federal poverty thresholds, which we do not adjust for the SPM income measure. We also

use the poverty thresholds as an equivalence scale to adjust for household size and composition by

reporting results in terms of income relative to the poverty line. The federal poverty thresholds arguably

have several shortcomings and are often considered arbitrary, but in lieu of a universally preferred

measure, they provide a well‐known and easily interpretable metric to analyze economic hardship.

Contrary to un‐linked administrative records, our linked data provide us with the demographic detail

necessary to analyze demographic groups that are known to be particularly affected by poverty.

Therefore, besides analyzing the overall population, we focus on three disadvantaged groups: single

mother headed households (unmarried females with at least one child under 18 present), households

with an elderly member (age 65 or older), and households with a disabled member.9




9
 The survey questions we use to identify disabled individuals were added to the CPS in survey year 2009, so our
analyses of households with a disabled member are restricted to 2008 to 2012.

                                                       12
     3. Program Effects Across the Income Distribution


        We first examine how misreporting affects our understanding of the economic well‐being of

households throughout the income distribution, particularly low income households. We find that

underreporting of government transfers severely understates income of those in deep poverty and

thereby makes poverty look more severe and inequality look worse than it truly is. In addition, while

missing dollars as a share of income fade out quickly as income rises, dollars missing in the survey

remain sizeable higher up in the income distribution. Throughout the income distribution, accounting

for unreported dollars from our four programs makes a larger difference than adding reported amounts

of our two non‐cash programs to cash income.

        Table 2 compares dollars received and reported from SNAP, public assistance and housing

assistance as well as all programs combined in New York State in 2008‐2011 by bins of annual reported

pre‐tax household money income relative to the poverty line.10 The definition of the income bins uses

survey data only, since we are primarily interested in how accounting for misreporting changes our

views of the economic conditions of individuals at different points in the income distribution, based on

the typically available data. Throughout the income distribution, transfer or program dollars reported

are much lower than the administrative numbers. Thus, there is net underreporting in the CPS and the

differences are large enough to greatly skew analyses of the safety net and the well‐being of program

recipients.

        The first row of each panel (for all programs first and then the three programs separately)

contains estimates of program dollars received from the CPS survey data. The second row replaces the

survey reports of program dollars received by the numbers recorded in the administrative data.

Focusing first on those with reported incomes below half the poverty line in column 1 first, the first two


10
  Results using our SPM‐type income measure to define the income bins are in Appendix Table A2 and we discuss
the main differences at the end of this section.

                                                     13
rows of Table 2 show that while $1,553 in program dollars are reported, actual receipt is $2,991. Thus,

measures of income that use the CPS reports of government transfers make individuals in deep poverty

look substantially worse off. And those reported to be in deep poverty are not a small group—they are

5.5 percent of individuals. As shown in the third row, more than $1400 in transfer payments are missing

in the survey data per person. This makes an important difference for a poor family as, shown in the

fourth row, it adds up to 110 percent of their reported cash income.11 Reported cash income can be

found in the second line from the bottom of the table. In other words, the dollars from the three

programs we examine that is not reported in the survey exceeds the amount of cash income that is

reported by this group. The fifth row for all programs as well as the individual programs contains the

dollar reporting rate, i.e. the percentage of dollars received that are reported in the survey which is just

over half at 52 percent for all programs combined for those in deep poverty. To put the magnitude of

missing transfer dollars into context, the last row for all programs combined contains the amount

received from the two non‐cash programs (food stamps and housing assistance) according to the survey

as a proportion of reported cash income. This ratio is 104 percent for those reported to be in deep

poverty, smaller than unreported benefits as a percent of reported cash income.

        Consequently, accounting for misreporting would substantially improve measures of well‐being

of individuals in deep poverty, so individuals at the bottom of the income distribution are less severely

deprived than the survey data suggest. In addition, missing a large share of income of the very poor

makes measures of inequality look worse, particularly since many common measures of inequality are

most sensitive to values in the tails of the income distribution. The finding that the increase in available

resources from adding unreported benefits from the four programs is larger than the reported amount


11
  Note that the base for this percentage includes reported public assistance, but neither food stamps nor housing
assistance. We use this denominator for consistency as the numerator changes, but reported cash income also is
the most commonly used measure of resources in the CPS and is used to compute the official poverty rate. It
therefore provides a good illustration of the magnitude of survey errors relative to the resources we believe a
household to have.

                                                       14
received from the two non‐cash programs suggests that the change in well‐being of the poor when

correcting for misreporting is of comparable to or larger in magnitude than the change when moving

from a pre‐tax money income measure of resources to an SPM‐type definition.

        Repeating the analyses for the disadvantaged subpopulations further underlines that program

under‐reporting in the CPS makes poverty look more severe. Missing dollars per person for households

with an elderly member in deep poverty are slightly lower, by $100, than in the overall population, while

resources of households with a disabled member and single mother headed households are even more

severely understated by the CPS. Missing dollars per person in deep poverty are higher than the overall

average by about 30%, or $500 for both groups. Single mother headed households in deep poverty have

more than $2000 per person in additional income than the CPS suggests from our four programs alone.

Adding these benefits to pre‐tax money income increases their resources by more than 150 percent. In

comparison, adding the survey measures of food stamps and housing assistance only represents an

increase of 135 percent ($1734).

        Misreporting not only understates the importance of transfers overall, but also makes programs

with somewhat higher reporting rates such as the Food Stamp Program appear relatively more

important for low income individuals. For our four programs, survey data understate the support

families in deep poverty receive from the government, because only 52 percent of dollars truly received

are reported. Almost two‐thirds of this effect is due to missing housing assistance and about a quarter is

caused by underreporting of public assistance. Housing assistance makes up a larger share of missing

dollars since individuals in deep poverty receive almost three times as much in housing subsidies

($1509) as public assistance ($567). With annual transfers of $914 per individual in deep poverty, food

stamps are a more important resource than public assistance, but substantially smaller than housing

assistance. However, 85 percent of food stamp dollars received by individuals in deep poverty are

reported in the CPS, while housing and public assistance have low dollar reporting rates in this income


                                                   15
category (38 percent for housing assistance and 34 percent for public assistance). The higher reporting

rate makes the Food Stamp Program appear to be the most important transfer program for those in

deep poverty: In the survey data it accounts for slightly more than half of transfer income received from

any of the programs we analyze. However, the administrative data reveal that it makes up less than a

third of total dollars received and that housing assistance is a more important resource for individuals in

deep poverty.

        Missing program dollars, as a share of income, fall quickly as income rises. For those between

half the poverty line and the poverty line, the unreported dollars add up to 28 percent of reported

income. The decline continues above the poverty line as reported cash income is almost 10 times higher

than missing transfers for those in near poverty (100‐150 percent of the poverty line) and more than 20

times higher for individuals between 150 and 200 percent of the poverty line. As a share of income,

missing dollars become almost negligible after that. This fade out is mainly driven by the rapid increase

in income and reinforced by declining total amounts received from government programs. However,

adding unreported dollars continues to increase available resources by a larger amount than including

reported non‐cash benefits in the income definition throughout the income distribution.

        For the subpopulations, comparing survey and administrative measures of transfer receipt in

higher income bins provides further evidence that underreporting makes the disadvantaged look more

economically deprived than they are. Accounting for misreporting still makes a larger difference for

measures of economic resources of all three disadvantaged subpopulations in higher income bins,

because the decline of missing transfer dollars is slower. The difference is particularly pronounced for

single mothers for whom missing dollars still add up to 10 percent of reported cash income between 150

and 200 percent of the poverty line.

        While unreported dollars make up only a small share of total income, the survey data conceal

that dollars received from government programs per person are still substantial in absolute terms at


                                                    16
higher income levels. For example, individuals in the income category that includes the median

household (300 to 350 percent of the poverty line) receive an average of $299 in transfer payments per

year, only $58 of which are reported in the CPS. Amounts of this magnitude are unlikely to make an

important difference for estimates of the distribution of annual income. However, they are likely to

affect studies of income volatility and transitory poverty if the missing dollars are from underreporting

of short spells of program receipt.12

         For the subpopulations, amounts received are higher and reporting rates comparable, so

substantial absolute dollar amounts are missing in the survey at higher income levels as well. For the

disabled and elderly, more than $2000 per person are missing between 50 and 100 percent of the

poverty line and more than $1600 are missing between 100 and 150 percent. For single mother headed

households below 150 percent of the poverty line, missing dollars are slightly lower, but both received

and missing dollars remain sizeable higher in the income distribution. Even for individuals who live in

single mother headed households that belong to the upper half of the income distribution because their

income exceeds four times the poverty rate, the survey numbers fall short of true benefit receipt by

$414 per person.

         The main reason why missing dollars remain sizeable in higher income ranges is that reporting

rates decline with income. While slightly more than half of transfer dollars received in deep poverty and

almost half (46 percent) of dollars received between 50 and 100 percent of the poverty line are

reported, only 38% of dollars received between 100 and 200 percent of the poverty line and an even

smaller 20% of dollars received higher up is captured by the CPS. Reporting rates that decline with

income not only make simple corrections for misreporting inaccurate, but also imply that transfer

payments become less and less visible in the survey data as income increases. Consequently, studies of

those that have annual incomes well above the poverty line but still receive transfers, such as those with

12
  Besides research on income volatility, this finding is also likely to affect studies of people who supplement
earned income with transfer receipt.

                                                         17
volatile incomes or those who mix work with welfare receipt, are likely to be particularly affected by the

problem of underreporting.

        In summary, we find that underreporting in the CPS causes us to severely underestimate

resources available to the poor and thereby makes poverty look more severe and inequality worse. As a

share of income, the understatement of resources in the survey data fades out at higher income levels,

but does so slower for the elderly, disabled and single mothers. Using the SPM‐type income measure

instead of reported cash income to form the income bins changes our results slightly, but does not

affect the main conclusions. Results are reported in Appendix Table A2. Most notably, both dollars

received and missing dollars are lower up to 150 percent of the poverty line and higher above this

threshold. This result holds both in absolute terms and as a share of cash income. The main reason for

this pattern is that including reported government transfers in the income definition moves many

individuals, particularly transfer recipients, to higher income bins.



    4. Poverty Reduction and Program Effects


        Transfer misreporting not only makes the economic situation of low income households look

worse, but also causes the poverty reducing effect of government transfer programs to be greatly

understated. The CPS is the source of the official poverty rate and thereby an important source of

information that guides anti‐poverty policies. The poverty reduction due to government transfers is one

of the most important indicators used to evaluate the effectiveness of individual transfer programs as

well as overall government policies to reduce economic deprivation. Most of these analyses, regardless

of the indicator of effectiveness they employ, are based on survey data, since other data sources rarely

provide the required family characteristics. Underreporting of transfer receipt therefore makes

government efforts to reduce poverty appear much less effective. Maybe even worse, since measures of




                                                     18
the cost of government programs are usually based on administrative data, under‐reporting in surveys

has an uneven effect on cost‐benefit analyses.

        In the calculations below, we consider anyone to be moved out of poverty by a program if their

non‐program income is below the poverty threshold, but exceeds it when adding benefits received from

the program. These statistics have two well‐known caveats. First, they abstract from behavioral

responses. Second, more than one program may receive credit for moving a given household out of

poverty if they individually raise the household above the poverty threshold. Of course, when we look

at the effect of combinations of programs this double counting is removed. We focus on 2008 to 2011,

because we have administrative data on all programs for these four years. The average poverty rate

excluding the four programs we examine (i.e. according to reported cash income without public

assistance) was 13.6 percent over this time period.

        Table 3 shows that the four programs moved a much larger fraction of people out of poverty

than the CPS suggests. Including reported benefits from the four programs in the income definition

reduces the average poverty rate by 2.8 percentage points, while including benefits according to the

administrative data reduces it by 5.3 percentage points. Thus, when taking underreporting into account

all programs combined move another 2.5 percent of the population out of poverty. Consequently, the

overall poverty reducing effect of the four government transfer programs is almost twice as large as the

CPS indicates. Housing assistance appears particularly more effective when using the administrative

numbers, moving an additional 1.7 percent of individuals out of poverty. It thereby has the largest

poverty reducing effect of the programs we examine. However, this reduction is severely understated in

the survey data, where it is only half as large. Excluding housing assistance, the poverty reduction of

food stamps and public assistance combined was 1.9 percentage points in the CPS and almost 50

percent higher in the linked data (2.8 percentage points). Most of the reduction is due to food stamps

(2.1 percentage points), only 0.5 percentage points are due to public assistance.


                                                      19
        The understatement of poverty reduction is even more pronounced for two of the three

disadvantaged groups, single mother headed households and those with a disabled member, due to

their higher poverty rates. Results are reported in the bottom panel of Table 3 for single mothers and in

Appendix Table A3 for households with an elderly or disabled member. While average poverty rates

according to the base income measure are lower for households with elderly members (10.0 percent),

they are higher for those with a disabled member (19.8 percent) and those headed by single mothers

(37.5 percent). For households with disabled members and those headed by single mothers, both the

poverty reducing effects and the differences between the administrative and the survey measures are

striking. All programs combined account for a 10.2 percentage point reduction in the poverty rate for

disabled households and 18.3 percentage points for single mother headed households. For the latter,

the survey only captures a reduction of 7.3 percentage points. Consequently, a reduction in the poverty

rate of 11.0 percentage points, over 1.5 times that in the reported data, is missed when only using the

survey data.

        As Table 3 shows, the difference for single mother headed households is primarily due to the

large impact of housing assistance, which has poorly reported receipt and poorly imputed amounts. The

poverty reduction due to housing assistance in the CPS is only 0.7 percent, while the administrative

numbers show that the decrease exceeds 7 percentage points, i.e. its poverty reducing effect for single

mothers is 10 times higher than the CPS suggests. Public assistance also has a much larger effect on the

poverty rate for all three subgroups than the effect recorded in the CPS: using the administrative

measure, it is 5 times larger than recorded for households with a disabled member and 6.5 times larger

for households headed by a single mother. As the poverty rate is lower for the elderly, the effect of our

four government programs is lower for them in absolute terms. Yet, they still reduce poverty by 38

percent, while the survey data only suggest a reduction of 24 percent.




                                                   20
           The comparisons above show that the CPS poorly measures the number of people moved across

the federal poverty threshold, but other income cutoffs are also frequently considered and are

informative. The previous section shows that overall reporting rates decline with income, so the fraction

of program effects missed by the CPS is likely to be larger for higher cutoffs and smaller for lower

cutoffs.

           For example, the reduction in deep poverty due to government programs appears lower in the

CPS than it actually is by a smaller amount than the reduction in poverty. On average, 6 percent of

individuals lived in households with base income below 50 percent of the poverty line, i.e. in deep

poverty, between 2008 and 2012. According to administrative measures of transfer receipt, government

transfers account for a smaller reduction in the rate of deep poverty than the poverty rate, as they

reduced it by 3.3 percentage points. In the survey data, the reduction in both rates is similar at 2.5 and

2.8 percentage points for deep poverty and poverty, respectively.

           Reporting rates decline with income, so while government programs become less important at

higher income thresholds, the fraction of their effect that is missed in the CPS also becomes larger. For

example, 22.3 percent of individuals live in near poverty, i.e. in households with base income below 150

percent of the federal poverty line. The four government transfer programs reduce this rate by 4.3

percentage points. Thus, their effect is indeed smaller in absolute numbers than their effect on poverty.

However, only a 1.2 percent decrease in near poverty is captured by the survey reports. Consequently,

the programs move more than 3.5 times as many people out of near poverty than the CPS suggests,

making them look substantially more effective when correcting for misreporting. The CPS indicates that

government transfers only move 0.6 percent of the population across twice the poverty line, while the

linked data reveal that they still move 2.8 percent across this threshold.

           For the disadvantaged subpopulations, the differences between the survey and administrative

effects are often larger, and are most pronounced for single mother headed households. For this group,


                                                    21
of the 11 point reduction in near poverty, only 2 percentage points can be found in the CPS. Similar

results are found at twice the poverty line.

        In addition to the fraction of households below multiples of the poverty line, we also examine

the poverty gap and how much of it is filled by government transfers. The poverty gap, the total dollars

needed to raise all households to the poverty line, has been emphasized by many researchers as better

capturing deprivation (see e.g. Deaton 1997, Ravallion 1996). Correcting the survey data for

underreporting increases the share of the poverty gap filled by the four programs by 44 percent; they

now fill about half of the poverty gap rather than one‐third of the gap. As with the poverty rate, housing

assistance is the most important program as it fills more than a quarter of the poverty gap. Food stamps

are almost as important, filling 23 percent of the poverty gap and public assistance accounts for an 11

percentage point reduction.13 Both housing and public assistance are poorly reported and thereby, with

about half of their effect missing in the survey data, appear much less effective at narrowing the poverty

gap. Food stamps are reported more accurately, but almost a quarter of their effect is missing

nonetheless. Consequently, survey data understate the effect of food stamps, but they overstate the

relative importance of food stamps.

        The survey data also miss a large share of the poverty gap that is filled for the disadvantaged

subgroups. Even though the poverty gap is of similar magnitude for them, government programs fill a

larger share of it for households with disabled members (62 percent) and single mother headed

households (67 percent). Again, the differences between survey and administrative data are striking. For

example, the survey misses a 10 percentage point reduction in the gap due to public assistance and a 22

percentage point reduction due to housing assistance for single mother headed households.

        As well as the level of poverty, policy makers and researchers focus on changes over time. Due

to measurement error, the survey data may not only misrepresent the level of poverty and program

13
  Note that the contributions of the individual programs add up to more than their joint contribution, since
pooling them leads to a larger amount being spent above the poverty line.

                                                        22
effects, but also how they change over time as trends in misreporting magnify or hide trends in poverty.

We focus on how accurately the CPS reflects the effect of the government program expansion during

the great recession. According to our base income measure, the poverty rate grew steadily between

2008 and 2011, from 12.67 percent to 14.42 percent, i.e. a 1.74 percentage point (13.8 percent)

increase. However, when including transfers, the poverty rate only grew by 0.76 percentage points (7

percent) according to survey reports and 0.32 percentage points (4 percent) according to the

administrative measures. Neither of the measures that include transfers suggests an economically large

increase in poverty over the recessionary period,14 but the increase is more than twice as large when

relying on survey data only. Substantively, these numbers show that the expansion of government

benefits successfully dampened the increase of the poverty rate, because the poverty reducing effect of

the programs kept up with its increase: according to the administrative data, the poverty reduction due

to all programs combined increased from 4.5 to 5.9 percentage points between 2008 and 2011.

         The results are overall similar, but less pronounced when looking at our SPM‐type income

measure. This difference is mainly due to the fact that fewer people are poor according to the SPM‐type

income. While the differences between CPS reports and the administrative measures are still large, both

program effects and their understatement in the CPS are smaller overall for the measures we examine.

To summarize, we find that regardless of the measure of poverty used, underreporting makes poverty

look higher in survey data and severely understates the effectiveness of government policies in reducing

economic hardship. Particularly for the disadvantaged subpopulations, government programs have a

strikingly larger effect on measures of poverty than indicated in the data source of official poverty

statistics.




14
  This is in line with Sherman (2011), who relies on a simple imputation of missing program benefits and finds that
programs fill in nearly the entire drop in income in the recession.

                                                        23
    5. Holes in the Safety Net


        Another important criterion to evaluate government transfer programs and the overall safety

net is how well they reach people in need. We find that the safety net reaches far more people in need

than the survey data suggest. Focusing on single mothers, we show that the share that neither work nor

receive any program benefits is often overstated in the CPS by 50 percent or more due to misreporting,

depending on which programs are included. Our results suggest that underreporting of government

programs is likely to make any similar measure of the extreme left tail of the income distribution look

severely worse.

        We focus on single mothers who have little or no income from both work and welfare programs.

This group has been called disconnected single mothers, and has received particular attention in the

literature (Turner et al. 2006, Blank and Kovak 2009, Bitler and Hoynes 2010, Loprest 2011, Loprest and

Nichols, 2011, Turner). For example, Blank and Kovak (2009) find high and rising rates of

disconnectedness. A second reason to focus on single mothers is that the government programs for

which we link data are particularly relevant for them. However, we expect misreporting to make the

safety net look substantially worse for other disadvantaged groups as well, since the consequences of

misreporting loom particularly large in such studies for several reasons. First, the measures of interest

are very sensitive to the common failure to report program receipt in surveys as we discuss further

below. Second, unlinked administrative data usually do not contain the covariates required to isolate

particularly poor populations so these kinds of analyses usually have to rely on survey data. Finally,

reporting rates are known to differ by demographic group (Meyer, George, Mittag 2015), so using

survey data alone to analyze which demographic groups the safety net fails to reach is particularly

problematic. Linking survey data to administrative records at the individual level can overcome these

problems and greatly improve estimates of how many people the safety net fails to reach.




                                                   24
            Table 4 reports the percentage of single mother headed households who are missed by the

safety net according to survey reports and administrative program receipt for 2008 to 2011. The first

row uses the definition from Blank and Kovak (2009), which considers anyone disconnected who does

not work and does not receive TANF, but we also include General Assistance, since much of what used

to be TANF is now under the General Assistance program. In line with their definition, we only consider

single female household heads under age 55 and exclude full‐time students and households with income

higher than twice the poverty line. Following their approach, we initially require no earnings and no

benefits in the left panel of table 4, but then allow up to $2000 in annual earnings and $1000 in benefits

from all programs combined in the right panel.15 Even for the definition of Blank and Kovak in the first

row, which is only affected by failure to report public assistance, the CPS overstates the number of

single mother headed households without earnings and access to the safety net by 34 percent. While

allowing for some earnings and program receipt increases the numbers of households left behind, it

does not decrease the degree to which the survey understates the coverage of the safety net. The

survey continues to overstate the number of households by 33 percent, so that according to the CPS,

slightly more than 5 percent of all single mother headed households seem to fall through the cracks of

the safety net even though they are in fact program recipients, as we see in the administrative data.

            The problem that survey data understate the coverage of the safety net is not due to the

particular definition used by Blank and Kovak, but arises regardless of how we use the survey data to

measure the coverage of the safety net and extreme deprivation. Taking more transfer programs into

account makes the safety net look much more effective at reaching disadvantaged populations, but

does not alleviate the problems caused by underreporting of government transfers. In the remaining

rows of table 4, we consider several definitions of being missed by the safety net, varying what

programs we include. Going down the rows of Table 4 underlines two patterns. First, we see that a large


15
     For comparability with their definition, all dollars are in 2005 dollars.

                                                              25
share of those who neither work nor receive public assistance do not fall through the cracks of the

safety net, because they receive other cash or non‐cash transfers. Including non‐cash benefits

particularly affects the number of households the safety net fails to reach: adding food stamp receipt

reduces the fraction by 75 percent (70 percent for the low income and benefits definition). This

reduction is larger than the effect of including reported receipt of all other cash programs combined.

Accounting for housing assistance as well, reduces the remaining number by over 30 percent.

        Second, regardless of which programs are included in the definition, the third and sixth column

of Table 4 show that the extent to which the safety net fails to reach those in need substantively

depends on whether or not we measure program receipt using the administrative data. Depending on

which additional programs we include, the extent to which the CPS overstates the fraction of single

mothers that neither work nor participate in any of the programs rises to between 50 and 113 percent

in the survey data. The range of overstatement is slightly lower (40 to 82 percent) when including

households with low earnings and low benefit receipt, but the survey data still make the coverage of the

safety net and its ability to reach particularly disadvantaged individuals look worse. In fact, including

additional programs aggravates the problem of underreporting. The fraction of single mothers who

appear to fall through the cracks who actually receive one or more of the government benefits

according to the administrative data, increases as the definition of the safety net becomes more

inclusive. While a quarter of those who appear to be left behind when only considering public assistance

do in fact receive the program, this share rises to more than two‐fifths when including food stamps and

housing assistance. Finally, more than three‐quarters of those who appear to be left behind in the

survey when including all cash and non‐cash transfers are actually covered by one or more of the

programs.16 On the positive side, the CPS correctly reflects the pattern of the time trend. The



16
  When including all cash and non‐cash programs, 0.8% of households are left behind according to the survey and
0.2% according to the administrative measure. These numbers are based on the 2007‐2012 data because the

                                                      26
administrative and the survey data agree on the fact that both the number and the share of single

mothers the safety net fails to reach increased initially during our time period and declined as the

economy improved.

        The exaggeration of the extreme left tail of the income distribution seems to be a common

effect of program misreporting. Other measures that heavily weight these outliers are likely subject to

substantial error. Measures of being in contact with government anti‐poverty agencies necessarily rely

on binary measures of program receipt or agency contact that are likely heavily underreported as well

and therefore prone to be affected in similar ways. However, the problem also applies to other

measures of extreme deprivation that are based on resources rather than program receipt. For example,

the share of individuals with income below $2 per day (e.g. Ravallion, Chen and Sangraula 2008, Shaefer

and Edin, 2013) is likely to be overstated in surveys due to program misreporting. In most cases, receipt

of a single government program is sufficient to move a household out of this category. Thus, the

pervasive failure to report program receipt at all makes any entirely survey based measure of extreme

poverty likely to exaggerate true material deprivation.



    6. Discussion


        While our specific results pertain to New York, a large and important state, over a six year

period, it is very likely that our results are more general. As Table 5 shows, New York is similar

demographically to the rest of the U.S. in terms of age, education, race and the share Hispanic. The

poverty rate in New York and the generosity of its welfare system are higher than in the nation as a

whole. The most striking difference between New York and the rest of the U.S. is the frequency of

public housing receipt. Our results on the importance of under‐reporting of housing assistance receipt



sample size using 2008‐2011 only is too small to allow disclosure. The numbers are not included in table 4 and
understate the difference as housing assistance is not corrected in 2007 and 2012.

                                                        27
and the understatement of the value of the assistance almost certainly overstate these problems for the

rest of the U.S.

        On the other hand, several other studies have found reporting of SNAP to be worse in other

states than what we find for New York. While evidence from validation studies for other states is scarce,

it indicates that reporting is better in New York. Meyer, Goerge and Mittag (2015) find higher rates of

misreporting in the CPS for Illinois and Maryland. Harris (2015) uses validated American Community

Survey data to show that the rates of false negatives are substantially higher in Texas than in New York.

In terms of aggregate comparisons, Meyer, Mok and Sullivan (2015a, 2015b) provide a detailed picture

of dollar reporting rates nationally. As mentioned above, their results underline that New York is not an

outlier in terms of reporting rates, and its survey errors appear better, rather than worse than the

national average.

        More importantly, we are only able to correct for mis‐reporting in four programs, SNAP, TANF,

General Assistance, and housing assistance. Meyer, Mok and Sullivan (2015a) document that the CPS

substantially understates receipt of other benefits including the Earned Income Tax Credit,

unemployment insurance, Supplemental Security Income, Workers’ Compensation, and Social Security

(OASDI). While reporting of OASDI receipt is better than for other programs, dollars received are still

substantially understated in the CPS. Given the size of OASDI and the existing evidence on the extent of

underreporting of OASDI and SSI (e.g. Nicholas and Wiseman 2010), the dollars missed exceed those for

any of the programs analyzed here. Our study would indicate much larger overall effects of unreported

transfers if we were able to include all of these programs. We expect that our results especially

understate the problem of under‐reported transfers to those 65 and older given that we do not have

administrative data on the major programs for this demographic group such as Social Security and

Supplemental Security Income.




                                                   28
   7. Conclusions


       Previous work has documented the under‐reporting of transfers in surveys, but has not directly

showed that it mattered for widely used analyses of important outcomes. The results in this paper show

that using administrative data combined with survey data sharply alters our view of well‐being at the

bottom of the income distribution and the effects of transfer programs. The incomes of those far down

in the distribution, specifically those below half the poverty line, are considerably understated. The

under‐reporting of transfers is less important as income rises, but for some programs such as SNAP and

housing assistance, substantial dollars are under‐reported well above the poverty line. Throughout the

income distribution, correcting for underreporting of our four programs has a larger impact on

household resources than including reported non‐cash benefits from these programs. We also find that

poverty rates are markedly lower and the effects of government programs in reducing poverty are

sharply understated. All of these differences are much larger for disadvantaged groups, in particular

single mother headed households. In addition, we find that the fraction of non‐working single mothers

missed by government transfers is much lower than previously reported.

       Our findings also have implications for the broader issues of social science data quality as well as

measurement error and non‐response in surveys. We provide an example of how the declining quality

of data from household surveys documented in Meyer, Mok and Sullivan (2015b) has important

implications for what we learn from a key survey. The issue goes beyond poverty and inequality in the

Current Population Survey. While the under‐reporting of transfers is pronounced in all major U.S.

household surveys, other variables besides program receipt are mis‐measured such as educational

attainment and health insurance coverage.

       Knowing more about misreporting also allows us to improve surveys. One way to do so is to

improve survey design and interview procedures to reduce the severity of misreporting. A second

approach is to do a better job of imputing missing or mis‐measured variables and missing values due to

                                                   29
item non‐response. The evidence in the case of transfer programs suggests that simple imputation

methods are unlikely to work. The assumptions these methods rely on are unlikely to hold, because

program mismeasurement is non‐classical and related to covariates (Mittag 2013, Meyer and Mittag

2014, Meyer, Goerge and Mittag 2015). A third approach is to link administrative records to improve

data quality or even replace survey responses, which can address both the problem of misreporting and

item non‐response. Besides the substantive contributions of the paper, it demonstrates the value of

linking administrative data to an important and widely used survey dataset. This type of linkage is likely

to be increasingly used to augment and remedy weaknesses of survey data.




                                                   30
                                          References


Abowd, J.M., and Stinson, M.H. 2013. Estimating Measurement Error in Annual Job Earnings: A
Comparison of Survey and Administrative Data. Review of Economics and Statistics, 95(5), 1451–
1467.

Armour, P., Burkhauser, R.V. and Larrimore, J. 2013. Deconstructing Income and Income Inequality
Measures: A Crosswalk from Market Income to Comprehensive Income. American Economic
Review, 101(3), 173‐177.

Ben‐Shalom, Y., Moffitt, R.A., and Scholz, J. K. 2011. An Assessment of the Effectiveness of Anti‐
Poverty Programs in the United States. NBER Working Paper 17042.

Bitler, M., and Hoynes, H. 2010. The State of the Social Safety Net in the Post–Welfare Reform Era.
Brookings Papers on Economic Activity.

Bitler, M., and Hoynes, H. 2013. The More Things Change, the More They Stay the Same: The
Safety Net, Living Arrangements, and Poverty in the Great Recession. NBER Working Paper 19449.

Black, D.A., Sanders, S., and Taylor, L. 2003. Measurement of Higher Education in the Census and
Current Population Survey. Journal of the American Statistical Association, 98(463), 545–554.

Blank, R.M. and Kovak, B.K. 2009. The Growing Problem of Disconnected Single Mothers. In Making
the Work‐Based Safety Net Work Better, C. J. Heinrich and J. K. Scholz, eds. New York: Russell Sage
Press.

Bollinger, C.R. 1998. Measurement error in the Current Population Survey: a nonparametric look.
Journal of Labor Economics, 16(3), 576–94.

Bollinger, C.R. and Hirsch, B. 2006. Match Bias from Earnings Imputation in the Current Population
Survey: The Case of Imperfect Matching. Journal of Labor Economics, 24(3), 483‐519.

Bollinger, C.R., Hirsch, B.T., Hokayem, C.M., & Ziliak, J.P. 2014. Trouble in the Tails: Earnings Non‐
Response and Response Bias across the Distribution. Unpublished Manuscript.

Bound, J., and Krueger, A.B. 1991. The Extent of Measurement Error in Longitudinal Earnings Data:
Do Two Wrongs Make a Right? Journal of Labor Economics, 9(1), 1‐24.

Bound, J., Brown, C., and Mathiowetz, N. 2001. Measurement error in survey data. In: J.J. Heckman
& E.E. Leamer (Eds.), Handbook of Econometrics. Vol. 5, cp. 59, pp. 3705–3843. Amsterdam:
Elsevier.

Chua, T. C., and Fuller, W. A. 1987. A model for multinomial response error applied to labor flows.
Journal of the American Statistical Association, 82(397), 46‐51.




                                              31
Dahl, M., DeLeire, T., and Schwabish, J.A. 2011. Estimates of Year‐to‐Year Volatility in Earnings and
in Household Incomes from Administrative, Survey, and Matched Data. Journal of Human
Resources, 46(4), 750–774.

Davern, M., Call, K.T., Ziegenfuss, J., Davidson, G., Beebe, T.J., and Blewett, L. 2008. Validating
Health Insurance Coverage Survey Estimates: A Comparison of Self‐Reported Coverage and
Administrative Data Records. Public Opinion Quarterly, 241‐259.

Deaton, A. 1997. The Analysis of Household Surveys. Baltimore: Johns Hopkins Press.

Haider, S.J., Jacknowitz, A., and Schoeni, R.F. 2003. Food Stamps and the Elderly: Why Is
Participation so Low? The Journal of Human Resources, 38, 1080–1111.

Gottschalk, P. and Danziger, S.. 2005. Inequality of Wage Rates, Earnings and Family Income in the
United States, 1975–2002 Review of Income and Wealth, 51:2, 231–254.

Hoynes, H.W., Page, M.E. and Stevens, A.H. 2006. Poverty in America: Trends and Explanations.
Journal of Economic Perspectives 20: 47‐68.

Johnson, P., Renwick, T. and Short, K. 2011. Estimating the Value of Federal Housing Assistance for
the Supplemental Poverty Measure. U.S. Census Bureau SEHSD Working Paper #2010‐13.

Kapteyn, A., and Ypma, J.Y. 2007. Measurement error and misclassification: A comparison of survey
and administrative data. Journal of Labor Economics, 25(3), 513‐551.

Klerman, J.A., Davern, M., Call, K.T., Lynch, V., and Ringel, J.D. 2009. Understanding The Current
Population Survey’s Insurance Estimates and The Medicaid ‘Undercount’. Health Affairs, 28(6),
w991‐w1001.

Loprest, P. 2011. Disconnected families and TANF. Washington, DC: The Urban Institute.
Temporary Assistance for Needy Families Program—Research Synthesis Brief.

Loprest, P., and Nichols, A. 2011. Dynamics of being disconnected from work and TANF.
Washington, DC: The Urban Institute.

Meijer, E., Rohwedder, S., and Wansbeek, T. 2012. Measurement error in earnings data: using a
mixture model approach to combine survey and register data. Journal of Business & Economic
Statistics, 30(2).

Meyer, B.D., Goerge, R. and Mittag, N. 2015. Errors in Survey Reporting and Imputation and Their
Effects on Estimates of Food Stamp Program Participation. Unpublished Manuscript.

Meyer, B.D. and Mittag, N. 2014. Misclassification in Binary Choice Models. NBER Working Paper
20509.




                                              32
Meyer, B.D., Mok, W.K.C. and Sullivan, J.X. 2015a. The Under‐Reporting of Transfers in Household
Surveys: Its Nature and Consequences. Harris School of Public Policy Studies, University of Chicago
Working Paper.

Meyer, B.D., Mok, W.K.C. and Sullivan, J.X. 2015b. Household Surveys in Crisis. Journal of Economic
Perspectives, forthcoming, Fall 2015.

Meyer, B.D. and Sullivan, J.X. 2012a. Identifying the Disadvantaged: Official Poverty, Consumption
Poverty, and the New Supplemental Poverty Measure. Journal of Economic Perspectives,
Summer2012, 111‐136.

_____.    2012b. Winning the War: Poverty from the Great Society to the Great Recession.
Brookings Papers on Economic Activity, Fall, 133‐183.

_____. 2011. Further Results on Measuring the Well‐Being of the Poor Using Income and
Consumption. Canadian Journal of Economics.

_____. 2008. Changes in the Consumption, Income, and Well‐Being of Single Mother Headed
Families. American Economic Review, 98(5), 2221‐2241.

    . 2003. Measuring the Well‐Being of the Poor Using Income and Consumption. Journal of
Human Resources, 38:S, 1180‐1220.

Mittag, N. 2013. A Method of Correcting for Misreporting Applied to the Food Stamp Program. US
Census Bureau Center for Economic Studies Paper No. CES‐WP‐13‐2.

Nicholas, J. and Wiseman, M. 2010 Elderly Poverty and Supplemental Security Income, 2002‐2005.
Social Security Bulletin, Vol. 70(2).

NORC. 2011. Assessment of the US Census Bureau's Person Identification Validation System. NORC
at the University of Chicago Final Report presented to the US Census Bureau.

O'Leary, C.J. and Kline, K.J. 2010. Use of Unemployment Insurance and Employment Services by
Newly Unemployed Leavers from Temporary Assistance for Needy Families: Final Report. ETA
Occasional Paper 2010‐07. Washington, D.C.: U.S. Department of Labor.

Parker, J. 2011. SNAP misreporting on the CPS: Does it affect poverty estimates? US Census Bureau
SEHSD Working‐Paper 2012‐1

Partridge, M.D. and Rickman, D.S. 2006. The Geography of American Poverty: Is There a Need for
Place‐Based Policies?. Kalamazoo, MI: W.E. Upjohn Institute for Employment Research.

Poterba, J.M., and Summers, L.H. 1986. Reporting Errors and Labor Market Dynamics.
Econometrica, 54(6), 1319.

Ravallion, M. 1996. Issues in measuring and modeling poverty. Washington, D.C: World Bank
Publications.

                                             33
Ravallion, M., Chen, S. and Sangraula, P. 2008. Dollar a Day Revisited. Research Working Paper no.
4620, World Bank, Washington, DC.

Shaefer, H.L., and Edin, K. 2013. Rising extreme poverty in the United States and the response of
federal means‐tested transfer programs. Social Service Review, 87(2), 250‐268.

Scherpf, E., Newman, C., and Prell, M. 2014. Targeting of Supplemental Nutrition Assistance
Program Benefits: Evidence from the ACS and NY SNAP Administrative Records. Working Paper.

Scholz, J.K., Moffitt, R. and Cowan, B. 2009. Trends in income support. In: Changing poverty,
changing policies, M. Cancian and S. Danziger,eds. Washington, D.C.: Russell Sage Foundation.

Sherman, A. 2009. Safety Net Effective at Fighting Poverty But Has Weakened for the Very Poorest.
Center on Budget and Policy Priorities Policy Report. Washington, D.C.

Sherman, A. 2011. Poverty and Financial Distress Would Have Been Substantially Worse in 2010
Without Government Action, New Census Data Show. Center on Budget and Policy Priorities Policy
Report.

Turek, J., Scheuren, F. Sinclair‐James, B., Ghose, B. and Desale, S. 2009. The Effects of Imputation of
CPS Income and Poverty Series: 1981‐2007. In JSM Proceedings, Section on Survey Research
Methods. Alexandria, VA: American Statistical Association, 1892‐1900.

Turner, L., Danziger, S. and Seefeldt, K. 2006. Failing the Transition from Welfare to Work: Women
Chronically Disconnected from Employment and Cash Welfare. Social Science Quarterly 87(2): 227–
249.

U.S. Census Bureau. 2015a. Income and Poverty in the United States: 2014. P60‐252, September
2015.

U.S. Census Bureau. 2015b. The Supplemental Poverty Measure: 2014. P60‐254, September 2015.

Wagner, D., and Layne, M. 2012. The Person Identification Validation System (PVS): Applying the
Center for Administrative Records Research & Applications' (CARRA) Record Linkage Software. U.S.
Census Bureau.

Wooldridge, J.M. 2007. Inverse Probability Weighted Estimation for General Missing Data
Problems. Journal of Econometrics, 141, 1281–1301.




                                               34
                                               Data Appendix

Adjusting for Missing PIKs

        Less than 10 percent of the households in the CPS data do not have a PIK and therefore cannot

be linked to the administrative data. We adjust the household weights for missing PIKs using inverse

probability weighting (see e.g. Wooldridge 2007). In particular, we define a dummy variable that equals

1 if anyone in the survey household has a valid PIK. We then estimate the probability of a household

having a PIK by estimating a probit model using this variable as the dependent variable and

demographic and economic characteristics of the household and its head as independent variables. The

estimated coefficients are reported in Table A1. Using these coefficients, we calculate the probability

that each household is PIKed and multiply the household weights by the inverse of this probability.


Definitions of Income and Program Variables

        Our main income definition is pre‐tax money income, which includes reported earnings and all

reported cash transfers. The SPM‐type measure adds in‐kind transfers (food stamps and imputed

market values of housing assistance, school lunch, Medicaid, Medicare and employer health insurance

contribution) and subtracts FICA, the federal retirement payroll deduction and federal and state taxes

(accounting for tax credits). We use market values and not fungible values of non‐cash transfers. For

each definition, we use two types of income measures: raw dollar amounts inflation adjusted to 2012

dollars (referred to as dollar income) and dollar amounts divided by the poverty line (referred to as

poverty index income). We use the federal poverty thresholds both for the poverty rate and for the

normalization of income. We define them based on the total number of adults and children in the

household and the age of the householder.

        For all programs, we define receipt at the household level, i.e. a household is a recipient

household if anyone in the household receives a program. The CPS questions for food stamps and public

assistance refer to any receipt in the previous calendar year and we match that definition in the

                                                   35
administrative data. We consider anyone to report housing assistance receipt who reports either

subsidized rent or living in public housing. Both CPS question for housing assistance refer to current

recipt status and we match this definition in the administrative data. Our housing data do not cover all

types of public housing, so we consider a household to be a recipient of housing subsidies if it receives

housing subsidies according to the survey OR the administrative data. If it is a recipient in both sources,

we use the administrative subsidy amount.

        We define the monthly housing subsidy as the difference between the rent of the unit and total

tenant payments as recorded in the administrative data. The rent of the unit is missing for government

owned units (public housing). 29 percent of the households receiving housing subsidies in our linked

data live in publicly owned housing units. Since the administrative records contain very detailed

information, we impute the rent using the average rental payment of housing assistance cases with the

same number of individuals in the same 5‐digit zip code. We calculate annual amounts by multiplying

current receipt by 12 both in the survey and in the administrative data. For households in the

administrative data, we could obtain the exact amount from the administrative data, but this is not

possible for recipients of non‐HUD programs. We thereby overstate the amount for households that

only received assistance for part of the previous year. On the other hand, we miss receipt by those who

receive during the previous year but who were not recipients at the time of interview. As long as there

are no seasonal trends in housing assistance, multiplying the monthly amount by 12 assigns some of the

benefits to the wrong households, but yields correct aggregate amounts.


Definitions of Subpopulations

        When we restrict the analysis to single mothers, we use households headed by an unmarried

female (divorced, widowed, never married) with at least one child under 18 in the household (including

foster, grand and step children). We use a slightly different definition of single mother headed

households in the analyses of who is left behind by the safety net. Following Blank and Kovak (2009), we

                                                    36
exclude full‐time students, those with incomes above twice the poverty line and households headed by

a female younger than 18 or older than 55. Households with an elderly member are households in which

anyone is 65 or older. A household is included in the disabled subsample if anyone in the household

gave a positive answer to any of the 6 disability questions. Since these questions are first included in the

2009 CPS, this subsample starts in reference year 2008.




                                                    37
                                                                   Table 1
                                   Survey Errors in Transfer Receipt Reporting, CPS New York , 2008-2011
                                                                               Full Sample                                     Income < 2X Poverty Line
                                                                                  Public    Housing                                   Public     Housing
Error Type                                        Sample              SNAP      Assistance Assistance                       SNAP Assistance Assistance
False negatives                          True recipients                42.8%        63.3%       35.6%                       33.0%       56.8%        29.6%
False positives                          True non-recipients             1.9%          0.7%       2.8%                        7.6%        2.0%         8.0%
Absolute error in amount >$500           Recipients who report         53.22%       87.89%     97.50%                       52.66%      88.27%      97.57%
Mean of true amount (annual)             Recipients who report         $3,389       $5,213    $12,000                       $3,499      $5,317     $12,014
Mean of reported amount (annual)         Recipients who report         $3,170       $3,152      $3,081                      $3,262      $3,004       $3,230
SD of error in amount                    Recipients who report         $2,392       $4,619      $8,776                      $2,341      $4,384       $8,657
Correlation true and reported amount     Recipients who report            0.55         0.22       0.07                         0.57        0.26        0.08
Note: Estimation uses households with at least one PIKed member only, weights are adjusted for PIK rates. SNAP and public assistance amounts are average annual
receipt per household, housing assistance amounts are annualized from monthly amounts per household. False positives for housing assistance may be recipients of
non-HUD housing programs and therefore should not necessarily be interpreted as survey errors.
                                                                       Table 2
               Survey and Administrative Amounts Received by Program, by Annual Reported Pre-Tax Money Income Divided by Poverty Line,
                                                              CPS NY Sample, 2008-2011
                                                                       Categories of Annual Reported Income Relative to Poverty Line
                                                        < 50%    50-100% 100-150% 150-200% 200-250% 250-300% 300-350% 350-400%                                                   >400%
                                                                                         All Programs Combined
Dollars Received per Person Survey                       $1,553    $1,302        $612     $369       $194       $80         $58       $41                                             $14
Dollars Received per Person Admin                        $2,991    $2,850      $1,630     $970       $632      $429        $299      $189                                             $98
Dollars Missing per Person in Survey                     $1,438    $1,548      $1,018     $600       $439      $348        $241      $148                                             $84
... as Share of Reported Cash Income                     110.2%     28.3%       11.6%     4.9%        2.8%     1.9%        1.1%      0.6%                                            0.2%
Net Dollar Reporting Rate                                   52%       46%         38%      38%        31%       19%         19%       22%                                            14%
Reported Non-cash Benefits (% of Cash Income)            104.0%     21.5%        6.3%     2.4%        1.2%     0.4%        0.2%      0.1%                                            0.0%
                                                                                               Food Stamps
Dollars Received per Person Survey                         $780      $669        $337     $174         $92      $30         $28       $16                                              $6
Dollars Received per Person Admin                          $914      $884        $464     $306       $209      $101        $100       $63                                             $31
Dollars Missing per Person in Survey                       $135      $214        $127     $131       $117       $71         $72       $47                                             $25
... as Share of Reported Cash Income                      10.3%      3.9%        1.4%     1.1%        0.8%     0.4%        0.3%      0.2%                                            0.0%
Net Dollar Reporting Rate                                   85%       76%         73%      57%        44%       30%         28%       25%                                            18%
                                                                                             Public Assistance
Dollars Received per Person Survey                         $193      $119         $48       $78        $13        $8         $3        $7                                              $2
Dollars Received per Person Admin                          $567      $306         $91       $90        $30      $33         $21       $17                                             $11
Dollars Missing per Person in Survey                       $373      $187         $43       $12        $16      $25         $18       $10                                              $9
... as Share of Reported Cash Income                      28.6%      3.4%        0.5%     0.1%        0.1%     0.1%        0.1%      0.0%                                            0.0%
Net Dollar Reporting Rate                                   34%       39%         53%      87%        45%       24%         16%       42%                                            19%
                                                                                            Housing Assistance
Dollars Received per Person Survey                         $578      $510        $218     $117         $88      $39         $27       $18                                              $6
Dollars Received per Person Admin                        $1,509    $1,660      $1,076     $574       $394      $294        $179      $109                                             $57
Dollars Missing per Person in Survey                       $932    $1,150        $858     $457       $306      $255        $152       $91                                             $50
... as Share of Reported Cash Income                      71.4%     21.0%        9.8%     3.7%        2.0%     1.4%        0.7%      0.3%                                            0.1%
Net Dollar Reporting Rate                                   38%       31%         20%      20%        22%       13%         15%       16%                                            11%

Share of Individuals                                                     5.5%          7.9%         8.7%         8.0%          8.4%         8.2%          7.3%         6.2%         39.8%
Income per Individual ($)                                                1305          5474         8782        12240         15505        18661         21959        25964         55973
Number of Household Observations                                          689          1045         1143         1000          1001          972           864          750          4682
Note: Estimation uses households with at least one PIKed member only, weights are adjusted for PIK rates. Income categories are defined based on pre-tax money income, poverty thresholds
are the official poverty thresholds. Dollars received are 2012 dollars, but not adjusted for family size.
                                                                                      Table 3
                             Reduction in Poverty, Deep Poverty and Near Poverty due to Transfer Programs According to Survey and Administrative Data,
                                                                            CPS NY Sample, 2008-2011
                                                                                        Entire Population

                                         Deep Poverty (baseline: 6.0% )                             Poverty (baseline: 13.65%)                             Near Poverty (baseline: 22.3%)
                                                                          % of                                                     % of                                                     % of
                                   Survey      Admin       Difference    Survey            Survey      Admin       Difference     Survey             Survey      Admin      Difference     Survey
All Programs Combined                 2.48%       3.33%         0.85%      34.28%             2.79%       5.29%         2.50%       89.7%              1.18%       4.33%          3.14%    265.48%
SNAP                                  1.38%       1.57%         0.19%      13.68%             1.59%       2.09%         0.50%       31.2%              0.57%       1.06%          0.48%     84.10%
Public Assistance                     0.42%       0.89%         0.47%    112.75%              0.19%       0.47%         0.28%      149.7%              0.15%       0.24%          0.09%     59.53%
Housing Assistance                    0.76%       1.84%         1.08%    142.23%              0.86%       2.56%         1.71%      199.1%              0.31%       2.43%         2.12%     674.00%
Public Assistance and SNAP            1.85%       2.39%         0.54%      29.35%             1.89%       2.75%         0.86%       45.2%              0.74%       1.42%         0.67%      90.45%
                                                                               Single Mother Headed Households

                                         Deep Poverty (baseline: 21.4%)                             Poverty (baseline: 37.5%)                              Near Poverty (baseline: 51.5%)

                                                                          % of                                                     % of                                                     % of
                                   Survey      Admin       Difference    Survey            Survey      Admin       Difference     Survey            Survey       Admin      Difference     Survey
All Programs Combined               11.52%      15.93%          4.40%      38.23%             7.30%      18.34%        11.04%     151.20%              2.31%      11.43%         9.12%     394.07%
SNAP                                  6.59%       6.77%         0.17%       2.65%             3.47%       5.00%         1.52%      43.85%              1.42%       3.39%         1.97%     139.20%
Public Assistance                     2.25%       4.71%         2.46%    109.46%              0.28%       1.81%         1.53%     548.28%              0.19%       1.04%         0.85%     436.21%
Housing Assistance                    3.53%       9.72%         6.19%    175.09%              0.71%       7.68%         6.98%     986.70%              0.54%       4.89%          4.35%    811.13%
Public Assistance and SNAP            8.79%     10.98%          2.19%      24.92%             4.90%       8.32%         3.41%      69.62%              1.61%       4.59%          2.98%    184.73%
Note: N=12,146 households for the entire population, 1072 for single mothers. Poverty rate is share of individuals in households with income below thresholds. The baseline poverty rates use pre-tax
cash income excluding public assistance as the income definition. Poverty thresholds are the official poverty thresholds, individuals in households below 50% of the threshold are in deep poverty,
those below 150% in near poverty.
                                                         Table 4
   Single Mother Headed Households without Program Receipt or Earnings According to Survey and Administrative Data, CPS NY
                                                   Sample, 2008-2011
                                                                 No earnings and program receipt                        Low earnings and program receipt
                                                                                        % Over-                                                % Over-
Included Programs                                                Survey     Admin      statement                         Survey    Admin      statement
Public Assistance only                                              17.1%           12.8%              34%                   22.8%         17.1%               33%
Public Assistance and Food Stamps                                     5.3%           3.2%              68%                    7.4%           5.1%              46%
Public Assistance, Food Stamps and Housing                            3.6%           1.7%            113%                     5.1%           3.0%              71%
All Cash Transfers                                                    5.4%           3.6%              50%                    9.8%           7.0%              40%
All Cash Transfers and Food Stamps                                 numbers too small to disclose                              3.5%           1.9%              82%
Note: N=578. All definitions restrict the sample to households headed by an unmarried female with at least one own, grand, related or foster child present in the
household. In column 2-4, we consider households that have no earnings and receive none of the programs in the first 3 columns as left behind, columns 5-7 also
include those with yearly earnings less than $2000 and combined program receipt of less than $1000 (2005 dollars). "All Cash Transfers" includes unemployment
compensation, Social Security, SSI, PA, Education Assistance, Worker's compensation, Veteran's payments, Survivor income, disability income, retirement income,
child benefits, alimony and financial assistance. Estimation uses individuals in household with at least one PIKed member only, weights are adjusted for PIK rates.
                          Table 5
   Reported Transfer Program Receipt and Demographics,
                U.S. v. NY, 2007-2012 CPS

Transfer Receipt                                   U.S.           NY
Any Program Receipt Rate                           13.06%         16.04%
  Average Received ($)                               $432           $687
SNAP Receipt Rate                                  11.17%         12.43%
  Average Received ($)                               $264           $344
Public Assistance Receipt Rate                      2.12%          2.78%
  Average Received ($)                                 $49           $73
Housing Assistance Receipt Rate                     3.67%          7.50%
  Average Received ($)                               $118           $270

Demographics                                       U.S.           NY
Age under 18                                       24.42%         22.72%
Age 18-39                                          29.56%         30.28%
Age 40-64                                          33.06%         33.56%
Education Less than High School                    34.52%         33.16%
Education High School                              23.08%         23.19%
Education Some College                             21.46%         19.55%
Black                                              12.75%         17.22%
Other Non-white                                     8.05%          9.79%
Hispanic                                           16.27%         17.37%
Poverty Rate                                       12.26%         13.85%

Note: Average received is unconditional annual dollars. Housing assistance
is CPS imputed market values of reduced rent and public housing. For the
demographics, the omitted category is "65 and older" for age, "college
degree or more" for education and "white" for ethnicity.
Table A1 – The Determinants of a Household having a PIK, CPS New York, 2007-2012
                                                        Coefficients        Marginal Effects
Single, no children                                     -0.4309***             -0.0672***
                                                          (0.0709)               (0.0112)
Single, with children                                      -0.0020                -0.0003
                                                          (0.0727)               (0.0113)
Multiple adults, no children                            -0.2032***             -0.0317***
                                                          (0.0608)               (0.0095)
Number of members under 18                                0.0483*                0.0075*
                                                          (0.0268)               (0.0042)
Number of members 18 or older                             0.0614**               0.0096**
                                                          (0.0247)               (0.0038)
Age 16-29                                                  -0.0678                -0.0106
                                                          (0.0494)               (0.0077)
Age 30-39                                               -0.1113***             -0.0174***
                                                          (0.0423)               (0.0066)
Age 50-59                                               0.1672***              0.0261***
                                                          (0.0451)               (0.0070)
Age 60-69                                               0.3932***              0.0613***
                                                          (0.0553)               (0.0086)
Age 70 or more                                          0.3180***              0.0496***
                                                          (0.0587)               (0.0092)
Less than high school                                    -0.1144**              -0.0178**
                                                          (0.0481)               (0.0075)
High School graduate                                    -0.1637***             -0.0255***
                                                          (0.0379)               (0.0059)
Complete graduate and beyond                                0.0010                 0.0002
                                                          (0.0410)               (0.0064)
Hispanic                                                -0.2106***             -0.0328***
                                                          (0.0380)               (0.0059)
Black non-hispanic                                      -0.1328***             -0.0207***
                                                          (0.0392)               (0.0061)
Other non-hispanic                                      -0.4917***             -0.0767***
                                                          (0.0454)               (0.0070)
Unemployed                                              0.2085***              0.0325***
                                                          (0.0761)               (0.0119)
Not in Labor Force                                      -0.1034***             -0.0161***
                                                          (0.0389)               (0.0061)
Household income/poverty line                           0.0214***              0.0033***
                                                          (0.0062)               (0.0010)
Anyone in household Disabled                                0.1726                 0.0269
                                                          (0.1281)               (0.0200)
Rural                                                     0.1042*                0.0163*
                                                          (0.0560)               (0.0087)
Recipient of Housing assistance (CPS)                   0.3103***              0.0484***
                                                          (0.0553)               (0.0086)
Linear trend in CPS survey year                             0.0121                 0.0019
                                                          (0.0081)               (0.0013)
Constant                                                1.3505***
                                                          (0.0974)

Observations                                               19,852                 19,852
Note: Dependent variable is a dummy whether anyone in the household was assigned a PIK.
All models use household weights. Robust standard errors in parentheses (using the delta
method in column 2). All analyses conducted using household weights. The unreported
omitted family type is multiple adults with children, the age category is 40-49, the education
category is some college, the race group is non-Hispanic white, the employment category is
employed. *** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1
                                                                       Table A2
                  Survey and Administrative Amounts Received by Program, by Annual Reported SPM-type Income Divided by Poverty Line,
                                                              CPS NY Sample, 2008-2011
                                                                        Categories of Annual Reported Income Relative to Poverty Line
                                                        < 50%     50-100% 100-150% 150-200% 200-250% 250-300% 300-350% 350-400%                                                     >400%
                                                                                           All Programs Combined
Dollars Received per Person Survey                         $275       $721       $809       $546        $477     $407       $387      $256                                               $84
Dollars Received per Person Admin                          $954     $2,031     $1,674     $1,358      $1,230     $996       $899      $671                                              $251
Dollars Missing per Person in Survey                       $679     $1,310       $865       $812        $752     $589       $512      $415                                              $167
... as Share of Reported Cash Income                      67.4%      23.2%      10.0%       6.8%        4.9%     3.1%       2.2%      1.6%                                              0.4%
Net Dollar Reporting Rate                                   29%        35%        48%        40%         39%      41%        43%       38%                                               33%
Reported Non-cash Benefits (% of Cash Income)             27.0%      11.3%       7.6%       4.1%        2.7%     1.8%       1.6%      0.9%                                              0.2%
                                                                                                 Food Stamps
Dollars Received per Person Survey                         $167       $383       $412       $299        $261     $179       $186      $108                                               $43
Dollars Received per Person Admin                          $335       $576       $542       $478        $389     $286       $238      $175                                               $75
Dollars Missing per Person in Survey                       $168       $193       $131       $179        $128     $107        $52       $67                                               $32
... as Share of Reported Cash Income                      16.7%       3.4%       1.5%       1.5%        0.8%     0.6%       0.2%      0.3%                                              0.1%
Net Dollar Reporting Rate                                   50%        66%        76%        63%         67%      63%        78%       62%                                              58%
                                                                                               Public Assistance
Dollars Received per Person Survey                            $3       $82       $146        $65         $56      $68        $16       $16                                                $5
Dollars Received per Person Admin                          $146       $293       $276       $172        $134     $110        $69       $39                                               $17
Dollars Missing per Person in Survey                       $143       $211       $129       $107         $78      $43        $53       $22                                               $13
... as Share of Reported Cash Income                      14.2%       3.7%       1.5%       0.9%        0.5%     0.2%       0.2%      0.1%                                              0.0%
Net Dollar Reporting Rate                                    2%        28%        53%        38%         42%      61%        23%       42%                                              27%
                                                                                             Housing Assistance
Dollars Received per Person Survey                         $105       $256       $245       $182        $157     $154       $184      $132                                               $36
Dollars Received per Person Admin                          $473     $1,163       $856       $708        $706     $600       $592      $457                                              $159
Dollars Missing per Person in Survey                       $368       $906       $612       $526        $549     $446       $408      $325                                              $123
... as Share of Reported Cash Income                      36.5%      16.0%       7.1%       4.4%        3.6%     2.4%       1.8%      1.2%                                              0.3%
Net Dollar Reporting Rate                                   22%        22%        29%        26%         22%      26%        31%       29%                                               23%

Share of Individuals                                                       1.5%         2.1%          5.2%         8.4%         12.0%        10.8%         10.8%          9.3%        40.0%
Income per Individual ($)                                                  1008         5654          8615        11885         15416        18810         23069         26429        45804
Number of Household Observations                                            217          270           600          972          1462         1309          1378          1182         4756
Note: Estimation uses households with at least one PIKed member only, weights are adjusted for PIK rates. Income categories are defined based on SPM-type income (after taxes, including in-
kind transfers), poverty thresholds are the official poverty thresholds. Dollars received are 2012 dollars, but not adjusted for family size.
                                                                                       Table A3
                               Reduction in Poverty, Deep Poverty and Near Poverty due to Transfer Programs According to Survey and Administrative Data,
                                                       CPS NY Sample, 2008-2011, Households With an Elderly or Disabled Member
                                                                                 Households With an Elderly Member

                                          Deep Poverty (baseline: 3.1% )                                Poverty (baseline: 10.0%)                                Near Poverty (baseline: 21.0%)
                                                                            % of                                                                                                                   % of
                                    Survey      Admin       Difference     Survey            Survey      Admin       Difference     % of Survey            Survey      Admin       Difference     Survey
All programs Combined                 1.06%        1.28%         0.22%      20.71%             2.35%        3.84%         1.48%          62.89%               1.59%       5.69%         4.10%     257.55%
SNAP                                  0.50%        0.58%         0.08%      15.93%             1.50%        1.72%         0.22%          14.94%              0.86%        1.45%         0.59%      68.66%
                                                                                                                                                1)
Public Assistance                     0.06%        0.29%         0.24%    429.45%              0.00%        0.16%         0.16%                               0.05%       0.00%         -0.05% -100.00%
Housing Assistance                    0.60%        0.96%         0.36%      59.61%             1.27%        2.61%         1.34%         105.09%               0.40%       4.19%         3.79%     952.78%
Public Assistance and SNAP            0.58%        0.78%         0.20%      34.28%             1.53%        1.98%         0.44%          28.87%              0.90%        1.49%         0.58%      64.51%
                                                                                 Households With a Disabled Member

                                          Deep Poverty (baseline: 7.3%)                                 Poverty (baseline: 19.8%)                                Near Poverty (baseline: 32.0%)

                                                                            % of                                                                                                                   % of
                                    Survey      Admin       Difference     Survey            Survey      Admin       Difference     % of Survey            Survey      Admin       Difference     Survey
All programs Combined                 3.93%        5.09%         1.16%      29.40%             5.86%      10.22%          4.37%          74.53%              2.44%        8.83%         6.39%     262.37%
SNAP                                  2.02%        2.39%         0.37%      18.17%             2.77%        3.84%         1.08%          38.89%              1.20%        1.71%         0.51%      42.82%
Public Assistance                     0.63%        1.34%         0.71%    112.58%              0.24%        1.22%         0.98%         408.55%              0.09%        0.52%         0.43%     480.25%
Housing Assistance                    1.13%        2.75%         1.63%    144.63%              3.02%        5.69%         2.67%          88.65%              0.73%        5.37%         4.64%     631.64%
Public Assistance and SNAP            2.69%        3.53%         0.83%      30.99%             3.26%        5.16%         1.91%          58.58%               1.29%       2.35%         1.06%      82.33%
Note: N=2,919 households for the elderly, 2,168 for the disabled. Poverty rate is share of individuals in households with income below thresholds. The baseline poverty rates use pre-tax cash income
excluding public assistance as the income definition. Poverty thresholds are the official poverty thresholds, individuals in households below 50% of the threshold are in deep poverty, those below 150% in
near poverty.
1)
   The poverty reduction according to the survey is 0%, so the true reduction as a percentage of the survey reduction is not defined due to the required division by 0.
