                                NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




THE WELFARE GAINS FROM MACRO-INSURANCE AGAINST NATURAL DISASTERS

                                        Eduardo Borensztein
                                         Eduardo Cavallo
                                          Olivier Jeanne

                                        Working Paper 21674
                                http://www.nber.org/papers/w21674


                      NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                               1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                 Cambridge, MA 02138
                                     October 2015




This paper was completed while Jeanne visited the Research Department of the IMF, whose hospitality
is gratefully acknowledged. The views expressed herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily
reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

At least one co-author has disclosed a financial relationship of potential relevance for this research.
Further information is available online at http://www.nber.org/papers/w21674.ack

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.

© 2015 by Eduardo Borensztein, Eduardo Cavallo, and Olivier Jeanne. All rights reserved. Short sections
of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full
credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
The Welfare Gains from Macro-Insurance Against Natural Disasters
Eduardo Borensztein, Eduardo Cavallo, and Olivier Jeanne
NBER Working Paper No. 21674
October 2015
JEL No. F36,G15,G22

                                           ABSTRACT

This paper uses a dynamic optimization model to estimate the welfare gains that a small open economy
can derive from insuring against natural disasters with catastrophe (CAT) bonds. We calibrate the
model by reference to the risk of earthquakes, floods and storms in developing countries. We find
that the countries most vulnerable to these risks would find it optimal to use CAT bonds for insurance
only if the cost of issuing these bonds were significantly smaller than it is in the data. The welfare
gains from CAT bonds range from small to substantial depending on how insurance affects the country's
external borrowing constraint. The option of using CAT bonds may bring a welfare gain of several
percentage points of annual consumption by improving external debt sustainability. These large gains
disappear if the country can opportunistically default on its external debt.


Eduardo Borensztein                               Olivier Jeanne
Inter-American Development Bank                   Department of Economics
1300 New York Avenue N.W.                         Johns Hopkins University
Washington D.C. 20577                             454 Mergenthaler Hall
borensztein@iadb.org                              3400 N. Charles Street
                                                  Baltimore, MD 21218
Eduardo Cavallo                                   and NBER
Inter-American Development Bank                   ojeanne@jhu.edu
1300 New York Ave NW
Room SE-1064
Washington, DC 20005
cavalloe@iadb.org
    1     Introduction
    Countries can insure themselves against the macroeconomic consequences of natural disasters
    in several ways. They can accumulate foreign assets as precautionary savings to be spent
    in the event of disasters. They can rely on crisis loans, aid and relief from the international
    community. Finally, they can take insurance, for example with catastrophe (CAT) bonds.
    Natural disasters is one of the risks that can be insured with a minimal degree of moral
    hazard as its occurrence is exogenous to the insuree’s actions.1 Although the market for
    insurance instruments against natural disasters has developed significantly, it remains small
    relative to the potential demand for insurance.
        This paper measures the welfare gains from macroeconomic insurance against natural
    disasters. We use a dynamic optimization model of a small open economy populated by a
    representative agent. The agent’s income may be reduced by natural disasters. We assume
    that the agent may issue noncontingent debt as well as CAT bonds whose principal is ex-
    tinguished in the event of a natural disaster. We investigate the conditions under which the
    representative agent finds it optimal to issue CAT bonds and the implied welfare gains. In
    particular we derive closed-form expressions for upper bounds on the cost of insurance (the
    pure risk premium on CAT bonds) such that the country chooses to insure in the short run
    and in the long run.
        The model is then calibrated by looking at the average impact of natural disasters (earth-
    quakes, floods and storms) on growth in a sample of developing countries. We find that only
    the largest disasters have a significant impact on growth but that this impact is large. A
    large disaster lowers growth by 4 percent for one year and induces a permanent fall in the
    level of output (which exhibits no tendency to catch up with the pre-disaster trend). The
    probability of such a large disaster is between 2 and 5 percent per year for the most exposed
    countries.
        The main results from our calibrated model are as follows. First, we find that the country
    is willing to issue CAT bonds if and only if the pure risk premium on CAT bonds is smaller
    than a fraction of a percentage point. By contrast, the available empirical evidence suggests
    that the pure risk premium on CAT bonds is between 1 and 4 percent. It may not seem
    surprising, then, that we see little issuance of CAT bonds in the data.
        Second, we estimate the welfare gains from CAT bonds assuming that they can be issued
    at a zero risk premium—as an upper bound for the welfare gains that could be reaped from
    developing large and liquid markets for catastrophe insurance. We find that these welfare
    gains are generally moderate, although they may be substantial under some conditions. The
    welfare gains come from two channels. The first benefit from insurance is to smooth the
    country’s income. We find this benefit to be fairly small—it amounts to a fraction of a
    percentage point of annual consumption.
        The second, more indirect, benefit from insurance is that it may allow the country to
    borrow more. In the baseline version of our model we assume that the country can issue
    nondefaultable debt subject to a limit on the fraction of its output that it can pledge in
    repayment to foreign lenders. With noncontingent debt the maximum amount that the
1
    Moral hazard may distort preventive policies to mitigate the impact of disasters (for example, the effectiveness
    of antiseismic building codes). This type of moral hazard can be addressed by making the insurance contract
    contingent on measurable exogenous characteristics of the disaster rather than on its impact.


                                                           2
    country can promise to repay with certainty is the maximum amount that it would repay in
    the worst case scenario where it is hit by a natural disaster in every period in the future. By
    contrast with CAT bonds the country can promise to repay amounts that are contingent on
    whether there is a disaster or not, and can promise to repay more if there is no disaster. As a
    result, the option to issue CAT bonds improves debt sustainability.2 Under our benchmark
    calibration, CAT bonds allow the country to increase its external borrowing from about 30
    percent of GDP to more than 60 percent of GDP. The resulting welfare gain is substantial
    and can amount to the equivalent of a several percentage points of consumption if the
    representative agent is impatient. This result is however sensitive to how the country’s
    external borrowing constraint is modeled. If (perhaps more realistically) the borrowing
    constraint is determined by the risk that the country opportunistically default on its debt,
    CAT bonds have a relatively small impact on the country’s borrowing constraint and on
    welfare.
        This paper is at the intersection of several lines of literature. This paper is related, first,
    to the branch of the literature on risk management that focuses on insurance against natural
    disasters. This literature addresses issues faced by the actors in the financial and insurance
    industry, such as the optimal design and pricing of CAT bonds, or their complementarity
    with or substitutability to insurance contracts. For example, Härdle and Cabrera (2010)
    examine the calibration of a CAT bond for earthquakes sponsored by the Mexican govern-
    ment. Borensztein, Cavallo and Valenzuela (2009) show how catastrophic risk insurance can
    improve the sustainability of government debt in the case of Belize. Lee and Yu (2007)
    examine how a resinsurance company can increase the value of a reinsurance contract and
    reduce its default risk by issuing CAT bonds. Barrieu and Loubergé (2009) point out that
    downside risk aversion and ambiguity aversion may have contributed to the limited success
    of CAT bonds. Cummins (2008) and Cummins and Mahul (2009) provide facts about the
    CAT bonds markets that will be useful to calibrate our model.
        This paper is more closely related to contributions that estimate the welfare gains from
    financial innovations in dynamic optimizing models of a small open economy hit by macroe-
    conomic shocks. For example, Borensztein, Jeanne and Sandri (2013) quantify the welfare
    gains from hedging instruments for commodity exporters subject to commodity price risk.
    Caballero and Panageas (2008) show, in the context of a dynamic general equilibrium model,
    how optimal hedging strategies can help a country to save on precautionary savings against
    sudden stops in capital flows. Hatchondo and Martinez (2012) study the welfare gains from
    introducing GDP-indexed bonds in an optimizing model of sovereign debt and default. This
    paper is the first, to our knowledge, to provide estimates of the welfare gains from catastro-
    phe insurance in a stochastic dynamic optimizing model of a country exposed to the risk of
    natural disasters.
        Barro (2009) finds that the welfare cost of rare disasters is very large, amounting to about
    20 percent of average annual income. We find that the welfare gains from insurance against
    natural disasters are much smaller. The difference begs explanation. The first reason is that
    our natural disasters have a significantly smaller economic impact than the economic disasters
    in Barro’s study. The natural disasters in our sample are associated with a permanent fall in

2
    Interestingly, this benefit occurs even if the country chooses not to issue CAT bonds in equilibrium. The
    mere knowledge that it could is sufficient to relax the external borrowing constraint.


                                                       3
    output of about 4 percent, whereas Barro’s economic disasters lead to a 29 percent permanent
    fall in output on average. Second, Barro assumes Epstein-Zin preferences with a larger level
    of risk aversion than we do here. As a result, the welfare cost of the natural disaster risk is
    equivalent to a permanent consumption loss of 1.3 percent in our model, much lower than
    in Barro’s. Furthermore the potential welfare gains from CAT bonds are smaller than the
    welfare loss from disasters for two reasons. First, CAT bonds allow countries to smooth
    their expenditures against falls in income caused by the disasters but they do not remove
    the income risk itself. Second, CAT bonds are not introduced in a vacuum but in a situation
    where countries can already insure by borrowing and lending abroad. Our estimates capture
    the welfare gains that CAT bonds bring on top of precautionary savings.
        The paper is structured as follows. Section 2 presents some stylized facts about the
    impact of natural disasters on output and growth. Section 3 presents the baseline model.
    Section 4 calibrates the model and measures the welfare gains from CAT bonds. Section 5
    presents two extensions of the model and section 6 concludes.


    2    Stylized Facts
    Natural disasters have important human and economic consequences. Although it is known
    that these events typically involve huge output losses in their immediate aftermath, espe-
    cially in developing countries, there is little research on whether the output losses are fully
    recovered.3
        Economic theory offers competing hypotheses as to the possible long-run impact of nat-
    ural disasters on output and growth. Neoclassical growth models a la Solow (1956) would
    predict lower growth at the time of a disaster that reduces the stock of capital, followed
    by higher growth rates as the economy reverts to its trend. The loss of life associated with
    the natural disaster may reduce output permanently if the disaster has a permanent impact
    on population, but it does not necessarily reduce output per capita. Models rooted in a
    Shumpeterian view of recessions would predict that the output collapse in the aftermath of
    a catastrophic event may unleash the forces of creative destruction in the economy, cleansing
    it of inefficient firms, and leading to higher productivity and growth.4
        By contrast, some endogenous growth theories would support the view that natural dis-
    asters induce a permanent fall in the level of output. For example, Martin and Rogers (1997)
    show that if future benefits of learning by doing are not fully internalized by economic agents,
    then recessions are periods in which opportunities for acquiring experience are forgone.5

3
  Rasmussen (2004) documents that of the more than 6,000 natural disasters recorded during 1970-2002, three-
  fourths of the events and 99 percent of the people affected were in developing countries. At the macroeconomic
  level, the paper finds that large natural disasters produce a median reduction in same-year GDP growth of 2.2
  percentage points. Raddatz (2007) and Loayza and Christiansen (2009) find that natural disasters have an
  adverse short-run impact on output dynamics. Noy (2009) finds that a disaster of similar relative magnitude
  has a much larger macroeconomic impact in developing countries than in advanced economies. Cavallo et al.
  (2013) emphasize the role of political instability in the causal impact of natural disasters on growth. See
  Cavallo and Noy (2011) for a survey of this literature.
4
  See, for example, Caballero and Hammour (1994).
5
  The channel could also involve financial frictions. Barlevy (2003) shows that credit constraints could have
  a negative effect on aggregate productivity during downturns via an allocation effect. Firms with relatively


                                                       4
      This suggests that whether output losses are fully recovered in the aftermath of natural
 disasters is an empirical question. In order to address it, we pursue an event study approach,
 taking advantage of the fact that natural disasters are purely exogenous events from the point
 of view of the affected country.
      Our source of data for natural disasters is EM-DAT, an online emergency disaster database
 sponsored by the United States Agency for International Development (USAID) and the
 Center for Research on the Epidemiology of Disasters (CRED).6 The EM-DAT database
 has worldwide coverage, and contains data on the occurrence and effects of natural disasters
 from 1900 to the present.7
      CRED defines a natural disaster as a situation or event that overwhelms local capacity,
 necessitating a request for external assistance. For a disaster to be entered into the EM-DAT
 database at least one of the following criteria must be fulfilled: (1) 10 or more people reported
 killed; (2) 100 or more people reported affected; (3) declaration of a state of emergency; or
 (4) call for international assistance.8 Since these criteria may select relatively small events of
 little macroeconomic significance, we identify the largest events by using somewhat arbitrary
 thresholds. For concreteness, we focus on three types of natural disasters: earthquakes, floods
 and storms. These are by and large the most common events and the ones with best data
 availability in the dataset. For this subsample of 4,640 events in the period 1970-2008, we
 measure the disaster’s magnitude by the associated rate of mortality—the percentage of the
 population killed by the disaster as a share of the previous year’s population. The summary
 statistics for our sample of disasters are reported in Table 1. The mortality rate is equal to
 0.0028 percent on average but exceeded 0.4 percent in the 1972 Nicaragua earthquake.9
      Table 2 in the appendix reports the 50 largest disasters in the database (above the 95th
 percentile of the distribution of the mortality rate) between 1970 and 2008. These are the
 relatively large, catastrophic and rare events that we want to isolate in this study. The top
 20 (top 30) disasters correspond to disasters that are more than 0.5 standard deviations (1
 standard deviation) above the average mortality rate in the sample.
      It can be readily observed that the episodes cover all regions of the world, although the
 incidence is clearly biased towards small developing economies. Naturally, the more lenient
 the rule to qualify as large disaster, the less severe the event in our analysis sample will be,
 and the less likely are we to detect any impact on GDP per capita.
      Having determined the sample of events, the next step is to trace the evolution of real
 GDP per capita following a disaster. To do so, we follow the event-study methodology in
 Cerra and Saxena (2008) based on the average behavior of the level of real GDP per capita


  high productivity, but which are credit-constrained and therefore cannot face recessions successfully, may
  be forced to exit the market. Shedding of high productivity firms could be productivity-decreasing at the
  aggregate level.
6
  Available online at http://em-dat.net.
7
  The database is compiled from various sources, including UN agencies, non-governmental organizations,
  insurance companies, research institutions and the press.
8
  These disasters can be hydro-meteorological disasters including floods, wave surges, storms, droughts, land-
  slides and avalanches; geophysical disasters (earthquakes, tsunamis and volcanic eruptions); and biological
  disasters covering epidemics and insect infestations (these are less frequent).
9
  The 2010 Haiti earthquake is reported to have led to between 150,000 and 200,000 casualties, i.e., between
  1.7 and 2.2 percent of the population.


                                                      5
General Statistics
Sample                                                      1970 - 2008
Number of countries                                                196
Number of disasters (a)                                          4,640
Disaster types:
       Earthquakes                                                 561
       Floods                                                    2,200
       Storms                                                    1,879
Mortality Rate (Deaths per million of inhabitants)
Mean                                                             28.03
Median                                                             1.76
Standard deviation                                              213.55
Maximum                                                        4,046.04
Minimum                                                            0.01
95th percentile                                                  60.99
99th percentile                                                 439.08
Notes: (a) The number of disasters is the total number of
events before yearly aggregation.
Source: Authors’ calculations based on EM-DAT database.

                                Table 1: Summary Statistics.




                                              6
     for the selected episodes.10
         Figure 2 shows the average level of real GDP per capita in a 12-year window centered
     around the event.11 In order to take averages across countries, we normalize the level of
     output per capita to 1 in the year of the event. The figure compares the average behavior
     of real GDP per capita for the top-50, top-30 and top-20 disasters discussed above. We also
     include the pre- and post-disaster trends to emphasize the difference. The results show that
     there is a break in the pre- and post-disaster trends for the top-20 and top-30 disasters. The
     output drop in the year of the disaster is equal to about 2 percentage points for the top-
     30 disasters and about 4 percentage points for the top-20 disasters respectively. While the
     intercepts of the pre- and post-disaster trend lines are different, the slopes are not, suggesting
     the output loss is indeed permanent.
         Another way of analyzing the data is by focusing on the average growth rates in real GDP
     per capita before and after the event. Here, rather than rescaling and indexing countries’
     GDP per capita series, we compute the average cross-county growth rates of real GDP
     per capita for every year. We look at the pre- and post-disaster averages to test if there are
     significant differences. Figure 3 presents the results. It shows that while there is a significant
     drop in growth rates in the year of the event (in the range of 2 to 4 percent), the ensuing
     recovery is not large enough to catch up with the pre-disaster trend. In particular, the pre-
     and post-disaster growth averages are not statistically different (if anything, the post-crisis
     growth rates are smaller).
         Overall, the evidence suggests that natural disasters make growth fall by 2 to 4 percent in
     the year of the disaster and there is little evidence that output catches up to the pre-disaster
     trend afterwards. This is consistent with Hamilton’s (1989) view of economic fluctuations,
     where output is modeled as a stochastic trend that undergoes Markov switching between
     positive and negative drift rates. Since the regime switch occurs in the growth rate of the
     permanent component of output, a negative state results in output loss that is persistent.
     After a collapse, output resumes growth with a positive drift, but remains on a parallel path
     below the original trend.
         While the results are robust, it is worth stressing that they relate to a narrow subset
     of events, which by construction are large and rare. However, this is precisely the set of
     events that we want to focus as the benefits of insurance are probably less compelling for
     more frequent and moderate events, especially if insurance comes with sizeable transaction
     or other fixed costs. Moreover, in two recent papers (Barro, 2006, 2009) Robert Barro has
     shown that the occurrence of infrequent economic disasters has much larger welfare costs
     than economic fluctuations of less amplitude. Barro estimated that, for the typical advanced
     economy, the welfare cost associated with large economic disasters such as those experienced
     in the twentieth century (wars, economic depressions, financial crises) amounted to about
     20 percent of annual GDP, while normal business cycle volatility only amounted to about
     1.5 percent of GDP. For developing countries, which usually suffer from a larger propensity
     to disasters of all types, and of larger magnitude than in advanced economies, these events
     should have an even greater effect on the welfare of the average citizen.
10
   The data for real GDP per capita comes from the World Development Indicators and covers most countries
   in the world for the period 1960-2007. As a robustness check, we have used PPPP-adjusted data from the
   Penn World Tables but the results do not change.
11
   The results are not sensitive to the length of the window.


                                                     7
3     The Model
Our analysis is based on a stochastic dynamic optimizing model of a small open economy
that is populated by a representative infinitely-lived consumer. The country’s GDP can be
negatively affected by a natural disaster, and the representative consumer can insure himself
against this risk by issuing CAT bonds.

3.1    Assumptions
We consider a small open economy producing populated by a representative infinitely-lived
consumer. There is one homogeneous good that is consumed at home and abroad. The
representative consumer maximizes his utility
                                              ∞        1−γ
                                              X
                                                     iCt+i
                                    Ut = Et         β      .                               (1)
                                              i=0
                                                      1−γ

The representative consumer receives a stochastic endowment denoted by Yt (the country’s
output). We will assume throughout that the output growth factor,

                                                  Yt
                                          Gt =        ,
                                                 Yt−1
follows a stochastic Markov process. In order to better focus on the consequences of natural
disasters, we abstract from real business cycle fluctuations and assume that domestic output
grows at a constant rate in normal times (when there is no disaster). In light of the evidence
reviewed in the previous section, we assume that a natural disaster lowers the growth rate
for one period. Thus, we assume a two-state process: the economy is either in normal times
(state s = n) or is hit by a natural disaster (state s = d). The growth factor is equal to
Gn in normal times and to Gd < Gn if there is a natural disaster. The probability that
the economy will be in state s in the following period is constant and denoted by πs , with
πn + πd = 1.
    The representative consumer invests in, or issues, two types of one-period bonds: non-
contingent bonds and CAT bonds. The country’s budget constraint is,

                        Ct + qBt + q c Btc = Yt + Bt−1 + 1st =n · Bt−1
                                                                   c
                                                                       ,                   (2)

where Bt and Btc are the period-t country’s investment in noncontingent bonds and in CAT
bonds respectively, and q and q c are their prices, assumed to be constant. The indicator
variable 1st =n captures the fact that the CAT bond is repaid only if there is no disaster. The
price of CAT bonds is lower than that of noncontingent bonds, q c ≤ q, because of the risk
of disaster as well as premia that may be due to the investors’ risk aversion, the complexity
or illiquidity of CAT bonds, or to transaction costs.
    The consumer’s holding of noncontingent bonds, Bt , can be interpreted as the country’s
international reserves, unless it is be negative, in which case −Bt is the country’s external
debt. The country can insure itself against the risk of disaster by issuing CAT bonds, i.e.,
by setting a negative value for Btc . We assume for now that bonds are default-free, which

                                               8
     means that noncontingent bonds are always repaid and that CAT bonds are repaid if there
     is no disaster.
         The model is flexible enough to capture various ways in which CAT bonds are used to
     provide insurance in the real world. A typical structure is one in which the investors purchase
     a safe bond, such as a U.S. Treasury bond, for the desired amount of coverage and deposit
     it with a special purpose vehicle (SPV) institution. The investors collect the interest on the
     bond plus the insurance premium that is paid by the insured party while the disaster does
     not occur. If the disaster strikes, however, their claim is extinguished while the SPV sells
     the bond and transfers the funds to the insured. This arrangement reproduces an insurance
     contract in which the insured party pays a premium to the insurer in good times against
     the promise of a compensation in bad times. It is captured by the model if one assumes
     that the country invests the proceeds of the CAT bond issuance in noncontingent bonds,
                c c
     qBt = −q  Bt , so that in period t + 1 the country receives Bt if there is a disaster but pays
          q
     Bt qc − 1 to foreign investors if there is no disaster.12
         The cost of insurance against disasters can be measured as the expected excess return that
     the country pays on its CAT bonds. We assume that investors receive a positive expected
     excess return on CAT bonds,
                                                   πn 1
                                             rx = c − ≥ 0.                                        (3)
                                                   q    q
     This expected excess return is equal to zero in the limit case where foreign investors are
     risk-neutral (or the natural disaster risk is completely diversifiable) and there are no admin-
     istrative cost or illiquidity premium associated with CAT bonds. Any departure from these
     assumptions should lead to a positive level of rx.
         In order to derive the country’s natural borrowing constraint, we assume that consump-
     tion cannot fall below a fraction of output,

                                              Ct ≥ (1 − η)Yt ,                                           (4)

     where η is the maximum share of domestic output that can be pledged in repayment to
     foreign creditors. This constraint could reflect limits on the political feasibility of repressing
     domestic consumption to repay foreign investors. It implies that the maximum net repayment
     flow from the country to its creditors is equal to a fraction η of the country’s output.

     3.2    Complete markets
     In this section we show that because the risk is limited to two states , non-contingent bonds
     and CAT bonds span the same allocations as complete asset markets. The equivalence with
     complete asset markets will be useful to derive the equilibrium and characterize its main
     properties.
         To introduce complete markets, let us assume that instead of CAT bonds, agents can
     trade Arrow securities that make state-contingent payments in the following period.13 Then
12
   Alternatively, the country could decide to pay the insurance premium in period t rather than period t + 1,
   by setting Bt = −Btc .
13
   The allocations that can be achieved in this way are the same as with an Arrow-Debreu structure with
   complete markets in dated contingent claims all traded at time 0.


                                                      9
     the country’s budget constraint becomes
                                      X
                                Ct +      πs0 ms0 Bs0 ,t = Yt + Bst ,t−1 ,                                    (5)
                                            s0 =n,d

     where Bst ,t−1 , the security’s payoff, is contingent on the state at time t, and mn and md
     are the stochastic discount factors for evaluating the present value of next-period payoffs in
     states n and d respectively.
         By comparing (2) and (5) one can see that the allocation with CAT bonds is equivalent
     to the allocation with contingent Arrow securities if and only if,

                                                 q = πn mn + πd md ,                                          (6)

                                                       q c = πn m n ,                                         (7)
     that is, if CAT bonds are priced with the same pricing kernel as the Arrow securities.14 In
     this case the same allocation can be achieved by holding B in non-contingent bonds and B c
     in CAT bonds, or by holding Bd = B and Bn = B + B c in contingent securities.
         Given q and q c , it is always possible to find mn and md that satisfy equations (6) and
     (7). Hence the model with CAT bonds has a dual representation as a model with complete
     asset markets. This is stated more formally in the proposition below.

     Proposition 1 The model with non-contingent bonds and CAT bonds is equivalent to a
     model with a complete set of one-period contingent Arrow securities valued with the stochastic
     discount factors:
                                                             qc
                                                  mn =          ,                                             (8)
                                                             πn
                                                             q − qc
                                                      md   =        .                                         (9)
                                                               πd
     Proof. See discussion above. Expressions (8) and (9) are obtained by solving for mn and
     md in equations (6) and (7).

        For the issuing country the cost of insurance comes from the expected excess return
     that must be paid to foreign investors on CAT bonds. We have assumed in (3) that this
     excess return is nonnegative, or equivalently that the CAT bonds have a lower price than
     the actuarially fair level. Using (3), (6) and (7), the expected excess return on CAT bonds
     can be expressed in terms of the stochastic discount factors,
                                                       πd (md /mn − 1)
                                              rx =                     .                                     (10)
                                                               q
     The condition rx ≥ 0 is equivalent to assuming md ≥ mn . That is, CAT bonds yield
     a positive expected excess return in the dual model with complete markets if and only if
     foreign investors value cash more in disaster states than in non-disaster states.
14
     These relationships would have to hold by arbitrage if agents had access to frictionless markets for the four
     types of bonds.


                                                            10
   It is conventional to define the ”natural borrowing constraints,” in this type of models, as
the maximum amount that the country can borrow with a zero probability of default. The
natural borrowing constraints are straightforward to derive in the dual model with contingent
securities. First we assume that,

                                Φ ≡ πn mn Gn + πd md Gd < 1.                              (11)

This condition is the stochastic analog of the Golden Rule which requires (under perfect
foresight) that the growth rate be smaller than the interest rate. Condition (11) is necessary
for the representative consumer to have a well-defined intertemporal budget constraint.
    Then we have the following proposition.


Proposition 2 The natural borrowing limits on the country’s state-contingent external debt
are given, for s0 = n, d, by,
                                  ∀t, Bs0 ,t ≥ bs0 Yt ,
where.
                                                   ηGs0
                                        bs 0 ≡ −        .                                 (12)
                                                   1−Φ
Proof. See Appendix.

    The natural borrowing constraint is the maximum amount of external debt that the
country can credibly promise to repay with certainty, given that it cannot pledge more than
a fraction η of its output in repayment to foreigners (see equation (4)). Because pledgeable
income is proportional to output, so is the natural borrowing constraint. The country can
promise a higher repayment contingent on the normal state than contingent on a disaster
(bn < bd ).
    The natural borrowing constraints can be transposed to the model with CAT bonds as
follows,

                                          Bt ≥ bd Yt ,
                                     Bt + Btc ≥ bn Yt ,

where bd and bn are given by (12). There is one constraint for noncontingent bonds and
another (less strict) constraint for the sum of noncontingent bonds and CAT bonds.
    A property that will turn out to be important for the following results is that the natural
borrowing constraint for noncontingent bonds depends on whether CAT bonds are available.
In the absence of CAT bonds the natural borrowing constraint must ensure that the country
can repay its debt under all circumstances, including the worst-case scenario in which growth
is low in every period in the future. The natural borrowing constraint then becomes,
                                         +∞
                                         X
                                Bt =           q i (Ct+i − Yt+i ) ,
                                         i=1
                                               +∞
                                               X
                                     ≥ −η            q i Yt+i .
                                               i=1


                                                11
     The first equation is the country’s intertemporal budget constraint and the inequality in the
     second equation comes from (4). For the probability of default to be zero, this inequality
     has to be satisfied even in the worst-case scenario where the growth rate would be low in all
     the subsequent periods, so that Yt+i = (Gd )i Y t. Hence one must have Bt ≥ bYt where b is
     given by,
                                                      Gd
                                             b = −η         .                                 (13)
                                                    1 − qGd
     Note that
                                                         b > bd ,
     that is, the natural borrowing constraint on noncontingent debt is less strict if the country
     can issue CAT bonds, or to put it differently, the country can issue more noncontingent debt
     provided it can also issue CAT bonds. This is true even if the country does not issue CAT
     bonds in equilibrium—the mere possibility that it could do so out of equilibrium is sufficient.
         The intuition is that CAT bonds allow the country to pledge more domestic output in
     repayment to foreign lenders, because more output can be promised in the nondisaster state
     than in the disaster state. This implies that the country can issue more noncontingent debt
     because it will be better able to roll over this debt in the future by issuing CAT bonds. This
     is true irrespective of the cost of issuing CAT bonds because what counts for the natural
     borrowing constraint is the country’s ability to repay subject to (4), not its willingness to
     repay.15

     3.3     Equilibrium

     We derive the equilibrium in the dual model with contingent securities. The consumer’s
     problem is made stationary by normalizing all variables by output. Normalized variables are
     denoted with lower-case letters, for example bt = Bt /Yt . It will be convenient to define as a
     state variable the country’s current resources in period t,

                                                  Xt = Yt + Bst ,t−1 ,                                            (14)

     that is, the representative consumer’s current income plus his beginning-of-period external
     assets.
        The normalized Bellman problem for the consumer can then be written,
                                                                !1−γ                               
                                                                                                   
                                  1
                                                                                   πs0 G1−γ      0 
                                         P                                  P                      
                               
                                1−γ x−         π s 0 m s 0 bs 0       +β               s0  v (x  ) 
                v(x) = max              s0 =n,d                            s0 =n,d                    , (15)
                        bn ,bd                      P
                                                             πs0 λs0 (bs0 − bs0 )
                                                                                                    
                               
                               
                                              +                                                    
                                                                                                    
                                                                                                    
                                                         s0 =n,d


     where λs0 are the costate variables for the borrowing limits and the transition equation for
     current resources is given by x0 = 1 + bs0 /Gs0 .


15
     The results are different if the country’s willingness to repay is limited, as we will see in section 5.1.


                                                            12
         The equilibrium can be characterized by three policy functions, c(x), bn (x) and bd (x),
     giving respectively consumption and the country’s portfolio of contingent securities as func-
     tions of current resources. The equilibrium policy functions can solved for numerically using
     a simple extension of Carroll’s (2006) endogenous grid points method, as shown in Appendix
     B. This equilibrium can then be “translated” into the equilibrium of the model with CAT
     bonds by setting b(x) = bd (x) and bc (x) = bn (x) − bd (x).
         One question is whether the country finds it optimal to insure against natural disasters.
     Issuing CAT bonds means B c < 0, or equivalently Bd > Bn , i.e., the country’s debt burden
     is reduced by a natural disaster. We adopt a slightly more demanding criterion, which is
     that the country’s debt-to-GDP ratio (and not only its debt level) is reduced by a natural
     disaster:


     Definition 3 The country uses CAT bonds for insurance in period t if it issues enough CAT
     bonds to reduce its debt-to-GDP ratio in a disaster,
                                                         
                                     c              Gn
                                    bt < min 0,        − 1 bt .                            (16)
                                                    Gd

        The country issues CAT bonds if bc < 0. In addition, the definition above requires that if
     the country issues noncontingent debt (b < 0), then it also issues an amount of CAT bonds
     that is high enough to reduce the ratio of total debt to GDP in a disaster. This requirement
     can be written as −b/Gd < −(b + bc )/Gn , which, together with bc < 0, is equivalent to the
     condition given in Definition 3. We choose this criterion because it gives a simple necessary
     condition on the cost of insurance for insurance to be observed in equilibrium, as stated
     below.

     Proposition 4 The country uses CAT bonds for insurance in any period t only if,

                                                 md Gγd < mn Gγn ,                                          (17)

     or equivalently, if the excess return on CAT bonds is lower than a threshold,
                                                    γ        
                                             ∗  πd    Gn
                                      rx < rx ≡              −1 .                                           (18)
                                                 q    Gd

     Proof. See Appendix.

         The representative consumer wants to insure against natural disasters but insurance is
     costly. When the cost of insurance is too high the consumer prefers not to issue CAT bonds,
     and may even want to hold them (bc > 0) if the excess return on CAT bonds is high enough.
     Proposition 4 provides an upper bound on the cost of insurance for the country to be willing
     to ensure in any period t.16
16
     A realistic constraint on the consumer’s problem is bc ≤ 0, because it is unlikely that nonresidents would
     be willing to issue CAT bonds at a discount. Condition (18) can then be interpreted as a condition for the
     market for CAT bonds to exist, or at least to exceed a fraction Gn /Gd − 1 of the noncontingent bonds issued
     by the country.


                                                         13
          Condition (18) is necessary for CAT bonds to be used for insurance but it is not sufficient.
     We can derive a condition that is both necessary and sufficient but it holds only in the long
     run. We shall say that the country insures in the long run if the probability that it issues
     CAT bonds for insurance in the future does not go to zero as the time horizon goes to infinity,
     i.e.                                                   
                                           c           Gn
                                lim Pr bt < min 0,         − 1 bt     6= 0.
                               t→+∞                    Gd
     A condition that is both necessary and sufficient for the country to insure in the long run is
     stated in the following proposition.

     Proposition 5 The country uses CAT bonds for insurance in the long run if and only if,

                                            md Gγd < β < mn Gγn ,                                        (19)

     or equivalently, if the excess return on CAT bonds is lower than a threshold,

                                                             Gγn
                                                                
                                                    πn              1
                                   rx < min             −γ ,       − .                                   (20)
                                               q − βπd Gd    β      q

     Proof. See Appendix.

         Compared to Proposition 4 this result adds a condition about the discount factor β, which
     should be neither too high not too low. The intuition is as follows. First, a consumer who is
     “too patient” (β ≥ mn Gγn ) prefers to insure by accumulating large amount of international
     reserves rather than by issuing CAT bonds. One can show that the ratio of reserves to
     GDP, bt , grows without bound, a result that is reminiscent of the well-known result in the
     precautionary savings literature that consumption and financial wealth grow without bound
     if the consumer’s psychological discount rate is smaller than the interest rate. “martingale
     result” in the precautionary savings literature.17 Furthermore, if insurance is costly (rx > 0)
     the consumer would like to hold some of his external assets in the form of CAT bonds, i.e.,
     the country wants to be long rather than short on CAT bonds.18
         Second, if the representative consumer is ”too impatient” (β ≤ md Gγd ) his overriding
     concern is to borrow rather than insure. Recall that the consumer’s natural borrowing
     constraints are,

                                                    bt ≤ bd ,
                                               bt + bct ≤ bn .

     The second equation shows that there is a borrowing limit for the sum of noncontingent
     debt and CAT bonds. Thus issuing CAT bonds may reduce the quantity of noncontingent
     debt that the country can issue, as well as the net proceeds from borrowing since CAT
     bonds sell for a lower price than noncontingent debt. An impatient country issues as much
     noncontingent debt as possible, bt = bd , and then the extra amount of CAT bonds that
17
   The condition β < mn Gγn is the analog of what Carroll (2008) calls the ”impatience condition” in his model
   with incomplete markets
18
   This and the other claims made to explain Proposition 5 can be found in the proof of the proposition.


                                                      14
                              γ   Gn      Gd     πd      η       q         β
                              2   1.02    0.98 0.02      0.02    1.05−1    1.04−1

                                     Table 2: Benchmark Calibration

     can be sold to foreign investors after the country’s capacity to issue noncontingent bonds
     has been exhausted, bc = bn − bd . But in this case the CAT bonds are issued not so much
     for insurance as a source of extra borrowing. Furthermore they amount to a small share of
     noncontingent debt and they (equal to Gn /Gd − 1 in the long run).


     4     Quantitative Results
     4.1    Calibration
     The benchmark calibration is given in Table 2. The value for relative risk aversion, γ = 2,
     is standard in the literature. The growth rate is equal to 2 percent in normal times and falls
     to minus 2 percent when a natural disaster occurs. This is consistent with the average fall
     in growth observed in the ”top-20 disasters” (see Figure 2 and 3). A disaster thus reduces
     the level of output by 4 percent forever, implying a loss in the present discounted value of
     the country’s income amounting to 136 percent of GDP.19
         The probability of disaster is set to 2 percent per year. This probability is calibrated by
     reference to the sample of disasters listed in Table 2. For the 37 countries that are listed
     in Table 2, the unconditional probability of having a top-20 disaster (with a mortality rate
     above one standard deviation) was 1.39 percent per year between 1970 and 2008.20 The
     in-sample probability of ”top-20” disaster was 5.13 percent for the four countries that had
     two such disasters between 1970 and 2008 (Honduras, Solomon Islands, Vanuatu, Dominican
     Republic). Thus a plausible range of variation for the probability of disaster is between 1
     and 5 percent. Our benchmark calibration of πd is at the lower end of this interval.
         We assume that the riskless interest rate is equal to 5 percent. We assume that the
     country cannot pledge more than 2 percent of domestic output in repayment to foreign
     creditors. This is a low value but it still allows the country to issue a fairly large amount of
     external debt. If insurance were costless (so that mn = md = q), equation (12) would imply
     bn = −0.6954 and bd = −0.6682, i.e., the country’s external noncontingent debt can reach
     66.8 percent of its output.
         Finally, we assume that the consumer’s discount rate is 4 percent. Because β > q the
     consumer’s desire to borrow comes from the expected growth in his income.



19
   The expected PDV of the country’s income, V , satisfies V = Y + q[(1 − π)Gn + πGd ]V , implying, with the
   parameter values of Table 2, V = 34.1 · Y . A 4 percent fall in Y thus reduces V by 136.4 percent of Y .
20
   In the full sample of 196 countries this unconditional probability is reduced to 0.26 percent. However, this
   lower probability is obtained by averaging the high-risk countries listed in Table 2 with a large number of
   low-risk countries that did not have a large disaster. We are interested here in the high-risk countries for
   which insurance is likely to be most beneficial.


                                                       15
     4.2    Cost of macro-insurance
     We have not yet calibrated the cost of insurance rx. The evidence in Cummins (2008) and
     Cummins and Mahul (2009) suggests that the expected excess return rx exceeds 1 percent,
     sometimes by a large margin. Cummins and Mahul (2009) report that the average ratio of
     premium to expected loss declined from about 6 in 2001 to about 2 in 2005 as the market for
     CAT bonds developed, before it increased in response to the 2005 hurricane season. Under
     our benchmark calibration, the expected annual loss is 2 percent (the probability of a natural
     disaster) and a ratio of 2 means that CAT bonds delivered an excess return of 2 percent.
     If the excess return is proportional to the expected loss it could be smaller for CAT bonds
     that have a lower disaster risk. For example, Cummins (2008) reports that a CAT bond
     issued by the Mexican government in 2006 (at a time when the cost of insurance was low)
     had an expected annual loss of 0.96 percent and a spread over LIBOR of 2.35 percent. This
     implies, in the context of our model, a cost of insurance of rx = 2.35 − 0.96 = 1.39 percent.
     The updated evidence presented in Cummins (2012) suggests that the cost of insurance was
     still in excess of 1 percent as of 2011. Since the expected annual loss varies between 1 and 2
     percent for most CAT bonds, it seems reasonable to assume a lower bound of 1 percent for
     the cost of insurance rx.
          However for the parameter values in Table 1 the maximum value of rx consistent with
     using CAT bonds for insurance in the short run, given by equation (18), is rx∗ = 0.17%.
     The maximum value consistent with using insurance in the long run, given by (20), is 0.11%.
     Thus condition (18) is violated in the data, by a wide margin. The observed cost of insurance
     seems too large by a factor ten for countries to be willing to issue CAT bonds for insurance.
     It may not seem surprising, then, that we see little issuance of CAT bonds in the data.
          This begs the question of why the cost of macro-insurance against natural disasters is so
     high in the real world. The model with complete markets, in which this cost comes entirely
     from the fact that investors value liquidity more in the disaster state, is unlikely to give a
     plausible explanation. Investors may value liquidity more in the disaster state, but not to an
     extent that can explain the observed excess return on CAT bonds. Expression (10) should
     imply a cost of insurance that is small, because the probability of a disaster πd is small, and
     the premium put on liquidity in the disaster state, md /mn − 1, should not be very large
     either. First, the risk of natural disasters in developing countries is not very large for the
     global investor community (at least at current levels of insurance) and second, this risk is
     not very correlated with other insured risks.
          The high expected excess return rx is more likely to be due to complexity and illiquidity
     premia or administrative costs that are not taken into account by a model with frictionless
     complete asset markets.21 It is important to keep these frictions in mind if one wants to
     understand the potential welfare benefits of policies that reduce the cost of macro-insurance
     through CAT bonds.22

21
   The presence of administrative costs does not invalidate the equivalence between the model with CAT bonds
   and the model with complete assets markets insofar as the optimal behavior of the small open economy is
   concerned. This behavior depends on the level of the expected excess return on CAT bonds, not on whether
   this level reflects a pure risk premium or other causes.
22
   See Froot (2001) and Cummins and Mahul (2009) for discussions of the market imperfections that may
   contribute to restrict the supply and raise the cost of catastrophe insurance.


                                                     16
        Some of these costs might be reduced, raising the question of the welfare gains that might
     be thus obtained. In the next section we compute the welfare gains from CAT bonds when
     rx is low enough for the country to insure.

     4.3     Welfare gains from macro-insurance
     We first assume that insurance is costless (rx = 0). Figure 4 shows how b and bc vary with
     current resources x. When its resources are low the country must borrow, and issues mostly
     noncontingent debt because issuing CAT bonds is costly in terms of current consumption
     (however it still issues a small fraction of its debt in the form of CAT bonds). When the
     country’s resources are high it accumulates reserves and issues substantial amounts of CAT
     bonds. For example the country issues 43.6 percent of its GDP in CAT bonds when its
     international reserves amount to 50 percent of its GDP.
         To see the amount of CAT bonds that the country issues on average, we ran simulations
     of the model for 10,000 periods and computed the average level of b and bc (excluding the
     first thousand periods). Figure 5 shows how the average levels of noncontingent and CAT
     bonds vary with the cost of insurance rx when rx stays low enough to be consistent with
     long-term insurance (i.e., lower than 0.1%). It appears that even when insurance is costless
     (rx = 0) the average amount of CAT bonds is relatively small, about 6.5 percent of GDP
     or one tenth of the noncontingent debt. The reason is that the representative consumer is
     relatively impatient and prefers to borrow rather than insure in the long run. The average
     amount of CAT bonds decreases with the cost of insurance, to 2.9 percent of GDP when
     rx = 0.1 percent, while noncontingent debt increases. As a result the debt reduction implied
     by a disaster is much smaller than the loss in the country’s present discounted value of income
     that is caused by the disaster (which amounts to 136.4 percent of the country’s GDP).
         Next, we look into the welfare gains from introducing CAT bonds. As is standard in
     the literature, we express the welfare gains from insurance as the equivalent increase in
     consumption starting from an equilibrium without insurance, i.e.,
                                                              1/(1−γ)
                                                       v(x)
                                          α(x) =                          − 1,
                                                       ve(x)

     where ve(x) is the level of welfare in the economy without CAT bonds, and x is the level of
     resources when CAT bonds are introduced. Figure 6 shows the variations of α with x.
         The welfare gains from CAT bonds are relatively large. They decrease with the current
     level of resources, from about 0.9 percent of consumption when current resources are at their
     minimum to about one half of this level when current resources amount to about four times
     GDP. The average welfare gain from introducing CAT bonds (based on the same simulations
     as for Figure 5) is about 0.85 percent of consumption if rx is small enough for the country
     to issue CAT bonds in the long run. This is significantly larger than most measures of the
     welfare cost of the business cycle even for developing countries.23 To illustrate the size of the
     welfare gains from macroinsurance with a different metrics, introducing CAT bonds yields
23
     Lucas (1987) estimated the welfare gain from eliminating the business cycle in advanced economies at one-
     tenth of a percent of consumption. Pallage and Robe (2003) have found business cycle fluctuations to be
     more costly in developing countries than in advanced economies because their economies are more volatile.


                                                         17
     the average welfare gain as a one-time wealth transfer amounting to about 16 percent of
     GDP.
          The welfare gains from CAT bonds are significant but they come primarily from the
     relaxation of the natural borrowing constraint. By equation (13) the natural borrowing
     constraint in the absence of CAT bonds is b = −0.294. That is, the ability to issue CAT
     bonds allows the country to increase it maximal issuance of noncontingent debt from 29.4
     percent to 66.8 percent of GDP.
          To understand better the nature of the welfare gains, we look how the economy responds
     to the introduction of CAT bonds. Figure 7 shows the path for the stocks of noncontingent
     debt and CAT bonds as well as the current account balance (all in share of GDP) assuming
     that the country can issue CAT bonds from period 0 onwards. It is assumed that the
     country is in the steady state with b = b before the introduction of CAT bonds, and that
     no disaster is observed before or after the introduction of CAT bonds. In period 0 the
     country issues about 30 percent of its GDP in CAT bonds and use the proceeds first to
     reduce its stock of noncontingent debt by about 20 percent of GDP and second to finance a
     current account deficit amounting to 10 percent of GDP. The reason is that the country is
     far from its borrowing limit for noncontingent debt (which has suddenly been relaxed by the
     introduction of CAT bonds) and uses the spare room to both consume and insure more. The
     initial reaction, however, is reversed in the following periods: the country starts to reduce
     its stock of CAT bonds and switches back to noncontingent debt, as the desire to borrow
     increasingly dominates the insurance motive. In the long run (which is reached in seven
     years) the country issues only a relatively small stock of CAT bonds—about 6 percent of its
     GDP, less than one tenth of its stock of noncontingent debt.
          Most of the gain comes from relaxing the external debt constraint, which leads to a tem-
     porary consumption boom. If one shuts off this channel, the welfare gains from consumption
     smoothing are much smaller. One can shut off the balance sheet channel by assuming that
     the borrowing limit for noncontingent debt is not relaxed by the introduction of CAT bonds,
     i.e., it remains (13). Then the residual welfare gains from CAT bonds do not exceed 0.04
     percent of consumption.24

     4.4     Sensitivity analysis
     This section presents some sensitivity analysis of the welfare gains from CAT bonds with
     respect to the main model parameters. We assume rx = 0 throughout. The first sensitivity
     exercise is with respect to the discount factor β. Figure 8 shows the variations of the average
     level of noncontingent bonds and CAT bonds with β, for values of β in the interval implied by
     condition (19). For β smaller than 0.98 the borrowing motive dominates and the consumer
     issues mostly noncontingent debt. This is the case that we have seen under the benchmark
     calibration. But when β exceeds 0.98 the consumer start to switch the composition of
     his balance sheet, being short on CAT bonds and long on noncontingent debt. As discussed
     following Proposition 5 this is because the insurance motive dominates the borrowing motive
24
     These welfare gains are even smaller than the welfare cost of the business cycle for developing countries.
     Remember, however, that the insurance is against a risk that occurs very rarely (with probability 2 percent
     per period), and that the risk is covered only partially (the country receives less than 10 percent of its GDP
     whereas the cost of the disaster in terms of intertemporal income is in excess of 100 percent of GDP.)


                                                          18
and the consumer insures by issuing CAT bonds to finance a stock of reserves. When β is
close to the upper bound implied by condition (19) the country issues CAT bonds to finance
a stock of reserves and these gross positions can be very large.
    Figure 9 shows the variations of the welfare gain from CAT bonds with β. The solid
line shows the total welfare gain whereas the dashed line represents the welfare gains from
insurance only (computed by assuming that the borrowing constraint on noncontingent bonds
is not relaxed by CAT bonds). The total welfare gains decrease with β because most of the
gains come from relaxing the borrowing constraint, and these gains are smaller when the
consumer is more patient. The welfare gains from insurance remain relatively small, even
when β is larger than 0.98 and the country issues large amounts of CAT bonds.
    We also performed sensitivity analysis with regard to the other parameters of the model.
The results are not reported here but a summary follows. Increasing risk aversion strengthens
both the borrowing motive and the insurance motive. It does not have a significant impact on
the average stocks of noncontingent and CAT bonds, which are already close to the maximum
levels under the benchmark calibration. The welfare gains from CAT bonds increase with
risk aversion (to about 3.5 percent of consumption if γ = 10) but this comes primarily from
the relaxation of the borrowing constraint on noncontingent debt. The welfare gains from
insurance increase with risk aversion but do not exceed 0.2 percent of consumption if γ
remains below 10.
    The average composition of the debt is not very sensitive to the disaster probability πd .
The welfare gains from CAT bonds decrease with the risk of a disaster, as the country derives
less benefits from a looser external credit constraint if disasters are more likely. The welfare
gain from insurance increases with the probability of a disaster but remain small (they do
no exceed 0.04 percent of consumption even if the disaster probability is 5 percent instead
of 2 percent).


5     Extensions
We present in this section two extensions of the baseline model. The first extension assumes
that the country can default opportunistically on its external debt. The second extension
introduces a nontradable good in the baseline model.

5.1    Defaultable debt
We analyze in this section an extension of the model where the country can default on its
external debt. Like in much of the literature on sovereign debt, the government is assumed to
default in an opportunistic way, if and only defaulting raises domestic welfare. The question
is how relaxing the assumption of commitment to repay changes the welfare gains from
macro-insurance.
    We consider the dual model with complete markets and assume that in every period t the
country can default on its state-contingent liabilities. A default means that the country’s
external liabilities are reduced by a fraction h (the haircut). The country’s normalized
liabilities before default amount to 1 − xt at the beginning of period t, and a default raises
the country’s normalized current resources from xt to xt + h(1 − xt ). This is the benefit of


                                              19
defaulting. But defaulting may be costly, for example because it cuts off the country from
access to international financial markets or because of an output loss. For simplicity we
model the cost of defaulting in period t as a penalty that reduces the country’s welfare by
d · Yt1−γ , where d is an exogenous positive parameter. Since the borrowing constraint is now
determined by the country’s willingness to repay we do not need to set an exogenous limit
on the fraction of output that the country can pledge to foreign lenders. We accordingly set
η = 1.
     Like in the dynamic optimization literature on sovereign default (Aguiar and Gopinath
(2006), Arellano (2008)) there is a threshold in current resources, x∗ , such that the country
defaults if and only xt is lower than x∗ . The default threshold is the level that makes the
country indifferent between defaulting and not defaulting,

                              v R (x∗ ) = v R (x∗ + h(1 − x∗ )) − d,

where v R (·) is normalized welfare conditional on repayment.
    The threshold x∗ is the same in the disaster state as in the non-disaster state. Since
xt = 1 + bst ,t−1 /Gst the level of x∗ determines default thresholds for the contingent bonds as
follows,
                                          bs = Gs (x∗ − 1).                                 (21)
In equilibrium the country never borrows more than this default threshold since this would
imply a sure default conditional on the realization of state s. This is a difference with the
models of default on non-contingent debt such as Arellano (2008) in which default can occur
in equilibrium. Once debt is contingent, it is possible to avoid default by keeping debt below
the default threshold for each state. Thus the model with default implies the borrowing
constraint,
                                           bs,t ≥ bs ,
where bs is given by (21). One can easily see that the borrowing constraint given by (21)
is the same as the natural borrowing constraint in the baseline model, given by (12), if
η = (1 − Φ)(1 − x∗ ). Hence the equilibrium in the model with defaultable debt is the same
as in the baseline model for suitably chosen values of η and x∗ (or d). This is stated in the
following proposition.

Proposition 6 The equilibrium in the model with defaultable debt is the same as in the
baseline model if the share of pledgeable output is given by,

                                     η = (1 − Φ)(1 − x∗ ),

where x∗ is the default threshold.

Proof. See discussion above.

    The model with defaultable debt is isomorphous to the baseline model. For any default
cost d, there is a level of η (and for any η there is a level of d) that makes the two models
equivalent. Hence the results derived for the baseline model, such as Propositions 4 and 5,
also apply to the model with defaultable debt.

                                               20
         The two models differ, however, in the welfare gains from CAT bonds. In the absence of
     CAT bonds the borrowing constraint for noncontingent debt is still given by (21). The level
     of the default threshold x∗ depends in general on whether CAT bonds are available but it is
     not clear a priori whether CAT bonds increase or decrease x∗ , and so whether they relax or
     restrict the borrowing constraint for noncontingent debt. Another difference is that without
     CAT bonds the country might default on its debt if there is a disaster. Defaultable debt
     provides a form of insurance against natural disasters, but it is rather different from CAT
     bonds. The level of insurance is determined by the level of debt and by the haircut. The
     cost of insurance is not the excess return rx but the cost of defaulting d. It is not clear a
     priori how these various effects affect the welfare gains from CAT bonds.
         To estimate the welfare gains from CAT bonds in the model with defaultable debt, we
     assume rx = 0 and d = 0.3. This value of d implies x∗ = 0.3534 in the model with defaultable
     debt and CAT bonds, which is equivalent to the baseline model with η = 0.019 (a value that
     is close to the level of 0.02 assumed in the benchmark calibration).25 The other parameters
     are the same as in the benchmark calibration (Table 2).
         We then estimate the welfare gain from introducing the CAT bonds in the model with
     defaultable debt. Figure 10 shows the variations with the discount factor β of the average
     welfare gain from introducing CAT bonds into the model with defaultable debt (based on
     the same simulations as for Figure 5, 8 and 9). Figure 10 is the analog of Figure 9 for the
     model with defaultable debt. We observe that with defaultable debt the welfare gains from
     CAT bonds are much smaller than the total welfare gains in the baseline model (the solid
     line in Figure 9), and of the same order magnitude as the welfare gains from insurance only
     (the dashed line in Figure 9). The reason is that with defaultable debt CAT bonds have a
     relatively small impact on the default threshold. We find that CAT bonds lower the default
     threshold, and so enhance the country’s ability to borrow, but only by a small amount (x∗
     is reduced by less than 0.006 for the range of values of the discount factor considered in
     Figure 10). In the absence of CAT bonds the country is able to insure against disasters
     through default (default occurs only when there is a disaster and the probability of a default
     conditional on a disaster is always larger than 80 percent for the parameter values considered
     in Figure 10).

     5.2     Real exchange rate
     We now assume that the representative consumer consumes a tradable good and non-tradable
     good, and receives exogenous endowments of both goods, YT t and YN t . External debt is
     denominated in tradable good. The consumption index is given by,
                                 h                                  iθ/(θ−1)
                                   1/θ (θ−1)/θ          1/θ (θ−1)/θ
                              C = σ CT         + (1 − σ) CN                  .

        We assume that the growth rate is the same for the endowments in tradable good and
     in nontradable good. Thus the ratio YN /YT is constant: we normalize it to (1 − σ)/σ, so
     that the relative price of the two goods would stay equal to 1 if the representative consumer

25
     The model with defaultable debt is resolved using an extension of the endogenous gridpoint method along
     the same lines as in Villemot (2012). Details are available upon request to the authors.


                                                       21
consumed the endowments. We denote with lower-case letters the level of the variables
normalized by tradable output, e.g. cT t = CT t /YT t , cN t = CN t /YT t . Then the price of the
tradable good in terms of nontradable good, denoted by pt , satisfies,

                                            pt = cθT t .

This is a measure of the real exchange rate (a real appreciation corresponds to an increase
in p).
    The equilibrium can then be solved for like before, the main difference being that the
marginal utility of consuming the tradable good which appears in the Euler equation can be
written in normalized form,
                                                            1−γθ
                          ∂c −γ     1−γ −1/θ    θ−1   1 − σ    θ−1
                              c = σ θ−1 cT     cT θ +              .
                          ∂cT                           σ

    We assume that the country can pledge a fraction η of tradable output in repayment to
foreign creditors, i.e., equation (4) applies to the consumption and the output of tradable
good. Our benchmark calibration for the revised model is σ = 0.3 and θ = 1. The rest of
the calibration is the same as in Table 2 and we assume insurance is costless (rx = 0).
    We summarize below the properties of the extended model with two goods (details are
available upon request). The impact of a disaster on the real exchange rate depends on
whether CAT bonds are available. Without CAT bonds, a disaster reduces the relative con-
sumption of tradable good and so depreciates the real exchange rate. By contrast with CAT
bonds, a disaster reduces the consumption of nontradable good more than the consumption
of tradable good and the real exchange rate appreciates on impact. The welfare gains from
CAT bonds are smaller than in the benchmark model as these bonds insure only the tradable
component of total consumption. These gains increase with the elasticity of substitution be-
tween the two goods, and are the same as in the benchmark model if the two goods are
perfectly substitutable. Overall, introducing a real exchange rate into the baseline model
does not substantially affect the main results.


6     Conclusion
We have measured the welfare gains from insurance against natural disasters in a small open
economy populated by a representative consumer. The evidence suggests that large disasters
have a permanent effect on the level of output and so entail a large loss of intertemporal
income. Insurance yields two kinds of welfare gains in our model: first, it smoothes domestic
income and consumption and second, it allows the country to issue a larger quantity of
default-free debt. There is a trade-off between these two benefits since issuing more debt
means that debt is less state-contingent and there is less income smoothing. We find that
the welfare gains from insurance may be large (and amount to several percentage points of
annual consumption) for the countries that use CAT bonds primarily as a way of borrowing
more rather than smoothing income and consumption.
   There are two important caveats to the conclusion that CAT bonds may yield large
welfare gains. First, countries will avail themselves of CAT bonds only if the pure risk

                                                22
premium is much smaller than it is in the data. Second, most of the gains—when they
are large—come from relaxing the country’s external borrowing constraint rather than from
insurance per se, and the existence of these gains depend on how the constraint on the
country’s pledgeable income is modeled. CAT bonds can significantly relax the external
borrowing constraint in our baseline model, where it is assumed that the country can pledge
a fixed fraction of its output in repayment to foreigners. These large gains disappear if we
assume instead that the country can opportunistically default on its external debt.
    The approach taken in this paper relies on a specific definition of insurance against natural
disasters. Macroeconomic insurance against natural disasters serves the same purpose as car
insurance for individuals: it insures against the income loss caused by the accident. Our
model does not capture the fact that insurance might reduce the output cost of a disaster, for
example by allowing the country to reconstitute more quickly the physical or human capital
lost in the disaster. It also does not take into account certain welfare costs of disasters that
may be large in practice—such as the emotional disutility associated with injuries or deaths
caused by the disaster.
    The model could be extended in several directions. First, it could include productive
capital and international financial frictions (a natural disaster might destroy a fraction of
the domestic capital stock and at the same time hamper capital inflows to finance invest-
ment). Finally, one would like to endogenize the cost of insurance. We have assumed in
this paper that CAT bonds yielded a constant premium above non-contingent bonds but
other assumptions could be made, for example that the premium increases with the risk in
the CAT bonds or with the quantity of bonds issued. This could be studied in a general
equilibrium model that would also encompass the supply of insurance.




                                               23
                                     APPENDICES



                       Appendix A. Proofs of the Propositions


   Proof of Proposition 2

   For period t + 1 the budget constraint (5) can be written,
                                                                     
                       Bst+1 ,t = Ct+1 − Yt+1 + Et+1 mst+2 Bst+2 ,t+1 .

Iterating forward and using C ≥ (1 − η)Y as well as the transversality condition then gives,
                                         " +∞    i
                                                           !                  #
                                          X Y
           Bst+1 ,t = Ct+1 − Yt+1 + Et+1           mst+1+j (Ct+1+i − Yt+1+i ) ,        (22)
                                             i=1      j=1
                          (               " +∞ i
                                                                   !            #)
                                           X Y
                  ≥ −η      Yt+1 + Et+1                  mst+1+j       Yt+1+i        .   (23)
                                           i=1     j=1

One can then show by forward induction that,
                             " i          !      #
                                Y
                        Et+1       mst+1+j Yt+1+i = Φi Yt+1 ,
                                   j=1


where Φ is defined in (11). Hence (23) can be rewritten,

                                                   ηGst+1
                                    Bst+1 ,t ≥ −          Yt .
                                                   1−Φ
This is the second equation in Proposition 2. Q.E.D.

   Proof of Proposition 4

    The first-order conditions of problem (15) are:
                                                        −γ
                                  −γ        −γ        bn
                          mn c(x)     = βGn c 1 +             + λn ,                     (24)
                                                      Gn
                                                        −γ
                                  −γ        −γ        bd
                          md c(x)     = βGd c 1 +             + λd .                     (25)
                                                      Gd
                                                              
    Using b = bd and bc = bn − bd , the condition bc < G  n
                                                         Gd
                                                            − 1  b can be rewritten in terms
of the state-contingent payments in the complete markets model as,
                                          bd   bn
                                             >    .
                                          Gd   Gn

                                                 24
It follows that the credit constraint for the disaster state cannot be binding (λd = 0), so that
dividing (24) by (25) gives,
                                                   −γ
                                                 bn
                              mn Gnγ    c   1 +  Gn
                                                        + λn Gγn
                                     =                           > 1,
                              md Gγd
                                                       −γ
                                              c 1 + bd
                                                   Gd

which implies (17). Then using (10) gives (18). Q.E.D.

   Proof of Proposition 5

   We first show that if condition (19) is violated the country does not use CAT bonds for
insurance in the long run. First assume that β ≥ mn Gγn . The Euler equations at time t are,

                                mn ct−γ = βG−γ −γ
                                            n cnt+1 + λnt ,
                                md ct−γ = βG−γ −γ
                                            d cdt+1 + λdt ,

where cst+1 denotes normalized consumption in the following period conditional on state
s. Using β ≥ mn Gγn > md Gγd this implies cnt+1 ≥ ct and cdt+1 > ct , so that consumption
increases over time. Hence there is a time after which the credit constraint is no longer
binding, after which λnt = λst = 0 and consumption grows at a positive rate that depends
on the state. It follows that ct grows without bound, and so does bst for s = n, d since in
state s, ct = c (1 + bst−1 /Gs ). Once the economy is unconstrained the Euler equations imply
that bnt and bdt satisfy,
                                          −γ                   −γ
                            β           bn          β          bd
                                  c 1+          =        c 1+         .                   (26)
                          mn Gγn        Gn        md Gγd       Gd
   Consider a value of current income x that is large enough that the credit constraints are
never binding in the future. Then one can write consumption as a linear function of current
income, c(x) = a0 + a1 x (closed-form expressions for coefficients a0 and a1 can be derived,
but these expressions do not matter for the proof). Using this expression in equation (26)
gives
                                             1/γ
                                           mn      Gn
                a0 + a1 (1 + bdt /Gd ) =              [a0 + a1 (1 + bnt /Gn )] .
                                           md      Gd
Taking the limit when both bnt and bdt go to infinity gives,
                                                                  1/γ
                   a0 + a1 (1 + bdt /Gd )   Gn          bdt    Gn mn
               lim                        =      lim         =            ,
              t→+∞ a0 + a1 (1 + bnt /Gn )   Gd t→+∞ bnt        Gd md

from which it follows that limt→+∞ (bdt /bnt ) = (mn /md )1/γ .
    Going back to the model with noncontingent bonds and CAT bonds, b = bd implies that
the country accumulates foreign reserves without bound, and bc = bn − bd implies that the
ratio of CAT bonds to noncontingent bonds converges to,
                                                         1/γ
                             bct
                                                   
                                         bnt          md
                        lim      = lim       −1=                − 1 ≥ 0.
                       t→+∞ bt    t→+∞ bdt            mn

                                              25
This means that in the long run the country holds a positive level of CAT bonds and so does
not insure. (In the limit case where insurance is costless, md = mn the country does not
hold or issue CAT bonds in the long run.) Hence β ≥ mn Gγn implies that the country does
not insure in the long run.
    Second, assume β ≤ md Gγd . Then the Euler equations show that consumption decreases
over time
          andthat in the long run the constraints bst ≥ bs are binding for both states. Then
 c     Gn
bt = Gd − 1 bt so that condition (16) is not satisfied. We conclude that if (19) is violated
the country does not use CAT bonds for insurance in the long run.
    Next we show that if condition (19) is satisfied the country uses CAT bonds for insurance
in the long run. The Euler equations imply that whether or not λn = 0, one has Gbdd > Gbnn .
                            
                       Gn
                c
This implies b < Gd − 1 b. It remains to show that bc < 0 in order to prove that the
country uses CAT bonds for insurance. To do this note that bc = bn − bd < (1 − Gd /Gn ) bn
has the same sign as bn . Since ct and bnt strictly decrease until bnt = bn in the normal state
there is a strictly positive probability that bnt is negative for any future t. This proves that
(19) is both necessary and sufficient for insurance in the long run.
    Finally, using (8)-(9) and (3), condition (19) can be rewritten as (20). Q.E.D.

     Appendix B. Endogenous grid point method with contingent securities

    We show how the endogenous grid point can be generalized to the case with state-
contingent securities. With non-contingent bonds, the endogenous grid point method de-
termines the policy functions by iterating on the Euler equation. Iteration k starts with
consumption function ck (·). For each level of end-of-period asset b taken from an exogenous
grid, one computes βEc0−γ using function ck (·). The Euler equation then gives current con-
sumption c and the budget constraint gives current resources x = c + qb. By doing this for
each b in the exogenous grid, one obtains two “endogenous grids” for x and c, which can then
be used to construct a new function ck+1 (·). The iteration is stopped when a fixed point for
the consumption function has been achieved with a sufficient degree of precision.
    With state-contingent securities the first-order conditions of problem (15) are:

                                                                 −γ
                       ms0 c(x)−γ = βG−γ s0 c (1 + bs0 (x)/Gs0 )    + λs0 (x),   s0 = n, s   (27)
                                            0
            λs0 (x) [bs0 (x) − bs0 ] = 0, s = n, s.                                          (28)
   The endogenous grid point method can be transposed to the case with state-contingent
securities by using the state-contingent payments bs0 instead of b. This raises the question
of which state s0 should be used to define the exogenous grid for bs0 . It is most convenient
to use the state for which the credit constraint bs0 ≥ bs0 is the “least binding”, in the sense
that if the constraint binds for that state then it binds for the other state. Under condition
(17) the least binding state is state d and so we use that state to define the exogenous grid.

   We now describe the iteration method used to solve for the equilibrium in the model with
contingent securities. First, we define a grid for b, b = (b1 , . . . , bI ) with b1 = −η/(1 − Φ),
and a grid for x, x = 1 + b.

                                                  26
     We define a grid for bd , bd = Gd b. The iteration starts with a consumption function
ck (·).
     Consider bdi ∈ bd . If i > 1 the credit constraint is not binding for state d, so that the
Euler equation (27) for state d maps bdi into the consumption level,
                                               1/γ                       
                                           md                         bdi
                                ci =                   Gd ck       1+           .            (29)
                                           β                          Gd

One can also map bdi into bni by taking the ratio of the Euler equations for state d and n,
which implies
                                          1/γ                
                                bni       md       Gd         bdi
                       ck 1 +        =                ck 1 +                           (30)
                                Gn        mn      Gn          Gd
if the implied value of bni is larger than bn , and bni = bn otherwise. Finally one can map bdi
into xi by using
                                  xi = ci + πn mn bni + πd md bdi .                       (31)
By interpolating the endogenous grids (xi )i=1,...,I and (ci )i=1,...,I one obtains a new consump-
tion function ck+1 (·). For x low enough that the credit constraints are binding for both states
the consumption function is given by ck+1 (x) = x − πn mn bn − πd md bd .




                                                       27
                                                                                                     Rate by million
 Ranking         Country           year             Main event type (a)          Number of killed
                                                                                                      of inhabitants
         1 Nicaragua                  1972 Earthquake                                      10,000            4,046.04
         2 Guatemala                  1976 Earthquake                                      23,000            3,707.14
         3 Honduras                   1974 Storm (tropical cyclone)                          8,000           2,733.23
         4 Honduras                   1998 Storm (tropical cyclone)                        14,600            2,506.46
         5 Sri Lanka                  2004 Earthquake (tsunami)                            35,405            1,838.93
         6 Solomon Islands            1975 Earthquake (tsunami)                                200           1,075.60
         7 Iran, Islamic Rep.         1978 Earthquake                                      25,045              707.64
         8 Haiti                      2004 2 Storms and 2 floods                             5,434             603.47
         9 Vanuatu                    1997 Earthquake (tsunami)                                100             568.38
        10 Dominica                   1979 Storm (tropical cyclone)                             40             554.40
        11 Pakistan                   2005 Earthquake                                      74,032              486.86
        12 Papua New Guinea           1998 Earthquake (tsunami)                              2,182             439.08
        13 Grenada                    2004 Storm (tropical cyclone)                             39             372.80
        14 Solomon Islands            1986 Storm (tropical cyclone)                            101             371.57
        15 Bhutan                     2000 General flood                                       200             368.06
        16 Maldives                   2004 Earthquake                                          102             356.50
        17 Vanuatu                    1987 Storm (tropical cyclone)                             48             355.11
        18 St Lucia                   1988 Storm (tropical cyclone)                             45             350.19
        19 Dominican Republic         1979 Storm (tropical cyclone)                          1,432             252.75
        20 Tajikistan                 1992 Flood                                             1,346             248.41
        21 Vanuatu                    1999 Earthquake                                           44             241.19
        22 Djibouti                   1994 General flood                                       145             241.15
        23 El Salvador                1986 Earthquake                                        1,100             230.65
        24 Iran, Islamic Rep.         1972 Earthquake                                        5,117             174.33
        25 Solomon Islands            1977 Earthquake                                           34             170.29
        26 Bangladesh                 1985 Storm (tropical cyclone)                        15,155              154.48
        27 Philippines                1976 Earthquake                                        6,405             152.43
        28 Puerto Rico                1985 Flood                                               500             149.51
        29 Haiti                      1994 Storm                                             1,122             148.73
        30 Algeria                    1980 Earthquake                                        2,635             144.74
        31 St Lucia                   1990 Storm (tropical cyclone)                             18             136.16
        32 Thailand                   2004 Earthquake (tsunami)                              8,372             134.76
        33 Mexico                     1985 Earthquake                                        9,500             128.53
        34 St. Kitts and Nevis        1998 Storm (tropical cyclone)                              5             122.73
        35 El Salvador                1982 Flood                                               520             112.12
        36 Oman                       1977 Storm (tropical cyclone)                            107             111.10
        37 Solomon Islands            2007 Earthquake (tsunami)                                 52             107.43
        38 Philippines                1991 Storm (tropical cyclone)                          6,153             100.50
        39 Turkey                     1976 Earthquake                                        3,846              96.09
        40 Cape Verde                 1984 Storm (tropical cyclone)                             29              94.88
        41 Comoros                    1983 Storm (tropical cyclone)                             33              93.45
        42 Guatemala                  1982 Flood                                               640              89.02
        43 Iran, Islamic Rep.         1981 2 Earthquakes                                     3,458              88.39
        44 Fiji                       1979 Storm (tropical cyclone)                             53              87.14
        45 Swaziland                  1984 Storm (tropical cyclone)                             53              85.52
        46 Italy                      1980 Earthquake                                        4,689              83.26
        47 El Salvador                1998 Storm (tropical cyclone)                            475              81.04
        48 Samoa                      1991 Storm (tropical cyclone)                             13              80.58
        49 Honduras                   1993 Flood                                               413              79.95
        50 Bhutan                     1994 Flash flood and Storm                                39              74.65
Notes: (a) In cases where there are more than one type of event (for example, one earthquake and one flood), if
the severity of one of them is considerable greater than the others, the main event type just reports the more
severe of them.
Source: Authors' calculations based on EM-DAT database.




                      Figure 1: Table 2. Largest Disasters




                                                       28
                                              Real GDP per capita
                      50 Largest Events                                                            30 Largest Events
   1.1                                                                          1.1
  1.05                                                                         1.05
     1                                                                           1
   .95                                                                          .95
         -7 -6 -5 -4 -3 -2 -1 0 1 2 3 4 5 6 7                                         -7 -6 -5 -4 -3 -2 -1 0 1 2 3 4 5 6 7
                            Period                                                                       Period

                                     Average                                                                      Average
         Events: 50. Difference in trend is not significant at 5% level               Events: 30. Difference in trend is not significant at 5% level



                      20 Largest Events
   1.1
  1.05
     1
   .95
         -7 -6 -5 -4 -3 -2 -1 0 1 2 3 4 5 6 7
                            Period

                                     Average
         Events: 20. Difference in trend is not significant at 5% level


Source: Authors' calculations based on data from WDI and EM-DAT databases.




                                  Figure 2: Natural Disasters and Output




                                                                          29
                                       Real GDP per capita growth
                     50 Largest Events                                                  30 Largest Events
  3                                                                   3
  2                                                                   2
                                                                      1
  1                                                                   0
  0                                                                  -1
       -7 -6 -5 -4 -3 -2 -1 0 1 2 3 4 5 6 7                               -7 -6 -5 -4 -3 -2 -1 0 1 2 3 4 5 6 7
                          Period                                                             Period

                                    Average                                                            Average
       Events: 50. Difference is not significant at 5% level              Events: 30. Difference is not significant at 5% level



                      20 Largest Events
   4
   2
   0
  -2
        -7 -6 -5 -4 -3 -2 -1 0 1 2 3 4 5 6 7
                           Period

                                     Average
        Events: 20. Difference is not significant at 5% level


Source: Authors' calculations based on data from WDI and EM-DAT databases.




                                   Figure 3: Natural Disasters and Growth




                                                                30
                                               5




                                               4
        Noncontingent (b) and CAT (bc) bonds




                                               3

                                                                         b(x)

                                               2




                                               1




                                               0
                                                                                bc(x)


                                               -1
                                                    0   0.5   1   1.5   2         2.5        3   3.5   4   4.5   5
                                                                         current resources, x



Figure 4: Variations of noncontingent and CAT bond holdings (b and bc ) with current
resources (x)




                                                                              31
                                                                       0
         Average ratio of noncontingent bonds and CAT bonds to GDP




                                                                     -0.1                               CAT bonds (bc)


                                                                     -0.2




                                                                     -0.3




                                                                     -0.4




                                                                     -0.5

                                                                                                           Noncontingent bonds (b)

                                                                     -0.6




                                                                     -0.7
                                                                            0   0.1   0.2   0.3      0.4       0.5      0.6       0.7   0.8   0.9          1
                                                                                             Excess return on CAT bonds, rx (1=0.1%)                   -3
                                                                                                                                                    x 10



Figure 5: Variations of average levels of noncontingent and CAT bond holdings (b and bc )
with cost of insurance (rx)




                                                                                                             32
                                                               1




                                                              0.9
         Welfare gains from CAT bonds (in % of consumption)




                                                              0.8




                                                              0.7




                                                              0.6




                                                              0.5




                                                              0.4




                                                                0.5   1   1.5   2            2.5         3   3.5   4   4.5
                                                                                    current resources, x




Figure 6: Variations of welfare gains from CAT bond in % of consumption (α) with current
resources (x)




                                                                                          33
                                                              0.1



                                                                0
                                                                          cab
         and current account balance (cab) as shares of GDP




                                                              -0.1
              Noncontingent bonds (b), CAT bonds (bc)




                                                                                bc
                                                              -0.2



                                                              -0.3



                                                              -0.4



                                                              -0.5
                                                                                     b
                                                              -0.6



                                                              -0.7
                                                                 -5   0          5              10   15   20
                                                                                      time, t



Figure 7: Response of noncontingent debt (b), CAT bonds (bc ) and current account balance
(cab) to introduction of CAT bonds




                                                                                     34
                                                                      0.6
        Average level of noncontingent bonds (b) and CAT bonds (bc)




                                                                      0.4




                                                                      0.2


                                                                                                                     bc
                                                                        0




                                                                      -0.2




                                                                      -0.4


                                                                                                                                  b
                                                                      -0.6




                                                                      -0.8
                                                                         0.91   0.92   0.93   0.94          0.95           0.96       0.97   0.98   0.99
                                                                                                     Discount factor, beta



Figure 8: Variation of average stocks of noncontingent bonds (b) and CAT bonds (bc ) with
discount rate (β)




                                                                                                           35
                                               2.5




                                                2
         Welfare gains from CAt bonds, alpha




                                               1.5




                                                1




                                               0.5




                                                0
                                                0.91   0.92   0.93   0.94          0.95           0.96   0.97   0.98   0.99
                                                                            Discount factor, beta



Figure 9: Variation of welfare gain from CAT bonds (α) with discount rate (β): total (solid
line) and insurance only (dashed line)




                                                                                   36
                                               0.12




                                                0.1
         Welfare gains from CAT bonds, alpha




                                               0.08




                                               0.06




                                               0.04




                                               0.02




                                                 0
                                                 0.92   0.93   0.94          0.95             0.96   0.97   0.98
                                                                      Discount factor, beta




Figure 10: Variation of welfare gain from CAT bonds (α) with discount rate (β) in the model
with defaultable debt




                                                                            37
References
Aguiar, M., and G. Gopinath. 2006. “Defaultable Debt, Interest Rates and the Current
 Account.” Journal of International Economics, 69: 64–83.

Arellano, C. 2008. “Default Risk and Income Fluctuations in Emerging Economies.” The
 American Economic Review, 98(3): 690–712.

Barlevy, Gadi. 2003. “Credit Market Frictions and the Allocation of Resources over the
 Business Cycle.” Journal of Monetary Economics, 50(8): 1795–1818.

Barrieu, Pauline, and Henri Loubergé. 2009. “Hybrid Cat Bonds.” Journal of Risk and
 Insurance, 76(3): 547–578.

Barro, Robert. 2006. “Rare Disasters and Asset Markets in the Twentieth Century.” Quar-
 terly Journal of Economics, 121: 823 – 899.

Barro, Robert. 2009. “Rare Disasters, Asset Prices and Welfare Costs.” American Eco-
 nomic Review, 99(1): 243 – 264.

Borensztein, Eduardo, Eduardo Cavallo, and Patricio Valenzuela. 2009. “Debt
 Sustainability under Catastrophic Risk: The Case for Government Budget Insurance.”
 Risk Management and Insurance Review, 12(2): 273–294.

Borensztein, Eduardo, Olivier Jeanne, and Damiano Sandri. 2013. “Macro-hedging
 for commodity exporters.” Journal of Development Economics, 101: 105–116.

Caballero, Ricardo, and Mohamad Hammour. 1994. “The Cleansing Effect of Reces-
 sions.” American Economic Review, 84(5): 1350 – 1368.

Caballero, Ricardo J., and Stavros Panageas. 2008. “Hedging Sudden Stops and Pre-
 cautionary Contractions.” Journal of Development Economics, 85: 28–57.

Carroll, Christopher D. 2006. “The Method of Endogenous Gridpoints for Solving Dy-
 namic Stochastic Optmization Problems.” Economic Letters, 312–320.

Cavallo, Eduardo A., and Ilan Noy. 2011. “Natural Disasters and the Economy—A
 Survey.” International Review of Environmental and Resource Economics, 5: 63102.

Cavallo, Eduardo, Sebastian Galiani, Ilan Noy, and Juan Pantano. 2013. “Catas-
 trophic Natural Disasters and Economic Growth.” Review of Economics and Statistics,
 95(5): 1549–1561.

Cerra, Valerie, and Sweta C. Saxena. 2008. “Growth Dynamics: The Myth of Economic
 Recovery.” American Economic review, 98(1): 439 – 57.



                                          38
Cummins, J.D. 2008. “CAT Bonds and Other Risk-Linked Securities: State of the Market
 and Recent Developments.” Risk Management and Insurance Review, 11(1): 23–47.

Cummins, J.D. 2012. “CAT Bonds and Other Risk-Linked Securities: Product Design and
 Evolution of the Market.” In Extreme Events and Insurance: 2011 Annus Horribilis. , ed.
 Christophe Courbage and Walter R. Stahel, 39–61. The Geneva Association.

Cummins, J.D., and O. Mahul. 2009. Catastrophe risk financing in developing countries:
 principles for public intervention. World Bank Publications.

Froot, Kenneth A. 2001. “The Market for Catastrophe Risk: a Clinical Examination.”
  Journal of Financial Economics, 60(2): 529–571.

Hamilton, James D. 1989. “A New Approach to the Economic Analysis of Nonstationary
 Times Series and the Business Cycle.” Econometrica, 57: 357 – 84.

Härdle, Wolfgang Karl, and Brenda López Cabrera. 2010. “Calibrating CAT Bonds
 for Mexican Earthquakes.” Journal of Risk and Insurance, 77(3): 625–650.

Hatchondo, Juan Carlos, and Leonardo Martinez. 2012. “On the Benefits of GDP-
 indexed Government Debt: Lessons from a Model of Sovereign Defaults.” FRB Richmond
 Economic Quarterly, 98(2): 139–157.

Lee, Jin-Ping, and Min-Teh Yu. 2007. “Valuation of Catastrophe Reinsurance with
  Catastrophe Bonds.” Insurance: Mathematics and Economics, 41(2): 264–278.

Loayza, Norman, Eduardo Olaberra Jamele Rigolini, and Luc Christiansen. 2009.
  “Natural Disasters and Growth-Going Beyond the Averages.” World Bank Policy Research
  working paper 4980.

Lucas, Robert E. 1987. Models of Business Cycles. Basil Blackwell, New York.

Martin, Philippe, and Carol Ann Rogers. 1997. “Stabilization Policy, Learning-By-
 Doing, and Economic Growth.” Oxford Economic Papers, 49(1): 152 – 66.

Noy, Ilan. 2009. “The Macroeconomic Consequences of Disasters.” Journal of Development
 Economics, 88(2): 221 – 231.

Pallage, Stephane, and Michel A. Robe. 2003. “On the Welfare Cost of Business Cycles
 in Developing Countries.” International Economic Review, 44(2): 677–98.

Raddatz, Claudio. 2007. “Are External Shocks Responsible for the Instability of Output
 in Low-income Countries?” Journal of Development Economics, 84: 155 – 187.

Rasmussen, T. N. 2004. “Macroeconomic Implications of Natural Disasters in the
 Caribbean.” IMF Working Paper 04/224.

                                          39
Solow, Robert M. 1956. “A Contribution to the Theory of Economic Growth.” Quarterly
  Journal of Economics, 70: 65 – 94.

Villemot, Sebastien. 2012. “Accelerating the Resolution of Sovereign Debt Models Using
 an Endogenous Grid Method.” Dynare Working Papers Series.




                                         40
