                               NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




      GLOBAL IMBALANCES AND POLICY WARS AT THE ZERO LOWER BOUND

                                       Ricardo J. Caballero
                                         Emmanuel Farhi
                                    Pierre-Olivier Gourinchas

                                       Working Paper 21670
                               http://www.nber.org/papers/w21670


                     NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                              1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                Cambridge, MA 02138
                          October 2015, Revised February 2020




A previous version of this paper was circulated under the title: “Global Imbalances and Currency
Wars at the Zero Lower Bound.” We thank Chris Ackerman, Mark Aguiar, Manuel Amador,
Cristina Arellano, Olivier Blanchard, Luca Fornaro, Jordi Galì, Gita Gopinath, Nobuhiro
Kiyotaki, Dimitri Mukhin, Jaume Ventura, and seminar participants at Chicago Booth, the
European Central Bank, the Fundaçao Getulio Vargas, CREI, NBER, LSE, and Princeton for
useful comments and suggestions. Adriano Fernandes provided outstanding research assistance.
All errors are our own. The first draft of this paper was written while Pierre-Olivier Gourinchas
was visiting Harvard University, whose hospitality is gratefully acknowledged. We thank the
NSF for financial support. First draft: June 2015. The views expressed herein are those of the
authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

At least one co-author has disclosed a financial relationship of potential relevance for this
research. Further information is available online at http://www.nber.org/papers/w21670.ack

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.

© 2015 by Ricardo J. Caballero, Emmanuel Farhi, and Pierre-Olivier Gourinchas. All rights
reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit
permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
Global Imbalances and Policy Wars at the Zero Lower Bound
Ricardo J. Caballero, Emmanuel Farhi, and Pierre-Olivier Gourinchas
NBER Working Paper No. 21670
October 2015, Revised February 2020
JEL No. E0,F3,F4,G01

                                         ABSTRACT

This paper explores the consequences of extremely low real interest rates in a world with
integrated but heterogenous capital markets and nominal rigidities. We establish four main
results: (i) Liquidity traps spread to the rest of the world through the current account, which we
illustrate with a new Metzler diagram in quantities; (ii) Beggar-thy-neighbor currency and trade
wars provide stimulus to the undertaking country at the expense of other countries; (iii) (Safe)
public debt issuances and increases in government spending anywhere are expansionary
everywhere; (iv) At the ZLB, net issuers of safe assets experience a disproportionate share of the
global stagnation.

Ricardo J. Caballero                            Pierre-Olivier Gourinchas
Department of Economics, E52-528                Department of Economics
MIT                                             University of California, Berkeley
50 Memorial Drive                               530 Evans Hall #3880
Cambridge, MA 02142                             Berkeley, CA 94720-3880
and NBER                                        and CEPR
caball@mit.edu                                  and also NBER
                                                pog@econ.berkeley.edu
Emmanuel Farhi
Harvard University
Department of Economics
Littauer Center
Cambridge, MA 02138
and NBER
emmanuel.farhi@gmail.com
1    Introduction

In Caballero, Farhi and Gourinchas (2008a,b) we modeled global imbalances as the result of global differ-
ences in the capacity to produce assets, and the decline in potential growth in the developed world. The
steady decline in interest rates was a natural outcome of this process. Figs. 1 and 2 illustrate these trends.
The world has changed since then: interest rates have reached extremely low levels and there is limited
space for further downward adjustment. We denote this downward rigidity in policy rates the ‘Zero Lower
Bound’ (ZLB). How are global imbalances resolved in this ‘ZLB’ context? How do policies in one country
spill over to others in this environment? And how do local policymakers’ incentives change at the ZLB?
    We build a stylized model to address these questions. Our basic framework is a two-country perpetual-
youth model with nominal rigidities, designed to highlight the heterogeneous relative demand for, and
supply of, financial assets across countries. In the body of the paper, we study a stationary world in
which all countries share the same preferences for domestic and foreign goods (i.e., there is no home bias)
and financial markets are fully integrated. This is an all-or-none world: Either all countries experience a
permanent ‘liquidity trap’—characterized by an ineﬀiciently low level of aggregate economic activity—or
none do. Within this model, we show that: (i) the current account plays a key role in spreading liquidity
traps; (ii) local governments have an incentive to engage in zero-sum currency and trade wars; and (iii)
fiscal deficits and public debt issuance generate positive global spillovers. We then expand the model to
consider heterogeneity in the demand for, and supply of, safe assets across countries. In our setting,
the overall scarcity of safe assets tips the global economy into a global ‘safety trap,’ and safe-asset issuers
experience a disproportionate share of the adjustment burden.
    The ZLB emerges as a natural tipping point. Away from the ZLB, real interest rates clear global asset
markets: A shock that creates an asset shortage (excess demand for assets) at the prevailing real interest
rate results in an endogenous reduction in global real interest rates that restores equilibrium in global
asset markets. At the ZLB, real interest rates cannot play their equilibrating role and global output must
adjust to clear asset markets: Global output endogenously declines, reducing income and therefore net
global asset demand and restoring equilibrium in global asset markets. Moreover, the role of capital flows
changes at the ZLB. Away from the ZLB, current account surpluses propagate low interest rates from the
origin country to the rest of the world. At the ZLB, current account surpluses propagate recessions.
    We characterize global imbalances at the ZLB with a Metzler diagram in quantities that connects the size
of the global recession and net foreign asset positions (and current accounts) to the recessions that would
prevail in each country under financial autarky. This is analogous to the case away from the ZLB, where
the world equilibrium real interest rate and net foreign asset (and current account) positions are connected


                                                      2
                                % OF WORLD GDP
                                                                                                   Asian Crisis               Financial Crisis                      Eurozone Crisis
                                      2.5

                                      2.0


                                      1.5

                                      1.0

                                      0.5


                                      0.0

                                      -0.5

                                      -1.0

                                      -1.5

                                      -2.0

                                      -2.5
                                             1980          1983      1986          1989         1992         1995   1998      2001       2004       2007          2010      2013         2016


                                             U.S.      European Union                   Japan       Oil Producers       Emerging Asia ex-China             China          Rest of the world



Note: The graph shows current account balances as a fraction of world GDP from 1980 to 2018. We observe the build-up of global
imbalances in the early 2000s, until the financial crisis of 2008. Since then, global imbalances have receded but not disappeared. Deficits
subsided in the U.S., and surpluses emerged in Europe. Source: World Economic Outlook (Oct. 2018), and Authors’ calculations. Oil
Producers: Bahrain, Canada, Iran, Iraq, Kuwait, Libya, Mexico, Nigeria, Norway, Oman, Russia, Saudi Arabia, United Arab Emirates,
Venezuela; Emerging Asia ex-China: India, Indonesia, Korea, Malaysia, Philippines, Singapore, Taiwan, Thailand, Vietnam.

                                                                          Figure 1: Global Imbalances, 1980-2018

    percent                                                                                                                percent
                                                                     Financial Crisis      Eurozone Crisis                                                                               Financial Crisis      Eurozone Crisis
      25                                                                                                                    18

                                                                                                                            16
     20
                                                                                                                            14

                                                                                                                            12
     15
                                                                                                                            10

     10                                                                                                                      8

                                                                                                                             6
      5
                                                                                                                             4

                                                                                                                             2
      0
                                                                                                                             0

      -5                                                                                                                     -2
        1980   1983   1986   1989   1992    1995    1998   2001    2004    2007     2010    2013    2016     2019              1980   1983   1986   1989   1992    1995    1998   2001    2004    2007      2010   2013   2016   2019

                                     U.S.      Eurozone           U.K.      Japan                                                                           U.S.         Eurozone        U.K.      Japan



                                           (a) Policy Rates                                                                                                       (b) Long Rates

Note: Panel (a) reports policy rates while panel (b) reports nominal yields on 10-years government securities. We use Germany’s 10-year
yield as a proxy for the Eurozone 10-year yield and the Bundesbank Lombard rate prior to 1999 as a proxy for the Eurozone policy rate.
Both panels show the large decline in global interest rates. Following the financial crisis, the developed world has remained at or near
the Zero Lower Bound. Source: Global Financial Database and FRED.

                                              Figure 2: Short and Long Nominal Interest Rates, 1980-2019


                                                                                                                    3
to the equilibrium real interest rate that would prevail in each country under autarky. Our analysis shows
that, other things equal, when a country’s autarky recession is more (less) severe than the global recession,
that country is also a net creditor (debtor) and runs current account surpluses (deficits) in the financially
integrated environment, effectively exporting its recession abroad. In turn, a country experiences a more
(less) severe autarky recession than the average recession when its autarky asset shortage is more (less)
severe than the global asset shortage. In this environment, a large country with a severe autarky liquidity
trap recession can pull the world economy into a global liquidity trap recession.
   But other things need not be equal. In particular, our benchmark model has a critical degree of
indeterminacy at the ZLB. This indeterminacy is related to the seminal result by Kareken and Wallace
(1981) that the nominal exchange rate is indeterminate in a world with pure interest rate targets. This
is de facto the case when the economy is in a persistent global liquidity trap at the ZLB. However,
in our framework and in contrast to the environments envisioned by Kareken and Wallace (1981), this
indeterminacy has substantive real implications. In the presence of nominal rigidities, different values of
the nominal exchange rate correspond to different values of the real exchange rate, and therefore to different
output levels and current account balances across countries. In a global liquidity trap, global output needs
to decline, but the exchange rate affects the distribution of recessions across countries. This creates fertile
grounds for zero-sum beggar-thy-neighbor devaluations achieved by direct interventions in exchange rate
markets, stimulating output and improving the current account in one country at the expense of others.
These sorts of beggar-thy-neighbor policies can lead to “currency wars” when countries are at the ZLB.
By the same token, this indeterminacy implies that countries have an incentive to engage in “trade wars”:
Countries may hike tariffs to divert global demand away from foreign goods and toward domestic goods.
   In sharp contrast, policies that alleviate asset scarcity have positive spillovers. In particular, fiscal
expansions by countries with sound fiscal accounts have powerful positive spillovers. A balanced budget
expansion reduces the net demand for (safe) assets, while an unbalanced expansion has the additional
virtue of directly expanding asset supply. Moreover, as the global liquidity trap becomes more persistent,
fiscal capacity constraints become less and less relevant. The upshot is that public debt issuance and
increases in government spending anywhere are expansionary everywhere.
   Our benchmark model considers a general scarcity of stores of value. In practice, the distinction between
a general scarcity of stores of value versus a scarcity of safe assets matters. To address this issue, we relax
our risk neutrality assumption and introduce safe and risky assets, along the lines of Caballero and Farhi
(2017). This enriched model delivers five additional results: First, macroeconomic outcomes depend on
whether there is a scarcity of safe assets, not on whether there is an overall scarcity of stores of value.
When the return on safe assets reaches the ZLB, the economy enters a ‘safety trap’. Second, the scarcity of

                                                      4
safe assets depresses the return on safe assets relative to the expected return on risky assets: risk premia
increase. Third, our model uncovers a ‘reserve currency paradox’: a country issuing a reserve currency,
i.e. a currency expected to appreciate in bad times, faces lower safe real rates and will enter a safety trap
earlier, or experience a larger recession in a global safety trap. Fourth, as before, the financial account
plays a key role in transmitting economic shocks at the ZLB. However, the most important dimension of
the financial account is the net flow of safe assets. At the ZLB, countries that are net issuers of safe assets
experience a worse recession, and vice-versa. Fifth, net issuers of safe assets experience an ‘exorbitant
privilege’, i.e. a high return on their (riskier) external assets relative to their (safer) external liabilities.
   We present several important extensions in the appendix. There, we introduce home bias, allow for
milder nominal rigidities, relax some elasticity assumptions, and consider a model with heterogeneity in
the propensity to save both within and across countries.


Related literature.       Our paper is related to several strands of literature. Most closely related is the
literature that identifies the shortage of assets, and especially the shortage of safe assets, as a key macroe-
conomic driver of global interest rates and capital flows (see e.g. Bernanke (2005), Caballero (2006, 2010);
Caballero et al. (2008a,b), Caballero and Krishnamurthy (2009), Mendoza, Quadrini and Ríos-Rull (2009),
Bernanke, Bertaut, DeMarco and Kamin (2011), Gourinchas, Rey and Govillot (2010), Maggiori (2012)
and Coeurdacier, Guibaud and Jin (2015)). In particular, Caballero et al. (2008a) develops the idea that
global imbalances originated in the superior development of financial markets in developed economies (as
well as in the decline in potential growth of Europe and Japan relative to the U.S.). This paper analyzes
the implications of asset scarcity when the world economy experiences ultra-low natural real interest rates
and is constrained by the Zero Lower Bound: The adjustment now occurs through quantities (output)
rather than prices (interest rates), and exchange rates play an important role in allocating a global slump
across countries.
   Another strand of the literature emphasizes that public debt is safe because it is insensitive to informa-
tion, mitigating the role of information asymmetries and discouraging investors from acquiring information
(see for example Gorton (2010), Stein (2012), Moreira and Savov (2014), Gorton and Ordonez (2013, 2014),
Dang, Gorton and Holmström (2015) and Greenwood, Hanson and Stein (2015)). A recent literature also
considers relative degrees of safety and what makes some assets ‘safe’ in equilibrium when there are coor-
dination problems (see for example He, Krishnamurthy and Milbradt (2015)). Our model offers a different
interpretation, where the “specialness” of public debt and close substitutes arises from their safety in bad
aggregate states (see also Gennaioli, Shleifer and Vishny (2012), Barro and Mollerus (2014), and Caballero
and Farhi (2017)).


                                                         5
    There is an extensive literature on liquidity traps (see e.g. Keynes (1936), Krugman (1998), Eggerts-
son and Woodford (2003), Christiano, Eichenbaum and Rebelo (2011), Guerrieri and Lorenzoni (2011),
Eggertsson and Krugman (2012), Werning (2012), and Correia, Farhi, Nicolini and Teles (2013)). This
literature emphasizes that the binding Zero Lower Bound on nominal interest rates presents an impor-
tant challenge for macroeconomic stabilization. A subset of this literature considers the implications of a
liquidity trap in the open economy (see e.g. Svensson (2003), Jeanne (2009), Farhi and Werning (2012),
Cook and Devereux (2013a,b, 2014), Devereux and Yetman (2014), Benigno and Romei (2014),Erceg and
Lindé (2014), and Fornaro and Romei (2019)). While many of these papers share similar themes, our paper
makes three distinct contributions. First, we use our Metzler diagram in quantities to elucidate the link
between the global recession and net foreign asset positions. We also allow for permanent liquidity traps
and capital flows (global imbalances). Finally, we make a distinction between risky and safe assets.
    Our paper is also related to the recent literature on secular stagnation (see e.g. Kocherlakota (2014),
Eggertsson and Mehrotra (2014), Caballero and Farhi (2017)). Like us, these papers use an OLG structure
with a zero lower bound and nominal rigidities, but in a closed economy. Our contribution is to explore
the open economy dimension of the secular stagnation hypothesis. We study the propagation of liquidity
traps from one country to another and the role of global imbalances and policy spillovers at the ZLB.
    From that perspective, the paper closest to ours is Eggertsson, Mehrotra, Singh and Summers (2015)
which finds, like us, that exchange rates have powerful effects when the economy is in a global liquidity
trap. Complementary to ours, their paper explores the role of market integration and capital controls.
Our paper emphasizes other methodological and substantive dimensions, such as the Metzler diagram in
quantities, the “reserve currency paradox”, the spillovers of safe public debt issuance, the role of capital
flows in spreading liquidity traps and macroeconomic policies, and the role of safe vs. risky assets.


2    A Model of the Diffusion of Liquidity Traps

This section introduces our baseline model of a global economy with structurally low real interest rates.
We first lay out the assumptions of the model and characterize the world equilibrium. Throughout the
paper, we focus on steady state balanced growth paths. We start under financial autarky, i.e. when trade
is balanced, then move to the integrated equilibrium. In each case, we characterize the equilibrium and
discuss the relevant economic mechanisms both at and away from the Zero Lower Bound (ZLB).




                                                     6
2.1     Assumptions and Competitive Equilibrium

Time is continuous. There are two countries, Home and Foreign. Foreign variables are denoted with stars.
We first describe Home, and then move on to Foreign.


Demographics.         Population is constant and normalized to one. Agents are born and die at a constant
hazard rate θ, independent across agents. Each dying agent is instantaneously replaced by a newborn.
Therefore, in an interval dt, θdt agents die and θdt agents are born, leaving total population unchanged.


Preferences.       Agents have a single opportunity to consume, ct , at the time of death. Until they die, agents
save and reinvest all their income.1 Formally, we let τθ denote the stopping time for the idiosyncratic death
process. Agents value home and foreign goods according to a Cobb-Douglas aggregate with an expenditure
share on the home good γ ∈ [0, 1], are risk neutral over short time intervals, and do not discount the future.
For a given stochastic consumption process of home and foreign goods {cH,t , cF,t }, which is measurable
with respect to the information available at date t, we define the utility Ut of an agent alive at that date
with the following stochastic differential equation:


                                      Ut = 1{t−dt≤τθ <t} ct + 1{t≤τθ } Et [Ut+dt ],                                       (1)

                                       ct = cγH,t c1−γ
                                                   F,t ,



where we use the notation Et [Ut+dt ] to denote the expectation of Ut+dt conditional on the information
available at date t.2


Nominal rigidities, potential output and actual output.                      In an interval dt, potential output of the
home good is Ȳt dt, where Ȳt grows at the exogenous rate g. Because of nominal rigidities, actual output
Yt is demand-determined and can be lower than potential output, Ȳt . We define ξt = Yt /Ȳt ∈ [0, 1], the
ratio of output to potential output and, slightly abusing terminology, we refer to ξt as the output gap, with
ξ < 1 when the economy is in a recession.
      We assume that nominal rigidities take an extreme form: the prices of home goods are fully and
permanently rigid in the home currency.3 We normalize home prices to one, PH,t = 1, and assume that
  1
     This assumption allows us to focus on the store-of-value scarcity we wish to highlight. It also simplifies the algebra by
removing non-central intertemporal substitution considerations, while delivering an aggregate consumption function with the
same economic properties as if agents had log-preferences. See Gourinchas and Rey (2014) for details.
   2
     Note that the information at date t contains the information about the realization of the idiosyncratic shocks up to t,
implying that 1{t−dt≤τθ <t} and cH,t and cF,t are known at date t. Similarly, the conditional expectation Et is an expectation
over idiosyncratic death shocks.
   3
     This provides us with a sharp characterization of the equilibrium. Appendix A.2 relaxes this assumption.



                                                              7
the Law of One Price holds so that the price of home goods in the foreign currency is PH,t /Et where
Et is the nominal exchange rate, defined as the home price of the foreign currency. With this definition,
an increase in Et represents a depreciation of the home currency. Home’s consumer price index (CPI)
satisfies Pt = (1/γ)γ (Et /(1 − γ))1−γ , and Home CPI inflation is πt = (1 − γ)Ėt /Et . Appendix A.1 provides
a micro-foundation in the New Keynesian tradition with monopolistic competition and rigid prices à la
Blanchard and Kiyotaki (1987).


Private incomes, assets, and financial development.              Domestic income has two components: the
income of newborns and financial income. In the interval dt, newly born agents receive income (1−δ)ξt Ȳt dt.
The remainder of income, δξt Ȳt dt, is distributed as financial income. Specifically, we assume there is a
mass Ȳt of Lucas trees, each producing a claim to a dividend of δξt units of output in the interval dt. With
independent and instantaneous probability ρ each tree dies and the corresponding stream of dividends is
transferred to a new tree. The stock of trees grows at rate g to accommodate growth in potential output.
All new trees are bestowed to newborns.
   Financial development is controlled by two key parameters: ρ and δ. The assumption that trees die
(ρ > 0) can be interpreted either as a consequence of creative-destruction, or as a form of weak property
rights. Either way, this assumption reduces the share of future output that is capitalized into assets that
are traded today: a higher ρ reduces the aggregate supply of assets.
   The assumption that only a fraction of output can be capitalized into traded financial claims (δ < 1)
captures many factors behind the limited pledgeability of income, as in Caballero et al. (2008a). At the
most basic level, one can interpret δ as the share of income paid to capital in production. But in reality only
a fraction of this share can be committed to asset holders, as the government, managers, and other insiders
can dilute and divert part of the profits. For this reason, we refer to δ as an index of how well-defined and
tradable rights over earnings are in the home country’s financial markets. A lower δ reduces asset supply
and simultaneously increases asset demand, since newborns receive a higher share of total income, which
they save.


Public debt and the provision of public liquidity. In addition to private assets, we assume that
a home government issues short-term public debt Dt , which it services by levying taxes τt on the income
(1 − δ)ξt Ȳt of newborns. We let dt = Dt /Ȳt denote the ratio of home public debt to potential output and
assume that the tax rate is adjusted to maintain the desired ratio of debt to potential output, dt .
   Public debt plays a critical role in our model. Since the environment is non-Ricardian, public debt does




                                                      8
not fully crowd out private financial assets.4 An increase in the ratio of public debt to potential output (dt )
increases the total supply of assets, while the concomitant increase in taxes decreases the demand for these
assets, since it reduces the disposable income of newborns. Public debt therefore provides ‘public liquidity’
in the sense of Holmström and Tirole (1998). By taxing the income of future (unborn) generations, the
government capitalizes part of the economy’s non-financial income into public debt. Moreover, by adjusting
the tax rate, it can fix the supply of public assets dȲt independently of the state of the aggregate economy,
ξt . By contrast, along a balanced-growth path with interest rate r, the supply of private financial assets is
proportional to the level of aggregate activity, ξt : Vt = δξt Ȳt /(r + ρ). While our baseline set-up does not
feature aggregate risk, this provision of public liquidity makes public debt ‘safer’ than private financial
assets, in the sense that the value of public debt does not vary across possible realizations of aggregate
demand ξt .


Monetary policy and ZLB.                 Home monetary policy follows a truncated Taylor rule that can be sum-
marized as
                                  it = max{rtn + πt , 0} with it = 0 whenever ξt < 1,                                          (2)

where it is the home nominal interest rate and rtn is the relevant natural real interest rate at Home, defined
as the real interest rate that clears markets ignoring the ZLB constraint. This monetary policy rule defines
two regimes: when rtn + πt ≥ 0, monetary policy is not constrained by the ZLB and can achieve potential
output, ξt = 1. When instead rtn + πt < 0, monetary policy is constrained at the ZLB, it = 0 and ξt < 1.


Foreign. Foreign differs from Home along five dimensions. First, potential output of the foreign good is
given by Ȳt∗ , which also grows at rate g, and the output gap is denoted ξt∗ = Yt∗ /Ȳt∗ . Second, we allow
financial development to differ, with the financial capacity of the foreign country given by δ ∗ . Third, public
debt in the foreign country is given by Dt∗ , the debt to output ratio by d∗t , and taxes by τt∗ . Fourth, Foreign
has its own currency and the prices of foreign goods are sticky in this currency. We normalize the price
                                                     ∗ = 1. Fifth, foreign monetary policy follows a
of the Foreign good to one in the foreign currency: PF,t
truncated Taylor rule similar to Home’s:


                                 i∗t = max{rtn∗ + πt∗ , 0} with i∗t = 0 whenever ξt∗ < 1,                                      (3)
   4
    Our framework becomes Ricardian if all future financial income is capitalized into existing financial assets (i.e. if ρ = g = 0
so that there are no new trees) and if taxes fall entirely on financial income. This would occur despite the overlapping
generations: public debt would crowd out private assets one-for-one. See Caballero et al. (2008a) and Gourinchas and Rey
(2014) for a detailed discussion of the Non-Ricardian features of this type of model.




                                                                9
where rtn∗ is the relevant natural real rate in the foreign country and πt∗ = −γ Ėt /Et is Foreign’s CPI
inflation rate.
   We assume that there is no home bias and that in both countries the share γ of home consumption is
equal to the share of potential output of home goods in total output: γ = y, where y ≡ Ȳt /(Ȳt + Ȳt∗ ).


Competitive equilibrium.           We denote by Wt and Wt∗ the total wealth of home and foreign households
in their respective currencies. Vt and Vt∗ are the total value of home and foreign private assets in their
respective currencies.
   We consider two environments: financial autarky and financial integration. Under financial autarky,
agents are free to trade goods across countries, but they cannot trade financial claims. Under financial
integration, agents can also trade claims to the Lucas trees and public debt across borders.
   We now write the domestic and foreign wealth dynamics, asset pricing conditions, government con-
straints, and market clearing conditions, then define and characterize a competitive equilibrium of our
economy in each environment.
   First, at each instant aggregate nominal consumption expenditure satisfies Pt ct = θWt and Pt∗ c∗t = θWt∗ ,
since a fraction θ of the population in each country dies every instant and consumes all its wealth.
   Second, the evolution of Home and Foreign aggregate wealth follow:


                            Ẇt = (1 − τt )(1 − δ)ξt Ȳt − θWt + it Wt + (ρ + g)Vt ,                         (4a)

                            Ẇt∗ = (1 − τt∗ )(1 − δ ∗ )ξt∗ Ȳt∗ − θWt∗ + i∗t Wt∗ + (ρ + g)Vt∗ .              (4b)


The change in home aggregate wealth has three components: (i) the newborn’s net of-tax-income (1−τt )(1−
δ)ξt Ȳt is earned and consumption expenditure θWt from dying agents are subtracted; (ii) home wealth earns
a return equal to the home nominal risk-free rate, it , given that there is no aggregate uncertainty; (iii)
new trees with aggregate value (ρ + g)Vt , accounting both for creative destruction and growth of potential
output, are endowed to newborns. Foreign wealth follows similar dynamics with a return equal to the
foreign nominal risk-free rate, i∗t .
   Third, since there is no aggregate risk, the return to private assets equals the nominal risk free rate in
each country:


                                         it Vt = δξt Ȳt − ρVt + V̇t − gVt ,                                 (5a)

                                        i∗t Vt∗ = δ ∗ ξt∗ Ȳt∗ − ρVt∗ + V̇t∗ − gVt∗ .                        (5b)




                                                             10
This return consists of three terms. First a dividend payment of δξt Ȳt ; second a capital loss equal to the
fraction of trees that die, −ρVt ; third a capital gain V̇t − gVt for trees that survive.5
       In addition, under financial integration Uncovered Interest Parity (UIP) holds between Home and
Foreign since agents are risk neutral:
                                                                       Ėt
                                                          it = i∗t +       .                                                 (6)
                                                                       Et

Combined with the expression for domestic and foreign CPI inflation rates, UIP ensures that real returns
are equalized under financial integration: rt = rt∗ where rt = it − πt and rt∗ = i∗t − πt∗ .
       Fourth, government debt dynamics can be expressed as


                                              Ḋt = it Dt − τt (1 − δ) ξt Ȳt ,                                             (7a)

                                              Ḋt∗ = i∗t Dt∗ − τt∗ (1 − δ ∗ ) ξt∗ Ȳt∗ ,                                   (7b)


where the first term represents interest payments (at the risk free local interest rate) and the second term
represents tax revenues on local non-financial income.
       Fifth, market clearing conditions for home and foreign goods require


                                      cH,t + c∗H,t = γθ(Wt + Et Wt∗ ) = ξt Ȳt ,                                            (8a)

                                  Et (cF,t + c∗F,t ) = (1 − γ)θ(Wt + Et Wt∗ ) = Et ξt∗ Ȳt∗ .                              (8b)


       To understand the first expression, observe that home consumption expenditure on the home good (in
home currency), cH,t , represents a fraction γ of total home consumption expenditure θWt , while foreign
consumption expenditure on the home good (in foreign currency), c∗H,t /Et , represent the same fraction γ
of total foreign consumption expenditure θWt∗ since there is no home bias in consumption. The second
expression is derived in a similar way.
       Finally, under financial integration, asset market clearing requires that total asset demand equals total
asset supply:
                                         (Vt + Dt ) + Et (Vt∗ + Dt∗ ) = Wt + Wt∗ ,                                           (9)
   5
    The term −gVt is a correction for the fact that the number of trees is growing with potential output. To obtain this
expression, observe that the value of a single home Lucas tree, vt , defined as a claim to δξt units of output, satisfies it vt =
δξt − ρvt + v̇t . The value of all home trees is Vt = vt Ȳt .




                                                                 11
while under financial autarky, asset demand must equal asset supply in each country:


                                                  V t + Dt = Wt ,                                           (10a)

                                                 Vt∗ + Dt∗ = Wt∗ .                                          (10b)


   We can now define a competitive equilibrium, both under financial integration, when home and foreign
agents are free to trade financial claims, and under financial autarky, when they are restricted to trade
financial assets within their country.

Definition 1. (Competitive Equilibrium under Financial Integration and Financial Autarky)
Given paths for the ratio of public debt to potential output, dt and d∗t , a competitive equilibrium consists of
sequences for output gaps ξt and ξt∗ , natural real rates rtn and rtn∗ , household wealth Wt and Wt∗ , private
financial assets Vt and Vt∗ , taxes τt and τt∗ , consumptions ct and c∗t , consumer prices Pt and Pt∗ , policy
rates it and i∗t , and the nominal exchange rate Et , such that (i) household consumption, wealth and private
assets satisfy Eqs. (4) and (5); (ii) debt dynamics follow Eq. (7) with Dt = dt Ȳt and Dt∗ = d∗t Ȳt∗ ; (iii)
policy rates are set according to Eqs. (2) and (3); and (iv) goods markets clear Eq. (8). Moreover:

   • Under financial integration, global asset markets clear (Eq. (9)) and UIP holds (Eq. (6));

   • Under financial autarky, asset markets clear only locally (Eq. (10)).

   We now specialize the model by focusing on steady state Balanced Growth Paths (BGP) where both
economies grow at rate g and the ratio of debt to potential output in both countries, d and d∗ , are constant.
With some abuse of notation we drop the time subscript. Along a BGP, the exchange rate E, prices P ,
P ∗ , output gaps ξ, ξ ∗ , policy rates i, i∗ and taxes τ , τ ∗ are constant, while wealth W, W ∗ , private assets
V, V ∗ , public debt D, D∗ and consumption c, c∗ grow at rate g.
   First, we characterize the financial autarky equilibrium both at and away from the ZLB, then we move
to the case of financial integration.


2.2   Financial Autarky

It is useful to introduce the concepts of financial autarky natural rates, ra,n and ra,n∗ and financial autarky
natural output gaps ξ a,n and ξ a,n∗ :

                                                  δθ                              δ∗θ
                                 ra,n ≡ −ρ +             ;    ra,n∗ ≡ −ρ +                                  (11a)
                                                1 − θd                          1 − θd∗
                                                 θd                         θd∗
                                    ξ a,n   ≡            ,    ξ a,n∗ ≡               .                      (11b)
                                              1 − δθ/ρ                   1 − δ ∗ θ/ρ

                                                         12
   The financial autarky natural rate is the real interest rate consistent with potential output under
financial autarky when we ignore the ZLB constraint. The financial autarky natural output gap is the
level of output that obtains when the interest rate is set at the ZLB under financial autarky. We make the
following assumptions on the parameters.

Assumption 1.
                                      0 < δ, δ ∗ < ρ/θ    ;   0 < d, d∗ < 1/θ

   We will discuss the role of Assumption 1 in detail after we state our first proposition, which characterizes
the economy under financial autarky, both away from the ZLB and at the ZLB.

Proposition 1 (Financial Autarky Away from and At the Zero Lower Bound). Under financial autarky
and Assumption 1, the competitive equilibrium is as follows:

  • The home economy satisfies ia = ra = max{ra,n , 0} and ξ a = min{ξ a,n , 1}.

        – If ra,n ≥ 0, then ξ a,n ≥ 1 and the home economy is away from the Zero Lower Bound. There
           is a unique balanced growth path equilibrium with a positive interest rate, ia = ra = ra,n , and
           output at its potential level, ξ a = 1.

        – If ra,n < 0, then ξ a,n < 1 and the home economy is at the Zero Lower Bound. There is a unique
           balanced growth path equilibrium with ia = ra = 0 > ra,n , and home output is below its potential
           level, with ξ a = ξ a,n < 1.

  • Similarly, the foreign economy satisfies ia∗ = ra∗ = max{ra,n∗ , 0} and ξ a∗ = min{ξ a,n∗ , 1}.

  • The autarky exchange rate satisfies:
                                                                ξa
                                                         Ea =        .                                     (12)
                                                                ξ a∗

Proof. See text.

   To understand the economics behind this proposition, observe first that along a BGP the nominal
exchange rate is constant, so all prices are constant and there is no inflation: π a = π a∗ = 0. It follows that
nominal and real interest rates coincide, ia = ra and ia∗ = ra∗ . From the goods market conditions Eqs. (8a)
and (8b), the autarky exchange rate obtains immediately as the ratio of the output gaps, E a = ξ a /ξ a∗ ,
which establishes the last part of the proposition.




                                                         13
      Consider now a BGP financial autarky equilibrium with home output gap ξ and home real interest rate
r. From Eq. (5a), total home asset supply along a BGP is given by

                                                               δ
                                                  V +D =          ξ Ȳ + dȲ ,                            (13)
                                                              r+ρ

which is decreasing with the interest rate. From Eq. (4a), home asset demand along the BGP satisfies

                                                              ξ
                                                           W = Ȳ ,                                       (14)
                                                              θ

which is invariant to the interest rate. The financial autarky natural rate ra,n given by Eq. (11a) equates
asset demand with asset supply (V + D = W ) when output is at its potential level, ξ = 1. This is only
possible if ra,n ≥ 0. Next, observe that we can rewrite ξ a,n = 1 + ra,n (1 − θd)/(ρ − δθ), so that under
Assumption 1, ξ a,n ≥ 1 if and only if ra,n ≥ 0. This establishes the first part of the proposition.
      Suppose now that ra,n < 0. Inspecting Eq. (11a), this occurs when δ is low or ρ is high (i.e. a low
supply of private assets), when d is low (i.e. a low supply of public assets) or when θ is low (i.e. a high
demand for stores of value). In this case, the ZLB constraint imposes ia = ra = 0. A ZLB equilibrium
arises when there is a shortage of private or public assets that cannot be resolved by a decline in equilibrium
real interest rates.
      Instead, an alternative (perverse) equilibrating mechanism endogenously arises in the form of a recession
with ξ a < 1. Under Assumption 1, at a fixed zero interest rate, the recession reduces asset demand
(Eq. (14)) more than asset supply (Eq. (13)), which helps restore equilibrium in the global asset market.
The size of the required home recession is given by Eq. (11b). This establishes the second part of the
proposition. The last part of the proposition obtains by symmetry.
      We can now understand the role of Assumption 1. The conditions δθ−ρ < 0 and d > 0 ensure that asset
demand decreases faster than asset supply as ξ a declines, and that the intersection satisfies 0 < ξ a,n < 1.
The condition θd < 1 ensures that the supply of public assets is not large enough to satisfy asset demand (in
which case the equilibrium would require an infinite interest rate). The restrictions imposed by Assumption
1 are exceedingly mild. For instance, if we assume ρ = 3% and θ = 5%, Assumption 1 implies that
δ, δ ∗ < 3/5 and d < 20. A reasonable estimate of δ is likely smaller than the capital share, often estimated
around 1/3, while realistic debt-output ratios are significantly lower than 20. The condition d > 0 is
economically important: it ensures that part of the asset supply is not affected by the recession. In that
sense, public debt is a ‘safe asset’.6
  6
      We develop this notion in more detail in Section 5 where we introduces ‘safe assets’ explicitly.




                                                                14
   An equivalent interpretation of the ZLB equilibrium comes from the goods market. At every instant,
the demand for goods arises from old households who die. At the ZLB, the aggregate purchasing power
of these households in local currency (aggregate demand) is given by θ(V + D) = θ(ξ a θδ/ρ + d)Ȳ . The
market value of domestic goods brought to the market in local currency (aggregate supply) is ξ a Ȳ . Since
trade is balanced under financial autarky, the two must be equal. When ra,n < 0, aggregate supply exceeds
aggregate demand at ξ a = 1. In other words, old agents don’t have enough purchasing power to buy all the
goods supplied by the young. With nominally rigid prices, output is demand-determined, as in standard
New Keynesian models. The recession simultaneously reduces aggregate supply and aggregate demand,
but supply falls more than demand under the conditions of Assumption 1, helping to restore equilibrium
in the goods market.
   Even though agents from each country consume goods from both countries, ZLB recessions stay in
their own economy. According to Proposition 1, whether a country is in a ZLB equilibrium depends only
on its own financial autarky natural rate ra,n . Under autarky, the nominal exchange rate adjusts to reflect
the relative scarcity of goods according to Eq. (12). Countries with a more severe ZLB recession (a lower
ξ a ) have a stronger currency (a lower E a ) that sustains their purchasing power for the foreign good and
prevents the ZLB recession from spilling over to the other country. In other words, under financial autarky
domestic financial conditions determine the level of domestic output, while the exchange rate simply adjusts
to make sure that the corresponding equilibrium is consistent with an integrated goods market.


2.3   Financial Integration

We now consider the case of financial integration. As in the case of financial autarky, the exchange rate
is constant along a BGP. From Eq. (6), it follows that i = i∗ = iw = r = r∗ = rw , where iw and rw
denote the world nominal and real interest rates. This implies that either no country is trapped at the
ZLB, iw = rw > 0, or all countries are, iw = rw = 0.
   By analogy with the case of financial autarky, we define the world natural interest rate rw,n as

                                                              δ̄θ
                                              rw,n = −ρ +          ,                                         (15)
                                                            1 − θd¯

where δ̄ = yδ + (1 − y)δ ∗ is the world’s financial capacity and d¯ = yd + (1 − y)d∗ is the world’s public debt to
potential output ratio evaluated at E = 1. The world natural interest rate is the real rate consistent with
global potential output when we ignore the ZLB constraint. It is similar to the autarky natural interest




                                                       15
rate, Eq. (11a), but for the world as a whole. We further define two bounds on the nominal exchange rate:

                                        ¯ w,n                             ¯ w,n −1
                                  (1 − θd)r                          (1 − θd)r
                         Ē = 1 −                     ;       E = 1−                 .                    (16)
                                  (1 − y)d∗ θρ                           ydθρ

The next proposition characterizes the BGP equilibrium away from the ZLB and at the ZLB.

Proposition 2 (Financial Integration ). Under financial integration and Assumption 1, competitive equi-
libria along a BGP are as follows:

  • If rw,n ≥ 0, then the global economy is away from the Zero Lower Bound. There is a unique balanced
     growth path with a positive interest rate, iw = rw = rw,n , output is at its potential level, ξ = ξ ∗ = 1,
     and E = 1.

  • If rw,n < 0, then the global economy is at the ZLB. There is a continuum of balanced growth path
     equilibria with iw = rw = 0, indexed by E ∈ [E, Ē], where ξ and ξ ∗ satisfy

                                                  ¯
                                                θd(E)                          ¯
                                                                              θd(E)/E
                                          ξ=                       ;   ξ∗ =             ,                 (17)
                                               1 − δ̄θ/ρ                      1 − δ̄θ/ρ

         ¯
     and d(E) = yd + (1 − y)d∗ E is the exchange-rate-adjusted ratio of global public debt to potential
     output.

  • In all cases, the exchange rate satisfies
                                                                       ξ
                                                              E=          .                               (18)
                                                                       ξ∗

Proof. See text.

   As before, the last part of the proposition obtains immediately from the goods market equilibrium
conditions Eq. (8). Consider a BGP under financial integration away from the ZLB, ξ = ξ ∗ = 1. It follows
from Eq. (18) that the exchange rate is E = 1. Define world potential output Ȳ w = Ȳ + E Ȳ ∗ , the world
supply of private assets V w = V + EV ∗ , the world supply of public assets Dw = D + ED∗ , and world
wealth W w = W + EW ∗ , all in Home’s currency. From Eqs. (5) and (7), total asset supply V w + Dw along
the BGP is given by                                                    
                                          w      w              δ̄     ¯
                                      V       +D =                   + d Ȳ w ,                           (19)
                                                              rw + ρ

which is decreasing in the global real rate rw , while total asset demand along the BGP satisfies

                                                                   Ȳ w
                                                     Ww =               ,                                 (20)
                                                                     θ

                                                              16
which is invariant to the interest rate. The natural rate rw,n given by Eq. (15) equates global asset demand
and global asset supply, W w = V w + Dw . This is only possible if rw,n ≥ 0, which establishes the first part
of the proposition.
      We can express the world natural rate rw,n as a weighted average of home and foreign financial autarky
real rates:
                                               1 − θd a,n           1 − θd∗ a,n∗
                                    rw,n = y          r   + (1 − y)         r    .                               (21)
                                               1 − θd¯              1 − θd¯

      In this expression, the weights represent the relative supply of private assets under autarky, V /V w
and V ∗ /V w .7 Under Assumption 1, the weights are positive and sum to one. It follows that the world
natural rate always lies between the home and foreign financial autarky rates. Hence, the global economy
may escape the ZLB (rw,n ≥ 0) even if Home (but not Foreign) finds itself at the ZLB under financial
autarky, i.e. when ra,n < 0 ≤ rw,n < ra,n∗ . This occurs when the scarcity of assets in Home is offset by an
abundance of assets in Foreign. In this case, financial integration pulls Home away from the ZLB.


      Suppose now that rw,n < 0. Inspecting Eq. (15), this occurs when δ̄ is low or ρ is high (i.e. a low global
supply of private assets), when d¯ is low (i.e. a low global supply of public assets) or when θ is low (i.e. a
high global demand for stores of value). The ZLB constraint imposes iw = rw = 0. In other words, under
financial integration a ZLB equilibrium arises when there is a global shortage of private or public assets
that cannot be resolved by a decline in the world real rate.
      A global ZLB can only arise if at least one country (e.g. Home) is at the ZLB under financial autarky.
However, the global economy may be pushed against the ZLB (rw,n < 0) even if Foreign would have
remained away from the ZLB under financial autarky, i.e. when ra,n < rw,n < 0 ≤ ra,n∗ . This occurs when
the scarcity of assets in Home is too large to be offset by asset supply in Foreign. Financial integration
drags Foreign into a ZLB trap it would avoid under autarky.
      Along a balanced growth path at the ZLB, total asset supply can be expressed as

                                                 δξ Ȳ + δ ∗ Eξ ∗ Ȳ ∗
                                  V w + Dw =                           + dȲ + Ed∗ Ȳ ∗ ,                        (22)
                                                         ρ

and global asset demand satisfies
                                                         ξ Ȳ + Eξ ∗ Ȳ ∗
                                                 Ww =                     .                                      (23)
                                                                θ

In addition, both the asset market Eq. (9) and the goods market Eq. (18) need to clear.
      This is a system of four equations Eqs. (9), (18), (22) and (23), in five unknowns V w , W w , ξ, ξ ∗ , and E.
  7                                                                                                    ¯ Ȳ w . Taking
    Under autarky W = 1/θȲ while D = dȲ so V = W − D = (1/θ − d)y Ȳ w while V w = W w − Dw = (1/θ − d)
                                        ¯
the ratio yields V /V = y(1 − θd)/(1 − θd). Similar expressions apply to Foreign.
                     w




                                                           17
That is, there is a degree of indeterminacy. This indeterminacy is related to the seminal result by Kareken
and Wallace (1981) that the exchange rate is indeterminate with pure interest rate targets, which is de facto
the case when both countries are at the ZLB. Unlike in Kareken and Wallace (1981), money is not neutral
in our model: different exchange rates correspond to different levels of output at Home and in Foreign, as
prescribed by Eq. (18). In other words, while global output needs to decline to restore equilibrium in asset
markets, different combinations of domestic and foreign output—corresponding to different values of the
exchange rate—are possible.
   From a technical point of view, indeterminacy arises from the assumption that the liquidity trap is
perceived as permanent. In Online Appendix B.2, we extend our model to consider the possibility of
exit from the ZLB at some future stochastic time τ . Post-exit, the exchange rate is determinate. By
the usual arbitrage arguments and backward induction, this pins down the exchange rate path pre-exit as
well, removing the indeterminacy. There are, however, important reasons to be skeptical of the rational
expectations backward-induction logic that pins the exchange rate today to its value after the economy
exits the trap, especially when the trap may be very persistent. A natural practical interpretation is that
the longer the liquidity trap is expected to last, the less anchored to fundamentals is the exchange rate
rate today. Our model considers the limit case where exchange rate expectations are not anchored by long
run outcomes or when long run outcomes themselves are constrained by the ZLB.
   Indexing these different solutions by the exchange rate, we can substitute ξ ∗ E = ξ and equate world
asset demand and world asset supply:
                                                ξ  δ̄   ¯
                                                  = ξ + d(E).                                           (24)
                                                θ  ρ

Solving for the home output gap yields Eq. (17). A similar derivation holds for Foreign. Any value of the
exchange rate is possible as long as both countries are at the ZLB, i.e. ξ ≤ 1 and ξ ∗ ≤ 1. This determines
a range [E, Ē] with ξ = 1 for E = Ē and ξ ∗ = 1 for E = E, where E and Ē are defined in Eq. (16). This
establishes the second part of Proposition 2.
   As in the case of financial autarky, under Assumption 1 a recession at Home or in Foreign reduces
total asset demand (the left hand side of Eq. (24)) faster than it reduces total asset supply (the right hand
side of Eq. (24)). The novelty under financial integration is that a weaker currency (a higher E) increases
                                                    ¯
the total supply of public assets in local currency d(E), while simultaneously reducing the total supply
                                     ¯
of public assets in foreign currency d(E)/E. This results in a smaller recession at Home (higher ξ) and
a larger recession in Foreign (lower ξ ∗ ). As before, an equivalent interpretation of the ZLB equilibrium
comes from the goods market: a cheaper currency acts as a positive aggregate demand shifter at Home
and a negative aggregate demand shifter in Foreign.


                                                     18
This figure illustrates home (ξ) and foreign (ξ ∗ ) output gaps at the global ZLB for different values of the exchange rate
E ∈ [E, Ē] when ξ a < 1 and ξ a∗ < 1. Point A denotes the autarky equilibrium (E = E a = ξ a /ξ a∗ ). When E > E a , ξ > ξ a
and ξ ∗ < ξ a∗ (point B). When E = Ē, ξ = 1, Home escapes the ZLB and Foreign absorbs all the output loss (point C). The
red segment [CD] plots the output frontier at the ZLB.

                                Figure 3: Output Determination in the Global ZLB


    To summarize our findings, under financial integration global financial conditions (reflected in the de-
terminants of the world natural rate rw,n ) determine whether the global economy is at the ZLB. Unlike
under financial autarky, however, the exchange rate is not anchored by goods market fundamentals. Dif-
ferent values of the exchange rate affect local financial conditions by changing the relative supply of public
assets. This affects relative demand and the allocation of output across countries.
    We can illustrate the indeterminacy by considering the special case where both countries experience
a liquidity trap under financial autarky (that is, when ra,n < 0 and ra,n∗ < 0). The equilibrium autarky
exchange rate simplifies to
                                                             d ρ − δ∗θ
                                                     Ea =              .
                                                             d∗ ρ − δθ

    The country with worse asset scarcity (lower d or lower δ) has lower output and a stronger currency
under financial autarky. Under financial integration, if E = E a the financial integration equilibrium
coincides with the financial autarky equilibrium: ξ = ξ a and ξ ∗ = ξ a∗ . For E > E a , Eq. (17) implies
that we have ξ > ξ a and ξ ∗ < ξ a∗ , and vice-versa for E < E a . Fig. 3 summarizes this relationship and
maps home and foreign output when the exchange rate varies between E and Ē. The segment [CD] in red
reports the possible combinations of the Home and Foreign output gaps ξ, ξ ∗ that satisfy Eq. (17).




                                                              19
2.4   Net Foreign Assets, Current Accounts and the Metzler Diagram

We briefly characterize Net Foreign Asset positions and Current Accounts under financial integration, both
away from the ZLB and at the ZLB. Consider the case where the global economy is away from the ZLB
(ξ = ξ ∗ = 1).

Proposition 3 (Net Foreign Assets and Current Accounts Away from the ZLB). Under Assumption 1, if
rw,n > 0 then along a Balanced Growth Path:

   • The world interest rate is a weighted average of the home and foreign autarky rates ra,n and ra,n∗ ,
      as in Eq. (21).

   • Home is a net creditor and runs a current account surplus if and only if the world interest rate is
      higher than the autarky interest rate: ra,n < rw,n < ra,n∗ .

   • Home’s Net Foreign Asset position (N F A) and Current Account (CA) are given by

                                NFA    (1 − θd)(rw − ra,n )           CA    NFA
                                    =                             ,      =g     .                    (25)
                                 Ȳ   (g + θ − rw )(ρ + rw )          Ȳ     Ȳ


Proof. See text.

   We have already established that away from the ZLB, the world interest rate is a weighted average of
the financial autarky rates in both countries. Next, note that along a BGP and for a given world interest
rate rw , we can express home wealth accumulation (Eq. (4a)), the home asset pricing equation Eq. (5a),
and the home government budget constraint Eq. (7a) as



                                           δ
                                V   =          Ȳ ,                                                 (26a)
                                        rw +ρ
                                        (1 − δ) − (rw − g)d + (ρ + g) rwδ+ρ
                               W    =                                         Ȳ .                  (26b)
                                                     g + θ − rw

   The net foreign asset position is defined as N F A = W − (V + D), and the current account is the change
in the net foreign asset position: CA = N F˙ A = gN F A along the BGP. Substituting, we obtain Eq. (25),
which tells us that the home Net Foreign Asset position increases with global interest rates rw .
   Similar equations hold for Foreign, which together with equilibrium in the world asset market allow us
to characterize the world interest rate rw in a conventional Metzler diagram (Fig. 4).




                                                      20
Panel (a) reports asset demand W/Ȳ (solid line) and asset supply (V + D)/Ȳ (dashed line) in Home, scaled by Home
potential output. The two lines intersect at the autarky natural interest rate ra,n (point A). Panel (b) reports world asset
demand W w /Ȳ w (solid line) and world asset supply (V w + Dw )/Ȳ w (dashed red line). The two lines intersect at the world
natural interest rate rw,n (point D). When the world interest rate is below the autarky rate (0 < rw,n < ra,n ) the country is
a net debtor and runs a current account deficit.

             Figure 4: World Interest Rates and Net Foreign Asset Positions: the Metzler Diagram


       Panel (a) of Fig. 4 reports home asset supply V +D (dashed line) and home asset demand W (solid line),
scaled by Home potential output Ȳ , as functions of the world interest rate rw .8 The two curves intersect at
the financial autarky natural interest rate ra,n —assumed positive—where the country is neither a debtor
nor a creditor (point A). For lower values of the world interest rate, Home is a net debtor: N F A/Ȳ < 0.
For higher values, it is a net creditor. Panel (b) reports global asset supply V w + Dw (red dashed line)
and global asset demand W w (solid line), scaled by global potential output Ȳ w , as a function of the global
interest rate rw (Eqs. (19) and (20)). Global asset supply decreases with the world interest rate, while
global asset demand is constant. The two curves intersect at the world natural interest rate rw,n , assumed
positive. The figure assumes ra,n∗ < ra,n , hence rw,n < ra,n and Home runs a current account deficit.
       Away from the ZLB, foreign’s Current Account surplus helps propagate its asset shortage, increasing
the foreign interest rate above its autarky level (ra,n∗ < rw,n ), while reducing the home interest rate below
autarky (rw,n < ra,n ).
   8
    Asset supply (V + D)/Ȳ is monotonically decreasing in the world interest rate rw . Asset demand W/Ȳ is non-monotonic
because of two competing effects. First, higher interest rates imply that wealth accumulates faster. But higher interest rates
also reduce the value of the new trees endowed to the newborns and increase the tax burden required to pay the higher interest
on public debt. For high levels of the interest rate and low levels of debt, the first effect dominates and asset demand increases
with rw . For low levels of the interest rate, the second effect dominates and asset demand decreases with rw . Regardless of
the shape of W/Ȳ , N F A/Ȳ is always increasing in the interest rate.



                                                               21
      Consider the case where the global economy is at the ZLB (rw,n < 0, ξ ≤ 1 and ξ ∗ ≤ 1) described in
Proposition 2. The next proposition characterizes global imbalances.

Proposition 4 (Net Foreign Assets and Current Accounts at the ZLB). Under Assumption 1, if rw,n < 0,
then given an exchange rate E ∈ [E, Ē]:

   • Domestic output ξ is a weighted average of home and exchange-rate-weighted foreign financial autarky
        outputs, ξ a,n and Eξ a,n∗ , according to

                                                                               δ∗ θ
                                               1−   δθ
                                                     ρ a,n               1−      ρ
                                        ξ=y             ξ    + (1 − y)                Eξ a,n∗ .                     (27)
                                               1−   δ̄θ
                                                     ρ                   1    − ρ
                                                                                δ̄θ



   • Home is a net creditor and runs a current account surplus if and only if home output ξ exceeds its
        financial autarky level: ξ a,n < ξ < Eξ a,n∗ . Along the BGP, Home’s Net Foreign Asset Position and
        Current Account are given by

                                    NFA   (1 − δθ
                                               ρ )(ξ − ξ
                                                         a,n )
                                                                               CA    NFA
                                        =                                ,        =g     .                          (28)
                                     Ȳ         g+θ                            Ȳ     Ȳ


Proof. See text.

      The first part of the proposition obtains directly by manipulating Eq. (24), using the definition of ξ a,n
and ξ a,n∗ in Proposition 2. In this expression, the weights represent the relative supply of public assets
under autarky, D/Dw and E a D∗ /Dw .9 Under Assumption 1, the weights are positive and sum to one.
This implies that ξ a,n ≤ ξ ≤ Eξ a,n∗ .
      Assume that rw,n < 0 and fix a nominal exchange rate E ∈ [E, Ē]. We can rewrite wealth accumulation
Eq. (5a) and home asset pricing Eq. (4a) along the BGP as a function of the domestic output level ξ:

                                                       δξ
                                                 V =      Ȳ ,                                                     (29a)
                                                       ρ
                                                       ξ + gd + g δξ
                                                                  ρ
                                                W =                    Ȳ ,                                       (29b)
                                                             g+θ

which immediately implies Eq. (28). This establishes the last part of the proposition.
      Since ξ ≤ 1, Home always runs a Current Account deficit when ξ a,n > 1, i.e. when Home would
escape the liquidity trap under financial autarky. A similar equation holds for Foreign, which together
  9
    Under autarky at the ZLB, W = ξ a /θȲ while V = δξ a /ρ so that D = W −V = (1/θ −δ/ρ)ξ a y Ȳ w while Dw = W w −Dw =
(1/θ − δ̄/ρ)ξ a Ȳ w . Taking the ratio yields D/Dw = y(1 − δθ/ρ)/(1 − δ̄θ/ρ). Similar expressions apply to Foreign.



                                                             22
Panel (a) reports Home asset demand W/Ȳ (solid line) and asset supply (V + D)/Ȳ (dashed line) as functions of home
output ξ. The two lines intersect at the autarky level of output ξ a,n (point A). Panel (b) reports global asset demand W w
(solid line) and asset supply V w + Dw (red dashed line) scaled by world potential output Ȳ w as a function of home output ξ,
for a given exchange rate E < E a , when ξ a,n < 1 and ξ a,n∗ < 1. The two lines intersect at the home level of output ξ (point
D). Home experiences a worse recession, ξ < ξ a , when it is a net debtor, N F A/Ȳ < 0 and runs a Current Account deficit
(CA/Ȳ < 0).

Figure 5: Recessions and Net Foreign Asset Positions in a Global Liquidity Trap: the Metzler Diagram in
Quantities


with equilibrium in the world asset market allows us to characterize the equilibrium Home recession ξ as
a function of the exchange rate E in a modified Metzler diagram in quantities (Fig. 5).
    Panel (a) of Fig. 5 reports home asset supply V + D (dashed line) and home asset demand W (solid
line) scaled by home potential output Ȳ , as functions of domestic output ξ, for a given exchange rate E
(Eqs. (29a) and (29b)). Both asset demand and asset supply are increasing in output, but supply increases
faster than demand. The two curves intersect at the financial autarky output ξ a,n (point A). For lower
values of output, Home is a net debtor: N F A/Ȳ < 0. For higher values, it is a net creditor: N F A/Ȳ > 0.
Panel (b) reports global asset supply V w + Dw (red dashed line) and global asset demand W w (solid line)
scaled by global potential output Ȳ w , as a function of the home recession ξ (Eqs. (22) and (23)). Both
global asset demand and supply are increasing in output, but supply increases faster than demand. The
two curves intersect at the equilibrium level of home output 0 < ξ < 1. The figure assumes Eξ a,n∗ < ξ a,n
or equivalently E < E a .
    Replacing ξ and ξ a,n from Eq. (17) and Eq. (11b) respectively, we can rewrite the home Net Foreign




                                                              23
Asset position and Current Account in Eq. (28) as
                                          "                  #
                            NFA   (1 − δθ     ¯
                                       ρ ) θ d(E)       θd                         CA    NFA
                                =                   −                          ,      =g     .                           (30)
                             Ȳ    g+θ      1 − δ̄θ
                                                 ρ
                                                      1 − δθ
                                                           ρ
                                                                                   Ȳ     Ȳ

    A cheaper home currency implies a larger home Net Foreign Asset position and hence a larger Current
Account, allowing Home to export more of its recession abroad. Depending on the value of the exchange
rate E, Home can be a surplus country or a deficit country.10
    When both countries are in a liquidity trap under financial autarky, we can express the Net Foreign
Asset position and Current Account directly as a function of the exchange rate E, relative to the autarky
exchange rate E a . Substituting the expression for the exchange rate-adjusted financial capacity, we obtain

                             NFA   1−        δθ
                                              ρ    (1 − y)θd∗ (E − E a )           CA    NFA
                                 =                                         ,          =g     .                           (31)
                              Ȳ   1−        δ̄θ
                                              ρ
                                                          g+θ                      Ȳ     Ȳ

    We can now connect our results to the case of financial autarky. Under autarky, the exchange rate is
determinate precisely because the capital account is closed. If both countries are in a liquidity trap under
financial autarky, ξ a = ξ a,n < 1, ξ a∗ = ξ a,n∗ < 1 and E a = ξ a,n /ξ a,n∗ . Then for E = E a , the financial
integration equilibrium coincides with the financial autarky equilibrium and there are no current account
imbalances. For E > E a , we have ξ > ξ a , ξ ∗ < ξ a∗ and N F A/Ȳ > 0, and vice versa for E < E a . By
depreciating its exchange rate and running a Current Account surplus, Home can reduce the size of its
recession.
    In the ZLB equilibrium, Home’s current account surplus helps propagate recessions, increasing Home’s
output and reducing Foreign’s output. The ZLB is a ‘tipping point’ for global imbalances, where the
economy transitions from benign (current account surpluses propagating low interest rates) to malign
(current account surpluses propagating recessions).


3    Negative Policy Spillovers: Currency and Trade Wars

The adverse impact of current account surpluses on foreign output in the ZLB equilibrium is a symptom
of a more general increased policy interdependence. At the global ZLB, some policies have large positive
spillovers; others have large negative spillovers. This section focuses on the negative spillovers. In partic-
ular, we consider currency wars and trade wars. Each of these policies affects the global equilibrium by
reallocating demand towards the home country and away from the foreign country, without addressing the
  10
     In a global liquidity trap, there can be global imbalances even though the two countries are identical, which could never
happen outside of a global liquidity trap.


                                                              24
underlying cause of global stagnation.


3.1   Currency Wars

Consider the role of exchange rate policy away from the ZLB and at the ZLB. Our model provides a way
of thinking about “currency wars”, i.e. the incentives for one country to manipulate its currency at the
expense of its trading partners.
   Outside the global liquidity trap, the exchange rate is pinned down (E = 1), output in each country is
at its potential level (ξ = ξ ∗ = 1) and the real interest rate is equal to its Wicksellian natural counterpart
(r = r∗ = rw,n ). Countries have nothing to gain from manipulating their exchange rates. This result
accords with the theoretical literature on the gains from monetary policy coordination in models with
nominal rigidities, concluding that the gains are at best modest (Corsetti and Pesenti, 2001; Obstfeld and
Rogoff, 2002).
   In the global liquidity trap, the global asset shortage cannot be offset by lower world interest rates
and the world enters a recession. The distribution of this global recession across countries is mediated by
the exchange rate and global imbalances. Even though the exchange rate is indeterminate in this global
liquidity trap regime, it is in principle possible for the home monetary authority to peg the exchange rate
at any level E in the indeterminacy region [E, Ē], by simply standing ready to buy and sell the home
currency for the foreign currency at the exchange rate E.
   By choosing a suﬀiciently depreciated exchange rate, Home is able to partly export its recession abroad
by running a Current Account surplus (Proposition 2 and Proposition 4). That is, once interest rates
are at the ZLB, our model indicates that exchange rate policies generate powerful beggar-thy-neighbor
effects. This zero-sum logic resonates with concerns regarding “currency wars”: in the global stagnation
equilibrium, attempts to depreciate one’s currency affect relative output one-for-one, according to Eq. (18).
   Of course, if both countries attempt to simultaneously depreciate their currencies, these efforts cancel
out, and the exchange rate remains a pure matter of coordination. Moreover, if agents coordinate on an
equilibrium where the home exchange rate is appreciated, as could be the case if the home currency were
perceived to be a “reserve currency,” then this would worsen the recession at Home. In other words, while
the reserve currency status may be beneficial outside a liquidity trap, it exacerbates the domestic recession
in a global liquidity trap. This “paradox of the reserve currency” captures a dimension of the appreciation
struggles of countries like Switzerland during the recent European turmoil in 2015, and of Japan before
the implementation of Abenomics in 2012.
   We can develop these insights further by extending our baseline model. For tractability the baseline



                                                      25
model of Section 2 assumed a unitary elasticity of substitution between home and foreign goods. Under
this assumption, while a depreciation can stimulate output, the value of home vs. foreign goods ξ/(Eξ ∗ )
remains invariant to the exchange rate because income and substitution effects perfectly cancel each other.
In order to analyze currency wars, we move away from the assumption of a unitary elasticity. Appendix
A.4 presents this extension, allowing for an arbitrary elasticity of substitution σ between home and foreign
goods.
   The analysis under financial autarky, or outside the ZLB under financial integration, is identical to the
case σ = 1 except for the value of the financial autarky exchange rate. In particular, ξ = ξ ∗ = 1 and E = 1
when the global natural rate is positive, rw,n ≥ 0, under Proposition 2. In the case of a global liquidity
trap under financial integration, Appendix A.4 shows that domestic and foreign output satisfy

                                           ξ
                                               = E σ−1 ,                                                (32a)
                                          Eξ ∗
                                                         ¯
                                                       θd(E)
                                             ξ=                     ,                                   (32b)
                                                 (1 − θδ̂(E)
                                                         ρ   )P 1−σ



where δ̂(E) = (δy + δ ∗ (1 − y)E 1−σ )/P 1−σ is a weighted average of δ in Home and Foreign using the relative
price of H and F goods as weights, and P = (y + (1 − y)E 1−σ )1/(1−σ) is the consumer price index at Home.
The first equation indicates that the value of home vs. foreign goods ξ/(Eξ ∗ ) increases with the exchange
rate when σ > 1. The second equation illustrates that the exchange rate affects domestic output via the
                         ¯
supply of public assets, d(E), as in the case σ = 1, but also via the supply of private assets, δ̂(E), and via
the price level P that affects both asset demand and asset supply. When σ > 1, one can check that the
net effect of a depreciation is expansionary at Home and contractionary in Foreign.
   Along a BGP at the Zero Lower Bound under financial integration, domestic wealth W is increasing
in ξ according to Eq. (29b). It follows that a depreciation of the exchange rate E has two effects on real
consumption c = θW/P : it stimulates output ξ, which increases wealth and consumption, but also leads to
an increase in the price level P , which reduces real consumption. The analysis of the general case, although
conceptually straightforward, leads to a nonlinear system of equations which is not amenable to a closed
form solution. Things simplify in the limit σ → ∞ where the goods become perfect substitutes.
   In that limit, E = 1 and P = 1, yet there is still a degree of indeterminacy indexed by a re-normalization
of the exchange rate Ê ≡ E σ . We show in the appendix that, when σ → ∞, home and foreign output




                                                      26
satisfy

                                                             θd¯
                                          ξ=                                   δ∗ θ
                                                                                      ,                              (33a)
                                               y(1 − δθ
                                                     ρ ) + Ê (1 − y)(1 −
                                                           1
                                                                                ρ )
                                                              θd¯
                                        ξ∗ =                                   δ∗ θ
                                                                                      .                              (33b)
                                               y(1 −   δθ
                                                       ρ )Ê   + (1 − y)(1 −    ρ )


       Since P = 1 in that limit, we can ignore the effect of the (renormalized) exchange rate on the price
index: real consumption θW/P is proportional to output ξ. By choosing a more depreciated Ê, Home can
stimulate domestic output and consumption at the expense of Foreign.11
       To develop this idea further, assume that the central bank at Home can take some ‘non-conventional’
action a ≥ 1, while the central bank in Foreign can take an action a∗ ≥ 1. These actions can be interpreted
as non-conventional monetary policies such as large-scale asset purchases, foreign exchange interventions
or any other (costly) communication by central banks. We rule out policies with a ‘fiscal dimension’, for
instance non-conventional monetary policies that expand the supply of public or quasi-public debt, since
these would have positive spillovers (see Section 4).
       These actions come at a non-pecuniary cost C(a) ≥ 0 and C(a∗ ) ≥ 0 per unit of output, which can be
interpreted as the political-economy cost for the central bank of deviating from a narrow interest rate policy.
We assume that the function C(a) is twice continuously differentiable and convex in a, with C(1) = C ′ (1) = 0
and let ηc = aC ′′ (a)/C ′ (a) > 0 denote the elasticity of the marginal cost. We assume further that these
actions can potentially impact the renormalized exchange rate, with Ê = E(a, a∗ ) ≡ (a/a∗ )n denoting how
the exchange rate responds to the actions of both central banks, and 0 < n < 1. A stronger action by the
Home (resp. Foreign) central bank depreciates (resp. appreciates) the currency, at a decreasing rate.
       We do not explicitly spell out the mechanism by which central banks can affect the exchange rate. One
possibility is that this is just a communication game, where the central bank announcement a is expected
to affect the exchange rate according to E(a, a∗ ). Another possibility is that non-conventional monetary
policy affects the exchange rate via its effect on relative output both away from the ZLB and at the ZLB.
       If the economy were outside the global liquidity trap, there would be no incentive to manipulate the
exchange rate: a = a∗ = 1 = Ê = 1 since output would already be at its potential level (ξ = 1). Any
stimulative non-conventional policy at Home would trigger a countervailing monetary tightening according
to the Home Taylor rule Eq. (2).
       Consider now what happens in the global liquidity trap when the central bank aims to maximize
domestic consumption c, net of the non-pecuniary cost C(a), given foreign action a∗ . Using Eqs. (29b)
  11
    While the exchange rate E remains equal to 1, we can interpret changes in Ê as infinitesimal attempts to manipulate the
exchange rate, with an effect on output described by Eq. (33).


                                                               27
and (33a), Home’s optimal non-conventional action a satisfies

                                                               ∗
                                              1
                                                 (1 − y)(1 − δ ρθ )            n
                                  ξ           Ê
                                                                    δ∗ θ
                                                                                 = C ′ (a),             (34)
                                      y(1 −    ρ ) + Ê (1 − y)(1 − ρ )
                                              δθ      1                        a

which generates a best-response function a = A(a∗ ). By symmetry, the foreign central bank aims to max-
imize foreign consumption c∗ , net of the non-pecuniary cost C(a∗ ), given home action a. Using Eq. (33b),
Foreign’s optimal action a∗ satisfies

                                                  y(1 −       δθ
                                                              ρ)              n
                                ξ∗                                       δ ∗ θ a∗
                                                                                    = C ′ (a∗ ) ,       (35)
                                     y(1 −   δθ
                                             ρ)   +   1
                                                         (1   − y)(1 −     ρ )
                                                      Ê


which defines a best-response function a∗ = A∗ (a). A Nash equilibrium of the Currency War game
obtains when a = A(a∗ ) and a∗ = A∗ (a) hold simultaneously. Under some restrictions on the parameters
(described in the appendix), a Nash equilibrium exists, is unique and is asymptotically stable. This
equilibrium features a > 1 and a∗ > 1: both countries have an incentive to depreciate their currency. This
is generically ineﬀicient since the efforts of each country are undone by the other, while each country bears
the full cost of its action, C(a) and C(a∗ ).
   Furthermore, we show in appendix A.4 that each country’s optimal action is increasing in the amount
               ¯ ∂a/∂d > 0. It follows that, if one country issues more public debt, all countries attempt
of public debt d:
to depreciate their currency, in a largely futile effort.
   We summarize these results in the following proposition.

Proposition 5 (Currency Wars). Under financial integration, in the limit of σ → ∞ and under the
parameter restriction described in appendix A.4, the Nash equilibria of the Currency War game where the
central banks tries to maximize consumption c, c∗ by choosing actions (aN , aN ∗ ), are as follows:

   • If rw,n ≥ 0, then the global economy is away from the Zero Lower Bound. There is a unique balanced
      growth path Nash equilibrium with positive interest rate iw = rw = rw,n , output is at its potential,
      ξ = ξ ∗ = 1, and there is no incentive to manipulate the exchange rate: E = 1, aN = aN ∗ = 1.

   • If rw,n < 0, then the global economy is at the ZLB: iw = rw = 0. There is a unique asymptotically
      stable balanced growth path Nash equilibrium with aN > 1, aN ∗ > 1 characterized by Eqs. (34)
      and (35); the normalized exchange rate satisfies Ê N = E(aN , aN ∗ ) and ξ N ≤ 1, ξ N ∗ ≤ 1 satisfy
      Eq. (33).

   • At the ZLB Nash equilibrium, the more public debt a country issues, the more each country tries to
      depreciate its currency: ∂aN /∂ d¯ > 0, ∂a∗N /∂ d¯ > 0.

                                                                28
Proof. See text and appendix A.4.


3.2   Trade Wars

Trade wars share the mechanisms and negative spillovers of currency wars at the ZLB. To explore this
issue, we introduce the possibility of asymmetric tariffs into the baseline model of Section 2. This provides
a way to think about “trade wars,” i.e. the incentives for one country to erect trade barriers at the expense
of its trading partners.
   The setup is identical to Section 2, except that we now allow Home to impose an ad-valorem tariff λ
on imports from Foreign, and conversely allow Foreign to impose an ad-valorem tariff λ∗ on imports from
                                                                                       ∗ (1 + λ), while
Home. Under the law of one price, households in Home now face import prices PF,t = Et PF,t
                                              ∗ = P
households in Foreign now face import prices PH,t             ∗
                                                    H,t (1 + λ )/Et . As before, we assume that prices
                                                            ∗ = 1.
are fully rigid in their home market and normalize: PH,t = PF,t
   In addition, we assume that each country instantaneously rebates tariff revenues to the consuming
households. With Cobb-Douglas preferences, aggregate expenditure shares are

                                          γ(1 + λ)                    (1 − γ) θW
                                cH =               θW      ,    cF =                                   (36a)
                                           1 + γλ                     1 + γλ E
                                      γ                               (1 − γ)(1 + λ∗ )
                       c∗H =                       θEW ∗   ,    c∗F =                  θW ∗ .          (36b)
                               1+   λ∗ (1   − γ)                       1 + λ∗ (1 − γ)

   Everything else equal, tariffs shift households’ expenditure shares towards domestic goods: as Home
increases its tariffs on Foreign goods, demand for Foreign goods by Home households decreases by a factor
(1 + γλ)−1 < 1. Further, since tariff revenues are rebated lump sum to consumers, demand for Home
goods by Home households increases by a factor (1 + λ)/(1 + γλ) > 1. The same effect holds for the tariffs
imposed by Foreign.
   Substituting Eq. (36) into the goods market clearing conditions, Eq. (8) becomes
                                                                  
                                   y(1 + λ)           y          ∗
                               θ            W+                EW     = ξ Ȳ ,                          (37a)
                                    1 + yλ     1 + λ∗ (1 − y)
                                                                  
                                    1−y      (1 − y)(1 + λ∗ )
                               θ          W+                  EW ∗ = Eξ ∗ Ȳ ∗ .                       (37b)
                                   1 + yλ     1 + λ∗ (1 − y)

   Because tariff revenues are rebated lump sum to households, all remaining equilibrium conditions are
unchanged: wealth accumulation Eq. (4), asset pricing Eq. (5) and government debt dynamics Eq. (7).
   Manipulating the equilibrium conditions, under financial autarky the natural rate ra,n , the natural
output gap ξ a,n and the equilibrium allocations are the same as in Proposition 1, regardless of the tariffs



                                                           29
λ and λ∗ : ra = max{ra,n , 0} and ξ a = min{ξ a,n , 1}. The only effect of the tariffs is to force an adjustment
in the autarky exchange rate, now equal to

                                                   ξ a 1 + λ∗ (1 − y)
                                           Ea =                       .                                     (38)
                                                  ξ a,∗   1 + λy

   Under autarky, the natural rate ra,n is entirely determined in asset markets. Since asset market
conditions are not changed by the tariffs, the natural rate is unchanged: whether the economy is away
from or at the ZLB is unaffected by the tariffs. It follows that wealth (in domestic currency) is also
independent of the tariffs. Consequently, the exchange rate must adjust to counteract the shift in relative
demand induced by the tariffs in Eq. (36). Since the root of the ZLB equilibrium lies in the financial
sphere, reallocating demand between Home and Foreign goods cannot resolve this problem: an increase in
tariffs in Home simply appreciates the currency, leaving the domestic economy just as depressed.
   Things are different under financial integration. We can distinguish between two cases. First, away
from the ZLB, output is at its potential level (ξ = ξ ∗ = 1) in both countries. In that case, a change in tariffs
requires an adjustment in exchange rates. As the exchange rate varies, so does the global supply of assets
relative to global asset demand, hence global interest rates need to adjust as well. This can be illustrated
most directly by combining the asset supply and asset demand conditions Eqs. (4), (5) and (7) with the
fact that global wealth spent must equal global output, θW w = Ȳ + E Ȳ ∗ . This yields an expression for
the world risk free rate as a weighted average of the home and foreign natural autarky rates, where the
weights are a function of the exchange rate:

                               y(1 − θd)                          (1 − y)E(1 − θd∗ )
              rw =                                  r a,n
                                                          +                                ra,n∗ .          (39)
                     y(1 − θd) + E(1 − x)(1 − θd∗ )         y(1 − θd) + E(1 − x)(1 − θd∗ )

   An appreciation of the exchange rate shifts the global interest rate towards the Home country’s autarky
natural rate as it increases Home asset supply relative to Foreign.
   Given a global interest rate rw , Home and Foreign asset demands (Eq. (4) along the BGP) satisfy
Eq. (26). Substituting this into the goods market equilibrium conditions Eq. (36) yields an expression for
the exchange rate needed to clear the goods markets, given a global interest rate rw :

                                        θy(1 + λ)
                (g + θ − rw )(ρ + rw ) =           [ρ + g(δ + d) + rw (1 − δ − d)]                         (40a)
                                          1 + yλ
                                             θ(1 − y)
                                       +E                [ρ + g(δ ∗ + d∗ ) + rw (1 − δ ∗ − d∗ )] .         (40b)
                                          1 + λ∗ (1 − y)

   As before, for a given world interest rate (and therefore asset demands), an increase in domestic tariffs



                                                       30
requires an appreciation of the domestic currency to clear the goods markets. But this movement in the
exchange rate now affects world interest rates according to Eq. (39).
    As long as this system admits a solution rw,n with rw,n > 0, the economy escapes the ZLB. Output
in each country is unaffected by tariffs, whose effect is absorbed by a combination of exchange rate and
global interest rate adjustments.
    While tariffs leave output unchanged, they do affect global imbalances: Home’s net foreign asset position
along the BGP is still given by Eq. (25) from Proposition 3, reproduced here:

                                  NFA    (1 − θd)(rw − ra,n )                 CA    NFA
                                      =                                  ,       =g     .
                                   Ȳ   (g + θ − rw )(ρ + rw )                Ȳ     Ȳ

An increase in tariffs at Home, which appreciates the currency, reduces global imbalances at Home (relative
to its output) as it reduces the gap between the world interest rate and Home’s autarky rate. This is true
regardless of whether the country is a creditor or a debtor: following an increase in its tariffs, a creditor
country runs a smaller surplus; a debtor country runs a smaller deficit.12 This illustrates that global
imbalances are not driven by the expenditure switching effect due to the tariffs or to the exchange rate
appreciation, for otherwise the current account would always either improve or deteriorate regardless of
its initial position. Instead, global imbalances are determined in global financial markets and reflect the
tension between the local and global supply and demand of assets.
    Consider what happens when the natural rate rw,n becomes negative and the economy experiences a
global liquidity trap. As in Proposition 2, given tariff policies λ and λ∗ , rw = 0 and there is a continuum
of balanced growth path equilibria indexed by the exchange rate E within a range [E, Ē]. Combining asset
demand, supply and goods market conditions Eqs. (4), (5), (7) and (36) for a given exchange rate E, the
output gaps satisfy the following system:
                                                                                                       
                θ+g    y(1 + λ)             gδ           1−y            ∗                              gδ ∗
                    ξ=            gd + 1 +      ξ +                 E gd + 1 +                               ξ∗            (41a)
                 θ      1 + λy              ρ        1 + λ∗ (1 − y)                                     ρ
                                                                                                       
              θ+g ∗       y              gδ        (1 − y)(1 + λ∗ )     ∗                              gδ ∗
                  Eξ =          gd + 1 +       ξ +                  E gd + 1 +                               ξ∗ .          (41b)
               θ       1 + λy             ρ         1 + λ∗ (1 − y)                                      ρ

    This system boils down to Eq. (17) in the absence of tariffs, λ = λ∗ = 0.13 Conditional on an exchange
rate E, an increase in tariffs in Home increases Home’s output, i.e. ∂ξ/∂λ > 0, while decreasing Foreign’s
output: ∂ξ ∗ /∂λ∗ < 0. The intuition is simple: at the global ZLB asset prices and the exchange rate are
   12
      The same expression implies that Foreign’s external imbalances, as a fraction of foreign output, must become larger when
Home tariffs increase. This is consistent with N F A + E N F A∗ = 0 since the exchange rate appreciates.
   13
      The range of indeterminacy [E, Ē] is also constrained by tariff policy. Ē is defined such that ξ = 1 in Eq. (41a), while E
is defined such that ξ ∗ = 1. As tariffs increase, this range shrinks and converges to E a .



                                                               31
fixed. Hence Home tariffs, which tilt global demand towards the Home good, must reduce home slack at the
expense of foreign slack. In that sense, trade wars, like currency wars, simply reallocate a global deficiency
of aggregate demand without addressing the underlying cause, which lies in global financial markets.
   Next, observe that global imbalances still satisfy Eq. (28) from Proposition 4:

                                          NFA        ρ )(ξ − ξ
                                                (1 − δθ        a,n )
                                              =                      .
                                           Ȳ         g+θ

Consequently, at the ZLB tariffs always increase a country’s net foreign asset position and current account,
regardless of its autarky position, and deteriorate the net foreign position and current account of the rest
of the world.
   The following proposition extends Proposition 2 and characterizes the BGP equilibrium away from
the ZLB and at the ZLB in the presence of asymmetric tariffs. This is intuitive, since at the ZLB the
effect of tariffs on aggregate output operates entirely via the reallocation of demand, with no effect on the
underlying global financial conditions.
   The monotonicity of the output gap with respect to tariffs suggests that countries face strong (local)
incentives to increase their tariffs. If we identify a country’s objective with minimizing the size of its own
recession, a country’s “best response” to any fixed tariff level by their neighbors is to increase their own
tariffs, so long as they are not at potential output. In other words, countries have strong incentives to
engage in ‘trade wars’ to mitigate their own recessions at the expense of their neighbors. This is a direct
parallel to the currency wars result presented in Section 3.1. The next proposition summarizes these results
and characterizes what happens when the trade war logic is taken to an extreme.

Proposition 6 (Financial Integration with Asymmetric Tariffs). Under financial integration and Assump-
tion 1, competitive equilibria along a BGP in the presence of asymmetric tariffs are as follows:

  • If rw,n ≥ 0, then the global economy is away from the Zero Lower Bound, where rw,n and E jointly solve
     Eqs. (39) and (40a). There is a unique balanced growth path with positive interest rate iw = rw = rw,n
     and output at its potential level, ξ = ξ ∗ = 1. Tariffs have no effect on output but reduce global
     imbalances: ∂ξ/∂λ = 0 ; ∂|N F A|/∂λ < 0.

  • If rw,n < 0, then the global economy is at the ZLB. There is a continuum of balanced growth path
     equilibria with iw = rw = 0, indexed by E ∈ [E, Ē], where ξ and ξ ∗ satisfy Eq. (41a). Tariffs reduce
     the output gap: ∂ξ/∂λ > 0, and increase the net foreign asset position, ∂N F A/∂λ > 0, at the expense
     of the rest of the world: ∂ξ ∗ /∂λ < 0, ∂N F A∗ /∂λ < 0.



                                                      32
    • Suppose the world starts in a global liquidity trap at a fixed E ∈ [E, Ē]. Then, as λ → ∞ and
      λ∗ → ∞ jointly, the world converges to a no-trade equilibrium where ξ → ξ a,n , ξ ∗ → ξ ∗a,n and
      E → E a . Consequently, N F A → 0 and N F A∗ → 0.

Proof. See text.


4     Positive Policy Spillovers: Public Debt (Deficits) and Balanced-Budget
      Fiscal Expansions

Currency depreciations and tariffs are zero-sum (at best) because they do not address the key shortage of
(safe) assets to store value, which lies behind the global liquidity trap. In contrast, public debt issuances
(deficits) and balanced-budget fiscal expansions have the potential to generate positive spillovers. These
two methods of expansionary fiscal policy reduce the net supply of safe assets via distinct channels: public
debt issuances increase the supply of (safe) assets and balanced-budget fiscal expansion reduce the net
demand for (safe) assets. Both have the potential to stimulate the economy by alleviating the global excess
demand for financial assets and the corresponding global excess supply of goods in the ZLB equilibrium.


4.1    Public Debt (Deficits): The Net Asset Creation Channel

We first focus on public debt (deficits), assuming that there is no change in government spending. At the
ZLB, public debt issuances can be financed without levying any extra taxes. Public debt is essentially a
rational bubble. Public debt issuances increase the global (safe) asset supply, and stimulate global output,
thereby generating positive spillovers.
    In the interest of space, we only consider the case of a global liquidity trap. From Proposition 2,
Eq. (17), it is immediate that for a given exchange rate E, an increase in public debt at Home (D) or in
Foreign (D∗ ) increases world net asset supply and reduces the world asset shortage. As a result, home and
foreign outputs ξ and ξ ∗ increase proportionately. It does not matter whether the increase in public debt
originates at Home or at Foreign: an increase in public debt anywhere is expansionary everywhere. From
Eq. (30) an increase in debt at Home (D) decreases the Home Net Foreign Asset position and pushes the
Home Current Account toward a deficit.
    It is important to note that in a liquidity trap we have rw ≤ g since rw = 0 and g ≥ 0. This implies
that the government does not need to levy taxes to sustain debt, and in fact can afford to rebate some tax
revenues to households. Fiscal capacity is therefore not a constraint on the use of debt as an instrument




                                                     33
to stimulate the economy. This stark conclusion rests on the assumption that the trap is permanent.14
       Note also that at the ZLB, public debt and money are (at the margin) perfect substitute zero interest
rate government liabilities. As a result, issuing government bonds and issuing money as a helicopter drop
are equivalent at the ZLB. Hence all the results regarding the issuance of public debt at the ZLB apply
identically to the issuance of money.15 Through the lens of the model, helicopter drops anywhere are
expansionary everywhere.


4.2      Balanced-Budget Fiscal Expansions: the Net Asset Demand Channel

We now focus on a specific case of fiscal policy: balanced-budget increases in government spending. Because
of this assumption, we shut down the (safe) asset creation mechanism of public debt (deficit) increases.
Budget-balanced government spending has two components: contemporaneous government consumption
spending and taxes on private income (which would have been partly saved). Thus, on net budget-balanced
government spending reduces desired global savings and global (safe) asset demand. At the ZLB, this
reduction in net asset demand stimulates output in all countries, thereby generating positive spillovers.
This can also be seen in the goods market, where the reduction in net asset demand directly increases the
demand for the goods that are consumed by the government, and indirectly increases the demand for all
goods by increasing income via a Keynesian multiplier.
       At Home, government spending on domestic goods γG Ȳ is financed by increasing the tax τ on the
income of newborns, (1 − δ) ξ Ȳ , for a constant level of public debt D/Ȳ . The same applies to Foreign where
                     ∗ Ȳ ∗ is financed by increasing the tax τ ∗ on the income of newborns, (1 − δ ∗ ) ξ ∗ Ȳ ∗ ,
government spending γG
for a constant level of public debt D∗ /Ȳ ∗ . In the interest of space, we only consider the case of a global
  14
      If the trap were only temporary, as in the model with exit in Online Appendix B.2, the results could be different, depending
on whether the post-exit economy is dynamically eﬀicient (i.e. rw < g) or not. If the post-exit economy is dynamically
ineﬀicient, then the conclusion holds. But if the post-exit economy is dynamically eﬀicient, then fiscal capacity is eventually
required to service debt, constraining the use of debt issuance as a stimulus tool during the liquidity trap.
   15
      In both cases, if the liquidity trap were temporary, and if the economy were dynamically eﬀicient after exiting the trap,
fiscal capacity would be needed either to soak up the extra money that was issued at the ZLB, or to service the government
bonds that were issued at the ZLB.




                                                               34
liquidity trap. Following the same steps as in the baseline model, the BGP equilibrium satisfies:

                           ξ − γG
                  E =           ∗ ,
                           ξ − γG
                                             δγG (E)θ
                                    ¯
                                   θd(E) +       ρ                     ∗
                                                                                ¯
                                                                             1 θd(E) + δγGρ(E)θ
                   ξ = γG +                             ,    ξ=       γG   +                    ,
                                        1−   δ̄θ
                                              ρ
                                                                             E     1 − δ̄θ ρ
                                                                                                                 
                                                                           ¯        δγG (E)θ       δγG θ
              NFA          ξ(1 −   δθ
                                   ρ)   − γG − θd       (1 −     δθ
                                                                 ρ)       θd(E) +                          + θd
                       =                            =                                  ρ
                                                                                               −
                                                                                                     ρ            ,
               Ȳ                   g+θ                     g+θ               1−    δ̄θ
                                                                                     ρ
                                                                                                    1−     δθ
                                                                                                           ρ

                CA           NFA
                       = g       ,
                Ȳ            Ȳ

where δγG (E) ≡ yδγG + (1 − y)δ ∗ γG
                                   ∗ E. These equations show that, given the exchange rate E, home


government spending stimulates home output more than one-for-one, i.e. with a Keynesian government
spending multiplier:
                                               ∂ξ      yδθ
                                                  =1+         > 1,
                                              ∂γG     ρ − δ̄θ

while it stimulates foreign output but less so, with a Keynesian government spending multiplier of

                                               ∂ξ ∗   1 yδθ
                                                    =           > 0.
                                               ∂γG    E ρ − δ̄θ

These two effects are intuitive given that government spending not only increases the demand for home
goods and reduces the asset demand arising from Home households, but also indirectly increases asset
supply by stimulating home output. This explains why the domestic government spending multiplier is
greater than one, and why the effect on foreign output is positive. Moreover, and for the same reason,
home government spending reduces the home Net Foreign Asset position and pushes the home Current
Account toward a deficit. Similar effects apply for foreign government spending.
   All in all, fiscal policy—be it in the form of public debt issuances, helicopter drops of money, or
budget-balanced increases in government spending—is a positive-sum remedy to a ZLB environment.


4.3   Public Debt and Currency Wars

Unfortunately, the incentives to expand public debt are further depressed by the possibility of currency
wars. Indeed, Proposition 5 shows that both a and a∗ increase in d:
                                                                 ¯ public debt issuances increase the

efforts of each country to engage in a currency war to depreciate its currency. This in turn discourages
each country from issuing more public debt.
   That is, the possibility of a currency war reduces the domestic benefits from issuing public debt. Recall


                                                            35
that—at a constant exchange rate—issuing more public debt in one country raises output in all countries.
This creates room for some coordination, as countries will not take into account the impact of their debt
issuance on foreign output. However, there is a more pernicious effect: issuing more public debt in one
country increases the incentives for foreign exchange intervention in the other country. The resulting
appreciation of the Home currency reduces the expansion in home output, in favor of foreign. Hence, the
possibility of a future currency war dilutes the domestic benefits from an expansion of public debt.16


5         A Model of the Diffusion of Safety Traps

So far, all assets have been safe in terms of their individual payoffs. Yet, from a macroeconomic perspective,
public debt was safer than private assets since its payoff did not change with the size of the recession at the
ZLB. We now extend our discussion by distinguishing between safe and risky private assets, and between
public and private provision of safe assets. This extension is conceptually important for five reasons. First,
what matters in our extended environment is not the overall scarcity of stores of value, but whether there
is a scarcity of safe assets. Second, this scarcity of safe assets depresses the return on safe assets, relative
to the expected return on risky assets: the risk premium increases. Third, our model uncovers a new form
of the ‘reserve currency paradox’ described earlier: a country issuing a reserve currency, i.e. a currency
expected to appreciate in bad times, faces lower safe real rates and can enter a safety trap earlier, or
experience a larger recession in a global safety trap. Fourth, as before, the financial account plays a key
role in transmitting economic shocks at the ZLB. However, the dimension of the financial account that
matters is the net flow of safe assets. At the ZLB, countries that are net issuers of safe assets experience a
worse recession, and vice-versa. Fifth, very naturally in our framework, net issuers of safe assets experience
an ‘exorbitant privilege’ i.e. a high return on their (riskier) gross external assets relative to their (safer)
gross external liabilities.
         We present a simple extension of the model, building on Caballero and Farhi (2017), that carries most
of the relevant intuition and establishes the results described above. In this extension, risk arises from
the (vanishingly) small possibility of a disaster shock, modeled as a permanent drop in output in both
countries. After the realization of this Poisson shock, all uncertainty is resolved: risk disappears and the
    16
     In the model, countries benefit from a depreciation of their currency because prices are set in the producer’s currency. A
large body of evidence indicates that international prices are instead set in a few dominant currencies (Gopinath, Boz, Casas,
Diez, Gourinchas and Plagborg-Møller, 2018). In that case, a depreciation of the dominant currency may be expansionary in
the dominant currency’s country and in the rest of the world. Mukhin (2017) develops this point in a New Keynesian model.
His result holds in our model in the limit where all trade is invoiced in a single dominant currency. In practice, while dollar
currency pricing is prevalent among emerging market economies, it is less common for developed economies. The potential
for currency wars among developed countries is therefore stronger than the potential for currency wars between advanced and
emerging countries.



                                                              36
economy behaves as in the benchmark model of Section 2.
    We focus on the case where the post-disaster economy stays away from the ZLB. Formally, this means
that the post-shock world natural interest rate rw,n from Eq. (15) remains positive. This assumption allows
us to isolate the role of the demand for, and supply of, safe assets in generating a stagnation equilibrium.
    Prior to the shock, a fraction of (locally) infinitely risk-averse investors only hold safe assets. These
assets consist of (default and risk-free) public debt—unaffected by the realization of the Poisson shocks—
and private assets that are created by tranching and securitizing private risky assets. All remaining assets
are held by risk neutral investors. These infinitely risk-averse investors capture a central notion of “fear,”
i.e. extreme uncertainty that translates into an extreme reluctance to hold any risk. When the supply
of safe assets, private or public, is insuﬀicient to meet the demand from risk averse investors, the market
segments and safe assets earn a safety premium relative to risky assets. As the demand for safe assets
grows, or as the capacity of the global economy to produce them shrinks, this safety premium can become
so large that it pushes the global economy into what Caballero and Farhi (2017) call a ‘safety trap.’
    The safety trap of this section and the liquidity trap of Section 2 are intimately related in the sense
that both arise when interest rates cannot fall far enough to restore equilibrium in asset markets. There
are, however, two important differences. First, exiting a safety trap requires an increase in the supply of, or
a reduction in the demand for, safe assets, regardless of the overall supply of, or demand for, other assets.
By contrast, exiting a liquidity trap only requires an increase in the net supply of assets, regardless of
their risk characteristics. Second, safety traps can exist and persist even in environments with long-dated
assets, as long as these assets remain risky: while the yield on safe assets decreases, risk-premia increase,
which bounds the value of long-lived assets and reduces the associated wealth effects.


5.1     Assumptions and Constrained Symmetric Competitive Equilibrium

We modify the model of Section 2 along the following lines.


Risk.    A Poisson shock occurs with instantaneous probability λ. When the Poisson shock occurs, all
uncertainty is resolved and output in both countries drops instantaneously and permanently by a factor
µ < 1. We assume that the natural interest rate after the Poisson shock remains positive: rw,n = −ρ +
          ¯
θδ̄/(1 − θd/µ) > 0. However, the possibility of an adverse future shock depresses the world natural interest
rate before the Poisson shock, which might be negative or positive. It follows that the economy may be at
the ZLB before the Poisson shock, but never after it.17 For simplicity, we study the limit λ → 0. Since some
  17
     We have also built a version of the model where liquidity traps are possible after the Poisson shock, for example because
of a deleveraging shock. This version of the model endogenizes µ as a recession ξ µ brought about by the deleveraging liquidity
trap after the Poisson shock. See Section 5.5 for a detailed discussion. We chose not to include this version of the model


                                                              37
agents are risk averse, the Poisson shock matters even in the limit where its intensity becomes vanishingly
small.


Heterogeneity in Risk Appetite: Neutrals and Knightians. Following the closed economy analysis
in Caballero and Farhi (2017), we allow for a fraction α of savers in each country to be ‘Knightians,’ i.e.
infinitely locally risk-averse agents. The remaining fraction 1 − α of savers are ‘Neutrals,’ i.e. risk-neutral
agents as in the benchmark model. We assume that Knightians have full home bias: they only consume
the goods of their own country. This implies that domestic Knightians only value financial assets whose
payoffs are constant in the home good numeraire. By contrast, Neutrals have no home bias. Formally, the
preferences of Home Knightians and Neutrals are given by the following stochastic differential equations:


                                 UtK   = 1{t−dt≤τθ <t} cH,t + 1{t≤τθ } min t {Ut+dt
                                                                               K
                                                                                    },

                                 UtN   = 1{t−dt≤τθ <t} cγH,t c1−γ
                                                              F,t + 1{t≤τθ } Et [Ut+dt ].
                                                                                  N




    Home Neutral and Knightian savers receive the same income (1 − δ) ξt Ȳt at birth, and save it until
the time of death by investing in different portfolios. We make two further assumptions that simplify the
analysis but do not matter for our substantive results: Neutral newborns pay all taxes and receive all new
trees. The foreign country has a similar setup.


Private Safe Assets: Tranching and securitization.                     At any point in time, Knightian savers will
only invest their wealth in domestic safe assets. These safe assets come in two varieties: public debt, which
we assume is default free, and private safe assets. We now describe the supply of these private safe assets.
    First, we simplify the analysis by assuming that δ = δ ∗ , so that there are no differences across countries
in the ability to pledge future output into current assets. Instead, the difference will come from their ability
to manufacture safe assets from risky ones. At any point in time in each country, a fraction of the existing
Lucas trees can be arbitrarily tranched into Arrow-Debreu securities that can then be arbitrarily traded
and recombined. These Arrow-Debreu securities cannot be sold short. The remaining fraction of the trees
can only be traded as a whole. Countries differ in their ability to generate tranched trees, and we denote
0 ≤ ϕ ≤ 1 (resp. 0 ≤ ϕ∗ ≤ 1) the fraction of tranched trees at Home (resp. in Foreign). As we shall see,
private safe assets can be synthesized using the right mix of Arrow-Debreu securities. Equilibrium in the
asset markets requires that Neutral savers hold all remaining assets: all the untranched trees as well as the
remaining public debt and Arrow-Debreu securities originating from tranched private assets and not held
because it is more complex and less connected to the baseline model.




                                                            38
by Knightians.
   It is convenient to classify combinations of Arrow-Debreu securities into two categories. We use the term
“macro puts” to denote combinations of Arrow-Debreu securities that pay zero dividends until the Poisson
shock realizes, and positive dividends after. Similarly, we use the term “macro calls” to denote Arrow-
Debreu securities that only pay positive dividends before the Poisson shock realizes, but zero dividends
after. It is immediate that the right combination of macro puts and macro calls on local trees will deliver
a riskless payoff in terms of the local good, regardless of the occurrence of the Poisson shock.


Monetary policy and ZLB.           By analogy with Section 2, Home monetary policy follows a truncated
Taylor rule that can be summarized as


                            it = max{rtK,n + πt , 0} with it = 0 whenever ξt < 1,                      (42)


where it is the home nominal interest rate and rtK,n is the relevant natural real risk-free interest rate at
Home, defined as the risk-free real interest rate that clears markets when ignoring the ZLB constraint. The
remaining assumptions are the same as in Section 2.


Constrained Symmetric Competitive Equilibrium under Financial Integration. We focus through-
out on constrained symmetric stochastic steady states under financial integration. We denote by rtK and
rtK∗ the risk-free interest rates in the home and foreign numeraires; by rtw the risky rate of return, which
is the same in the home and foreign numeraires since we are working in the limit λ → 0; and by Et and
Eτ the value of the exchange rate before and immediately after the Poisson shock. We further denote by
WtK and WtN the wealth of Home Knightians and Neutrals in the Home currency; by Vt and VtS the value
of Home private assets prior to and after the Poisson shock in the Home currency; and by V̂tS the value of
Home macro puts in the Home currency. Similar definitions hold for Foreign.
   First, along a BGP prior to the Poisson shock, the evolution of wealth for the two groups of Home
savers satisfies (with similar equations for Foreign):


                   gWtK = ẆtK = −θWtK + α (1 − δ) ξt Ȳt + rtK WtK ,                                 (43a)

                   gWtN = ẆtN = −θWtN + (1 − τ ) α (1 − δ) ξt Ȳt + rtw WtN + (ρ + g) Vt .           (43b)


   Second, home private asset value satisfies (with a similar equation for Foreign)

                                                              δξt
                                            Vt = V̂tS +           Ȳt .                                (44)
                                                          rtw  +ρ

                                                         39
       To understand Eq. (44) observe that home private assets Vt are composed of home macro puts worth
V̂tS , home macro calls, and untranched home trees. Macro calls constitute claims to a future stream of
dividends ϕδ Ȳt e−ρ(s−t) ds in an interval ds until the Poisson shock realizes, and 0 afterwards. In the limit
λ → 0, they are worth ϕδ Ȳt /(rtw + ρ). By the same logic, untranched home trees constitute claims to
a future stream of dividends (1 − ϕ)δ Ȳt e−ρ(s−t) ds in an interval ds until the Poisson shock realizes, and
(1 − ϕ)δµȲt e−ρ(s−t) ds afterwards. They are worth (1 − ϕ)δ Ȳt /(rtw + ρ).18 Equation (44) follows.
       Third, the value of Home macro puts V̂tS satisfies

                                                          rtw − rtK
                                                 V̂tS =             ϕVtS .                                           (45)
                                                              rtw

       To understand Eq. (45) observe that Home macro puts can be combined with macro calls to create
safe assets from the perspective of Home Knightians worth ϕVtS —i.e. a fraction ϕ of the value of home
assets after the Poisson shock. The required macro calls represent a constant future stream of dividends
rtK ϕVtS ds in an interval ds until the Poisson shock realizes. They are worth (rtK /rtw )ϕVtS . The value of
home macro puts is the residual ϕVtS − (rtK /rtw )ϕVtS . Eq. (45) follows.
       Moreover, home macro puts can be combined with macro calls to create safe assets from the perspective
of foreign Knightians worth (E/Eτ )ϕVtS . The required macro calls are worth (rtK∗ /rtw )(Et /Eτ )ϕVtS . The
value of home macro puts is also given by V̂tS = ϕVtS (1 − rK∗ /rw )(Et /Eτ ). Equating the two expressions
for the value of Home macro puts implies the following ‘modified UIP’ equation for the exchange rate:

                                                   rtw − rtK    Et
                                                              =    .                                                 (46)
                                                   rtw − rtK∗   Eτ

       Eq. (46) indicates that the exchange rate of the country with the lowest safe interest rate rtK , or
the highest risk premium rtw − rtK , appreciates following the realization of the Poisson shock. To gain
some intuition for this ‘modified UIP’ relationship, suppose that the Home currency appreciates upon the
realization of the Poisson shock (Et > Eτ ). It follows that Home safe assets in the Home numeraire are
also safe from the perspective of Foreign Knightians. Conversely, Foreign safe assets in Foreign’s numeraire
are not safe from the perspective of Home Knightians (they depreciate). This tilts the demand for safe
assets towards Home safe assets and away from Foreign safe assets: in equilibrium, Home safe assets must
offer a lower return rtK < rtK∗ , as indicated by Eq. (46).
       Another way to interpret the ‘modified UIP’ condition is in terms of an endogenous foreign exchange
risk premium ψt in the UIP equation Eq. (6) : rtK = rtK∗ + ψt + Ėt /Et . Prior to the Poisson shock along
  18
    Because these trees cannot be tranched, they are held by Neutrals, who do not value the associated dividends after the
Poisson shock realizes because the intensity of the Poisson process λ is vanishingly small.


                                                            40
the BGP, Ėt /Et = 0. Substituting into Eq. (46), we obtain an expression for ψt ,
                                                              
                                                         Eτ
                                              ψt =          − 1 (rtw − rtK ),                                           (47)
                                                         Et

that links the foreign exchange risk premium ψt and the risk premium (rtw − rtK ).
       In general, we can have a safety trap in one country but not in the other. For example, Home can be
in a safety trap with rK = 0 and ξ < 1 while Foreign is not: rK∗ > 0 and ξ ∗ = 1. Going back to our
modified UIP equation Eq. (46), this requires that Et > Eτ , i.e. that the currency in Home appreciates
when the Poisson shock occurs, with corresponding negative foreign exchange risk premium ψt < 0. This
offers another interpretation of the “reserve currency paradox” discussed earlier. If the home currency is
a reserve currency, i.e. a currency expected to appreciate in bad times, then the home risk free rate rK is
lower, and Home can be in a safety trap even if Foreign is not.
       If the economy escapes the ZLB after the shock, Eτ = 1 as prescribed by Proposition 2. We focus on
symmetric equilibria both inside and outside the global safety trap such that Et = 1 and ξt = ξt∗ prior to
the shock. It follows from Eq. (46) that rtK = rtK∗ = rtK,w . Equilibrium in asset markets after the Poisson
                                    ¯
shock then imposes that VtS = (1 − θd/µ)µ Ȳt /θ.19
       Fourth, along the BGP government debt dynamics can be expressed as

                                                  
                                           rtK − g d = τt (1 − α) (1 − δ) ξt ,                                        (48a)
                                                 
                                         rtK∗ − g d∗ = τt∗ (1 − α) (1 − δ) ξt∗ .                                      (48b)


       Fifth, market clearing conditions for home and foreign goods require

                                                                           Ȳt
                                            WtK + y WtN + Et WtN ∗          = ξt ,                                    (49a)
                                                                              θ
                                                                                 Ȳ ∗
                                 Et WtK∗ + (1 − y) WtN        + Et WtN ∗ = Et ξt∗ t .                                 (49b)
                                                                                   θ

To understand the first expression, recall that Home Knightians have full home bias, while Home and
Foreign Neutrals spend a share y of expenditures on the Home good.
  19
   To see this, observe that global asset demand after the shock is µȲ w /θ while global asset supply is VtS,w + d¯Ȳ w . By
symmetry of the equilibrium, VtS /Ȳt = VtS∗ /Ȳt∗ . The result follows.




                                                              41
    Finally, asset market clearing requires


                         Wtw = WtK + WtN + WtK∗ + WtN ∗ = Vt + Vt∗ + Dt + Dt∗ = Vtw + Dtw ,               (50a)

                WtK + WtK∗ ≤ ϕVtS + ϕ∗ VtS∗ + dȲt + d∗ Ȳt∗ .                                            (50b)


    The first equation states that global asset demand equals global asset supply. The second equation
states that Knightians’ wealth must be smaller than the payoff from safe public and private assets in
the event of a Poisson shock. As discussed in Caballero and Farhi (2017), there are different regimes
depending on whether Eq. (50b) holds as a strict inequality or as an equality. If Eq. (50b) holds as a strict
inequality, the marginal holder of safe assets is a Neutral investor and there are no risk premia: rtK = rtw
(unconstrained regime). In this regime, there is no scarcity of safe assets. In the second case, the marginal
holder of safe assets is a Knightian, Eq. (50b) holds with equality and there is a risk premium: rtw > rtK
(constrained regime). We assume throughout that we are in the constrained regime, which occurs when α
is large enough (so that the demand for safe assets is high enough), or when µ, ϕ or d¯ are small enough (so
that the supply of safe assets is small). We define a constrained symmetric competitive equilibrium under
financial integration.

Definition 2. Constrained Symmetric Competitive Equilibrium under Financial Integration
Given paths for the ratio of public debt to potential output, dt and d∗t , a constrained competitive symmetric
equilibrium under financial integration prior to the Poisson process consists of sequences for output gaps
ξt and ξt∗ , natural risk-free rates rtK,n and rtK,n∗ , household wealth for Knightians and Neutrals WtK , WtN ,
WtK∗ and WtN ∗ , private financial assets Vt and Vt∗ , macro puts VtS and VtS∗ , taxes τt and τt∗ , policy rates
it and i∗t , risky real return rtw , and nominal exchange rate Et , such that (i) household wealth and private
assets satisfy equations Eq. (43) Eq. (44), and Eq. (45); (ii) debt dynamics follow Eq. (48); (iii) policy rates
are set according to Eq. (42); (iv) goods markets clear Eq. (49); (iv) global asset markets clear Eq. (50a); (v)
the equilibrium is constrained, so that Eq. (50b) holds as an equality; and (vi) the equilibrium is symmetric,
so that Et = 1, ξt = ξt∗ , rtK = rtK∗ .


5.2   The Diffusion of Safety Traps

We can now characterize the constrained symmetric competitive equilibria. First, along a symmetric BGP
the exchange rate is constant E = 1, so real and nominal risk-free rates are constant and equated across
countries: rK = rK∗ = rK,w while ξ = ξ ∗ at the ZLB. We make the following assumption on the parameters
of the problem.



                                                       42
Assumption 2.
                                          µ > θd¯ ;                ¯ ϕ̄ + θd,
                                                         α > (µ − θd)      ¯


where ϕ̄ = yϕ + (1 − y)ϕ∗ is the global tranching capacity.

   The first part of Assumption 2 ensures that the supply of public assets remains limited after the Poisson
shock. It is necessary for rw,n > 0 after the Poisson shock, as we assumed. The second part ensures that
the competitive equilibrium is constrained, i.e. that the demand for safe assets (controlled by α) exceeds
                                    ¯
the supply (controlled by µ, ϕ̄ and d).


Safety Trap Equilibria.      From the constrained safe asset market condition Eq. (50b), we obtain

                                                                        Ȳ w
                                           W K,w =       µ − θd¯ ϕ̄ + θd¯       .                       (51)
                                                                             θ

This equation indicates how the market value of safe assets varies with the supply of private safe assets
                                                                             ¯
(controlled by ϕ̄ and µ) and the supply of public safe assets (controlled by d).
   Next, from the wealth accumulation equation for Knightians Eq. (43a), we obtain

                                                           α (1 − δ) ξ Ȳ w
                                               W K,w =                      .                           (52)
                                                           g + θ − rK,w

   Combining these two expressions, we obtain an expression for the natural risk free rate rK,w,n and the
natural output gap ξ w,n :
                                                                                 
                                                                  µ − θd¯ ϕ̄ + θd¯
                                                                  α−
                             r   K,w,n
                                         = g + δθ − (1 − δ) θ                      ,                  (53a)
                                                               µ − θd¯ ϕ̄ + θd¯
                                                            
                                             g + θ µ − θd¯ ϕ̄ + θd¯
                                 ξ w,n   =                         .                                   (53b)
                                           (1 − δ) θ        α

   When rK,w,n ≥ 0, the economy avoids the safety trap and ξ = 1. When instead the natural risk free rate
becomes negative, the global economy experiences a recession, ξ = ξ w,n . Eq. (53a) reveals that whether
a safety trap occurs is determined entirely by the demand for and supply of safe assets. The tighter the
                                                                    ¯ ϕ̄ + θd),
scarcity of safe assets (as measured by the gap between α and (µ − θd)      ¯ the lower the risk-free rate.

A safety trap obtains when this scarcity is so acute that the risk free rate reaches the ZLB. This may occur
even if the overall supply of assets is suﬀicient to avoid a liquidity trap when the regime is unconstrained.


Risk Premium.        Next, we solve for the risky return rw . We first use the market clearing conditions
Eq. (49) and the global asset market equilibrium Eq. (50a) to obtain total asset demand W w and private


                                                             43
asset supply V w :
                                                          Ȳ w
                                               Ww = ξ          = V w + d¯Ȳ w .                                          (54)
                                                            θ

       Replacing V w in Eq. (54) using Eq. (44) and Eq. (45), we obtain
                                                     
                                               δθ             rw − rK           
                                     ξ 1−                 =           ϕ̄ µ − θ ¯ + θd.
                                                                               d    ¯                                    (55)
                                             rw + ρ              rw

                                                                                                         ¯
       This implicitly defines rw . Since rw ≥ rK and ξ ≤ 1, it is easy to check that rw > −ρ + δθ/(1 − θd),
i.e. the risky return is higher than the autarky natural rate in the benchmark model of Section 2. The
scarcity of safe assets increases the risk premium rw − rK,w . Everything else equal, rw is decreasing in ξ
so that a deeper safety trap is associated with higher risk premia.


Net Foreign Assets, Current Accounts and ‘Exorbitant Privilege’. We can express Home’s Net
Foreign Asset position independent of whether the global economy is in a safety trap equilibrium. After
some simple manipulations, the Net Foreign Asset position can be expressed as

                         θ − (rw − rK,w )                      K,w                         
                                              ¯ − θ−r −ρr −r
            NFA                                      w    w
                     = −                  d − d                                           ¯ ,
                                                                      ϕ(µ − θd) − ϕ̄(µ − θd)                           (56a)
             Ȳ             θ+g−r   w             θ+g−r w   θr w

             CA          NFA
                     = g      .                                                                                        (56b)
               Ȳ         Ȳ

       Suppose that Home has more securitization capacity than Foreign (ϕ > ϕ∗ ) while d = d∗ = d.
                                                                                                ¯ In

this case, Home runs a negative Net Foreign Asset position and a Current Account deficit as long as
rw + ρ − θ < 0, which is automatically verified in equilibrium.20 Home’s larger securitization capacity
increases the value of its assets: it is able to tranche out more “expensive” safe assets (high price, low rate
of return) from its risky assets than Foreign. Therefore, Home experiences a version of the “exorbitant
privilege” documented by Gourinchas and Rey (2007): It is able to run a permanent negative Net Foreign
Asset position and Current Account deficit because it pays a lower interest rate on its liabilities than on
                                                                               ¯
its assets. A similar effect arises if Home issues more debt than Foreign (d > d).


Gross Capital Flows and Metzler Diagram in Safe Assets.                           Both outside of a safety trap (when
rK,w,n > 0) and in a symmetric safety trap (when rK,w,n < 0), we can represent the equilibrium determi-
  20
    There are two opposing effects of a larger securitization capacity. First, it increases the value of home assets. Second,
the wealth of home agents accumulates faster because of the larger value of new securitized trees. The first effect worsens
the Net Foreign Asset position and Current Account, while the second effect improves them. Since the strength of the
second effect depends negatively on the propensity to consume θ and positively on the rate of depreciation ρ, the condition
rw < θ − ρ essentially bounds the strength of the second effect and guarantees that the first effect dominates. This condition
is automatically verified in equilibrium.



                                                               44
nation of the safe interest rate rK,w and of the recession ξ through a Metzler diagram in safe assets. The
key is to focus on the safe asset component CAK of the Current Account and the corresponding safe asset
Component of the Net Foreign Asset position N F AK :

                                  N F AK      α(1 − δ)ξ w   ϕ(µ − θd) + θd
                                           =              −                ,
                                    Ȳ       θ+g−r    K,w         θ
                                    CAK        N F AK
                                           = g        .
                                      Ȳ         Ȳ

   The Metzler diagram in safe assets implies that in the global equilibrium, countries that are net suppliers
of safe assets experience a larger recession than under financial autarky.
   We summarize these results in the following proposition.

Proposition 7 (Constrained Symmetric Competitive Equilibrium, Safety Traps, Risk Premia, Net Foreign
Assets and Current Accounts under Financial Integration). Under Assumption 2, the constrained symmetric
competitive equilibrium is such that:

  • The global economy satisfies rK,w = max(rK,w,n , 0), ξ = min(ξ w,n , 1) and E = 1.

        – If rK,w,n ≥ 0 then ξ w,n ≥ 1 and the global economy is outside the Safety Trap. There is a unique
           constrained symmetric balanced growth path equilibrium with a positive risk free interest rate
           and output at its potential, ξ = 1;

        – If rK,w,n < 0 then ξ w,n < 1 and the global economy is in a Safety Trap, there is a unique
           constrained symmetric balanced growth path equilibrium with rK,w = 0 and ξ = ξ w,n < 1.

  • Outside or inside the Safety Trap, there is a positive risk premium rw − rK,w , decreasing in the size
     of the global recession ξ.

                                                         ¯ or private (ϕ > ϕ̄) safe assets, it is a net
  • If Home has a larger capacity to produce public (d > d)
     creditor, runs a current account surplus, and enjoys a version of the ‘exorbitant privilege’, paying
     lower interest rates on its (safe) liabilities than on its (riskier) assets.

  • In the global equilibrium, countries that are net suppliers of safe assets experience a larger recession
     than under financial autarky.

Proof. See text.




                                                      45
5.3    Policies to escape Safety Traps

We now briefly consider two policies to address a safety trap: debt issuance and quantitative easing. We
focus on these policies because their mechanisms differ in safety traps and in liquidity traps. By contrast,
trade wars work in similar ways in both cases.21


Debt Issuance and Fiscal Capacity. Assume that the global economy is experiencing a global safety
trap with rK,w,n < 0. Before the Poisson shock, fiscal capacity is irrelevant since rK,w − g = −g < 0. It
might therefore be tempting to increase public debt d in order to escape the safety trap, as in Section 4.1.
However, fiscal capacity still matters after the Poisson shock if rK,w = rw > g and taxes are needed to
stabilize the debt. Imagine an initial situation where the foreign country is at its fiscal capacity after
the Poisson shock, defined as the maximum level of debt achievable at the highest sustainable tax rate.
Suppose that the foreign country nonetheless decides to increase its debt before the Poisson shock. Any
additional increase in debt is effectively risky: it does not increase its payoff after the Poisson shock. In
turn, Knightians will not be willing to hold the increase in public debt: debt issuance would have no effect
on ξ prior to the Poisson shock. The payoff to an increase in foreign debt after the Poisson shock could
shrink if the increase in debt causes the foreign country to default on its debt, as could happen with a fixed
cost of defaulting. This would reduce ξ. It is the fiscal capacity of the country after it exits the safety trap
that matters for the issuance of public debt during a safety trap.


Quantitative Easing.           Consider a government purchase of risky assets (whether macro calls or un-
tranched trees) funded by issuing public debt. The effect is the same as issuing debt, with one additional
advantage: the assets on the government balance sheet can be sold after the Poisson shock to help pay
down the debt, if fiscal capacity is stretched. Government purchases of safe assets (Poisson puts) are
ineffective since they swap private safe assets for public safe assets.


5.4    Risk Premia and Safe Asset Imbalances

Our safety trap extension makes two important predictions (Proposition 7): risk premia rw − rK,w increase
at the ZLB with the size of the recession (a lower ξ), and net suppliers of safe assets experience a dispro-
portionate share of global stagnation. We briefly review the empirical evidence on these two predictions.
Panel (a) of Fig. 6 shows the Duarte and Rosa (2015) estimate of the expected return to U.S. equities along
  21
    Currency wars also work in the same way, but they are easier to analyze in the version of the model with a liquidity trap
after the Poisson shock discussed in Section 5.5, which recovers the exchange rate indeterminacy of the baseline model. In the
absence of liquidity traps after the Poisson shock, the exchange rate is determinate, and currency wars would have to involve
forms of forward guidance involving commitments to low rates after the Poisson shock.



                                                             46
                                                                                                                  percent
        Percent annualized                                                     Financial Crisis
                                                                                                                 5.0
       28

       26                                                                                                        4.5
       24
                                                                                                                 4.0
       22
                                                                                                                 3.5
       20

       18                                                                                                        3.0
       16
                                                                                                                 2.5
       14

       12                                                                                                        2.0

       10                                                                                                        1.5
        8
                                                                                                                 1.0
        6

        4                                                                                                        0.5

        2                                                                                                        0.0
        0                                                                                                           1980    1983   1986   1989   1992     1995   1998   2001   2004   2007   2010   2013   2016   2019
         1980                1985   1990          1995          2000          2005            2010   2015
                                      One-year Treasury yield    One year ahead ERP                                                                     Baa-Treas         Aaa-Treas


                               (a) Expected Equity Risk Premium                                                                                     (b) Bond Premia

Note: Panel (a) shows the one-year US Treasury yield (dark area) and the one-year expected risk premium (ERP) (grey area), calculated
as the first principal component of 20 models of the one-year-ahead equity risk premium. The figure shows that the equity risk premium
has increased, especially since the Global Financial Crisis. Source: One-year Treasury yield: Federal Reserve H.15; ERP: Duarte and Rosa
(2015). Panel (b) shows the spread between Moody’s Aaa and Baa seasoned corporate bond yields and the 20-year constant maturity
Treasury. The Baa and Aaa spreads have increased since the 2008 financial crisis. Source: Fred.

                                                                 Figure 6: Bond and Equity Premia, 1980-2019


with the yield on one-year Treasuries. The difference between the two lines (light blue area) represents
an estimate of the one-year expected equity risk premium (ERP). The figure illustrates how the decline in
safe interest rates has not been matched by a decline in expected equity return, i.e. the risk premium has
increased dramatically. Panel (b) reports two estimates of corporate bond risk premia: the Baa and Aaa
spread over a 20-year Treasury yield. This figure also indicates a gradual increase in bond risk premia, es-
pecially after the financial crisis of 2008, a point first made by Negro, Giannone, Giannoni and Tambalotti
(2017). Krishnamurthy (2019) further observes that bond risk premia are even more elevated when one
takes into account the decline in volatility and default risk: because volatility has substantially decreased,
default risk within a rating class, for example Baa, has decreased; a given credit spread for a given rating
class is therefore indicative of a greater price of risk now than in the past. Fixing the riskiness of a bond
instead of its rating would therefore result in more rapidly increasing spreads and risk premia over time.
       Finally, Fig. 7 reports a simple estimate of the Net Foreign Asset position in safe assets, N F AK ,
relative to world GDP from 1980 to 2015. The Net Foreign Asset position in safe assets is constructed
from Lane and Milesi-Ferretti (2018)’s update to their External Wealth of Nations dataset as the sum of
Oﬀicial Reserves (minus Gold holdings), Portfolio Debt and Other Assets, minus Portfolio Debt and Other
Liabilities.22 The figure shows that the net supply of safe assets originates largely with the U.S. and—to
  22
     This is a crude estimate of net safe asset positions since neither portfolio debt assets and liabilities nor other assets and
liabilities (mostly cross border bank loans) need be safe. Nevertheless, these holdings can be considered safer than portfolio



                                                                                                            47
                         % OF WORLD GDP
                                                                   Asian Crisis                 Financial Crisis    Eurozone Crisis
                         15




                         10




                          5




                          0




                          -5




                         -10




                         -15
                               1980       1983   1986     1989    1992      1995     1998     2001     2004        2007     2010      2013



                                 U.S.      Euro Area    Japan    Oil Producers     Emerging Asia ex China     China       Rest of the World



Note: The graph shows Net Safe positions as a fraction of world GDP. Net Safe positions are defined as the sum of Oﬀicial Reserves
(minus Gold), Portfolio Debt and Other Assets, minus Portfolio Debt and Other Liabilities. The net supply of safe assets originates
largely with the US and—to a smaller extent—the Eurozone. Source: Lane and Milesi-Ferretti (2018) update of the External Wealth of
Nations. Oil Producers: Bahrain, Canada, Iran, Iraq, Kuwait, Libya, Mexico, Nigeria, Norway, Oman, Russia, Saudi Arabia, United Arab
Emirates, Venezuela; Emerging Asia ex-China: India, Indonesia, Korea, Malaysia, Philippines, Singapore, Taiwan, Thailand, Vietnam.

                                           Figure 7: Net Safe Asset Imbalances, 1980-2015


a smaller extent—the Eurozone. In 2015, the U.S. net supply of safe assets accounted for 11.5% of world
GDP, up from 5% in 2000, while the Eurozone net supply accounted for 1.5% of world GDP. On the net
demand side, we observe a large increase from China, mostly in the form of Oﬀicial Reserves, from 0.7%
of world GDP in 2000 to 4.9% in 2015; a large increase from oil producers, from 0.24% in 2000 to 2.70%
in 2015; and a continued large absorption from Japan (around 2.7% of world GDP). This figure differs
substantially from Fig. 1. It indicates that the U.S. external safe asset imbalances have been increasing
over time, unlike global imbalances which have stabilized.23


5.5    Liquidity Trap after the Poisson Shock

Finally, we offer some remarks for the case where the global economy experiences a liquidity trap after the
Poisson shock. This occurs if rw,n < 0. Because we want the ZLB equilibrium prior to the Poisson shock
to be driven by safe asset scarcity—and not by a general lack of stores of value—we consider a slightly
equity and direct investment.
   23
      Figure Fig. 1 reports flows (current accounts), while Fig. 7 reports stocks (net safe asset holdings). This is mostly because
it is easier to construct estimates of the Net Foreign Asset position in safe assets N F AK than the corresponding Current
Account CAK .



                                                                                   48
different version of the model where the Poisson shock results in a decline in the marginal propensity to
consume from θ to θµ < θ.24 In the interest of brevity, we qualitatively describe the main results. First,
because the economy remains in a liquidity trap, the exchange rate post Poisson E µ is indeterminate
within some range. In a symmetric equilibrium the exchange rate before the Poisson shock will remain
constant: E = E µ . Next, the intensity of the scarcity of safe assets determines if the economy is in a Safety
Trap. When it is, as in the benchmark model, the exchange rate determines the relative output levels in
Home and Foreign. A cheaper exchange rate translates into higher output and a larger Net Foreign Asset
Position. A depreciation of the currency increases the supply of (foreign) safe assets in Home, lifting its
output. As in the benchmark model, we recover the currency and trade wars result. As in that model,
debt issuances are not an issue since rK − g is always negative: the government can always issue more safe
assets and does not face any fiscal capacity constraint.


6        Final Remarks

World interest rates and global imbalances go hand in hand: Countries with large safe asset shortages run
Current Account surpluses and push the world interest rate down. At the ZLB, the global asset market
remains in disequilibrium when output is at its potential: the resulting global (safe) asset shortage cannot
be resolved by lower world interest rates. It is instead alleviated by a world recession, which is propagated
by global imbalances: Current Account surplus countries push world output down, exerting a negative
effect on the world economy. Economic policy becomes more interconnected across the world, with either
negative or positive spillovers depending on the policy instrument. Exchange rate policy becomes a zero-
sum game of currency wars where each country can depreciate its exchange rate to stimulate its economy, at
the expense of other countries. The same logic and incentives hold for tariffs on foreign goods. In contrast,
safe public debt issuances, increases in government spending, and support for private securitization are
positive-sum and stimulate output in all countries. Our Metzler Diagram in Quantities is a powerful new
tool for illustrating the economics of global imbalances and economic wars at the ZLB. Safe asset shortages
also push the global economy into a global downturn, a global safety trap. This depresses the return on safe
assets relative to risky ones as risk premia increase. Reserve currency countries can be pushed into a safety
trap earlier, or experience a larger recession. Finally, recessions propagate through the safe component of
the financial account. Net Safe Asset issuers experience a disproportionate share of the global recession.

    24                                                                                                          ¯
    In our earlier model, it is possible to generate a liquidity trap after the shock if rw,n = −ρ + θδ/(1 − θd/µ)   < 0.
However, in that case it is immediate that the unconstrained regime also experiences a liquidity trap before the Poisson
shock, i.e. −ρ + θδ/(1 − θd)¯ < 0. To isolate the effect of safe asset scarcity, we consider instead an environment where
               ¯                              ¯ < 0.
−ρ + θδ/(1 − θd) > 0 while −ρ + θµ δ/(1 − θµ d)


                                                           49
References
Barro, Robert J. and Andrew Mollerus, “Safe Assets,” NBER Working Papers 20652, National
 Bureau of Economic Research, Inc October 2014.

Benigno, Pierpaolo and Federica Romei, “Debt deleveraging and the exchange rate,” Journal of
 International Economics, 2014, 93 (1), 1–16.

Bernanke, Ben S., “The Global Saving Glut and the U.S. Current Account Deficit,” Sandridge Lecture,
 Virginia Association of Economics, Richmond, Virginia, Federal Reserve Board March 2005.

  , Carol C. Bertaut, Laurie DeMarco, and Steven B. Kamin, “International capital flows and
  the returns to safe assets in the United States 2003-2007,” Financial Stability Review, February 2011,
  (15), 13–26.

Blanchard, Olivier J. and Nobuhiro Kiyotaki, “Monopolistic Competition, Aggregate Demand Ex-
  ternalities and Real Effects of Nominal Money,” American Economic Review, February 1987, 77 (4),
  647–666.

Caballero, Ricardo J., “On the Macroeconomics of Asset Shortages,” in Andreas Beyer and Lucrezia
 Reichlin, eds., The Role of Money: Money and Monetary Policy in the Twenty-First Century, Vol. 4 of
 European Central Banking Conference 2006, pp. 272–283.

  , “The ‘Other’ Imbalance and the Financial Crisis,” NBER Working Papers 15636, National Bureau of
  Economic Research, Inc 2010.

   and Arvind Krishnamurthy, “Global Imbalances and Financial Fragility,” American Economic
  Review, May 2009, 99 (2), 584–88.

  and Emmanuel Farhi, “The Safety Trap,” The Review of Economic Studies, 2017, 85 (1), 223–274.

  ,   , and Pierre-Olivier Gourinchas, “An Equilibrium Model of “Global Imbalances” and Low
  Interest Rates,” American Economic Review, March 2008, 98 (1), 358–93.

  ,   , and    , “Financial Crash, Commodity Prices and Global Imbalances,” Brookings Papers on
  Economic Activity, 2008, 2, 1–55.

Christiano, Lawrence, Martin Eichenbaum, and Sergio Rebelo, “When Is the Government Spend-
 ing Multiplier Large?,” Journal of Political Economy, 2011, 119 (1), 78 – 121.

Coeurdacier, Nicolas, Stéphane Guibaud, and Keyu Jin, “Credit Constraints and Growth in a
 Global Economy,” American Economic Review, 2015, 105 (9), 2838–2881.

Cook, David and Michael B. Devereux, “Sharing the Burden: Monetary and Fiscal Responses to a
 World Liquidity Trap,” American Economic Journal: Macroeconomics, July 2013, 5 (3), 190–228.

   and , “The Optimal Currency Area in a Liquidity Trap,” NBER Working Papers 19588, National
  Bureau of Economic Research, Inc October 2013.

   and , “Exchange rate flexibility under the zero lower bound,” Globalization and Monetary Policy
  Institute Working Paper 198, Federal Reserve Bank of Dallas 2014.

Correia, Isabel, Emmanuel Farhi, Juan Pablo Nicolini, and Pedro Teles, “Unconventional Fiscal
 Policy at the Zero Bound,” American Economic Review, June 2013, 103 (4), 1172–1211.


                                                  50
Corsetti, Giancarlo and Paolo Pesenti, “Welfare And Macroeconomic Interdependence,” The Quar-
 terly Journal of Economics, May 2001, 116 (2), 421–445.

Dang, Tri Vi, Gary Gorton, and Bengt Holmström, “The Information Sensitivity of a Security,”
 MIT mimeo, MIT July 2015.

Devereux, Michael B. and James Yetman, “Capital Controls, Global Liquidity Traps, and the Inter-
 national Policy Trilemma,” Scandinavian Journal of Economics, 01 2014, 116 (1), 158–189.

Duarte, Fernando M. and Carlo Rosa, “The equity risk premium: a review of models,” Staff Reports
 714, Federal Reserve Bank of New York February 2015.

Eggertsson, Gauti B. and Michael Woodford, “Optimal Monetary Policy in a Liquidity Trap,” NBER
 Working Papers 9968, National Bureau of Economic Research September 2003.

   and Neil R. Mehrotra, “A Model of Secular Stagnation,” NBER Working Papers 20574 October
  2014.

  and Paul Krugman, “Debt, Deleveraging, and the Liquidity Trap: A Fisher-Minsky-Koo Approach,”
  The Quarterly Journal of Economics, 2012, 127 (3), 1469–1513.

  , Neil R. Mehrotra, Sanjay Singh, and Lawrence H. Summers, “Contagious Malady? Global
  Dimensions of Secular Stagnation,” Working paper, Brown University 2015.

Erceg, Christopher and Jesper Lindé, “Is There A Fiscal Free Lunch In A Liquidity Trap?,” Journal
  of the European Economic Association, 02 2014, 12 (1), 73–107.

Farhi, Emmanuel and Iván Werning, “Fiscal Multipliers: Liquidity Traps and Currency Unions,”
  NBER Working Papers 18381, National Bureau of Economic Research, Inc September 2012.

Fornaro, Luca and Federica Romei, “The Paradox of Global Thrift,” American Economic Review,
  2019, forthcoming.

Gennaioli, Nicola, Andrei Shleifer, and Robert Vishny, “Neglected risks, financial innovation, and
 financial fragility,” Journal of Financial Economics, 2012, 104 (3), 452–468.

Gopinath, Gita, Emine Boz, Camila Casas, Federico Diez, Pierre-Olivier Gourinchas, and
 Mikkel Plagborg-Møller, “Dominant Currency Paradigm,” Dec 2018. NBER Working Paper No.
 22943.

Gorton, Gary, Slapped by the Invisible Hand: The Panic of 2007 number 9780199734153. In ‘OUP
 Catalogue.’, Oxford University Press, July 2010.

  and Guillermo Ordonez, “The Supply and Demand for Safe Assets,” NBER Working Papers 18732,
  National Bureau of Economic Research, Inc January 2013.

  and    , “Collateral Crises,” American Economic Review, February 2014, 104 (2), 343–378.

Gourinchas, Pierre-Olivier and Hélène Rey, “From World Banker to World Venture Capitalist:
 US External Adjustment and the Exorbitant Privilege,” in Richard Clarida, ed., G-7 Current Account
 Imbalances: Sustainability and Adjustment, University of Chicago Press, Chicago, 2007, pp. 11–55.

  and Helene Rey, “External Adjustment, Global Imbalances and Valuation Effects,” in Gita Gopinath,
  Elhanan Helpman, and Ken Rogoff, eds., Handbook of International Economics, Vol. 4, Elsevier, 2014.


                                                 51
  , Hélène Rey, and Nicolas Govillot, “Exorbitant Privilege and Exorbitant Duty,” mimeo, UC
  Berkeley 2010.

Greenwood, Robin, Samuel Hanson, and Jeremy C. Stein, “A Gap-Filling Theory of Corporate
 Debt Maturity Choice,” Journal of Finance, 09 2015, 117 (3), 449–469.

Guerrieri, Veronica and Guido Lorenzoni, “Credit Crises, Precautionary Savings, and the Liquidity
 Trap,” Working Paper 17583, National Bureau of Economic Research November 2011.

He, Zhiguo, Arvind Krishnamurthy, and Konstantin Milbradt, “A Model of the Reserve Asset,”
 Technical Report, Stanford University, Graduate School of Business June 2015.

Holmström, Bengt and Jean Tirole, “Private and public supply of liquidity,” Journal of political
 Economy, 1998, 106 (1), 1–40.

Jeanne, Olivier, “The Global Liquidity Trap,” Working paper, John Hopkins University 2009.

Kareken, John and Neil Wallace, “On the Indeterminacy of Equilibrium Exchange Rates,” The Quar-
 terly Journal of Economics, 1981, 96 (2), 207–222.

Keynes, John Maynard, The General Theory of Employment, Interest and Money, Palgrave MacMillan,
 1936.

Kocherlakota, Narayana, “Low Real Interest Rates,” 22nd Annual Hyman P. Minsky Conference, Levy
 Economics Institute of Bard College, Federal Reserve Bank of Minneapolis 2014.

Krishnamurthy, Arvind, “Comments on Rachel and Summers ‘On Falling Neutral Real Rates, Fiscal
 Policy, and the Risk of Secular Stagnation’,” in “Brookings Papers on Economic Activity,” Vol. Spring,
 Brookings, 2019.

Krugman, Paul, “It’s Baaack: Japan’s Slump and the Return of the Liquidity Trap,” Brookings Papers
 on Economic Activity, 1998, 29 (2), 137–206.

Lane, Philip R. and Gian Maria Milesi-Ferretti, “The External Wealth of Nations Revisited: Inter-
  national Financial Integration in the Aftermath of the Global Financial Crisis,” IMF Economic Review,
  Mar 2018, 66 (1), 189–222.

Maggiori, Matteo, “Financial Intermediation, International Risk Sharing, and Reserve Currencies,” 2012
 Meeting Papers 146, Society for Economic Dynamics 2012.

Mendoza, Enrique G., Vincenzo Quadrini, and José-Víctor Ríos-Rull, “Financial Integration,
 Financial Development, and Global Imbalances,” Journal of Political Economy, June 2009, 117 (3),
 371–416.

Moreira, Alan and Alexi Savov, “The Macroeconomics of Shadow Banking,” NBER Working Papers
 20335, National Bureau of Economic Research, Inc July 2014.

Mukhin, Dmitry, “An equilibrium model of the International Price System,” 2017. mimeo Princeton
 University.

Negro, Marco Del, Domenico Giannone, Marc P. Giannoni, and Andrea Tambalotti, “Safety,
 Liquidity, and the Natural Rate of Interest,” Brookings Papers on Economic Activity, 2017, 48 (1
 (Spring), 235–316.



                                                  52
Obstfeld, Maurice and Kenneth Rogoff, “Global implications of self-oriented national monetary
 rules,” The Quarterly journal of economics, 2002, 117 (2), 503–535.

Stein, Jeremy C., “Monetary Policy as Financial-Stability Regulation,” Technical Report 1 2012.

Svensson, Lars E.O., “Escaping from a Liquidity Trap and Deflation: The Foolproof Way and Others,”
  Journal of Economic Perspectives, Fall 2003, 17 (4), 145–166.

Werning, Iván, “Managing a Liquidity Trap: Monetary and Fiscal Policy,” Technical Report 2012. NBER
 Working Papers.




                                                 53
A Appendix
A.1    New-Keynesian Microfoundations for Section 2.1
We provide one possible exact microfoundation for demand determined output in the presence of nominal rigidities
in the model in Section 2.1. The microfoundation is in the New Keynesian tradition. We focus on the case of
Home (the case of Foreign is identical). In a nutshell, domestic monopolistic firms produce imperfectly substitutable
varieties of home intermediate goods and compete in prices. The firms’ posted prices are rigid in the home currency,
and that they accommodate demand at the posted price. The different varieties of the home intermediate goods are
combined into a home final good by a competitive sector according to a Dixit Stiglitz aggregator. These assumptions
are standard in the New Keynesian literature starting with Blanchard and Kiyotaki (1987).
    Between t and t + dt, there is an endowment Ȳt dt of each differentiated variety i ∈ [0, 1] of non-traded input.
Each variety i of non-traded input can be transformed into one unit of variety i of home intermediate good using a
one-to-one linear technology by a monopolistic firm indexed by i which is owned and operated by the agents supplying
variety i of the non-traded input, in proportion to their holdings of non-traded inputs.
    The differentiated varieties of final home intermediate goods are then combined together into a home final good
by a competitive sector according to a standard Dixit-Stiglitz aggregator
                                                     Z    1             σ−1
                                                                           σ
                                                                       σ−1
                                              Yt =             YH,i,t diσ
                                                                              dt,
                                                       0

where YH,i,t dt is the quantity of variety i of the final good. The price of the final home good is
                                                       Z          1            1−σ
                                                                                  1


                                              PH,t =                   p1−σ
                                                                        H,i,t di       ,
                                                               0

where pH,i,t is the home currency price posted by monopolistic firm i for variety i of the home intermediate good.
The resulting individual demand for each variety is given by
                                                                            −σ
                                                                   pH,i,t
                                              YH,i,t dt =                          Yt dt.
                                                                   PH,t

    Prices set by monopolistic firms are perfectly rigid in the home currency, equal to each other. We normalize
these prices in the home currency to one
                                                 pH,i,t = PH,t = 1.
All the varieties of intermediate goods are then produced in the same amount

                                               YH,i,t dt = Yt dt = ξt Ȳt dt.

     Between t and t + dt, the varieties of non-traded inputs indexed by i ∈ [δ, 1], are distributed equally to the
different agents who are born during that interval of time. The varieties of non-traded inputs indexed by i ∈ [0, δ]
accrue equally as dividends on the different Lucas trees.
     Real income (equal to real output) Yt dt is divided into an endowment (1 − δ)Yt dt distributed equally to agents
who are born during that interval of time, and the dividend δYt dt of the Lucas trees. This provides an exact
microfoundation for the model presented in Section 2.1.

A.2    Inflation
So far, we have assumed that prices are fully rigid. In this section, we relax this assumption and allow for some price
adjustment through a Phillips curve.
     This extension gives us the opportunity to reiterate some well-known insights about the economics of liquidity
traps, and to obtain some new ones. The former are that credibly higher inflation targets reduce the severity of a
liquidity trap, that more (downward) price flexibility can exacerbate the severity of the trap as the economy may
fall into a deflationary spiral. The less known one is that in a global liquidity trap, it is the more rigid country that
experiences the worst trap (note the contrast between this relative rigidity and the aggregate rigidity implication).


                                                                   54
Moreover, it is now possible for some regions of the world to escape the liquidity trap if their inflation expectations
are suﬀiciently high.

A.2.1     Extending the Model
Phillips curve. We wish to capture the idea that wages, or prices, are rigid downwards, but not upwards. We
follow the literature and assume that prices and wages cannot fall faster than a certain limit pace, perhaps determined
by a “social norm” and that this limit pace is faster if there is more slack in the economy:25

                                                  πH,t ≥ −κ0 − κ1 (1 − ξt ),
                                                   ∗
                                                  πF,t ≥ −κ∗0 − κ∗1 (1 − ξt∗ ),

                                 ∗          ∗    ∗
where πH,t = ṖH,t /PH,t (resp. πF,t = ṖF,t  /PF,t ) denotes the domestic (resp. foreign) inflation rate, and where κ1 ≥ 0
      ∗
and κ1 ≥ 0. Moreover, we assume that if there is slack in the economy, prices or wages fall as fast as they can: ξt < 1
implies that πH,t = −κ0 − κ1 (1 − ξt ) and ξt∗ < 1 implies that πF,t∗
                                                                       = −κ∗0 − κ∗1 (1 − ξt∗ ). We capture this requirement
                                                                                            ∗
with the complementary slackness conditions [πH,t +κ0 +κ1 (1−ξt )](1−ξt ) = 0 and [πF,t         +κ∗0 +κ∗1 (1−ξt∗ )](1−ξt∗ ) = 0.
    To summarize, there are two Phillips curves, one for Home and one for Foreign. The home Phillips curve traces
out an increasing curve in the (πH,t , ξt ) space, which becomes vertical at ξt = 1. The foreign Phillips curve is similar.

Monetary policy. We assume that monetary policy is conducted according to simple truncated Taylor rules,
where the nominal interest rate responds to domestic inflation:

                                          it = max{rtn + π̄ + ψπ (πH,t − π̄), 0},
                                          i∗t = max{rtn∗ + π̄ ∗ + ψπ∗ (πF,t
                                                                        ∗
                                                                            − π̄ ∗ ), 0}.

In these equations rtn and rtn∗ are the relevant natural interest rates at Home and in Foreign, which depend on whether
we analyze the financial integration equilibrium or the financial autarky equilibrium. We denote by π̄ ≥ max {−κ0 , 0}
and π̄ ∗ ≥ max {−κ∗0 , 0} the home and foreign inflation targets, and ψπ > 1 and ψπ∗ > 1 are Taylor rule coeﬀicients.
    For simplicity, we take the limit of large Taylor rule coeﬀicients ψπ → ∞ and ψπ∗ → ∞. This specification of
monetary policy implies that inflation in any given country is equal to its target and that there is no recession as
long as the country’s interest rate is positive. For example, for Home, either πH,t = π̄, ξt = 1, and it = rtn + π̄ ≥ 0
or πH,t ≤ −κ0 ≤ π̄, ξt ≤ 1, and it = 0. The same holds for Foreign.

A.2.2     Equilibria
We assume that the world natural interest rate rw,n = −ρ + δ̄θ/(1 − dθ)¯ < 0 is low enough that rw,n < min {κ0 , κ∗ },
                                                                                                                     0
which yields the existence of a global liquidity trap equilibrium. We show that in this case, there are several possible
equilibrium configurations once inflation considerations are added. First, there can be equilibria with no liquidity
traps either at Home or in Foreign. Second, there can be equilibria with a symmetic global liquidity trap both at
Home and in Foreign. Third, there can be asymmetric liquidity trap equilibria with a liquidity trap only in one
country. We treat each in turn.

No liquidity trap equilibrium. We solve for the no-liquidity trap case. This equilibrium is such that ξ = 1,
ξ ∗ = 1, πH = π̄, πF∗ = π̄ ∗ , i = rw,n + π̄, and i∗ = rw,n + π̄ ∗ .
                                                                        ∗
     It is straightforward to show that the terms of trade St = Et PF,t   /PH,t is constant at St = 1 which implies
that Ėt /Et = πH − πF = π̄ − π̄ . The condition for this equilibrium to exist is that i ≥ 0 and i∗ ≥ 0, i.e.
                          ∗             ∗

min{rw,n + π̄, rw,n + π̄ ∗ } ≥ 0. This condition shows that the no-liquidity trap equilibrium exists if and only if the
inflation targets π̄ and π̄ ∗ in both countries are high enough.
     Note, however, that this is an existence, not a uniqueness result. In fact, as we shall see next, other equilibria
exist even if inflation targets are high enough to make the no-liquidity trap equilibrium feasible.
  25
     The introduction of this kind of Phillips curves borrows heavily from Eggertsson and Mehrotra (2014) and Caballero and
Farhi (2017).




                                                               55
Symmetric global liquidity trap equilibrium. Let us now focus on the other extreme and solve for the
symmetric global liquidity trap case.
                                                                            ∗
    Observe that in a stationary equilibrium the terms of trade St = Et PF,t   /PH,t must be constant at St = ξ/ξ ∗ , so
that Ėt /Et = πH − πF . Uncovered Interest Parity then requires that i = i + Ėt /Et , which combined with i = i∗ = 0
                      ∗                                                     ∗

implies that Ėt /Et = 0 and hence πF∗ = πH = π w . That is, in a global liquidity trap, inflation rates are equal across
countries, hence real interest rates are equalized, r = r∗ = −π w .
    In Appendix ??, we provide a detailed exposition of the equilibrium equations. We can represent the equilibrium
as an Aggregate Demand (AD)-Aggregate Supply (AS) diagram which constitutes a system of four equations in four
unknowns πH , πF∗ , ξ, and ξ ∗ . The home and foreign AD curves are given by:
                                                                                             ∗
                                                                                            πF
                                                πH                                        1−
                                           1−    ρ
                                                   πH   yθd
                                                                                             ρ
                                                                                               π∗   (1 − y)θd∗
                                             ρ − ρ
                                         1− δ̄θ                                          ρ − ρ
                                                                                     1− δ̄θ     F
                                                                               ∗
                               ξ=               π                    ;     ξ =                       π∗
                                                                                                                    .
                                           1− ρH
                                    1−                  1−y     ∗                                1−   F
                                                         ξ ∗ θd                       1−              ρ      y
                                                                                                             ξ θd
                                                   πH
                                             ρ − ρ
                                         1− δ̄θ                                                         π∗
                                                                                               1− ρ − ρF
                                                                                                 δ̄θ




The home and foreign AS curves are given by:

                                  πH = −κ0 − κ1 (1 − ξ)              ;     πF∗ = −κ∗0 − κ∗1 (1 − ξ ∗ )

as long as ξ < 1 and ξ ∗ < 1, and become vertical at ξ = 1 and ξ ∗ = 1.
    It can be verified that the home and foreign AD equations imply πH = πF∗ = π w . If κ0 = κ∗0 , this implies that

                                                              1 − ξ∗  κ1
                                                                     = ∗,
                                                              1−ξ     κ1

so that Home has a smaller recession than Foreign, ξ > ξ ∗ , if and only if home prices or wages are more flexible
than foreign prices or wages: κ1 > κ∗1 . More (downward) price or wage flexibility reduces the size of the recession at
Home relative to Foreign because it depreciates the domestic terms of trade. In a stationary equilibrium, deflation
rates are equalized across countries so relatively more wage flexibility implies a relatively smaller recession.
    The rest of the equilibrium simplifies greatly when the Phillips curves are identical in both countries so that
κ∗0 = κ0 and κ∗1 = κ1 . Indeed, this requires that the recession is identical at Home and in Foreign: ξ = ξ ∗ = ξ w , and
S = 1. Moreover, in this case, we have the following simpler global AD-AS representation:
                                                                          πw
                                                                    1−     ρ
                                                    ξ = w                            ¯
                                                                                    θd,
                                                              1−    δ̄θ
                                                                     ρ    −    πw
                                                                                ρ
                                                    π w = −κ0 − κ1 (1 − ξ w ).

     This representation makes clear that compared with the case with no inflation, there is now a negative feedback
loop between the global recession and inflation. A larger recession reduces inflation, which in turn raises the real
interest rate, causing a further recession etc. ad infinitum. This feedback loop is stronger, the more flexible prices
and wages are, as captured by the slope of the Phillips curve κ1 . That is, wage flexibility plays out differently across
countries and at the global level: Countries with more price flexibility bear a smaller share of the global recession
than countries with less wage flexibility; but at the global level, more wage flexibility exacerbates the global recession.
     The equilibrium is guaranteed to exist under some technical conditions on the Phillips curves parameters κ0 and
κ1 , which ensure that the feedback loop is not so powerful to lead to a total collapse of the economy.26
     Figure 8 reports the global AD-AS diagram and displays both the no liquidity trap equilibrium (if it exists) and
the symmetric liquidity trap equilibrium. For simplicity the figure is drawn in the case where Philips curves and
inflation targets are identical in both countries so that κ∗0 = κ0 and κ∗1 = κ1 , π̄ ∗ = π̄.
     We focus on the no liquidity trap equilibrium and the symmetric liquidity trap equilibrium for now. The AS
curve (black solid line) slopes upwards, then becomes vertical at ξ = ξ w = 1: A smaller recession is associated with
less deflation, until full employment is achieved. At the ZLB, the global AD curve (black dashed line) also slopes
upwards since an increase in inflation reduces the real interest rate, which increases output. Away from the ZLB, the
   26
      For ξ w = 1− , the AD curve has π w = −rw,n , while the AS curve has π w = −κ0 < −rw,n . For ξ w = 0, the AD curve has
π w = ρ, while the AS curve has π w = −(κ0 + κ1 ). A suﬀicient condition for a unique intersection is that κ0 + κ1 ≤ −ρ.


                                                                     56
The figure reports Aggregate Supply (solid black line) and Aggregate Demand (dashed black line) in a symmetric liquidity
trap equilibrium (point A) and in a no liquidity trap equilibrium (point C), when κ∗0 = κ0 , κ∗1 = κ1 , and π̄ ∗ = π̄. The red
solid line represents the home AD curve in the asymmetric equilibrium where Foreign is out of the liquidity trap (point A′ ).

Figure 8: Aggregate Demand and Aggregate Supply in a symmetric and asymmetric liquidity trap equi-
libria.

AD curve becomes horizontal at π̄. We always assume that the upward sloping part of the AD curve is steeper than
the non-vertical part of the AS curve and that they intersect at one point, A. The AD and AS schedules intersect at
either exactly point A, or at three points, A, B, and C. Point A is the symmetric liquidity trap equilibrium: i = 0,
π w = −κ0 − κ1 (1 − ξ w ) < π̄, and ξ w < 1. Point C, if it exists, corresponds to the no liquidity trap equilibrium with
i = i∗ = π̄ > 0, π w = π̄, and ξ = ξ w = 1. Point B, if it exists, is unstable, and so we ignore it.

Asymmetric liquidity trap equilibria. Can we have an asymmetric equilibrium where one country is in a
liquidity trap but not the other? As we shall see, it is always possible. These asymmetric liquidity trap equilibria
are associated with different values of the real exchange rate, and are a manifestation of the same fundamental
indeterminacy that we identified in the case with no inflation.
    Suppose that one country is in a liquidity trap (say Home) but not the other (say Foreign). Then because the
terms of trade must be constant at St = ξ, we must have i = 0, i∗ = i − Ėt /Et = πF∗ − πH > 0, ξ < 1, ξ ∗ = 1,
πF∗ = π̄ ∗ , and πH + κ0 + κ1 (1 − ξ) = 0. In Appendix B.1, we provide a detailed exposition of the equilibrium
equations. We find:
                                                                    πH
                                                                1−   ρ
                                                          y            π   θd
                                                              1− ρ − ρH
                                                                δ̄θ
                                                ξ=                          π           ,
                                                                       1− ρH
                                                     1 − (1 − y)              π   θd∗
                                                                     1− ρ − ρH
                                                                        δ̄θ


                                              πH = −κ0 − κ1 (1 − ξ).

The equilibrium is guaranteed to exist under the same technical conditions on Phillips curves that the ones derived
above.
    It is easy to see that the home recession is larger and home inflation is lower in this asymmetric liquidity trap
equilibrium where only Home is in a liquidity trap, than in the symmetric equilibrium where both Home and Foreign
are in a liquidity trap. In Figure 8, the red solid line reports the Home AD curve in the asymmetric equilibrium
when Foreign is not in a liquidity trap. Point A′ is the corresponding equilibrium. We can verify immediately that
ξ < ξ w , that is: The recession is more severe for the country that remains in the trap.




                                                               57
Inflation, exchange rates, and the structure of equilibria. Let us take stock and summarize the
structure of equilibria when rw,n < min {κ0 , κ∗0 }. There may exist an equilibrium with no liquidity trap, which occurs
if and only if min{rw,n + π̄, rw,n + π̄ ∗ } ≥ 0. But there always exists a symmetric global liquidity trap equilibrium, as
well as two asymmetric liquidity trap equilibria where only one country is in a liquidity trap. These symmetric and
asymmetric liquidity trap equilibria are associated with different values of the real exchange rate and this multiplicity
is a manifestation of the same fundamental indeterminacy that we identified in the case with no inflation. Indeed, it
is immediate to see that terms of trade S are the most depreciated in the asymmetric liquidity trap equilibrium where
Home is not in a liquidity trap but Foreign is, the most appreciated in the asymmetric liquidity trap equilibrium
where Home is in a liquidity trap but Foreign is not, and intermediate between these two values in the symmetric
liquidity trap equilibrium where both Home and Foreign are in a liquidity trap. The severity of the recession at
Home is directly commensurate with the degree of appreciation of the terms of trade S.

“Currency wars”. Suppose that min{rw,n + π̄, rw,n + π̄ ∗ } < 0. A country (say Home) can target its exchange
rate by standing ready to exchange unlimited quantities of home currency for foreign currency at a given crawling
exchange rate. Doing so can in effect rule out both the symmetric liquidity trap equilibrium and the asymmetric
liquidity trap equilibrium where it is in a liquidity trap. Home can therefore always guarantee that it will not be in a
liquidity trap, and avoid a recession by shifting it entirely to Foreign, which then experiences a deeper recessions.27

A.3     Home Bias
We assume that the spending share on home goods of home agents is y + (1 − y)β, and similarly that the spending
share on foreign goods of foreign agents is y ∗ + (1 − y ∗ )β, where y ∗ = 1 − y and β ∈ [0, 1] indexes the degree of home
bias. Full home bias corresponds to β = 1. The case of no home bias analyzed previously corresponds to β = 0.
    With home bias in preferences, the good market clearing conditions become:

                                  [y + (1 − y)β]θW + (1 − y ∗ )(1 − β)θW ∗ E = ξ Ȳ ,                                     (A.1)
                                 (1 − y)(1 − β)θW + [y ∗ + (1 − y ∗ )β]θW ∗ E = Eξ ∗ Ȳ ∗ .                               (A.2)

    This applies both under financial integration and under financial autarky, whether Home is in a liquidity trap
(ξ < 1) or not (ξ = 1), and similarly whether Foreign is in a liquidity trap (ξ ∗ < 1) or not (ξ ∗ = 1).
    For conciseness, we only consider the case where there is a global liquidity trap under financial integration. In
that case, just like in the case of no home bias, there is a degree of indeterminacy indexed by the exchange rate E.
    The asset and wealth dynamic equations Eqs. (4) and (5) are unchanged. After simple manipulations, we can
express all equilibrium variables as a function of the nominal exchange rate:

                                           θd¯β (E)
                                      ξ=                 ,                                                                (A.3)
                                           1−   δ̄ β θ
                                                   ρ
                                                  δθ θ d¯ (E)
                                                         β
                                           (1 −   ρ )[ 1− δ̄β θ   −     θd
                                                                               ]       (1 −   δθ
                                                                                                      − ξ a,l )
                                                                                              ρ )(ξ
                                 NFA                                   1− δθ
                                                                          ρ
                                                  ρ
                                       =                                           =                              ,
                                  Ȳ            g+θ                                           g+θ
                                  CA      NFA
                                       =g     ,
                                    Ȳ     Ȳ
where we have defined the averages modified by home bias β as
                                              δ∗ θ   θ
                                                                                       δ∗ θ   θ
                                                                                                   
                                                ρ +g                                      ρ +g
                           [β + (1 − β)y 1 + 1− δ∗ θ ]θd + (1 − y)(1 − β) 1 + 1− δ∗ θ Eθd∗
                                                                                                  
                                                    ρ                                         ρ
                   ¯β
                  d (E) =                                                                              ,
                                                     δ∗ θ    θ                             δ∗ θ    θ
                                                      ρ +g                                   ρ +g
                               [β + (1 − β)y 1 + 1−        ∗
                                                          δ θ    ] + (1 − y)(1 − β)   1 +  1− δ θ
                                                                                                 ∗
                                                                  ρ                                                   ρ


  27
     In Appendix B.1, we characterize Net Foreign Asset positions and Current Accounts in all the equilibria described above.
In the no liquidity trap equilibrium, these quantities are given by exactly the same formula as in the case with no inflation
and can be represented in a Metzler diagram. In a symmetric global liquidity trap equilibrium instead, they are given by
a Metzler diagram in quantities augmented with a global AS curve. The qualitative effects are essentially similar to the no
inflation case.


                                                                      58
                                                δ∗ θ    θ
                                                                                                                   
                                                  ρ +g                                          1+ θ            δ∗ θ
                             [β + (1 − β)y 1 +   1− ρ δ∗ θ      ] 1−     δθ
                                                                         ρ    + (1 − y)(1 − β) 1− δ∗g θ 1 −      ρ
                                                                                                         
                                                                                                    ρ
                    δ̄ β =                                   δ∗ θ θ                               δ∗ θ    θ
                                                                                                                           .
                                                                  +g                                ρ +g
                                  [β + (1 − β)x 1 +           ρ
                                                                 ∗
                                                             1− δ ρ θ
                                                                         ] + (1 − y)(1 − β) 1 + 1−      ∗
                                                                                                       δ θ
                                                                                                       ρ


and where ξ a,l is defined exactly as in the case with no home bias, and given by the same formula. Equations (A.3)
and its equivalent for the foreign country show that, as before, home output ξ is increasing in the exchange rate
E while foreign output ξ ∗ is decreasing in E. Finally, as before, the home Net Foreign Asset Position and Current
Account are increasing in the gap between the domestic recession and the home financial autarky recession ξ a,l . The
key difference introduced by home bias β is that the home and foreign outputs ξ and ξ ∗ become less responsive to the
exchange rate E. This can be seen directly by examining (A.3) in the case of home bias (β > 0) and comparing to
Eq. (17) in the case with no home bias (β = 0). This effect is seen most transparently in the limit with full home
bias (β → 1) in which case the outputs ξ and ξ ∗ become completely insensitive to the exchange rate E.
    Assume further that both countries are in a liquidity trap under financial autarky. Then, just like in the case
with no home bias, the integrated equilibrium coincides with financial autarky when E = E a . For E > E a , we have
ξ > ξ a and ξ ∗ < ξ a and vice versa for E < E a .28

A.4    Trade Elasticities
We now assume away home bias and investigate instead the role of the elasticity of substitution σ between home and
foreign goods. The main difference in the system of equilibrium equations is once again the goods market clearing
conditions, which become


                                                y                       ξ Ȳ
                                                          (W + EW ∗ ) =      ,
                                        y + E 1−σ (1 − y)                θ
                                          (1 − y)E 1−σ            ∗        ξ ∗ Ȳ ∗
                                                          (W + EW   ) = E           .
                                        y + E 1−σ (1 − y)                     θ

This applies both under financial integration and under financial autarky, whether Home is in a liquidity trap (ξ < 1)
or not (ξ = 1), and similarly whether Foreign is in a liquidity trap (ξ ∗ < 1) or not (ξ ∗ = 1). This implies that we
now have
                                                             1
                                                      E = Ê σ
where Ê is a renormalized exchange rate given by

                                                                         ξ
                                                                  Ê =      .
                                                                         ξ∗

    The analysis under financial autarky is identical to the case σ = 1 except for the value of the financial autarky
exchange rate. Under financial integration and outside the liquidity trap, the analysis is also unchanged compared
to the case σ = 1: from Section A.4, ξ = ξ ∗ = 1 implies E = 1. Since the asset demands and asset supplies are
unchanged, so is the equilibrium. This obtains as long as rw,n ≥ 0 where rw,n is defined in Eq. (15).
    Consider now the case of a global liquidity trap (rw,n < 0). In that case, as before, we can index the solution by
the exchange rate E (or equivalently Ê). Using Eqs. (5) and (7), we can express the world supply of assets as:

                                                   δyξ + δ ∗ (1 − y)Eξ ∗ w ¯
                                     V w + Dw =                         Ȳ + d(E)Ȳ w
                                                              ρ
                                                   "                     #
                                                     δ̂(E) 1−σ ¯
                                                 =        ξP      + d(E) Ȳ w .
                                                        ρ

where δ̂(E) = (δy + δ ∗ (1 − y)E 1−σ )/P 1−σ is a weighted average of δ using the relative price of H and F goods as
weights, and P = (y + (1 − y)E 1−σ )1/(1−σ) is the consumption price index at Home. From Eq. (4) we can write asset
  28
                                          [     ]
    One can readily check that the range E, Ē increases with β, so that the model with home bias admits a larger range of
indeterminacy. In the limit of full home bias, any value of the exchange rate is admissible.


                                                                        59
demand along a BGP as:

                                                                           Ȳ w
                                                    W w = ξP 1−σ                .
                                                                             θ
    Putting the two together, we can solve for the Home recession ξ:
                                                                   ¯
                                                                  θd(E)
                                                  ξ=                                .
                                                                  θ δ̂(E)
                                                        (1 −          ρ )P
                                                                           1−σ


Compared to the case of σ = 1, a change in the exchange rate now has three effects on the recession at Home ξ.
                                                                 ¯
First, as before, it increases the supply safe ‘public’ assets d(E).     This increases output. In addition, an increase in
E changes the value of private assets, captured by δ̂(E). Finally, it increases the price level P , which affects both
private asset supply and private asset demand. Formally, we can write:
                                                                                                       
                                                                 ¯(E)                            ∗
                                                                                                      
                     ∂ξ            θ (1 − y)        d∗ −      d                               δ   θ   .
                         ==                                                 (1 − σ) E −σ 1 −
                     ∂E         1−  θ δ̂(E)
                                              P 1−σ         1− θ δ̂(E)
                                                                         P 1−σ                    ρ
                                     ρ                                 ρ


    The first term in bracket corresponds to the expansion of public assets. The second term is the net effect of the
expansion of private assets and the decline in asset demands. When σ > 1, this second effect is also positive: output
becomes more responsive to the exchange rate as goods become more substitutable.
    Things simplify in the limit σ → ∞, where the goods become perfect substitutes, to which we now turn. For
conciseness, we only treat the case where there is a global liquidity trap under financial integration. As we take the
limit σ → ∞, we have E = P = 1, but there is still a degree of indeterminacy indexed by the renormalized exchange
rate Ê. Indeed, we can compute all the equilibrium variables as a function of Ê:

                                                                    θd¯
                                          ξ=                                            δ∗ θ
                                                                                               ,
                                                y(1 −   δθ
                                                        ρ )   +   1
                                                                  Ê
                                                                     (1   − y)(1 −       ρ )
                                                                   θd¯
                                         ξ∗ =                                           δ∗ θ
                                                                                               ,
                                                y(1 − δθ
                                                       ρ )Ê + (1         − y)(1 −       ρ )

                                     NFA        (1 − ρ )ξ − θd
                                                     δθ
                                                                           (1 −     δθ
                                                                                    ρ )(ξ   − ξ a,l )
                                           =                           =                                ,
                                      Ȳ          g+θ                               g+θ
                                      CA      NFA
                                           =g      ,
                                        Ȳ     Ȳ

where rw,n and ξ a,l are defined exactly as in the unitary elasticity case, and are given by the same formulas. Home
output ξ is increasing in the renormalized exchange rate Ê, and foreign output is decreasing in the renormalized
exchange rate Ê. Finally, the home Net Foreign Asset Position is increasing in the gap between home output and
home financial autarky output ξ a,l under zero home nominal interest rates. The key difference introduced by σ > 1
over σ = 1 is that home and foreign outputs ξ and ξ ∗ become more responsive to the exchange rate E. Indeed in the
limit σ → ∞, ξ and ξ ∗ become infinitely sensitive to the exchange rate E. In other words, larger trade elasticities
magnify the stimulative effect of an exchange rate depreciation on the home recession.
    Assume further that both countries are in a liquidity trap under financial autarky. Then, just like in the case
with σ = 1, the financially integrated equilibrium coincides with financial autarky when Ê = Ê a . For Ê > Ê a , we
have ξ > ξ a and ξ ∗ < ξ a and vice versa for Ê < Ê a .
    Let’s now consider the Nash equilibrium where each central bank maximizes consumption θW/P net of the cost




                                                                  60
C(a). The first-order conditions are:
                                                                ∗
                                               1
                                                  (1 − y)(1 − δ ρθ )      n
                                       ξ       Ê
                                                                     δ∗ θ a
                                                                                         = C ′ (a),
                                         y(1 − ρ ) + Ê (1 − y)(1 − ρ )
                                               δθ       1


                                                   y(1 − δθ
                                                          ρ )             n
                                    ξ∗                               ∗                   = C ′ (a∗ ) .
                                       y(1 − ρ ) + Ê (1 − y)(1 − δ ρθ ) a∗
                                              δθ      1


The second order conditions are satisfied as long as n < 1. From the first order conditions, it is immediate that the
Nash equilibrium satisfies a, a∗ > 1 and we can also easily check that ∂a/∂d > 0 and ∂a∗ /∂d > 0 so that higher
public debt in either country increases the incentives to intervene to depreciate the currency.
   Further, define x = y(1 − θδ/ρ) and x∗ = (1 − y)(1 − θδ ∗ /ρ)/Ê. The slope of the Home best-response is given by:

                                                                            da             da∗
                                   [(x + x∗ )(1 + ηc ) + n(x − x∗ )]           = n(x − x∗ ) ∗
                                                                            a              a
while the slope of the foreign best response is given by

                                               da                                   da∗
                                   (x∗ − x)n      = [(x + x∗ )(1 + ηc ) + n(x∗ − x)] ∗
                                                a                                    a

When Ê < Ê o ≡ ((1 − y)(1 − θδ ∗ /ρ))/(y(1 − θδ/ρ)), the actions are strategic substitutes, while when Ê > Ê o , they
are strategic complements. Either way, the equilibrium is asymptotically stable in the sense of Fudenberg and Tirole
when
                                                       da             da
                                                                 <
                                                       da∗   A        da∗    A∗

    This condition boils down to

                                                     1 + ηc Ê + Ê o
                                                n<     √              ≡ H(Ê)
                                                        2 Ê o − Ê

It is easy to check that the function H(Ê) is increasing, so its lowest value will be reached at the lower bound Ê such
that ξ ∗ = 1:

                                                          θd¯
                                                Ê =              − Ê o
                                                       y(1 − θδ
                                                              ρ )
                                                                                  θδ ∗
                                                       θd¯ − (1 − y)(1 −           ρ )
                                                   =
                                                             y(1 −     θδ
                                                                       ρ )

    and the condition for an asymptotically stable Nash equilibrium is always satisfied if

                                                       1 + ηc         θd¯
                                        n < H(Ê) =      √                  ∗
                                                          2 2(1 − y)(1 − θδρ ) − θd¯

A suﬀicient condition is
                                                                                              θδ ∗
                                                   θδ ∗           2(1 − y)(1 −                 ρ )
                                      2(1 − y)(1 −      ) > θd¯ >
                                                    ρ                 1 + 1+η
                                                                           √ c
                                                                             2

    We assume that this condition is satisfied.




                                                                 61
A.5     Within Country Heterogeneity: Borrowers and Savers
Here we work out a version of our model incorporating within country heterogeneity between borrowers and savers.
For simplicity, we abstract away from public debt by setting D/Ȳ = D∗ /Ȳ ∗ = 0.
    We add a mass of borrowing constrained impatient borrowers (B) agents. The rest of the agents are savers (S)
and are modeled as before. Borrowers consume as much as possible when they are born, and the rest when they die.
They only get an endowment when they die, and they can only pledge a part of it. They must therefore borrow in
order to consume when born. They then roll over their debt until they die, at which point they use their income to
repay their debt and consume the remainder. In a small interval dt, a part ηξt Ȳt dt of total income accrues to dying
borrowers in the form of labor income. Because of the borrowing constraint, borrowers born in the interval dt can
only consume χȲt dt, where we imagine that χ is small compared to η.29 We assume that the new trees accrue to
savers.
    Note that there is now a distinction between financial wealth and human wealth for borrowers. Indeed a borrower
receives income when he dies. This future income is a form a human wealth and is not part of his financial wealth.
When the borrower dies, this human wealth allows him to repay the debt that he has incurred to borrow when he
was born and rolled over until his death (his financial wealth), and to consume the residual.
    The evolution equations for the financial wealth of borrowers and savers are given by:30,31

                                 gW B   =   −θW B − χX + rw W B ,
                                 gW S   =   −θW S + (1 − δ − η)ξ Ȳ + rw W S + (ρ + g)V,
                                gW B∗   =   −θW B∗ − χ∗ Ȳ ∗ + rw W B∗ ,
                                gW S∗   =   −θW S∗ + (1 − δ − η)ξ ∗ Ȳ ∗ + rw W S∗ + (ρ + g)V ∗ .

   We continue to denote by W = W B + W S total home wealth and by W ∗ = W B∗ + W S∗ total foreign wealth
and obtain the evolution equations for total wealth by aggregating the evolution equations for wealth by borrowers
and savers in both countries:

                            gW      = −θW + (1 − δ − η)ξ Ȳ − χȲ + rw W + (ρ + g)V,
                           gW ∗     = −θW ∗ + (1 − δ ∗ − η ∗ )ξ ∗ Ȳ ∗ − χ∗ Ȳ + rw W + (ρ + g)V ∗ .

The good market clearing conditions are now given by:32

                            ξ Ȳ   = y(θ(W + EW ∗ ) + ηξ Ȳ + Eη ∗ ξ ∗ Ȳ ∗ + χȲ + Eχ∗ Ȳ ∗ )
                         Eξ Ȳ ∗
                            ∗
                                   = (1 − y)(θ(W + EW ∗ ) + ηξ Ȳ + Eη ∗ ξ ∗ Ȳ ∗ + χȲ + Eχ∗ Ȳ ∗ ).
  29
     Note that, as in Guerrieri and Lorenzoni (2011) and Eggertsson and Krugman (2012), the borrowing limit χX does not
depend on whether the economy is in recession. This assumption is crucial to generate a liquidity trap, as it implies that the
debt issued by borrowers does not scale with output, so asset demand declines faster than asset supply in the recession. While
the assumption that the credit constraint is invariant to the recession is perhaps extreme, all that is needed for our result to
go through is that the borrowing limit does not scale one for one with output.
  30
     Let us for example explain in details the wealth evolution equation for borrowers at Home. The wealth of borrowers is
negative W B < 0, it represents their debt. In an interval dt, the wealth of borrowers W B changes because of because of dying
borrowers repaying their debt (−θW B dt), because of newborn borrowers taking on new debt (−χȲ dt), and because of the
accumulation of interest (rw W B ). In a steady state, the wealth of borrowers W B must also change by gW B dt. This gives the
wealth evolution equation for borrowers.
  31
     Note that the wealth of borrowers does not take into account the income of borrowers when they die, because it is not
part of their financial wealth. But of course, the income of borrowers influences their consumption when they die. It therefore
appears in the goods market clearing conditions. This explains the terms ηξ Ȳ and Eη ∗ ξ ∗ Ȳ ∗ in the market clearing conditions
at Home and in Foreign.
  32
     For example, the home market clearing condition can be understood as follows. The demand arising from dying savers is
given by yθ(W − W B + EW ∗ − EW B∗ ). The demand arising from newborn borrowers is given by y(χX + Eχ∗ Ȳ ∗ ). And the
demand arising from dying borrowers is given by y(ηξ Ȳ + θW B + Eη ∗ ξ ∗ Ȳ ∗ + EθW B∗ ).




                                                               62
The asset pricing equations are unchanged:

                                              rw V    = −ρV + δξ Ȳ ,
                                             rw V ∗   = −ρV ∗ + δ ∗ ξ ∗ Ȳ ∗ .

And we must still impose rw ≥ 0, 0 ≤ ξ ≤ 1, 0 ≤ ξ ∗ ≤ 1, and the complementary slackness conditions rw (1 − ξ) = 0
and rw (1 − ξ ∗ ) = 0.
   In the interest of space, we only treat the liquidity trap case. We get:

                                                          ξ
                                                E     =      ,
                                                          ξ∗
                                                             χ̄(E)
                                                 ξ    =                     ,
                                                          1 − η̄ −    δ̄θ
                                                                       ρ
                                                          1−η− δθ
                                                               ρ
                                                                      χ̄(E) − χ
                                           NFA            1−η̄− δ̄θ
                                                                 ρ
                                                      =                           ,
                                            Ȳ                g+θ
                                            CA            NFA
                                                      = g      .
                                              Ȳ           Ȳ
where for any variable z, we use the notation z̄(E) = xz(E) + (1 − x)z ∗ (E).
    The variable χ (χ∗ ) increases with home (foreign) financial development, and decreases with a home (foreign)
deleveraging shock. Identifying the borrowers with the young and the savers with the middle-aged and the old,
proportional decreases in the variables η and χ (η ∗ and χ∗ ) capture home (foreign) population aging.
    These equations indicate that a deleveraging shock at Home (a decrease in χ) or in Foreign (a decrease in χ∗ )
can push the global economy into a liquidity trap. For a given exchange rate E, the larger the world deleveraging
shock, the larger the recession in any given country. For a given exchange rate E and world deleveraging shock χ̄(E),
a larger home deleveraging shock (a lower χ) pushes the home Current Account towards a surplus.
    Similarly, aging at Home (a proportional decrease in χ and η) or in Foreign (a proportional decrease in χ∗ and
 ∗
η ) can push the global economy in a liquidity trap. For a given exchange rate E, the larger the shock, the larger the
recession in any given country. For a given exchange rate E, more aging at Home pushes the Home Current Account
towards a surplus.
    This analysis also shows how countries with tighter credit constraints or lower fraction of income accruing to
borrowers act as if they had a larger asset demand (lower θ).




                                                            63
B     Online Appendix: Not For Publication
B.1    Derivations for the Model with Inflation in Appendix A.2
Global liquidity trap equilibrium equations. In a global liquidity trap equilibrium, the equilibrium values
of V w = V + SV ∗ , W w = W + SW ∗ (expressed in terms of the home good numeraire) and πH , πF∗ , S, ξ, and ξ ∗
solve the following system of equations

                              ξ
                         S=     ,
                             ξ∗
                     θW w = ξX + Sξ ∗ X ∗
                   −πH V w = −ρV w + δξ Ȳ + δ ∗ Sξ ∗ Ȳ ∗ ,
                     gW w = −θW w + (1 − δ)ξ Ȳ + (1 − δ ∗ )Sξ ∗ Ȳ ∗ + gDw − πH W w + (ρ + g)V w ,
                       πH = −κ0 − κ1 (1 − ξ),                                                                  (B.1)
                       πF∗ = −κ∗0 − κ∗1 (1 − ξ ∗ )                                                             (B.2)
                       πF∗ = πH ,                                                                              (B.3)

where Dw = D + SD∗ . The first equation is the equation for the terms of trade. The second equation is the equation
for total world wealth. Both result directly from combining the home and foreign goods market clearing conditions.
The third equation is the asset pricing equation for world private assets. The fourth equation is the accumulation
equation for world wealth, where we have used the government budget constraints to replace taxes as a function
of public debt τ (1 − δ) ξ Ȳ = −gD and τ ∗ (1 − δ) ξ ∗ Ȳ ∗ = −gD∗ . The fifth and sixth equations are the home and
foreign Phillips curves. The seventh equation represents the requirement derived above that the terms of trade be
constant.

Asymmetric liquidity trap equilibrium equations. In an asymmetric liquidity trap equilibrium where
one country (say Home) is in a liquidity trap but not the other (say Foreign), the equilibrium equations are instead
given by:

                          S = ξ,
                      θW w = ξ Ȳ + S Ȳ ∗
                    −πH V w = −ρV w + δξ Ȳ + δ ∗ S Ȳ ∗ ,
                      gW w = −θW w + (1 − δ)ξ Ȳ + (1 − δ ∗ )S Ȳ ∗ + gDw − πH W w + (ρ + g)V w ,
                        πH = −κ0 − κ1 (1 − ξ),

and we have i = 0, i∗ = π̄ ∗ − πH = i − Ėt /Et > 0.

Net Foreign Assets, Current Accounts, and Metzler Diagram in quantities. In this section,
we characterize Net Foreign Asset positions and Current Accounts in the model with inflation of Appendix A.2.
We express these quantities in real terms in the home good numeraire. In the no liquidity trap equilibrium, these
quantities are given by exactly the same formula as in the case with no inflation. In a symmetric global liquidity
trap equilibrium, or in an asymmetric liquidity trap equilibrium, we have

                                     NFA     W − (V + D)   ξ(1 − r+ρ
                                                                  δθ
                                                                     ) − θd
                                           =             =                  ,
                                      Ȳ          Ȳ          g+θ−r
                                      CA      NFA
                                           =g       ,
                                        Ȳ     Ȳ
where ξ < 1 and r = −πH if Home is in a liquidity trap and ξ = 1 and r = −πF∗ if Home is not in a liquidity trap
(but Foreign is).
    The same forces that we identified in the model with no inflation are at play. For example, in a symmetric global




                                                         64
liquidity trap equilibrium when the Phillips curves are identical across countries (so that κ∗0 = κ0 and κ∗1 = κ1 ),

                                                                              πw         θ d¯
                                                            (1 −    δθ
                                                                         −     ρ )[ 1− δ̄θ −π w   −       θd
                                                                                                                  ]
                          NFA        W − (V + D)                    ρ
                                                                                        ρ
                                                                                                      1− δθ  πw
                                                                                                         ρ − ρ
                                   =             =                                                                    ,
                           Ȳ              Ȳ                                    g + θ + πw
                           CA          NFA
                                   = g       .
                             Ȳ         Ȳ
Hence to the extent that Home has a higher financial capacity than Foreign δ > δ ∗ , or a higher public debt ratio
than Foreign d > d∗ , then Home runs a negative Net Foreign Asset position and a Current Account deficit. We can
also represent the equilibrium with a Metzler diagram in quantities augmented with a global AS curve. Indeed we
have
                                                                         δθ

                                                  NFA   ξ w (1 − 1−ρπw ) − θd
                                                                     ρ
                                                      =                       ,
                                                   Ȳ         g + θ + πw
                                                                       δ∗ θ

                                                 NFA  ∗    ξ w (1 −     ρ
                                                                      1− πρ
                                                                           w    ) − θd∗
                                             S         =                                    ,
                                                  Ȳ ∗          g + θ + πw

and we must have
                                                  NFA              N F A∗
                                              y         + (1 − y)S           = 0,
                                                   Ȳ                Ȳ ∗
                                                    π w + κ0 + κ1 (1 − ξ w ) = 0,

with S = 1.

B.2     Recovery: Exchange Rates Movements and Interest Rates Differentials
We start with the model with permanently rigid prices, and consumption home bias of section A.3. For simplicity,
we assume that there is no public debt so that D/Ȳ = D∗ /Ȳ ∗ = 0.
     We then assume that a Poisson shock occurs with instantaneous probability λ > 0. When the Poisson shock
occurs, the fraction of output δ that accrues in the form of dividends jumps instantaneously and permanently by a
factor ν > 1 in both countries. This alleviates the asset shortage and increases the world natural interest rate. We
assume that ν is large enough that upon the realization of the Poisson shock the world natural interest rate rises
above zero: −ρ + ν δ̄θ > 0. This implies that the economy may experience a liquidity trap before the Poisson shock,
but never after it.
     The steady state of the post-Poisson shock economy is uniquely determined, and so are its dynamics from any
initial position.33 By backward induction, this means that the exchange rate during the liquidity trap phase is also
pinned down, conditional on the exchange rate Eτ that occurs at the time τ of the realization of the Poisson shock.
This removes the indeterminacy in the nominal exchange rate à la Kareken and Wallace (1981) that we found in our
baseline model.34
     But another form of indeterminacy appears which we can index by the exchange rate Eτ . This is because, in our
model, agents are risk neutral, so that international portfolios are indeterminate.35 Yet, a given portfolio allocation
will determine relative wealths immediately after the Poisson shock. In the presence of home bias in consumption, this
pins down relative demands for Home and Foreign goods and therefore the nominal exchange rate Eτ . Conversely,
for a given value Eτ , one can construct international portfolios that are consistent with this value of the exchange
  33
     One can verify that the dynamics of the economy are saddle-path stable.
  34
     This is because we have assumed that the economy is not a in a global liquidity trap after the Poisson shock. If we assume
instead that the economy is in a liquidity trap after the Poisson shock (so that the recovery is only a partial recovery which
doesn’t lift the economy out of the ZLB), then even without home bias, the exchange rate indeterminacy à la Kareken and
Wallace (1981) is reinstated. Indeed, in this case, the exchange rate Eτ after the Poisson shock is indeterminate. The exchange
rate E before the Poisson shock, which depends on its value Eτ after the Poisson shock, inherits this indeterminacy. In the
interest of space, we do not develop this model formally.
  35
     This other form of indeterminacy hinges on our assumption that some (here all) agents are risk neutral. If all agents were
somewhat risk averse, then portfolios would be pinned down and this other form of indeterminacy would disappear.


                                                               65
rate at the time of the Poisson shock. We summarize by writing domestic and foreign wealth and asset values at the
time of the shock as Wτ = wτ Ȳ /θ, Wτ∗ = wτ∗ Ȳ ∗ /θ, Vτ = vτ Ȳ /θ, and Vτ∗ = vτ∗ Ȳ ∗ /θ where it is understood that the
coeﬀicients wτ ,wτ∗ , vτ and vτ∗ are functions of the exchange rate Eτ at the time of the shock.
    We focus on the stochastic steady state before the Poisson shock. Because of the jump in the exchange rate at
the time of the Poisson shock, Home and Foreign typically experience different real interest rates. This is in contrast
to our baseline model where real interest rates are always equalized across countries. To see this most clearly, note
that financial integration imposes that in the stochastic steady state prior to the Poisson shock, we have the following
UIP equation:
                                                                Eτ
                                                    r = r∗ + λ(    − 1).                                              (B.4)
                                                                E
This implies that the home interest rate r < r∗ if the home currency is expected to appreciate after the Poisson
shock Eτ /E < 1.36
    The asset pricing equations include news terms accounting for capital gains and losses triggered by the realization
of the Poisson shock:

                                               rV = −ρV + δξ Ȳ + λ (Vτ − V ) ,


                                         r∗ V ∗ = −ρV ∗ + δ ∗ ξ ∗ Ȳ ∗ + λ (Vτ∗ − V ∗ ) .
For example, a higher value of home assets Vτ after the Poisson shock increases the value of home assets V in the
stochastic steady state before the Poisson shock.
    The wealth accumulation equations include new terms accounting for the risk and return of each country’s
portfolio:
                             gW = −θW + (1 − δ) ξ Ȳ + rW + λ (W − Wτ ) + (g + ρ) V,
                          gW ∗ = −θW ∗ + (1 − δ) ξ ∗ Ȳ ∗ + r∗ W ∗ + λ (W ∗ − Wτ∗ ) + (g + ρ) V ∗ .
For example, a lower value of home wealth Wτ after the Poisson shock means that home agents have a riskier portfolio,
and therefore collect higher returns as long as the Poisson shock does not materialize. This in turn increases home
wealth W in the stochastic steady state before the Poisson shock.
    The goods market clearing equations (A.1) and (A.2) are unchanged, and we must still impose r ≥ 0, r∗ ≥ 0,
0 ≤ ξ ≤ 1, 0 ≤ ξ ∗ ≤ 1, and the complementary slackness conditions r(1 − ξ) = 0 and r∗ (1 − ξ ∗ ) = 0.
    The jump in the exchange rate at the time of the Poisson shock opens the door to the possibility that Home
and Foreign may not experience a liquidity trap simultaneously prior to the shock. Real interest rates can differ
across countries, resulting in the possibility of more strongly asymmetric liquidity trap equilibria than those we have
encountered so far, where one country has zero nominal interest rates, zero real interest rates and a recession, while
the other country has positive nominal interest rates, positive real interest rates, and no recession.
    Going back to the UIP equation (B.4), we see that for Home to be the only country in a liquidity trap, we need
r = 0, ξ < 1, r∗ > 0, ξ ∗ = 1 and λ (Eτ /E − 1) = −r∗ < 0. This requires that the home exchange rate appreciate at
the time of the shock, Eτ < E. We focus on this configuration from here onwards.
    Home output ξ is then given by
                                                              (ρ+λ)λ
                                                      λvτ −     g−λ (wτ −vτ )
                                              g−λ
                                           β g−λ+θ              ρ+λ             + y ∗ (1 − β)E
                                   ξ=                 g−λ                                            .                   (B.5)
                                                   β g−λ+θ
                                        [1 −      g−λ
                                               β g−λ+θ
                                                                   δθ
                                                       +y ∗ (1−β) ρ+λ
                                                                           g−λ
                                                                      ][β g−λ+θ     + y ∗ (1 − β)]

This equation shows that everything else equal, as long as there is home bias β > 0, a higher value vτ /θ of the home
asset after the Poisson shock, and a lower value of the home Net Foreign Asset position after the Poisson shock
(wτ∗ − vτ∗ )/θ, contribute to a lower home output. Both increase the value of home wealth before the Poisson shock
  36
    We can also have equilibria with different values of E = Eτ , with similar implications in terms of relative outputs and
“currency wars” as in the main text—lower values of E = Eτ are associated with higher values of ξ and lower values of ξ ∗ .
Interestingly, But here, this logic can be more extreme in that we can also have equilibria with asymmetric liquidity traps
where there is a liquidity trap in one country but not in the other. For example, Home can be in a liquidity trap with r = 0
and ξ < 1 while Foreign is not: r∗ > 0 and ξ ∗ = 1. In this case, going back to the UIP equation, the exchange rate appreciates
when the Poisson shock occurs E > Eτ .



                                                                  66
and, because of home bias, of the demand for home goods. The reason is that a higher value of vτ /θ increases the
value of new trees, and that a lower value of (wτ∗ − vτ∗ )/θ indicates that home agents take more risk, and are hence
rewarded by a higher return before the Poisson shock.
    The foreign interest rate r∗ and the exchange rate are then given by the following system of nonlinear equations

                                                                         Eτ
                                                         0 = r∗ + λ(        − 1),
                                                                         E

                                                                 g−λ−r ∗ ∗
                                    ξ      1−β   θ+              ρ+λ+r ∗ (δ θ   + λvτ∗ ) − λ (wτ∗ − vτ∗ )
                               1 − ( − 1)y     =                                                            ,
                                    E       β                              g − λ + θ − r∗
where we use the equation above to express ξ as a function of E. This is an equilibrium as long as ξ < 1 and r∗ ≥ 0.
   We can also compute

                           NFA   ξ(1 −        δθ
                                             ρ+λ )   −   λvτ
                                                         ρ+λ   − λ g−λ
                                                                    θ
                                                                       (wτ − vτ )       1−    δθ
                                                                                             ρ+λ
                               =                                                    =              (ξ − ξˆa,l ),
                            Ȳ                       g−λ+θ                              g−λ+θ

                                                           CA    NFA
                                                              =g     .
                                                           Ȳ     Ȳ
where ξˆa,l is home output in the equilibrium where Home is in financial autarky before the Poisson shock, but
not after the Poisson shock (and where the equilibrium coincides with that under consideration after the Poisson
shock).37
    Financial integration before the Poisson shock increases output ξ ≥ ξˆa,l if and only if the exchange rate is more
depreciated E ≥ Ê a,l .38




  37
     By financial autarky we mean that Net Foreign Asset positions at Home and in Foreign are equal to 0. We allow countries
to trade actuarially fair insurance contracts on the realization of the Poisson shock. These contracts have zero ex-ante value
for both home and foreign agents.
  38
     The analysis simplifies drastically in the limit of full home bias (β → 1x). In this case, we have ξ a = ξ a,l , wτ = vτ = wτ∗ =
vτ = 1. This implies that ξ and r∗ are given by their financial autarky values ξ = ξ a,l , r∗ = r∗a,n = δ ∗ θ − ρ, and Net Foreign
 ∗

Asset Positions and Current Accounts are zero NȲF A = CA      Ȳ
                                                                  = 0. This is an equilibrium if and only if r∗a,n ≥ 0 and ra,n ≤ 0
(which is equivalent to ξ ≤ 1).
                          a,l




                                                                    67
