                                 NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




      COMPARATIVE ADVANTAGE, INTERNATIONAL TRADE, AND FERTILITY

                                            Quy-Toan Do
                                         Andrei A. Levchenko
                                           Claudio Raddatz

                                         Working Paper 21677
                                 http://www.nber.org/papers/w21677


                       NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                                1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                  Cambridge, MA 02138
                                      October 2015




We are grateful to the editor (Nathan Nunn), two anonymous referees, Raj Arunachalam, Martha Bailey,
Francesco Caselli, Francisco Ferreira, Elisa Gamberoni, Gene Grossman, David Lam, Carolina Sanchez-Paramo,
and seminar participants at various institutions for helpful suggestions. Çaatay Bircan, Aaron Flaaen,
Dimitrije Ruzic, and Nitya Pandalai-Nayar provided outstanding research assistance. The project has
been funded in part by the World Bank's Research Support Budget. The views expressed in the paper
are those of the authors and need not represent either the views of the World Bank, its Executive Directors
or the countries they represent, or those of the Central Bank of Chile or the members of its board. This
document is an output from a project funded by the UK Department for International Development
(DFID) and the Institute for the Study of Labor (IZA) for the benefit of developing countries. The
views expressed are not necessarily those of DFID, IZA, or the National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.

© 2015 by Quy-Toan Do, Andrei A. Levchenko, and Claudio Raddatz. All rights reserved. Short sections
of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full
credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
Comparative Advantage, International Trade, and Fertility
Quy-Toan Do, Andrei A. Levchenko, and Claudio Raddatz
NBER Working Paper No. 21677
October 2015
JEL No. F16,J13,O11

                                             ABSTRACT

We analyze theoretically and empirically the impact of comparative advantage in international trade
on fertility. We build a model in which industries differ in the extent to which they use female relative
to male labor, and countries are characterized by Ricardian comparative advantage in either female-labor
or male-labor intensive goods. The main prediction of the model is that countries with comparative
advantage in female-labor intensive goods are characterized by lower fertility. This is because female
wages, and therefore the opportunity cost of children are higher in those countries. We demonstrate
empirically that countries with comparative advantage in industries employing primarily women exhibit
lower fertility. We use a geography-based instrument for trade patterns to isolate the causal effect
of comparative advantage on fertility.


Quy-Toan Do                                         Claudio Raddatz
MSN MC3-306                                         Director, Financial Policy Division
The World Bank                                      Central Bank of Chile
qdo@worldbank.org                                   Agustinas 1180
                                                    Santiago
Andrei A. Levchenko                                 CHILE
Department of Economics                             craddatz@bcentral.cl
University of Michigan
611 Tappan Street
Ann Arbor, MI 48109
and NBER
alev@umich.edu
1    Introduction
Attempts to understand population growth and the determinants of fertility date as far back
as Thomas Malthus. Postulating that fertility decisions are influenced by women’s oppor-
tunity cost of time (Becker, 1960), choice over fertility has been incorporated into growth
models in order to understand the joint behavior of population and economic development
throughout history (see e.g. Barro and Becker 1989; Becker et al. 1990; Kremer 1993; Galor
and Weil 1996, 2000; Greenwood and Seshadri 2002; Doepke 2004; Hazan and Zoabi 2006;
Jones and Tertilt 2008; Doepke et al. 2015). The large majority of existing analyses exam-
ine individual countries in a closed-economy setting. However, in an era of ever-increasing
integration of world markets, the role of globalization in determining fertility can no longer
be ignored.
    This paper studies both theoretically and empirically the impact of comparative advan-
tage in international trade on fertility outcomes. Our conceptual framework is based on three
assumptions. First, goods differ in the intensity of female labor: some industries employ pri-
marily women, others primarily men. This assumption is standard in theories of gender and
the labor market (Galor and Weil, 1996; Black and Juhn, 2000; Qian, 2008; Black and Spitz-
Oener, 2010; Rendall, 2010; Pitt et al., 2012; Alesina et al., 2013), and as we show below finds
ample support in the data. In the rest of the paper, we refer to goods that employ primarily
(fe)male labor as the (fe)male-intensive goods. Second, women bear a disproportionate bur-
den of raising children. That is, a child reduces a woman’s labor market supply more than
a man’s. This assumption is also well-accepted (Becker, 1981, 1985; Galor and Weil, 2000),
and is consistent with a great deal of empirical evidence (see, e.g., Angrist and Evans, 1998;
Guryan et al., 2008). Finally, differences in technologies and resource endowments imply
that some countries have a comparative advantage in the female-intensive goods, and others
in the male-intensive goods. Our paper is the first to both provide empirical evidence that
countries indeed differ in the gender composition of their comparative advantage, and to
explore the impact of comparative advantage in international trade on fertility in a broad
sample of countries.
    The main theoretical result is that countries with comparative advantage in female-
intensive goods exhibit lower fertility. The result thus combines Becker’s hypothesis that
fertility is affected by women’s opportunity cost of time with the insight that this opportu-
nity cost is higher in countries with a comparative advantage in female-intensive industries.
    We then provide empirical evidence for the main prediction of the model using industry-
level export data for 79 manufacturing and non-manufacturing sectors in 146 developed and
developing countries over 5 decades. We use sector-level data on the share of female workers


                                               1
in total employment to classify sectors as female- and male- intensive. The variation across
sectors in the share of female workers is substantial: it ranges from 5-6 percent in industries
such as logging and coal mining to 55-65 percent in some types of textiles and apparel.
We then combine this industry-level information with data on countries’ export shares to
construct, for each country and time period, a measure of its female labor needs of exports
that captures the degree to which a country’s comparative advantage is in female-intensive
sectors. We use this measure to test the main prediction of the model: fertility is lower in
countries with a comparative advantage in female-intensive sectors.
    The key aspect of the empirical strategy is how it deals with the reverse causality problem.
After all, it could be that countries where fertility is lower for other reasons export more in
female-intensive sectors. To address this issue, we follow Do and Levchenko (2007) and con-
struct an instrument for each country’s trade pattern based on geography and a gravity-like
specification. Exogenous geographical characteristics such as bilateral distance or common
border have long been known to affect bilateral trade flows. The influential insight of Frankel
and Romer (1999) is that those exogenous characteristics and the strong explanatory power
of the gravity relationship can be used to build an instrument for the overall trade open-
ness at the country level. Do and Levchenko (2007)’s point of departure is that the gravity
coefficients on the same exogenous geographical characteristics such as distance also vary
across industries – a feature of the data long known in the international trade literature.
This variation in industries’ sensitivity to the common geographical variables allows us to
construct an instrument for trade patterns rather than the overall trade volumes. Section
3.1 describes the construction of the instrument and justifies the identification strategy at
length. As an alternative approach, we supplement the cross-sectional 2SLS evidence with
panel estimates that include country and time fixed effects.
    Both cross-sectional and panel results support the main empirical prediction of the model:
countries with a higher female-labor intensity of exports exhibit lower fertility. The effect is
robust to the inclusion of a large number of other covariates of fertility, and is economically
significant. Moving from the 25th to the 75th percentile in the distribution of the female-
labor needs of exports lowers fertility by as much as 20 percent, or about 0.36 standard
deviations of fertility across countries.
    Our paper contributes to two lines of research in fertility. The first is the empirical testing
of Becker’s hypothesis that fertility is affected by women’s opportunity cost of time. The key
hurdle in this literature is to identify plausibly exogenous variation in this opportunity cost.
While the negative correlation between women’s wages and fertility is very well-documented
(Jones et al., 2010), it cannot be interpreted causally, since wages are only observed for



                                                2
women who work.1,2 Some authors have used educational attainment as an instrument for
female wages after estimating a Mincer equation (Schultz, 1986) or directly as a proxy for
productivity (Jones and Tertilt, 2008). However, as emphasized by Jones et al. (2010),
education and occupational choices are potentially endogenous to fertility: women with a
preference for large families might decide to invest less in education or choose occupations
with lower market returns. Alternatively, to avoid using endogenous individual characteris-
tics, some studies use median and/or mean female wages to proxy for women’s opportunity
cost of time (Fleisher and Rhodes, 1979; Heckman and Walker, 1990; Merrigan and St.-
Pierre, 1998; Blau and van der Klaauw, 2007). Still, when the wage statistics are computed
from the selected sample of working women, they may not be representative of women’s
opportunity cost of time when it comes to fertility decisions.3 Our approach avoids these
limitations. By constructing country-level measures of female labor needs of exports, and
instrumenting these using exogenous (and arguably excludable) geographical variables, we
build a proxy for women’s opportunity cost of time that is exogenous to individual fertility,
education, or labor force participation.4 Our paper thus provides novel empirical evidence
on Becker’s influential hypothesis.
    The second is the (still sparse) literature on fertility in the context of international in-
tegration. Schultz (1985) shows that the large changes in world agricultural prices and
the gender division of labor in agriculture affected fertility in 19th-century Sweden, while
Alesina et al. (2011) test the hypothesis that historical prevalence of the plough use affected
fertility. Galor and Mountford (2009) study the impact of initial comparative advantage
on the dynamics of fertility and human capital investments. Sauré and Zoabi (2011, 2014)
examine how trade affects female labor share, wage gap, and fertility in a factor proportions
framework featuring complementarity between capital and female labor. Rees and Riezman
(2012) argue that when foreign direct investment improves work opportunities for women,
fertility will fall. Our framework is the first to combine the Ricardian motive for trade with
   1
     While some studies have argued – implicitly or explicitly – that levels of female labor force participation
are “high enough” in the US so that censoring is not a significant issue (Cho, 1968; Fleisher and Rhodes, 1979),
this assumption would be more problematic to make in the context of low and middle-income countries, that
typically exhibit low levels of female labor force participation and for which data on female wages are scarce
and imprecise in part due to the large size of the informal sector (World Bank, 2012).
   2
     At very high levels of household income, Hazan and Zoabi (2014) provide evidence that the usual negative
relationship between women’s opportunity cost of time and fertility does not hold, as high-earning women
can have more children by purchasing childcare services in the market.
   3
     Heckman and Walker (1990) argue that “[i]t is plausible that in Sweden the wage process is exogenous
to the fertility process. Sweden uses centralized bargaining agreements to set wages and salaries” (p.1422).
Since this institutional feature is specific to Sweden, this approach is difficult to extend to other contexts.
   4
     Our methodology is thus similar in spirit to Alesina et al. (2013), who also use a geography-based variable
(soil crop suitability in this case) as an instrument for the adoption of a female-labor-intensive technology:
the plough.



                                                       3
differences in female-labor intensity across sectors, and explore its role in the demand for
female labor.
    Our paper also relates to the small but growing literature on the impact of globalization
on gender outcomes more broadly (Black and Brainerd, 2004; Oostendorp, 2009; Aguayo-
Tellez et al., 2013; Marchand et al., 2013; Juhn et al., 2014). Closest to our paper is Ross
(2008), who shows empirically that oil-abundant countries have lower female labor force
participation (FLFP). Ross (2008)’s explanation for this empirical pattern is that Dutch
disease in oil-exporting countries shrinks the tradable sector, and expands the non-tradable
sector. If the tradable sector is more female-intensive than the non-tradable sector, oil lowers
demand for female labor and therefore FLFP. Our theoretical mechanism relies instead on
variation in female-labor intensity within the tradable sector. On the empirical side, the
effect we demonstrate is much more general: it is present when excluding natural resource
exporters, as well as excluding the Middle East-North Africa region.
    The rest of the paper is organized as follows. Section 2 presents a simple two-country
two-sector model of comparative advantage in trade and endogenous fertility. Section 3 lays
out our empirical strategy to test the predictions of the model. Section 4 describes the data,
while section 5 presents estimation results. Section 6 concludes. Detailed model exposition
and the proofs are collected in Appendix A.


2     Theoretical Framework
Consider a two-country two-sector model. The two countries are indexed by c ∈ {X, Y },
and the two sectors by i = {F, M }. The representative household in c values consumption
CFc and CM c
              of the two goods, as well as the number of children N c it has according to the
utility function
                                                          c 1−η
                          u (CFc , CM
                                    c
                                      , N c ) = (CFc )η (CM )   + v (N c ) ,              (1)

with v (.) is increasing and concave. To guarantee interior solutions, we further assume that
limN →0 v ′ (N ) = +∞.
    We adopt the simplest form of the gender division of labor, and assume that production
in sector F only requires female labor and capital, while sector M only requires male labor
and capital. Technology in sector i is therefore given by

                                   Yic (Ki , Li ) = ic Kiα L1−α
                                                            i   ,

where Li is the sector’s employment of female labor (in sector F ) and male labor (in sector
                                                            c∈{X,Y }
M ), Ki is the amount of capital used by sector i, and {ic }i∈{M,F } are total factor productivities

                                                 4
in the two sectors and countries. Formally, this is the specific-factors model of production
and trade (Jones, 1971; Mussa, 1974), in which female and male labor are specific to sectors
F and M respectively, while K can move between the sectors.5 Thus, we take the arguably
simplistic view that men supply “brawn-only” labor, while women supply “brain-only” labor,
and men and women are not substitutes for each other in production within each individual
sector. Of course, there is still substitution between male and female labor in the economy
as a whole, since goods F and M are substitutable in consumption.6
    The key to our results is the assumption that countries differ in their relative productiv-
ities F c /M c . For convenience, we normalize

                                            (F c )η (M c )1−η = 1                                           (2)

in both countries. Since the impact of relative country sizes is not the focus of our analysis,
and the aggregate gender imbalances in the population tend to be small, we set the country
endowments of male and female labor and capital to be L̄cM = L̄cF = 1 and K̄ c = 1 for
c ∈ {X, Y }. Capital can move freely between sectors, and the market clearing condition
for capital is KFc + KMc
                          = 1. Men supply labor to the goods production sector only, and
hence supply it inelastically: LcM = 1. On the other hand, childrearing requires female labor,
and women split their time between goods production and childrearing. N c children require
                                                                
spending λN c units of female labor at home, so that N c ∈ 0, λ1 . Female market labor force
participation is then
                                        LcF = 1 − λN c .                                   (3)

   All goods and factor markets are competitive. International trade is costless, while capital
and labor cannot move across countries.7 In country c, capital earns return rc and female
   5
      While the canonical specific-factors model has a factor mobile across sectors (capital here), it is not
strictly necessary for the main results to hold. For simplicity, we abstract from differences in the elasticity
of substitution between female labor and capital, and between male labor and capital (Goldin, 1990; Galor
and Weil, 1996). Sauré and Zoabi (2011, 2014) contain a comprehensive treatment of how this difference in
elasticities affects the impact of international trade on gender outcomes.
    6
      The necessary condition for obtaining our results is that in equilibrium, women’s relative wages are
higher in the country with a Ricardian comparative advantage in the female-intensive good. This plausible
equilibrium outcome obtains under more general production functions in which both types of labor are used
in both sectors (see, for instance, Morrow, 2010). On the other hand, our result is inconsistent with models
that feature Factor Price Equalization (FPE). FPE is ruled out in our model by cross-country productivity
differences in all sectors, which implies that generically FPE does not hold in our model.
    7
      The assumption of no international capital mobility is not crucial for our results. In fact, our results
can be even more transparent with perfect capital mobility. When capital is internationally mobile, relative
female wages in the two countries depend only on the relative Total Factor Productivities in the female sector
                                              !         1/(1−α)
(when the solution is interior): wFX /wFY = F X /F Y             . This expression relates relative female wages
to absolute advantage in the female-intensive sector. Thus, as long as a country’s Ricardian comparative
advantage is the same as its absolute advantage (that is, as long as M X /M Y is such that F X /F Y ⋚ 1 ⇒


                                                       5
and male workers are paid wages wFc and wM  c
                                              , respectively. Let the price of goods i ∈ {M, F }
be denoted by pi , and set the price of the goods consumption basket to be numeraire:

                                                pηF p1−η
                                                     M = 1.                                               (4)

                                                                                            c∈{X,Y }
    A competitive equilibrium in this economy is a set of prices {pi , rc , wic }i∈{M,F } , capital
                    c∈{X,Y }
allocations {Kic }i∈{M,F } , and fertility levels {N c }c∈{X,Y } , such that (i) consumers maximize
utility; (ii) firms maximize profits; (iii) goods and factor markets clear.
    Fertility in both countries and production/consumption allocations are thus jointly de-
termined in equilibrium, making it more difficult to handle than the typical model of inter-
national exchange in which factor supplies are fixed. For expositional purposes, we describe
the equilibrium in two steps. We first characterize the global production and consumption
allocations for a given fertility profile {N c }c∈{X,Y } . We then endogenize households’ decisions
over fertility.

Production and Trade Equilibrium Considering fertility choices {N c }c∈{X,Y } as given,
we look at the production and trade equilibrium. Fertility levels determine female labor
supply according to (3), and thus countries’ female labor “endowment”. Thus, and as formally
established in Proposition A1 in the Appendix, equilibrium production and trade are the
result of comparative advantage, which can be decomposed into a technological or Ricardian
component and a factor-proportions component.

Fertility equilibrium Letting fertility being determined endogenously, the central ques-
tion is to establish whether fertility decisions exacerbate or mitigate exogenous Ricardian
comparative advantage.

Labor supply First, functional form (1) for the representative agent’s utility function
makes it linear in income and additively separable in consumption and fertility. This implies
that in every country, the female formal labor supply curves (and hence fertility choices) are
solely driven by the substitution effect.8 The resulting upward-sloping female labor supply
curve and the associated negative relationship between female wages and fertility are in line
!         !           
 F X /F Y M Y /M X ⋚ 1), it will have higher female wages, and the rest of the results follow.
   8
     In general however, an increase in women’s wages will have both income and substitution effects. Higher
female wages represent a higher opportunity cost of having children, and thus the substitution effect implies
that a rise in women’s wages increases female labor supply and reduces fertility. However, higher female
wages can also have an income effect: since children are a normal good, all else equal higher female wages
can also lead to more children, and thus lower formal labor supply. Separability eliminates the income effect,
but is sufficient albeit not necessary. A necessary condition for labor supply to be sloping upward is for the
substitution effect to dominate, which is commonly assumed (see e.g. Galor and Weil 1996).


                                                      6
with a large body of both theoretical and empirical literature, going back to Becker (1965),
Willis (1973), and Becker (1981). Jones et al. (2010) and Mookherjee et al. (2012) are recent
discussions of the conditions necessary and sufficient to have the substitution effect dominate
the income effect and hence generate a negative fertility-income relationship.

Labor demand An increase in female labor supply in country c increases c’s comparative
advantage in the female-labor intensive good (the factor-proportions effect). This will in-
crease the size of the F -sector in country c and exert a downward pressure on female wages.
By the same token, country −c′ s comparative advantage in the female-labor intensive good
is reduced, decreasing the size of the F -sector in that country, which in turn will put addi-
tional downward pressure on female wages in country c. The female labor demand curve is
therefore downward-sloping.

Equilibrium fertility As a consequence, for a given fertility level in country −c, labor
supply and demand curves in c intersect in a unique equilibrium fertility level (see Lemma
A1 in the Appendix). Thus, for every fertility level N in country −c, there exists a unique
equilibrium fertility N c (N ) (see Lemma A2). Proposition A2 then formally establishes the
uniqueness of a competitive equilibrium.

Comparative statics The main result of the model is that fertility choices unambiguously
exacerbate initial Ricardian differences, leading to equilibrium differences in fertility.

    Theorem 1: Cross-sectional comparison If country c has a Ricardian comparative
                                                  Fc     F −c
advantage in the female-labor intensive sector ( M  c > M −c ), it will exhibit lower equilibrium

fertility: N c < N −c .
    Theorem 1 is the main theoretical prediction, and one that will be tested empirically.
The intuition for this result is as follows. Female wages will be higher in the country with
the comparative advantage in the female-intensive sector because of higher relative produc-
tivity further exacerbated by a flow of capital to the sector with comparative advantage.
Since a higher female wage increases the opportunity cost of childbearing in terms of goods
consumption, equilibrium childbearing drops.
    The theoretical exposition above makes clear what are the measurement and identifica-
tion challenges for the empirical work. First, in order to test for the impact of gender-biased
comparative advantage on fertility, we must develop a measure of comparative advantage in
(fe)male sectors. Fortunately, the model presents us with a way of doing this: observed trade
flows. Countries with a comparative advantage in the female-intensive good will export that


                                               7
good. Our empirical strategy thus starts by building a measure of the female intensity of
exports based on observed export specialization. Second, the model shows quite clearly that
observed specialization patterns, trade flows, and fertility levels are jointly determined. In
particular, countries with higher technological comparative advantage in the female sector
can potentially accentuate that comparative advantage with a higher female labor supply
and will thus effectively exhibit relative factor proportions that also favor exports in the
female-intensive sectors. Thus, in order to provide evidence for the causal impact of compar-
ative advantage on fertility, we must find an exogenous source of variation in comparative
advantage. We describe all parts of our empirical strategy and results below.


3       Empirical Strategy
To test for the impact of comparative advantage on fertility, we must first construct a measure
of the degree of female bias in a country’s export pattern. We begin by classifying sectors
according to their female intensity. Let an industry’s female-labor intensity F Li be measured
as the share of female workers in the total employment in sector i. We take this measure
as a technologically determined industry characteristic that does not vary across countries.
We then construct for each country and time period a measure of the “female-labor needs of
exports”:
                                               X I
                                                     X
                                    F LN Xct =     ωict F Li ,                              (5)
                                                  i=1
                                                                                   X
where i indexes sectors, c countries, and t time periods. In this expression, ωict    is the share
of sector c exports in country c’s total exports to the rest of the world in time period t. Thus,
F LN Xct in effect measures the gender composition of exports in country c. This measure is
meant to capture the female bias in each country’s comparative advantage. It will be high
if a country exports mostly in sectors with a large female share of employment, and vice
versa.9
    Using this variable, we would like to estimate the following equation in the cross-section
of countries:
                                N c = α + βF LN Xc + γZc + εc .                                (6)

The left-hand side variable N c is, as in Section 2, the number of births per woman, and Zc is a
vector of controls. The main hypothesis is that the effect of comparative advantage in female-
intensive sectors F LN Xc on fertility is negative (β < 0). The potential for reverse causality
    9
    The form of this index is based on Almeida and Wolfenzon (2005) and Do and Levchenko (2007), who
build similar indices to capture the external finance needs of production and exports.



                                                 8
is immediate here: higher fertility will reduce women’s formal labor force participation and
therefore could also affect the country’s export pattern. To deal with reverse causality, we
implement an instrumentation strategy that follows Do and Levchenko (2007), described in
the next subsection.
    We also exploit the time variation in the variables to estimate a panel specification of the
type
                          Ntc = α + βF LN Xct + γZct + δc + δt + εct ,                       (7)

where country and time fixed effects are denoted by δc and δt respectively. The advantage of
the panel specification is that the use of fixed effects allows us to control for a wide range of
time-invariant omitted variables that vary at the country level, and identify the coefficient
purely from the time variation in comparative advantage and fertility outcomes within a
country over time.
    The baseline controls include PPP-adjusted per capita income, overall trade openness,
and, in the case of cross-sectional regressions, regional dummies. (We also check robustness
of the results to a number of additional control variables.) The cross-sectional specifications
are estimated on averages for the period 2000-2007. The panel specifications are estimated
on non-overlapping 5-year and 10-year averages. As per standard practice, we take multi-
year averages in order to sweep out any variation at the business cycle frequency. The panel
data span 1962 to 2007 in the best of cases, though not all variables for all countries are
available for all time periods.


3.1    The Instrument
The construction of the instrument exploits exogenous geographic characteristics of countries
together with the empirically observed regularity that trade responds differentially to the
standard gravity forces across sectors. The exposition here draws on, and extends, the
material in Do and Levchenko (2007).
   For each industry i, we estimate the Frankel and Romer (1999) gravity specification,
which relates observed trade flows to exogenous geographic variables:

        LogXicd = αi + ηi1 ldistcd + ηi2 lpopc + η 3i lareac + ηi4 lpopd + η 5i laread +     (8)
                       η 6i landlockedcd + ηi7 bordercd + ηi8 bordercd ×ldistcd +
                       η 9i bordercd × popc + η 10                   11
                                                i bordercd ×areac + ηi bordercd ×popd +

                       ηi12 bordercd ×aread + η 13
                                                i bordercd ×landlockedcd + ǫicd ,


where LogXicd is the log of exports as a share of GDP in industry i, from country c to country

                                                 9
d. The right-hand side consists of the geographical variables. In particular, ldistcd is the log
of distance between the two countries, defined as distance between the major cities in the
two countries, lpopc is the log of population of country c, lareac log of land area, landlockedcd
takes the value of 0, 1, or 2 depending on whether none, one, or both of the trading countries
are landlocked, and bordercd is the dummy variable for common border. The right-hand
side of the specification is identical to the one used by Frankel and Romer (1999). We use
bilateral trade flows from the COMTRADE database, converted to the 3-digit ISIC Revision
3 classification. To estimate the gravity equation, the bilateral trade flows Xicd are averaged
over the period 1980-2007. This allows us to smooth out any short-run variation in trade
shares across sectors, and reduce the impact of zero observations.
    Having estimated equation (8) for each industry, we then obtain the predicted logarithm
of industry i exports to GDP from country c to each of its trading partners indexed by d,
\ icd . In order to construct the predicted overall industry i exports as a share of GDP
LogX
from country c, we then take the exponential of the predicted bilateral log of trade, and sum
over the trading partner countries d = 1, ..., C, exactly as in Frankel and Romer (1999):

                                              C
                                              X
                                    b ic =              \
                                    X                  eLogX icd .                           (9)
                                             d=1
                                             d 6= c

That is, predicted total trade as a share of GDP for each industry and country is the sum
of the predicted bilateral trade to GDP over all trading partners.
    The instrument for F LN X is constructed using the predicted export shares in each
industry i, rather than actual ones, in a manner identical to equation (5):

                                                 I
                                                 X
                                    F\
                                     LN X c =           ω X
                                                        bic F Li ,
                                                 i=1

                                                                         X
where the predicted share of total exports in industry i in country c, ω
                                                                       bic , is computed from
                            b
the predicted export ratios Xic :
                                                bic
                                                X
                                        X
                                      ω
                                      bic = PI          .                                 (10)
                                                  X bic
                                                  i=1

Note that even though X bic is exports in industry i normalized by a country’s GDP, every
sector is normalized by the same GDP, and thus they cancel out when we compute the
predicted export share.



                                               10
3.1.1   Discussion

We require an instrument for trade patterns, not trade volumes, and thus our strategy will
only work if it produces different predictions for X    bic across sectors for the same exporter.
All of the geographical characteristics on the right-hand side of (8) do not vary by sector.
However, crucially for the identification strategy, if the vector of estimated gravity coefficients
η i differs across sectors, so will the predicted total exports X  bic across sectors i within the
same country. The strategy of relying on variation in coefficient estimates for the same
geographical variables bears an affinity to Feyrer (2009), who uses the differential effect of
gravity variables on ocean-shipped vs. air-shipped trade to build a time-varying instrument
for overall trade openness, and to Ortega and Peri (2014), who exploit the fact that the
same gravity variables affect goods trade and migration flows differently to build separate
instruments for overall trade openness and immigrant population.
    This subsection (i) discusses the intuition for how the instrument works; (ii) reviews the
existing sector-level gravity literature to provide reasons to expect the gravity coefficients to
vary across sectors; (iii) describes the variation in our own gravity coefficients from estimating
(8) by sector.
    The following simple numerical example illustrates the logic of the strategy. Suppose that
there are four countries: the US, the EU, Canada, and Australia, and two sectors, Apparel
and Metals. Suppose further that the distance from Australia to either the US or the EU
is 10,000 miles, but Canada is only 1,000 miles away from both the US and the EU (these
distances are not too far from the actual values). Suppose that there are only these country
pairs, and that trade between them is given in Table A1. Let the gravity model include
only bilateral distance. The trade values have been chosen in such a way that a gravity
regression estimated on the entire “sample” yields a coefficient on distance equal to -1, a
common finding in the gravity literature. The gravity model estimated separately for each
of the two sectors yields the distance coefficient is -0.75 in Apparel and -1.25 in Metals (this
amount of variation in the distance coefficients is reasonable, as we show below). Using these
“estimates” of the distance coefficients, it is straightforward to take the exponent and sum
across the trading partners as in (9), and to calculate the predicted shares of total exports to
the rest of the world in each of the two sectors, as in (10). Now let the share of female labor
in Apparel be F LAP P = 0.66, and of Metals, F LM ET = 0.12 (these are the actual values of
F Li for these two industries). Then, the predicted female labor need of exports of Canada
is F\LN X CAN = 0.20, which is one-third lower than the predicted value for Australia of
F\ LN X AU S = 0.31.
    The key intuition from this example is that countries located far away from their trading
partners will have relatively lower predicted export shares in goods for which the coefficient

                                                11
on distance is higher, compared to countries located close to their trading partners. This
information is combined with cross-industry variation in female employment to generate
predicted F\ LN X. There are several important points to note about this procedure. First,
while this simple example focuses on the variation in distance coefficients along with dif-
ferences in distances between countries, our actual empirical procedure exploits variation in
all 13 regression coefficients in (8), along with the entire battery of exporting and destina-
tion country characteristics. Thus, to the extent that coefficients on other regressors also
differ across sectors, variation in predicted F\LN X will come from the full set of geography
variables. Second, while this simple four-country illustrative example may appear somewhat
circular – actual exports and distance affect the gravity coefficient, which in turn is used to
predict trade – in the real implementation we estimate the gravity model with a sample of
more than 150 countries, and thus the trade pattern of any individual country is unlikely to
affect the estimated gravity coefficients and therefore its predicted trade. Third, it is crucial
for this procedure that the gravity coefficients (hopefully all 13 of them) vary appreciably
across sectors. Below we discuss the actual estimation results for our gravity regressions,
and demonstrate that this is indeed the case.
    Can we support the notion that the gravity coefficients would be expected to differ across
sectors? Most of the research on the gravity model focuses on the effects of trade barriers on
trade volumes. Thus, existing empirical research is most informative on whether we should
expect significant variation in the coefficients on distance and common border variables,
which are meant to proxy for bilateral trade barriers. Anderson and van Wincoop (2003,
2004) show that the estimated coefficient on log distance is the product of the elasticity of
trade flows with respect to iceberg trade costs (commonly referred to as simply the “trade
elasticity”) and the elasticity of iceberg trade costs with respect to distance. Thus, the
distance coefficient will differ across industries if either or both of those elasticities differ
across industries.
    A number of papers estimate trade elasticities by sector (see, among many others, Feen-
stra, 1994; Broda and Weinstein, 2006; Caliendo and Parro, 2015; Imbs and Méjean, 2015).
Imbs and Méjean (2015) – the most recent and the most comprehensive study – reports
sector-level trade elasticity estimates using both of the principal estimation methods pro-
posed in the literature. The conservative range of trade elasticities across sectors reported in
that paper is from 2 to 20, consistent with the other studies undertaking similar exercises.
    There is less direct evidence on whether the elasticity of iceberg trade costs with respect
to distance varies across sectors. Trade costs do vary significantly across industries. Hummels
(2001) compiles freight cost data, and shows that in 1994 these costs ranged between 1% and



                                               12
27% across sectors in the US.10 Hummels (2001, 2007) further provides evidence that the
variation in freight costs is strongly related to the value-to-weight ratio: it is more expensive
to ship goods that are heavy. Thus, it is plausible that the elasticity of trade costs with
respect to distance is heterogeneous across sectors as well.
    To summarize, there are strong reasons to expect the coefficients in (8) to vary across
sectors. It is indeed typical to find variation in the gravity coefficients across sectors, though
studies differ in the level of sectoral disaggregation and specifications (see, e.g. Rauch, 1999;
Rauch and Trindade, 2002; Hummels, 2001; Evans, 2003; Feenstra et al., 2001; Berthelon and
Freund, 2008). For instance, Hummels (2001) finds that the distance coefficients vary from
zero to -1.07 in his sample of sectors, while the coefficients on the common border variable
range from positive and significant (as high as 1.22) to negative and significant (as low as
-1.23).
    Table A2 reports the cross-sectoral variation in the gravity coefficients in our estimates.
For each coefficient, it reports the mean, standard deviation, min, and max in our sample
of sectors. The variation in all of the gravity coefficients across sectors is considerable. The
distance coefficient, as expected, is on average around −1, but the range across sectors is
from -2.42 to -0.10. The common border coefficient has a mean of 0.66, and a standard
deviation of 3.68 across sectors. Our instrumentation strategy relies on this variation in
sectoral coefficients.
    There is another potentially important issue, namely the zero trade observations. In our
gravity sample, only about two-thirds of the possible exporter-importer pairs record positive
exports, in any sector. At the level of individual industry, on average only a third of possible
country-pairs have strictly positive exports, in spite of the coarse level of aggregation.11
We follow the Do and Levchenko (2007) procedure, and deal with zero observations in two
ways. First, following the large majority of gravity studies, we take logs of trade values, and
thus the baseline gravity estimation procedure ignores zeros. However, instead of predicting
in-sample, we use the estimated gravity model to predict out-of-sample. Thus, for those
observations that are zero or missing and are not used in the actual estimation, we still predict
trade.12 In the second approach, we instead estimate the gravity regression in levels using
the Poisson pseudo-maximum likelihood estimator suggested by Santos Silva and Tenreyro
  10
     In addition to the simple shipping costs, trade costs differ across industries in other ways. For in-
stance, trade volumes in differentiated and homogeneous goods sectors react differently to informational
barriers (Rauch, 1999; Rauch and Trindade, 2002), and to importing country institutions such as rule of law
(Berkowitz et al., 2006; Ranjan and Lee, 2007).
  11
     These two calculations make the common assumption that missing trade observations represent zeros
(see Helpman et al., 2008).
  12
     More precisely, for a given exporter-importer pair, we predict bilateral exports out-of-sample for all
sectors as long as there is any bilateral exports for that country pair in at least one of the sectors.



                                                    13
(2006). The advantage of this procedure is that it actually includes zero observations in the
estimation, and can predict both zero and non- zero trade values in-sample from the same
estimated equation. Its disadvantage is that it assumes a particular likelihood function, and
is not (yet) the standard way of estimating gravity equations found in the literature. Below
we report the results of implementing both alternative approaches. It turns out that they
deliver very similar results, an indication that the zeros problem is not an important one for
this empirical strategy.
    Finally, we stress that unfortunately this instrumentation strategy is only available in the
cross-section. In principle, a time-varying instrument for trade patterns could be constructed
in this way and used in a panel specification with country and time fixed effects. This
procedure would rely on the sector-level gravity coefficients varying over time (differentially
across sectors). Our attempt to implement this strategy revealed that there is simply not
enough differential time variation in the gravity coefficients for this strategy to be feasible.


4      Data Sources and Summary Statistics
The key indicator required for the analysis is the share of female workers in the total employ-
ment in each sector, F Li . The baseline measures of F Li come from the Labor Force Statistics
database of the US Bureau of Labor Statistics (BLS). The BLS has published “Women in the
Labor Force: A Databook” on an annual basis since 2005. It contains information on total
employment and the female share of employment in each industry covered by the Census,
sourced from the Current Population Survey. The data are available at the 4-digit US Census
2007 classification comprised of 262 distinct sectors, covering both tradeables (manufacturing
and non-manufacturing) and non-tradeables (services). In order to construct the share of
female workers in total sectoral employment F Li , we take the mean of this value across the
years for which the data on the female share of employment are available (2004-2009). After
dropping non-tradeables, the sector sample includes 79 sectors, 10 of which are in agriculture
and mining, and the rest in manufacturing.
   Table 1 reports the values of F Li in our sample of sectors, in descending order. There is
wide variation in the share of women in sectoral employment. While the mean is 27 percent,
these values range from the high of 66 percent in wearing apparel and over 50 percent in
footwear and other apparel-related sectors to the low of 5.5 percent in logging and coal
mining.13
  13
    A potential concern that these values may be very different across countries in general,      and across
developed and developing countries in particular. However, it turns out that the rankings of      sectors are
remarkably similar across countries. An earlier working paper version of this paper (Do et al.,   2014) built
measures of F Li based on the multi-country UNIDO database that contains information on           the female


                                                   14
                         X
    The export shares ωict are calculated based on the COMTRADE database, which contains
bilateral trade data covering manufacturing, agriculture, and mining sectors starting in 1962
in the 4-digit SITC revision 1 and 2 classification. The trade data are aggregated up to the
US Census classification using a concordance developed by the authors.
    Table 2 reports some summary statistics for the female labor needs of exports for the
OECD and non-OECD country groups. For the OECD, the mean F LN X rises modestly
between the 1960s and the 2000s, from 0.272 to 0.279. For the non-OECD countries, the
mean F LN X increases somewhat more over this period, from 0.255 to 0.291. Notably, the
dispersion in F LN X among the non-OECD countries is both much greater than among the
OECD, and increasing over time. In the OECD sample, the standard deviation is stable
around 0.030-0.040, whereas in the non-OECD sample it rises monotonically from 0.055 to
0.094 between the 1960s and the 2000s.
    Tables 3 reports the countries with the highest and lowest F LN X values. Typically,
countries with the highest values of female content of exports are those that export mostly
textiles and wearing apparel, while countries with the lowest F LN X are natural resource
exporters.
    Table 4 reports the countries with the largest positive and negative changes in F LN X
between the 1960s and today. Relative to the cross-sectional variation, the time variation
is also considerable. For the countries with the largest observed increases in F LN X, the
common pattern is that they change their specialization from agriculture-based sectors to
wearing apparel. For instance, in the 1960s 80% of exports from Cambodia were in the agri-
culture and food products sectors. By the 2000s, 85% of Cambodian exports are in wearing
apparel. The other countries in the top 10 largest positive changes in F LN X follow this
pattern as well. Since food products sectors are right in the middle of the F Li distribution,
and wearing apparel is the most female-intensive sector, this type of specialization change
will lead to large increases in F LN X.
    The largest observed decreases in F LN X are driven by the discovery of natural resources.
employment shares for a sample of 22 developed and developing countries over the period 1993-2008. In
that data, the values of F Li computed on the OECD and non-OECD samples have a correlation of 0.9. The
levels are similar as well, with the average F Li in the OECD of 0.29, and in the non-OECD of 0.27 in this
sample of countries. Pooling all the countries together, the first principal component explains 77 percent of
the cross-sectoral variation across countries, suggesting that rankings are very similar. Another concern is
that F Li is measured based on data from the 2000s, whereas our panel estimation sample goes back several
decades. We can examine how stable F Li is over time in UNIDO data, where F Li can be computed from
1993 to 2008. The average correlation between F Li based on individual years is 0.964, with a minimum of
0.903. Taking the ends of the sample, both the simple and the Spearman rank correlation between F Li in
1993 and in 2008 is 0.907. We conclude that the ranking of female labor intensity of sectors is quite stable
over this period. Our measure of F Li can be combined with data for earlier time periods as long as there
are no “gender-intensity reversals” over time, that is, the ranking of industries by female intensity is stable.



                                                      15
For instance, in Tanzania the second largest export sector after agriculture in the 1960s was
textiles, accounting for one-third of exports. By the 2000s, while agriculture retained its
primacy, the second-largest sector is now aluminum. The natural resource-based sectors are
among the least female-intensive, which accounts for why countries with major shifts towards
natural resources exhibit reductions in their F LN X.
    It turns out that these two groups of countries experienced very different changes in
fertility. Among the 10 countries with the largest increases in F LN X, fertility fell on average
by 3.7 children per woman, from 6.7 to 3.1 between the 1960s and the 2000s. By contrast, in
the 10 countries with the largest decreases in F LN X, fertility fell by only 1.7 children per
woman over the same period, from 5.5 to 3.8. Remarkably, while the latter group actually
had lower fertility levels in the 1960s, their subsequent paths were very different. This is of
course only an illustrative example, and the next section explores these patterns formally.
    Data on fertility are sourced from the World Bank’s World Development Indicators. The
baseline controls – PPP-adjusted per capita income and overall trade openness – come from
the Penn World Tables. Table 2 presents the summary statistics for fertility (number of births
per women) in each decade and separately for OECD and non-OECD countries. There is
considerable variation in fertility across countries: while the mean fertility in the 2000s is
3.1 births per woman in our sample of countries, the standard deviation is 1.7, and the
10th-90th percent range spans from 1.3 to 6.1. The table highlights the pronounced cross-
sectional differences between high- and low-income countries, as well as the secular reductions
in fertility over time in both groups of countries. Our final dataset contains country-level
variables on up to 146 countries.


5     Empirical Results
5.1    Cross-sectional results
Table 5 reports the results of estimating the cross-sectional specification in equation (6). Both
left-hand side and the right-hand side variables are in natural logs. All of the specifications
control for income per capita and overall openness. Column 1 presents the OLS results.
There is a pronounced negative relationship between the female-labor need of exports and
fertility, significant at the one percent level. By contrast, the coefficient on overall trade
openness is essentially zero and not significant. As is well known, income per capita is
significantly negatively correlated with fertility. These three variables absorb a great deal of
variation in fertility across countries: the R2 in this regression is 0.68. Column 2 repeats the



                                               16
OLS exercise but including the regional dummies.14 The R2 increases to 0.83, but the female
labor need of exports remains equally significant. Figure 1 displays the partial correlation
between fertility and F LN X from Column 2 of Table 5.
    Column 3 implements the 2SLS procedure. The bottom panel displays the results of the
first stage. As expected, the instrument is highly significant with a t-statistic of 7.7, and the
F -statistic for the excluded instrument of 56.42 is comfortably within the range that allows
us to conclude that the instrument is strong (Stock and Yogo, 2005). Figure 2 presents the
partial correlation plot from the first stage regression between F LN X and the instrument.
There is a clear positive association between the two variables that does not appear to be
driven by a few outliers. As expected, the variation in the instrument is much smaller than
the variation in the actual F LN X. The instrument is predicting F LN X while throwing out
a great deal of country-specific information, and thus the instrument’s predictions for the
country-specific F LN X vary much less across countries than do actual values.
    In the second stage, the main variable of interest, F LN X, is statistically significant at
the one percent level, with a coefficient substantially larger in absolute value than the OLS
coefficient. Column 4 repeats the 2SLS exercise adding regional dummies. The second-
stage coefficient of interest both increases in absolute value and becomes more statistically
significant.
    The OLS and 2SLS results described above constitute the main cross-sectional finding
of the paper. Countries that have a comparative advantage in the female-intensive sectors
exhibit lower fertility. The estimates are economically significant. Taking the coefficient in
column 4 as our preferred estimate, a 10 percent change in F LN X leads to a 5.9 percent
lower fertility rate. In absolute terms, this implies that moving from the 25th to the 75th
percentile in the distribution of the female labor needs of exports lowers fertility by as much
as 20 percent, or about 0.36 standard deviations of average fertility across countries. Applied
to the mean of 3.1 births per woman in this sample of countries, the movement from the
25th to the 75th percentile in F LN X implies a reduction of 0.6 births per woman.


5.2     Panel Results
The cross-sectional 2SLS results are informative, and allow us to make the clearest case for
the causal relationship between comparative advantage and fertility. However, because they
do not allow the use of country fixed effects, the cross-sectional results may still suffer from
omitted variables problems. As an alternative empirical strategy, we estimate the panel
  14
   The regional dummies correspond to the official World Bank region definitions: East Asia and Pacific,
Europe and Central Asia, Latin America and the Caribbean, Middle East and North Africa, North America,
South Asia, and Sub-Saharan Africa.


                                                  17
specification (7) on non-overlapping 5-year and 10-year averages from 1962 to 2007. The
gravity-based instrumentation strategy is not feasible in a panel setting with fixed effects.
On the other hand, country effects allow us to control for a wide range of unobservable time-
invariant country characteristics, and identify the coefficient of interest from the variation in
F LN X and fertility within a country over time.
    The results are presented in Table 6. To control for autocorrelation in the error term, all
standard errors are clustered at the country level. Column 1 reports the results for the pooled
specification without any fixed effects. The coefficient is negative and strongly significant.
Column 2 adds country fixed effects. The coefficient on F LN X is nearly unchanged, and
significant at the one percent level. Column 3 adds time effects to control for secular global
trends, while column 4 adds female educational attainment. The results continue to be
highly significant. Columns 5–8 repeat the exercise taking 10-year averages instead.15 The
coefficients are very similar in magnitude and equally significant.


5.3     Robustness
We now check the robustness of the cross-sectional result in a number of ways. The first set
of checks is on how the instrument construction treats zero trade observations. As detailed
in Section 3.1, the baseline instrument estimates the standard log-linear gravity specification
that omits zeros in the trade matrix, and predicts trade only for those values in which
observed trade is positive. We address the issue of zeros in two ways. The first is to predict
trade values for the observations in which actual trade is zero based on the same log-linear
regression. The second is to instead estimate a Poisson pseudo-maximum likelihood model
on the levels of trade values, as suggested by Santos Silva and Tenreyro (2006). In this
exercise, the zero trade observations are included in the estimation sample. The results of
using those two alternative instruments are presented in columns 5 and 6 of Table 5. Very
little is changed. The instruments continue to be strong, and the second-stage coefficients of
interest are similar in magnitude and significant at the one percent level. We conclude from
this exercise that the way zeros are treated in the construction of the instrument does not
affect the main results.
     Another concern is that the instrument is constructed based on variables – such as pop-
ulation – that do not satisfy the exclusion restriction. Note that the instrument relies on
the differential impact of each gravity variable across sectors, as determined by the sectoral
variation in non-country-specific gravity coefficients. To further probe into the importance
of the country-specific gravity variables, column 7 of Table 5 implements the instrument
  15
    To be precise, these are decadal averages for the 1960s, 1970s, and up to 2000s. Since our yearly data
are for 1962-2007, the 1960s and the 2000s are averages over less than 10 years.


                                                   18
without the exporter population (the population of each particular trading partner is plau-
sibly exogenous to the exporting country’s fertility). The instrument remains strong, as
evidenced by the first stage diagnostics. The coefficient drops by one-third, but the main
result remains robust. Alternatively, column 8 controls for area and population directly. The
coefficient of interest remains significant and of similar magnitude, while population and area
are insignificant as a determinant of fertility in this specification.
    Table 7 performs a number of additional specification checks. All columns report the
2SLS results controlling for openness, income, and regional dummies. First, it might be that
what matters is the female labor needs of net exports. That is, perhaps a country imports a
lot of the female-labor intensive goods, in which case its domestic demand for female labor
will be lower. This is unlikely to be a major force on average, as import baskets tend to be
more similar across countries than export baskets. Most countries specialize in a few sectors,
but import a broad range of products. Indeed, in our data the standard deviation of the
“female labor need of imports” (F LN I) is 4 times smaller than the standard deviation of
F LN X. Nonetheless, to check the robustness of the results, we use the female labor need
of net exports, F LN X − F LN I, as the independent variable. Since it can take negative
values, we must use levels rather than logs. As the instrument, we use the level of predicted
F LN X, rather than log. Column 1 of Table 7 reports the results, and shows that they are
robust to using this alternative regressor of interest.
    Next, we check whether the results are robust to including additional controls. Column 2
controls for female schooling, to account for the possible relationship between education and
fertility. Female schooling is measured as the average number of years of schooling in the
female population over 25, and is sourced from Barro and Lee (2000). While higher female
schooling is indeed associated with lower fertility, the coefficient on F LN X changes little
and continues to be significant at the one percent level. Column 3 controls for the prevalence
of child labor, since fertility is expected to be higher when children can contribute income to
the household. Child labor is measured as the percentage of population aged 10-14 that is
working, and comes from Edmonds and Pavcnik (2006). While the prevalence of child labor
is indeed positively associated with fertility, the main coefficient of interest remains robust.
Column 4 controls for infant mortality, sourced from the World Bank’s World Development
Indicators. Countries with higher infant mortality have higher fertility, but our coefficient
of interest remains robust.
    Next, column 5 controls for income inequality, using the Gini coefficient from the World
Bank’s World Development Indicators. Higher inequality is associated with higher fertility,
but once again the main result is robust. Finally, column 6 controls for the extent of democ-
racy, using the Polity2 index from the Polity IV database. The extent of democracy is not


                                              19
significantly associated with fertility, and F LN X is still significant at the one percent level.
    Table 8 checks whether the finding is driven by particular countries. Column 1 drops
outliers: the top 5 and bottom 5 countries in the distribution of F LN X. Column 2 drops
the OECD countries, to make sure that our results are not driven simply by the distinction
between high-income countries and everyone else.16 Column 3 drops Sub-Saharan Africa,
and column 4 drops the Middle East and North Africa region. The results are fully robust
to dropping outliers and these important country groups. The coefficients are similar to the
baseline and the significance is at one percent throughout. Finally, column 5 drops mining
exporters, defined as countries that have more than 60% of their exports in Mining and
Quarrying, a sector that includes crude petroleum.17 The results are unaffected by dropping
these countries.
    Table 9 looks at whether the effect of F LN X on fertility is present in other time periods,
by estimating the baseline 2SLS specification on every decade from the 1960s to the 1990s.
The effect is present in all decades except the 1960s, consistent with the fact that in the
1960s trade globalization was in much earlier stages, so the effect of trade is expected to be
more muted.
    Finally, one may be worried that the US-based measures of F Li may not be representa-
tive of the average country’s experience. An earlier working paper version of our paper (Do
et al., 2014) carried out the entire analysis using a measure of F Li computed on a sample
of 22 countries. This information comes from the UNIDO Industrial Statistics Database
(INDSTAT4 2009), which records the total employment and female employment in each
manufacturing sector for a large number of countries at the 3-digit ISIC Revision 3 classifi-
cation (61 distinct sectors), starting in the mid-1990s. We compute F Li as the mean share
of female workers in total employment in sector i across the countries for which these data
are available and relatively complete. This sample includes 11 countries in each of the devel-
oped and developing sub-samples: Austria, Cyprus, Ireland, Italy, Japan, Lithuania, Korea,
Malta, New Zealand, Slovak Republic, United Kingdom; and Azerbaijan, Chile, Egypt, In-
dia, Indonesia, Jordan, Malaysia, Morocco, Philippines, Thailand, Turkey. The results are
fully robust to this alternative way of measuring the female intensity of industries.
  16
     OECD countries in the sample are: Australia, Austria, Belgium, Canada, Denmark, Finland, France,
Germany, Greece, Iceland, Ireland, Italy, Japan, Netherlands, New Zealand, Norway, Portugal, Spain, Swe-
den, Switzerland, the United Kingdom, and the United States. We thus exclude the newer members of the
OECD, such as Korea and Mexico.
  17
     These countries are Algeria, Angola, Republic of Congo, Gabon, Islamic Republic of Iran, Kuwait,
Nigeria, Oman, Saudi Arabia, and Syrian Arab Republic.




                                                  20
5.4     Mechanisms and Other Outcome Variables
The women’s opportunity-cost-of-time hypothesis has a natural counterpart in another use of
time, namely female labor force participation (FLFP). We should expect that an increase in
comparative advantage in female-intensive sectors, as it lowers fertility, should also increase
FLFP. Appendix B discusses this issue at length and estimates the relationship between
comparative advantage in female-intensive sectors and FLFP. It appears that comparative
advantage in female-intensive sectors increases FLFP, but only for countries with lower levels
of income and female educational attainment and higher fertility. We argue that this type
of conditional relationship should be expected, given that there is no simple relationship
between fertility and FLFP, either in theory or in the data.18 The results with respect to
FLFP are nonetheless supportive of the main hypothesis in the paper.
    Similarly, one may expect to see a lower gender wage gap in countries with a comparative
advantage in female-intensive industries. Unfortunately, testing this hypothesis is even more
challenging than for FLFP. First and foremost, there are no reliable and comprehensive data
on the gender wage gaps for a large enough cross-section (much less a panel) of countries.
Second, even if data on the gender wage gaps were available, actual wage outcomes are
affected by worker heterogeneity in a number of ways that would be challenging to account
for in estimation. Across countries, there are large differences in the age, work experience,
and education distributions of both the male and female labor force. Within countries,
wages are only observed conditional on working, which introduces sample selection problem.
Controlling convincingly for these major confounding factors would be infeasible in our cross-
country context.


6      Conclusion
Fertility is an economic decision, and like all economic decisions has long been considered
an appropriate – and important – subject of analysis by economists. As trade integration
increased in recent decades, there is growing recognition that the impacts of globalization are
being felt well beyond the traditional market outcomes such as average wages, skill premia,
and (un)employment. This paper makes the case that international trade, or more precisely
  18
    Indeed, in the data there is no simple negative relationship between fertility and FLFP. For instance,
Ahn and Mira (2002) show that it is not stable even in the cross-section of OECD countries: FLFP was was
negatively correlated with fertility until the 1970s and 1980s, and but since then the correlation changed sign,
and fertility is now positively correlated with FLFP. Furthermore, Hazan and Zoabi (2014) show that among
US households the income-fertility relationship has gone from negative up until the 1990s to U-shaped in the
2000s. Hazan and Zoabi (2014)’s explanation is that at the very high levels of income, women buy childcare
services, which enables them to both work longer hours and have more children.



                                                      21
comparative advantage, matters for one key non-market outcome: the fertility decision.
    Our results thus emphasize the heterogeneity of the effects of trade on countries’ industrial
structures and gender outcomes. At a more conjectural level, to the extent that comparative
advantage impacts fertility, it may also impact women’s human capital investments, occu-
pational choice, and bargaining power within the household. From a policy perspective, our
results suggest that it will be more difficult for countries with technologically-based compar-
ative advantage in male-intensive goods to undertake policy measures to reduce the gender
gap, potentially leading to a slower pace of women’s empowerment. In an increasingly inte-
grated global market, the road to female empowerment is paradoxically very specific to each
country’s productive structure and exposure to international trade. At the same time, since
our paper points to comparative advantage as a determinant of women’s opportunities, a
potential policy lever to affect the gender gap could be through industrial policy promoting
female-intensive sectors.


Appendix A               Theory: Formal Derivation
It will be convenient to express all the equilibrium outcomes of the economy (prices and
                                 Kc
quantities) as functions of θc ≡ K cF instead of KFc .
                                    M



A.1     Production and Trade Equilibrium
We first characterize the production
                                  1and
                                      trade equilibrium under a fixed female labor supply
 c            c               c
LF = 1 − λN , for a given N ∈ 0, λ .

Firms’ optimization In each of the two sectors i ∈ {M, F }, firms rent capital and hire
labor to maximize profits:

                                max pi ic K α L1−α − rc K − wic L.
                                K,L


The necessary and sufficient first-order conditions with respect to Kic yield the following
                                                c 1−α
                                      rc      c Li
expression for the return to capital: pi = αi K c       . Equalizing the returns to capital
                                                  i
across sectors and
                 ! assuming
                        1−α that labor markets clear pins down relative prices of the two
        pF    Mc    θc
goods: pM = F c 1−λN c      . Under the choice of numeraire (4), prices are equal to
                                (                ! θc (1−α)(1−η)
                                              1
                                    pF   =     c        c
                                             F
                                              1
                                                 !1−λN    
                                                   1−λN c (1−α)η
                                                                    ,                      (A.1)
                                    pM   =   Mc      θc




                                                 22
which yields the following expression for the return to capital:
                                                                       η 1−α
                                  c                  c        1 − λN c
                              r       = α (1 + θ )                                 .                              (A.2)
                                                                 θc
                                                                                                                   wic
Finally, the necessary and sufficient first-order conditions with respect to Lci yield                             pi
                                                                                                                         =
           c α
         c Ki
(1 − α) i Lc , which pins down equilibrium wages of women and men:
             i

                                                          α               1−η(1−α)
                                                    1                θc
                        wFc   = (1 − α)                                                                           (A.3)
                                                  1 + θc          1 − λN c
                                                          α               −η(1−α)
                         c                          1                θc
                        wM    = (1 − α)                                                                           (A.4)
                                                  1 + θc          1 − λN c

Consumers’ optimization, market clearing conditions, and the law of one price
The Cobb-Douglas specification of the consumption bundle implies pF CFc = ηE c and pM CM        c
                                                                                                    =
          c
(1 − η) E , where expenditure is equal to income derived from wages paid to labor and rental
                           (1 − λN c ) + wM
of capital: E c = rc + wFc P              c
                                            . Aggregate consumption    P of good F equalizes aggre-
                                  c
gate production, so that c pF F (1 − KM     c α
                                                ) (1 − λN c )1−α = η [ c rc + (1 − λN c ) wFc + wMc
                                                                                                     ],
which can be rewritten
                              X                α
                                    c     1
                                 M            c
                                                   [η − (1 − η) θc ] = 0.                      (A.5)
                               c
                                        1+θ

Since the law of one price holds, equalizing the right-hand sides of equation (A.1) in the two
countries for sector F leads to the following condition:
                                      1−α                     1−α
                        Mc       θc            M −c       θ−c
                                             = −c                      ,                 (A.6)
                        F c 1 − λN c            F      1 − λN −c

where the notation “−c” denotes “not country c.”

                                                                                                      1−α
                                                                                                         1
                                                                                   c       F c M −c
Characterization of production equilibrium We define γ =                                   M c F −c
                                                                                                              , and ρc =
        c
     1−λN
γ c 1−λN               c
         −c . A value ρ > 1 indicates that country c has a comparative advantage in the female-

intensive good F . The comparative advantage can be decomposed into a technological or
                                                                                         1−λN c
Ricardian component γ c and an occupational or “factor-proportions” component 1−λN           −c ,

which can exacerbate or attenuate technological differences. We rewrite the two equations
(A.5) and (A.6) as a system of two equations with two unknowns {θc , θ−c } given exogenous
model parameters and “pre-determined” values {N c , N −c }:
                                                                    −c
                        η − (1 − η) θc      c η(1−α) η − (1 − η) θ
                                    α  + (γ  )                    α    = 0                                        (A.7)
                          (1 + θc )                    (1 + θ−c )
                                                                  θ−c
                                                              ρc c = 1                                            (A.8)
                                                                   θ


                                                         23
Equation (A.7) implicitly defines a downward-sloping “goods market-clearing curve” in the
space (θ−c , θc ) and is just a rearrangement
                                          of equation (A.5), keeping in mind that normal-
                                     c
                                              η
                                              = (γ c )η(1−α) . Since goods produced by the two
                            −c           −c
ization (2) implies that MM c = M    F M
                                       c F −c

countries are perfect substitutes, market clearing implies a negative relationship between the
size θc of the F -sector in country c and its size θ−c in country −c. On the other hand, the
upward-sloping “factor market-clearing curve” in the space (θ−c , θc ), defined by (A.8), implies
that F -sectors have to be of comparable size in the two countries (i.e. the larger sector F
gets in country c, the larger it needs to be in country −c as well), otherwise the return to
capital will diverge across the F - and M -sectors in each country. Thus, allocations of capital
between two sectors in the two countries {θc }c∈{X,Y } are uniquely determined by the system
of two equations (A.7) and (A.8).

    Proposition A1: Production and trade equilibrium Consider the endowment
                           c∈{X,Y }
structure K̄ c , L̄cM , LcF          = {1, 1, 1 − λN c }c∈{X,Y } . The unique production and con-
                                                                                c∈{X,Y }
sumption equilibrium is characterized by the vector of prices {pi , rc , wic }i∈{M,F } defined by
(A.1)-(A.4), and capital allocations {θc }c∈{X,Y } that solve (A.7)-(A.8).

    Proof of Proposition A1 The “goods market-clearing curve” and “factor market-
clearing curve” have opposite slopes. We therefore need to show that they intersect at least
once, since if they do, such intersection is unique. A necessary and sufficient condition for
the two curves to intersect is that the “goods market-clearing curve” be above the “factor
market-clearing curve” for low values of f c and below for larger values of θc .
   • As θc gets arbitrarily close to 0, equality (A.7) implies that the “goods market-clearing”
                                    1
     curve is bounded below by 1−η    , while (A.8) indicates that the “factor market-clearing”
                               1
     curve converges to 1 < 1−η , and therefore lies below the “goods market-clearing” curve.

   • On the other hand, when θc grows arbitrarily large, the “goods market-clearing” curve
                   1
     converges to 1−η , while the “factor market-clearing” diverges, and hence lies above the
     “goods market-clearing” curve.
Thus, the “goods market-clearing” curve is above the “factor market-clearing” curve in the
neighborhood of 1, while the opposite holds for large values of θc . Continuity of the two
curves implies existence of an intersection.

   The proof of Proposition A1 establishes existence of an intersection of the two “factor
market-clearing” and “goods market-clearing” curves, which is therefore unique since the two
curves have opposite slopes.

A.2     Fertility Decisions
The analysis above is carried out under an exogenously fixed fertility rate or, equivalently,
an exogenously fixed level of female labor force participation. We now turn to endogenizing
households’ fertility decisions. To pin down equilibrium fertility N c , we proceed in two steps.
First, for a given N −c , wFc and N c are jointly determined by labor supply and demand. Thus,

                                                  24
we must ensure that labor supply is upward-sloping and the female labor market equilibrium
is well defined. Second, fertility in the other country affects the labor market equilibrium by
shifting female labor demand and hence fertility in country c. We therefore look for a fixed
point in {N c , N −c } such that the female labor markets are in equilibrium in both countries
simultaneously.

Fertility choices and female labor supply Taking N −c as given and anticipating the
production equilibrium prices and quantities, households make fertility decisions accordingly.
Namely, they take prices as given and choose N c to maximize their indirect utility:

                            V c (N ) = rc + wFc (1 − λN ) + wM
                                                             c
                                                               + v (N ) .                  (A.9)

The first-order condition for the representative household’s fertility decision is necessary and
sufficient and given by           (        ′   c)
                                    wFc = v (N
                                             λ
                                                   if N c < λ1
                                           ′   c               .                          (A.10)
                                    wFc ≤ v (N
                                             λ
                                                 )
                                                   if N c = λ1
Since v (.) is concave, female labor market supply implicit in (A.10) is upward-sloping: a rise
in women’s wages reduces fertility and hence increases female labor supply.
                                                      
Female labor demand For a given set of parameters F X , M X , F Y , M Y , N −c , equation
(A.3) defines a downward-sloping female market labor demand curve. To see this, we rewrite
labor demand using (A.8):
                                                    α                  1−η(1−α)
                                              1                θ−c − 1
                      wFc   = (1 − α)                       γc
                                                                                      .   (A.11)
                                            1 + θc            1 − λN −c

Thus, for a given female labor force supply 1 − λN −c in country −c, wFc decreases with θc
and increases with θ−c . To sign the slope of the female labor demand curve, we first establish
the following result:

   Lemma A1: Comparative statics in partial equilibrium If comparative advan-
tage of country c ∈ {X, Y } in the female-labor intensive sector becomes stronger (ρc in-
                                                                     dθc   c
creases), then country c has a larger female-labor intensive sector: dρc (ρ ) > 0.




   Proof of Lemma A1 From equation (A.7), let’s try to characterize the behavior of θc
when the patterns of comparative advantage ρ are changing.
   Dropping the country reference and substituting for θ−c , f is implicitly defined for every
ρ by:
                   α                                                   
              θ                          c η(1−α)        α       θ
                + 1 [η − (1 − η) θ] + (γ )        (1 + θ) η − (1 − η) = 0
              ρ                                                  ρ




                                                      25
that is denoted x (θ, ρ) = 0. On the one hand,
                                       α−1
        ∂x (θ, ρ)    αθ          θ                                                       (1 − η) θ
                  =−               +1          [η − (1 − η) θ] + (γ c )η(1−α) (1 + θ)α
          ∂ρ         ρ2          ρ                                                          ρ2

and since x (θ, ρ) = 0, we can rewrite
                                         α                                       
          ∂x (θ, ρ)     c η(1−α) (1 + θ)    θ                                   θ
                    = (γ )                       αη + (1 − η) + (1 − α) (1 − η)
            ∂ρ                      ρ      ρ+θ                                  ρ

On the other hand, similar derivation yields
                                                                                  
     ∂x (θ, ρ)       c η(1−α)         α   ρ−1    α [ηρ − θ(1 − η)]      η (1 − η)
               = (γ )         (1 + θ)                              +
        ∂θ                                 ρ      (1 + θ) (θ + ρ)    [η − (1 − η) θ]

The implicit function theorem indicates that θ (ρ) is well defined and continuously differ-
entiable around ρ such that x(θ(ρ), ρ) = 0; we can now compute the derivative of θ with
respect to ρ :
                                                h                                   i
                                                                                  θ
             (1 − η) θ − η            θ (1 + θ)   αη + (1 − η) +  (1 − α) (1 − η) ρ
 θ′ (ρ) =
                 ρ−1       ηρ [α + (1 − α) (1 − η) (1 + θ)] + θ (1 − η) [αθ + (1 − α) η (1 + θ)]

The second term of the equation is always positive; by virtue of (A.7) and (A.8), the first
term (1−η)θ−η
        ρ−1
              > 0. We thus have
                                       θ′ (ρ) > 0.



    Lemma A2: Fertility in partial equilibrium For a given level of the other country’s
fertility level N −c , there exists a unique N c satisfying both (A.10) and (A.11).

   Proof of Lemma A2 Having established that the female labor demand curve is down-
ward sloping for every level of country −c’s female labor force participation and that the
female labor supply curve is upward sloping, we have shown uniqueness of an intersection.
We now need to show existence of an intersection.

    • As N c goes to zero (i.e. female labor supply goes to 1), the labor supply curve defined
      by (A.10) diverges given that lim0 v ′ (.) = +∞, by assumption. The labor demand
      curve is on the other hand bounded above since it is downward sloping; it therefore
      lies below the labor supply curve.

    • Let’s now let N c get arbitrarily close to λ1 , so that ρc converges to zero. Equation
      (A.8) implies that θc will converge to 0, so that, by virtue of (A.7), θ−c will converge
                                                 !         −α                  
      to some θ̄−c > 0 such that η + (γ c )η(1−α) θ̄−c + 1       η − (1 − η) θ̄−c = 0. Thus, the
      labor demand curve converges to some positive wage w̄Fc . Two cases arise:


                                                   26
             v′ ( 1 )
        – if λλ < w̄Fc , then the labor supply curve is below the labor demand curve at
          N c → λ1 ; the labor supply curve is thus above the labor demand curve in the
          neighborhood of N c = 0, while below in the neighborhood of N c = λ1 . Continuity
          of the two curves implies existence of an intersection, and thus existence of a
          well-defined fertility decision equilibrium.
            v′ ( 1 )
        – if λλ ≥ w̄Fc , then the two curves intersect in (1, w̄Fc ) .

The two possibilities are depicted in Figure A1.

    In the proof of Lemma A2, we establish that the female labor supply and demand curves
either intersect at the corner, i.e. N c = λ1 , or in the interior and the solution is also unique
since labor supply and demand curves have opposite slopes.

Equilibrium fertility Lemma A2 and the labor demand equation (A.11) imply that the
female labor demand curve in country c shifts down when female labor supply in country −c
goes up. Thus N c (N −c ) , the equilibrium fertility rate in country c when that rate in country
−c is N −c , is decreasing; so is N −c (N c ) . The following proposition formally establishes that
these two “reaction functions” intersect and therefore defines the complete equilibrium of the
economy.

   Proposition A2: Full characterization of the equilibrium Equations (A.1) to
                                                                   i∈{M,F }
(A.4), (A.8), and (A.10) define a vector of prices {pi , rc , wic }c∈{X,Y } , capital allocations
{θc }c∈{X,Y } and fertility decisions {N c }c∈{X,Y } that form the unique equilibrium of the
economy.

    Proof of Proposition A2 We need to prove that the two “reaction” functions N c (N −c )
and N −c (N c ) intersect at least once. We have argued that these two curves are decreasing.
Furthermore, we note that the two curves are continuous. We next investigate the behavior
of N c (N ) as N gets arbitrarily close to 0 and λ1 , respectively.
    Existence First, since prices in country c are continuous in N −c = 0, and lim0 v ′ (.) =
+∞, N c (0) is well defined and interior: there exists εc > 0, such that N c (0) = λ1 − εc . Next,
and given that N c (.) is decreasing, we have N c (N ) ∈ [0, 1 − εc ] , a compact set. Suppose
now that N −c is set arbitrarily close to λ1 . Then, (A.8) implies that θ−c converges to 0,
uniformly with respect to N c ; (A.7) in turn implies that θc converges towards some θ̄c < ∞
                          !        −α                 
such that η + (γ c )η(1−α) θ̄c + 1       η − (1 − η) θ̄c = 0. Equation (A.3) indicates that female
wages in country c remain bounded above, so that lim 1 N c (.) > 0. Thus, the curve N −c (.)
                                                             λ
cuts N c (.) at least once, and “from
                                    ! X above,”  as shown in Figure A2 below. This establishes
the existence of an equilibrium N , N Y .
    Uniqueness To show uniqueness, we look at the labor market equilibrium. For an
interior solution, we note that {(θc , N c )}c∈{X,Y } are implicitly defined by the intersection of
labor supply and demand, i.e.
                                                         α               1−η(1−α)
                      v ′ (N c )                   1                θc
                                 = (1 − α)                                              .   (A.12)
                           λ                     1 + θc          1 − λN c

                                                     27
N c can thus be expressed as a function N (.) of θc and exogenous parameters only such that
N (.) is continuously differentiable and simple algebra yields for an interior solution:
                                                       1       θ
                          dN (θ)   1 − λN (θ) 1 − 1−η(1−α) α 1+θ
                                 =                    (θ)] 1−λN (θ)
                                                                    ≥0                                          (A.13)
                            dθ          θ    λ − v”[N
                                                  ′    v [N (θ)] 1−η(1−α)

We now turn to the system
                       !     of equilibrium conditions (A.7) and (A.8) that are conditional
on labor endowments 1 − λN X , 1 − λN Y . On the one hand, (A.7) defines a negative un-
conditional relationship between θc and θ−c ; on the other hand, we rewrite (A.8) as

                                        θc        c    θ−c
                                              = γ                                                               (A.14)
                                     1 − λN c       1 − λN −c
                                                                  θ
that can be written uc (θc ) = γ c u−c (θ−c ) , where uc (θ) = 1−λN (θ)
                                                                        . Inequality (A.13) implies
       c
that u (.) is increasing, so that (A.14) defines a positive unconditional relationship between
θc and θ−c . Thus, the two equilibrium conditions for capital define two curves with opposite
slope, implying a unique intersection, given that existence was established above. Uniqueness
of capital allocation across sectors implies uniqueness of fertility decisions.

Comparative statics and cross-sectional comparisons We now consider (θc , N c ) and
(θ̃c , Ñ c ), two equilibrium capital allocations and fertility decisions of the economy when the
Ricardian comparative advantage of country c takes values γ c and γ̃ c , respectively. The
objective of this section is to compare fertility and the allocation of capital across sectors in
these two parameter configurations.

    Lemma A3: Comparative statics in general equilibrium An increase in compar-
ative advantage exacerbates fertility differences: if γ c ≥ γ̃ c , then N c ≤ Ñ c and N −c ≥ Ñ −c .

   Proof of Lemma A3 The ratio of female wages in the two countries and use (A.8) to
obtain the following equality:
                                                α
                             v ′ (N c )   1 + θc
                             ′     −c         −c
                                                    = (γ c )1−η(1−α) .       (A.15)
                            v (N ) 1 + θ

                                                              v ′ (N c )        v ′ (Ñ c )         1+θ c        1+θ̃ c
Equality (A.15) implies that if γ c ≥ γ̃ c then either       v ′ (N −c )
                                                                           ≥   v ′ (Ñ −c )
                                                                                              or   1+θ −c
                                                                                                            ≥   1+θ̃ −c
                                                                                                                        ,
or both. In other words, a change in comparative advantage triggers either a change in
fertility choices in either or both countries (N c ≤ Ñ c and/or N −c ≥ Ñ −c ), or a reallocation
of capital across sectors in either or both countries (θc ≥ θ̃c and/or θ−c ≤ θ̃−c ). However,
since γ c = 1/γ −c , a stronger comparative advantage in the F -good in country c is associated
with a weaker comparative advantage in country −c, vice and versa. Therefore, if a change
in comparative advantage positively (resp. negatively) affects fertility in country c, it will
simultaneously negatively (resp. positively) affect fertility in country −c. The same holds




                                                 28
for capital allocation. Thus, we can state the following:
                                                                          
        γ c ≥ γ̃ c =⇒ N c ≤ Ñ c and N −c ≥ Ñ −c or θc ≥ θ̃c and θ−c ≤ θ̃−c                    (A.16)

Finally, to see that both fertility and capital allocation respond to an exogenous change in
comparative advantage, we note that the right-hand side of (A.12) is increasing in θc , while
the left-hand side is decreasing in N c . The following equivalence therefore holds:

                                     θc ≥ θ̃c ⇐⇒ N c ≤ Ñ c .                                   (A.17)

That is, a higher inflow of capital in the F -sector is associated with higher female labor force
participation and hence lower fertility in equilibrium. Equivalence (A.17) implies that the
last term in (A.16) is therefore redundant and we can simply write
                                                                    
                          γ c ≥ γ̃ c =⇒ N c ≤ Ñ c and N −c ≥ Ñ −c .                     (A.18)

   

   From Lemma A3, the main result of the paper is stated in the theorem below:

     Proof of Theorem 1 To move from comparative statics to cross-sectional comparisons,
we set γ̃ c = 1.
     Interior solutions Equilibrium conditions (A.7) and (A.8) and labor market clearing
equations (A.12) are thus symmetric in both (N c , N −c ) and (θc , θ−c ), implying Ñ c = Ñ −c =
                                                    1
N 0 , where N 0 satisfies (A.12) with θ̃c = θ̃−c = 1−η . Implication (A.18) becomes for γ̃ c = 1:

                                  γ c ≥ 1 =⇒ N c ≤ N 0 ≤ N −c .

    Corner solutions Finally, since the arguments leading to Proposition 4 assume interior
solutions for equilibrium fertility in both countries, we now address the cases in which the
labor market equilibrium is at a corner (i.e. N c = λ1 or N −c = λ1 ). Without loss of generality,
suppose that γ c ≥ 1.

   • If N −c = λ1 , i.e. the F -sector in country −c disappears, then N c < λ1 (since N c = λ1
     implies that θc = 0, and (A.7) does not hold for θc = θ−c = 0), and the proposition
     trivially holds. Indeed, if c′ s comparative advantage in the F -sector is large enough,
     then c will end up producing all the F -goods in the economy.
                                            1
   • Alternatively, suppose that N c =      λ
                                                    and N −c < λ1 . Female wages are given by
                                                            1−η(1−α)           
                                              θ−c                         1      1
                         wFc   = (1 − α) γ      c
                                                                         ≤ v′
                                           1 − λN −c                      λ      λ
                                                           1−η(1−α)
                                                   θ−c                      1 ′ ! −c 
                         wF−c   = (1 − α)                               =     v N
                                                1 − λN −c                   λ


                                                      29
                                                                                !1
     and since N −c < λ1 , and v ′ (.) is decreasing, we have v ′ (N −c ) > v    λ
                                                                                      so that wF−c > wFc .
     This implies
                                                  γ c < 1,
     a contradiction.

   • Finally, N c = N −c = λ1 cannot be an equilibrium since no production would take place,
     thus pushing female wages in both countries to infinity.

This concludes the proof.




                                                 30
Appendix B                   Female Labor Force Participation
The theoretical model in Section 2 connects comparative advantage to fertility through the
opportunity cost of women’s time. This mechanism is related to female labor force participa-
tion (FLFP). This section presents a set of empirical results on how comparative advantage
affects FLFP. To clarify the connections between these and the baseline results, we preface
the empirics with a theoretical discussion of the relationship between fertility and FLFP.

B.1      Theoretical Discussion
In the simple model of Section 2, fertility is perfectly negatively correlated with FLFP,
which, if taken literally, conveys the impression that comparative advantage affects fertility
“through” FLFP. However, the notion that fertility is affected by the opportunity cost of
women’s time is distinct from women’s labor supply for a series of reasons.
    First, the elasticity of FLFP with respect to women’s wage is not simply the negative of
the elasticity of fertility with respect to the wage. Suppressing the country superscripts, let
N , as before, be the number of children, and denote FLFP by LF = 1 − λN . Denote the
elasticity of a variable x with respect to the female wage by εx ≡ w∂xF wxF . It is immediate
                   λN
that εLF = −εN 1−λN     . Thus, for a finite εN , the elasticity of FLFP with respect to the wage
approaches zero as childrearing time goes to zero, either because of low λ or low N . This
suggests that in countries with already low fertility, or in countries with low λ (for instance,
due to easily accessible childcare facilities, as in many developed countries) the impact of
(log) opportunity cost of women’s time on (log) FLFP may not be detectable.19
    Second, even in levels the negative linear relationship between fertility and labor supply
is an artifact of the assumption that working in the market economy and childrearing are
the only uses of women’s time. More generally, suppose that there is another use of women’s
time, Q, which can stand for leisure, investments in quality of the children (as opposed to
quantity N ), or non-market housework. Suppose further that the indirect utility, instead of
(A.9), is now represented by:

                    V (N, Q) = r + wF (1 − λN − µQ) + wM + v (N ) + z (Q) ,                                (B.1)
where µ is number of units of a woman’s time required to produce one unit of Q.
    On the one hand, this addition leaves unchanged the first-order condition with respect
to fertility, (A.10), embodying the notion that fertility is affected by the opportunity cost of
women’s time.
    On the other hand, there is now another first-order condition that relates women’s op-
portunity cost of time to Q:
                                               z ′ (Q)
                                         wF =          .                                  (B.2)
                                                   µ
Thus, the relationship between FLFP and wF is now
  19
     To give a stark example, suppose that v(.) is CES: v(N ) = N 1−1/ζ /(1 − 1/ζ), so that the elasticity of
fertility with respect to the wage is simply constant: εN = −ζ. In this case, we will always be able to detect
the effect of (log) wage on (log) fertility at all levels of fertility or income, whereas the impact of (log) wage
on (log) FLFP will go to zero as income rises/fertility falls.


                                                       31
                              LF = 1 − λ(v ′ )−1 (λwF ) − µ(z ′ )−1 (µwF ),
and the elasticity of FLFP with respect to the wage is
                                             λN               µQ
                           εLF = −εN                − εQ             .
                                        1 − λN − µQ      1 − λN − µQ
It is immediate that FLFP and fertility are no longer inversely related one-for-one. Depending
on the curvatures of v(.) and z(.), FLFP could be more or less concave in wF than N , even
as (A.10) continues to hold and the wage-fertility relationship is unaffected. When εQ is
different from εN , and µQ is high relative to λN , εLF can look very different from negative
εN even when women’s labor supply is far away from 1.20
     Third, the simple model above assumes that the marginal utility of income is always
constant at 1. Departing from that assumption and introducing diminishing marginal utility
of income will make the relationship between FLFP and wFc even more complex, and possibly
non-monotonic, due to income effects. While in all of the cases above, FLFP and fertility were
still negatively correlated, with income effects it is possible to generate a positive relationship
between FLFP and fertility at high enough levels of income, for instance through satiation
in goods consumption.
     Finally, when it comes to measurement of FLFP, an additional challenge is that the
model is written in terms of the intensive margin (i.e. hours), whereas the FLFP data
are recorded at the extensive margin (binary participation decision). This implies that,
especially for countries with already high FLFP, in which in response to fertility women
adjust hours worked rather than labor market participation, our data will not be able to
accurately capture the interrelationships between FLFP and fertility.21
     To summarize, the insight that fertility is determined by the opportunity cost of women’s
time does not have a one-to-one relationship to FLFP. One can easily construct examples in
which the wage elasticities with respect to fertility and FLFP are very different. In addition,
even the simple baseline model above implies that the elasticity of female labor supply with
respect to the opportunity cost of women’s time is not constant, and approaches zero as
time spent on childrearing falls. This suggests that the impact of comparative advantage
in female-intensive goods on FLFP will be attenuated, and potentially difficult to detect in
countries with high income and low fertility.

B.2      Empirical Results
With those observations in mind, Table A3 explores the relationship between F LN X and
FLFP. FLFP data come from the ILO’s KILM database, and are available 1990-2007. All
shown specifications include controls for per capita income and openness, and regional dum-
mies. Column 1 presents the OLS regression. The coefficient on FLFP is positive but not
significant. Column 2 reports the 2SLS results. The coefficient becomes larger, but not sig-
  20
      As an example, when v(.) and z(.) are CES: v(N ) = N 1−1/ζ /(1 − 1/ζ) and z(Q) = Q1−1/ξ /(1 − 1/ξ),
                                                 λN             µQ
εQ and εN are simply constants, and εLF = ζ 1−λN   −µQ + ξ 1−λN −µQ , which can obviously be very different
from ζ.
   21
      Unfortunately, data on hours worked are not available for a large sample of countries.


                                                    32
nificant at conventional levels. However, as argued above the elasticity of FLFP with respect
to F LN X should not be expected to be constant across a wide range of countries. Thus, in
columns 3 and 4 we re-estimate these regressions while letting the impact of F LN X vary
by income. The difference is striking. Both the main effect and the interaction with income
are highly significant, and the impact of F LN X is clearly less pronounced for higher-income
countries. Column 5 reports the 2SLS results in which F LN X is interacted with fertility,
and column 6 with female educational attainment. In both cases, all of the coefficients of
interest are highly significant.22
     Of course, the main effect of the F LN X is now not interpretable as the impact of F LN X
on FLFP. To better illustrate how the impact of F LN X on FLFP varies through the distri-
bution of income, fertility, and educational attainment, we re-estimate the specification with
quartile-specific F LN X coefficients, rather than the interaction terms (that is, we discretize
income, fertility, or female educational attainment into quartiles, and allow the F LN X co-
efficient to differ by quartile). Figure A3 reports the quartile-specific coefficient estimates,
with the bars depicting 95% confidence intervals. The top panel presents the results by
quartile of income. There is a statistically significant positive effect of F LN X on FLFP in
the bottom quartile of countries, with the coefficient estimate of 1.16. In the other quartiles,
the coefficient estimates are close to zero and not significant.
     The second panel presents the same result with respect to fertility. As expected, the
impact of F LN X on FLFP is most pronounced at high levels of fertility. The top quartile
estimate is statistically significant at the 1% level. Finally, the bottom panel presents the
results with respect to female educational attainment quintiles. The impact of F LN X is
strongly positive in the bottom quartile, and close to zero elsewhere.
     To summarize, the results with respect to FLFP are suggestive that the impact of com-
parative advantage on fertility is concomitant with a female labor supply response, but only
in some countries. As argued above, this is should be expected, given that the relationship
between FLFP and fertility is not straightforward.




  22
    In order to conserve space, Table A3 does not report the first-stage coefficients and diagnostics. With
the income, fertility and educational attainment interactions, two variables are being instrumented, which
would require reporting multiple coefficients and F -statistics. All of the F -statistics in these specifications
are above 15.


                                                       33
References
Aguayo-Tellez, Ernesto, Jim Airola, Chinhui Juhn, and Carolina Villegas-Sanchez, “Did
  Trade Liberalization Help Women? The Case of Mexico in the 1990s,” Research in Labor
  Economics, 2013, 38, 1–35.

Ahn, Namkee and Pedro Mira, “A note on the changing relationship between fertility and
 female employment rates in developed countries,” Journal of Population Economics, 2002,
 15 (4), 667–682.

Alesina, Alberto, Paola Giuliano, and Nathan Nunn, “Fertility and the Plough,” American
  Economic Review, Papers and Proceedings, May 2011, 101, 499–503.

  , , and , “On the Origins of Gender Roles: Women and the Plough,” Quarterly Journal
  of Economics, May 2013, 128 (2), 469–530.

Almeida, Heitor and Daniel Wolfenzon, “The Effect of External Finance on the Equilibrium
  Allocation of Capital,” Journal of Financial Economics, January 2005, 75 (1), 133–164.

Anderson, James and Eric van Wincoop, “Gravity with Gravitas: a Solution to the Border
 Puzzle,” American Economic Review, 2003, 93 (1), 170–192.

  and    , “Trade Costs,” Journal of Economic Literature, 2004, 42 (3), 691–751.

Angrist, Joshua D. and William N. Evans, “Children and Their Parents’ Labor Supply:
 Evidence from Exogenous Variation in Family Size,” American Economic Review, June
 1998, 88 (3), 450–77.

Barro, Robert J. and Gary S. Becker, “Fertility Choice in a Model of Economic Growth,”
  Econometrica, March 1989, 57 (2), 481–501.

   and Jong-Wha Lee, “International Data on Educational Attainment: Updates and Impli-
  cations,” 2000. CID Working Paper No. 42.

Becker, Gary S., “An Economic Analysis of Fertility,” in Gary S. Becker, ed., Demographic
  and Economic Change in Developed Countries., Princeton, NJ: Princeton University Press,
  1960.

  , “A Theory of the Allocation of Time,” Economic Journal, September 1965, 75 (299),
  493–517.

  , A Treatise on the Family, Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press, 1981.

  , “Human Capital, Effort, and the Sexual Division of Labor,” Journal of Labor Economics,
  January 1985, 3 (1), S33–S58.

  , Kevin M. Murphy, and Robert Tamura, “Human Capital, Fertility, and Economic
  Growth,” Journal of Political Economy, October 1990, 98 (5), S12–S37.



                                           34
Berkowitz, Daniel, Johannes Moenius, and Katharina Pistor, “Trade, Law, and Product
  Complexity,” The Review of Economics and Statistics, May 2006, 88 (2), 363–373.

Berthelon, Matias and Caroline Freund, “On the Conservation of Distance in International
  Trade,” Journal of International Economics, July 2008, 75 (2), 310–320.

Black, Sandra E. and Alexandra Spitz-Oener, “Explaining Women’s Success: Technological
  Change and the Skill Content of Women’s Work,” Review of Economics and Statistics,
  April 2010, 92 (1), 187–194.

   and Chinhui Juhn, “The Rise of Female Professionals: Are Women Responding to Skill
  Demand?,” American Economic Review, Papers and Proceedings, May 2000, 90 (2), 450–
  455.

   and Elizabeth Brainerd, “Importing equality? The impact of globalization on gender
  discrimination,” Industrial and Labor Relations Review, July 2004, 57 (4), 540–559.

Blau, David M. and Wilbert van der Klaauw, “The Impact of Social and Economic Policy
  on the Family Structure Experiences of Children in the United States,” December 2007.

Broda, Christian and David Weinstein, “Globalization and the Gains from Variety,” Quarterly
  Journal of Economics, May 2006, 121 (2), 541–85.

Caliendo, Lorenzo and Fernando Parro, “Estimates of the Trade and Welfare Effects of
  NAFTA,” Review of Economic Studies, January 2015, 82 (1), 1–44.

Cho, Lee-Jay, “Income and differentials in current fertility,” Demography, 1968, 5 (1), 198–
  211.

Do, Quy-Toan and Andrei A. Levchenko, “Comparative Advantage, Demand for External
 Finance, and Financial Development,” Journal of Financial Economics, December 2007,
 86 (3), 796–834.

  , , and Claudio Raddatz, “Comparative Advantage, International Trade, and Fertility,”
  June 2014. World Bank Policy Research Working Paper 6930.

Doepke, Matthias, “Accounting for Fertility Decline During the Transition to Growth,” Jour-
 nal of Economic Growth, September 2004, 9 (3), 347–383.

  , Moshe Hazan, and Yishay Maoz, “The Baby Boom and World War II: A Macroeconomic
  Analysis,” Review of Economic Studies, July 2015, 82 (3), 10331–1073.

Edmonds, Eric and Nina Pavcnik, “International Trade and Child Labor: Cross Country
  Evidence,” Journal of International Economics, January 2006, 68 (1), 115–140.

Evans, Carolyn, “The Economic Significance of National Border Effects,” American Economic
  Review, 2003, 93 (4), 1291–1312.

Feenstra, Robert C, “New Product Varieties and the Measurement of International Prices,”
  American Economic Review, March 1994, 84 (1), 157–77.

                                            35
Feenstra, Robert, James Markusen, and Andrew Rose, “Using the Gravity Equation to
  Differentiate Among Alternative Theories of Trade,” Canadian Journal of Economics,
  2001, 34 (2), 430–447.

Feyrer, James, “Trade and Income – Exploiting Time Series in Geography,” Apr 2009. NBER
  Working Paper No. 14910.

Fleisher, Belton M. and George F. Rhodes, “Fertility, Women’s Wage Rates, and Labor
  Supply,” American Economic Review, March 1979, 69 (1), 14–24.

Frankel, Jeffrey A. and David Romer, “Does Trade Cause Growth?,” American Economic
  Review, June 1999, 89 (3), 379–399.

Galor, Oded and Andrew Mountford, “Trading Population for Productivity: Theory and
 Evidence,” Review of Economic Studies, October 2009, 75 (4), 1143–1179.

  and David N. Weil, “The Gender Gap, Fertility, and Growth,” American Economic Review,
  June 1996, 86 (3), 374–387.

   and , “Population, Technology, and Growth: From Malthusian Stagnation to the De-
  mographic Transition and beyond,” American Economic Review, September 2000, 90 (4),
  806–828.

Goldin, Claudia, Understanding the Gender Gap: An Economic History of Amer- ican
 Women, New York: Oxford University Press, 1990.

Greenwood, Jeremy and Ananth Seshadri, “The U.S. Demographic Transition,” American
  Economic Review, Papers and Proceedings, May 2002, 92 (2), 153–159.

Guryan, Jonathan, Erik Hurst, and Melissa Kearney, “Parental Education and Parental Time
 with Children,” Journal of Economic Perspectives, Summer 2008, 22 (3), 23–46.

Hazan, Moshe and Hosny Zoabi, “Does Longevity Cause Growth? A Theoretical Critique,”
  Journal of Economic Growth, 2006, 11 (4), 363–376.

   and , “Do Highly Educated Women Choose Smaller Families?,” 2014. Forthcoming,
  Economic Journal.

Heckman, James J and James R Walker, “The Relationship between Wages and Income and
  the Timing and Spacing of Births: Evidence from Swedish Longitudinal Data,” Economet-
  rica, November 1990, 58 (6), 1411–41.

Helpman, Elhanan, Marc Melitz, and Yona Rubinstein, “Estimating Trade Flows: Trading
  Partners and Trading Volumes,” Quarterly Journal of Economics, May 2008, 123 (2),
  441–487.

Hummels, David, “Towards a Geography of Trade Costs,” 2001. Mimeo, Purdue University.

  , “Transportation Costs and International Trade in the Second Era of Globalization,”
  Journal of Economic Perspectives, Summer 2007, 21 (3), 131–154.

                                          36
Imbs, Jean and Isabelle Méjean, “Elasticity Optimism,” American Economic Journal:
  Macroeconomics, July 2015, 7 (3), 43–83.
Jones, Larry E., Alice Schoonbroodt, and Michele Tertilt, “Fertility Theories: Can They
  Explain the Negative Fertility-Income Relationship?,” in “Demography and the Economy”
  NBER Chapters, National Bureau of Economic Research, Inc, October 2010, pp. 43–100.
   and Michele Tertilt, “An Economic History of Fertility in the U.S.: 1826-1960,” in Peter
  Rupert, ed., Frontiers of Family Economics, Vol. 1, Bingley, UK: Emerald Group Publish-
  ing, 2008, pp. 165–230.
Jones, Ronald, “A Three-Factor Model in Theory, Trade, and History,” in Jagdish Bhagwati,
  ed., Trade, Balance of Payments, and Growth: Papers in International Economics in
  Honor of Charles P. Kindleberger, Amsterdam: North Holland, 1971.
Juhn, Chinhui, Gergely Ujhelyi, and Carolina Villegas-Sanchez, “Men, women, and machines:
  How trade impacts gender inequality,” Journal of Development Economics, January 2014,
  106, 179 – 193.
Kremer, Michael, “Population Growth and Technological Change: One Million B.C. to 1990,”
  Quarterly Journal of Economics, August 1993, 108 (3), 681–716.
Marchand, Beyza Ural, Ray Rees, and Raymond G. Riezman, “Globalization, Gender and
 Development: The Effect of Parental Labor Supply on Child Schooling,” Review of Eco-
 nomics of the Household, 2013, 11 (2), 151–173.
Merrigan, Philip and Yvan St.-Pierre, “An econometric and neoclassical analysis of the timing
 and spacing of births in Canada from 1950 to 1990,” Journal of Population Economics,
 1998, 11 (1), 29–51.
Mookherjee, Dilip, Silvia Prina, and Debraj Ray, “A Theory of Occupational Choice with
 Endogenous Fertility,” American Economic Journal: Microeconomics, November 2012, 4
 (4), 1–34.
Morrow, Peter M., “Ricardian–Heckscher–Ohlin comparative advantage: Theory and evi-
 dence,” Journal of International Economics, November 2010, 82 (2), 137 – 151.
Mussa, Michael, “Tariffs and the Distribution of Income: The Importance of Factor Speci-
 ficity, Substitutability, an Intensity in the Short and Long Run,” Journal of Political
 Economy, 1974, 82, 1191–1203.
Oostendorp, Remco, “Globalization and the Gender Wage Gap,” World Bank Economic
 Review, January 2009, 23 (1), 141–161.
Ortega, Francesc and Giovanni Peri, “Openness and income: The roles of trade and migra-
  tion,” Journal of International Economics, March 2014, 92 (2), 231 – 251.
Pitt, Mark M., Mark R. Rosenzweig, and Mohammad Nazmul Hassan, “Human Capital
  Investment and the Gender Division of Labor in a Brawn-Based Economy,” American
  Economic Review, December 2012, 102 (7), 3531–60.

                                             37
Qian, Nancy, “Missing Women and the Price of Tea in China: The Effect of Sex-Specific
  Earnings on Sex Imbalance,” Quarterly Journal of Economics, July 2008, 123 (3), 1251–
  1285.

Ranjan, Priya and Jae Young Lee, “Contract Enforcement And International Trade,” Eco-
  nomics and Politics, July 2007, 19 (2), 191–218.

Rauch, James E., “Networks Versus Markets in International Trade,” Journal of International
  Economics, June 1999, 48 (1), 7–35.

   and Vitor Trindade, “Ethnic Chinese Networks in International Trade,” Review of Eco-
  nomics and Statistics, 2002, 84 (1), 116–130.

Rees, Ray and Ray Riezman, “Globalization, Gender, And Growth,” Review of Income and
  Wealth, March 2012, 58 (1), 107–117.

Rendall, Michelle, “Brain Versus Brawn: The Realization of Women’s Comparative Advan-
  tage,” September 2010. mimeo, University of Zurich.

Ross, Michael L., “Oil, Islam, and Women,” American Political Science Review, February
  2008, 102 (1), 107–123.

Santos Silva, J.M.C. and Silvana Tenreyro, “The Log of Gravity,” Review of Economics and
  Statistics, 2006, 88 (4), 641–658.

Sauré, Philip and Hosny Zoabi, “When Stolper-Samuelson Does Not Apply: International
  Trade and Female Labor,” May 2011. mimeo, Swiss National Bank and Tel Aviv University.

   and , “International Trade, the Gender Wage Gap and Female Labor Force Participa-
  tion,” Journal of Development Economics, 2014, 111 (1), 17–33.

Schultz, T. Paul, “Changing World Prices, Women’s Wages, and the Fertility Transition:
  Sweden, 1860-1910,” Journal of Political Economy, December 1985, 93 (6), 1126–54.

  , “The Value and Allocation of Time in High-Income Countries: Implications for Fertility,”
  Population and Development Review, 1986, 12, 87–108.

Stock, James H. and Motohiro Yogo, “Testing for Weak Instruments in Linear IV Regres-
  sion,” in Donald W.K. Andrews and James H. Stock, eds., Identification and Inference
  for Econometric Models: Essays in Honor of Thomas Rothenberg, Cambridge University
  Press Cambridge, UK 2005, pp. 80–108.

Willis, Robert J., “A New Approach to the Economic Theory of Fertility Behavior,” Journal
 of Political Economy, March-April 1973, 81 (2), S14–S64.

World Bank, World Development Report 2012: Gender Equality and Development, World
 Bank, 2012.




                                            38
       Table 1. Share of Female Workers in Total Employment, Highest to Lowest

Sector Name                                                                                         F Li
Cut and sew apparel manufacturing                                                                   0.66
Footwear; Leather; Textile and apparel, n.e.c.                                                      0.56
Textile product mills, except carpet and rug                                                        0.55
Soap, cleaning compound, and cosmetics manufacturing                                                0.51
Sugar and confectionery products                                                                    0.48
Pharmaceutical and medicine manufacturing                                                           0.46
Medical equipment and supplies manufacturing                                                        0.44
Fabric mills, except knitting mills                                                                 0.43
Carpet and rug mills                                                                                0.41
Seafood and other miscellaneous foods, n.e.c.                                                       0.40
Miscellaneous manufacturing, n.e.c.                                                                 0.39
Not specified food industries                                                                       0.38
Fruit and vegetable preserving and specialty food manufacturing                                     0.37
Sporting and athletic goods, and doll, toy and game manufacturing                                   0.37
Not specified manufacturing industries                                                              0.37
Bakeries, except retail                                                                             0.37
Animal slaughtering and processing                                                                  0.36
Household appliance manufacturing                                                                   0.36
Printing and related support activities                                                             0.35
Electronic component and product manufacturing, n.e.c.                                              0.35
Agricultural chemical manufacturing                                                                 0.35
Miscellaneous paper and pulp products                                                               0.35
Navigational, measuring, electromedical, and control instruments manufacturing                      0.32
Communications, and audio and video equipment manufacturing                                         0.32
Rubber product, except tire, manufacturing                                                          0.32
Forestry, except logging                                                                            0.31
Electrical lighting and electrical equipment and other electrical component manufacturing, n.e.c.   0.31
Computer and peripheral equipment manufacturing                                                     0.30
Plastics product manufacturing                                                                      0.30
Cutlery and hand tool manufacturing                                                                 0.29
Commercial and service industry machinery manufacturing                                             0.28
Resin, synthetic rubber and fibers, and filaments manufacturing                                     0.28
Glass and glass product manufacturing                                                               0.28
Tobacco manufacturing                                                                               0.27
Furniture and fixtures manufacturing                                                                0.27
Dairy product manufacturing                                                                         0.26
Beverage manufacturing                                                                              0.26
Animal food, grain, and oilseed milling                                                             0.26
Paperboard containers and boxes                                                                     0.25




                                                39
    Table 1 (cont’d). Share of Female Workers in Total Employment, Highest to Lowest

       Sector name                                                                         F Li
       Animal production                                                                   0.25
       Miscellaneous fabricated metal products manufacturing                               0.25
       Motor vehicles and motor vehicle equipment manufacturing                            0.25
       Railroad rolling stock; Other transportation equipment                              0.24
       Crop production                                                                     0.23
       Paint, coating, and adhesive manufacturing                                          0.23
       Aircraft and parts manufacturing                                                    0.23
       Miscellaneous wood products                                                         0.22
       Machinery manufacturing, n.e.c.                                                     0.22
       Veneer, plywood, and engineered wood products                                       0.22
       Not specified machinery manufacturing                                               0.22
       Electric power generation, transmission, and distribution                           0.22
       Industrial and miscellaneous chemicals                                              0.22
       Engines, turbines, and power transmission equipment manufacturing                   0.21
       Agricultural implement manufacturing                                                0.21
       Miscellaneous petroleum and coal products                                           0.21
       Nonferrous metal (except aluminum) production and processing                        0.20
       Petroleum refining                                                                  0.20
       Oil and gas extraction                                                              0.20
       Pulp, paper, and paperboard mills                                                   0.19
       Pottery, ceramics, structural clay, and plumbing fixtures                           0.19
       Ordnance; Not specified metal industries                                            0.18
       Prefabricated wood buildings and mobile homes                                       0.17
       Ship and boat building                                                              0.17
       Structural metals, and boiler, tank, and shipping container manufacturing           0.17
       Miscellaneous nonmetallic mineral product manufacturing                             0.17
       Metalworking machinery manufacturing                                                0.17
       Aluminum production and processing                                                  0.16
       Tire manufacturing                                                                  0.16
       Construction, and mining and oil and gas field machinery manufacturing              0.15
       Fishing, hunting, and trapping                                                      0.15
       Machine shops; turned product; screw, nut, and bolt manufacturing                   0.14
       Iron and steel mills and steel product manufacturing                                0.13
       Foundries                                                                           0.13
       Metal ore and nonspecified type of mining                                           0.13
       Nonmetallic mineral mining and quarrying                                            0.11
       Sawmills and wood preservation                                                      0.11
       Cement, concrete, lime, and gypsum product manufacturing                            0.10
       Coal mining                                                                         0.06
       Logging                                                                             0.05

       Mean                                                                                0.27
Notes: This table reports the share of female workers in total employment by sector in the US. Source: BLS.




                                                    40
        Table 2. Summary Statistics for Female Labor Need of Exports and Fertility

                                  OECD                            NON-OECD

                                Panel A: Female Labor Need of Exports
                      Mean     St. Dev. Countries Mean St. Dev. Countries
             1960s    0.272     0.036      21      0.255    0.055     100
             1970s    0.274     0.034      21      0.260    0.061     101
             1980s    0.273     0.037      21      0.265    0.068     101
             1990s    0.280     0.036      21      0.288    0.080     121
             2000s    0.279     0.030      21      0.291    0.094     125

                                          Panel B: Fertility Rates
                      Mean     St. Dev.    Countries Mean St. Dev.             Countries
             1960s    2.784     0.452         21       6.165     1.380           100
             1970s    2.120     0.449         21       5.748     1.607           101
             1980s    1.735     0.257         21       5.109     1.768           101
             1990s    1.634     0.249         21       3.951     1.829           121
             2000s    1.641     0.255         21       3.341     1.664           125

Notes: This table reports the summary statistics for F LN X and fertility, by country group and decade.




                Table 3. F LN X: Top 10 and Bottom 10 Countries, 2000-2007

                         Highest F LN X                  Lowest F LN X
                       Lesotho      0.612          Mauritania               0.152
                       Cambodia     0.609          Gabon                    0.175
                       Bangladesh 0.595            Papua New Guinea         0.181
                       Haiti        0.593          Mozambique               0.184
                       Mauritius    0.512          Kazakhstan               0.189
                       El Salvador 0.490           Guinea                   0.190
                       Sri Lanka    0.485          Congo, Rep.              0.193
                       Honduras     0.482          Venezuela, RB            0.196
                       Pakistan     0.474          Libya                    0.198
                       Madagascar 0.440            Iraq                     0.198
Notes: This table reports the 10 countries with the highest, and 10 countries with the lowest F LN X .




                                                   41
                Table 4. F LN X: Top 10 and Bottom 10 Changers since 1960s

                Largest Increase    in F LN X        Largest Decrease in F LN X
                Cambodia             0.342         Sudan                     -0.040
                Haiti                0.298         Uruguay                   -0.044
                Honduras             0.252         Papua New Guinea          -0.056
                El Salvador          0.221         Central African Republic -0.058
                Albania              0.209         Australia                 -0.060
                Tunisia              0.192         Angola                    -0.063
                Nicaragua            0.165         Hong Kong, China          -0.064
                Jordan               0.161         Mozambique                -0.102
                Morocco              0.158         Tanzania                  -0.109
                Guatemala            0.141         Cuba                      -0.113
Notes: This table reports the 10 countries with the largest increases and the largest decreases in F LN X .
Change is calculated as the difference between the F LN X in the 2000s and that in the 1960s.




                                                    42
                                      Table 5. Cross-Sectional           Results, 2000-2007
                                 (1)        (2)        (3)                 (4)        (5)           (6)          (7)         (8)
                                OLS         OLS       2SLS                2SLS       2SLS          2SLS         2SLS        2SLS
       Dependent Variable: (Log) Fertility Rate
       (Log) Female Labor     -0.34*** -0.24*** -0.73***                 -0.59***    -0.65*** -0.60*** -0.41*** -0.46***
       Need of Exports         (0.08)      (0.08)    (0.18)               (0.15)       (0.19)  (0.18)   (0.14)   (0.18)
       (Log) Openness           -0.04       0.01      -0.02                0.03         0.03    0.03     0.02      0.02
                               (0.04)      (0.03)    (0.04)               (0.03)       (0.03)  (0.03)   (0.03)   (0.03)
       (Log) GDP per capita -0.35*** -0.22*** -0.35***                   -0.23***    -0.23*** -0.23*** -0.22*** -0.22***
                               (0.02)      (0.03)    (0.02)               (0.02)       (0.03)  (0.03)   (0.02)   (0.02)
       Log (Area)                                                                                                 0.01
                                                                                                                 (0.02)
       Log (Population)                                                                                           -0.02
                                                                                                                 (0.02)
       Constant                      5.34***     3.62***     6.57***      5.09***     5.31*** 5.14*** 4.42*** 4.62***
                                      (0.32)      (0.42)      (0.59)       (0.59)      (0.75)  (0.73)   (0.55)   (0.89)




43
       R2                             0.678       0.831
                                                                                          First Stage
       Dependent Var. (Log) FLNX
       (Log) Predicted FLNX                                  1.84***      1.68***                                          3.00***
                                                              (0.24)       (0.25)                                           (0.66)
       (Log) Predicted FLNX                                                           1.25***
       (out of sample)                                                                 (0.25)
       (Log) Predicted FLNX                                                                       0.96***
       (Poisson)                                                                                   (0.18)
       (Log) Predicted FLNX                                                                                   4.30***
       (No Population)                                                                                         (0.61)
       F-test                                                  56.42       44.01       24.16       27.00       49.81        20.39
       First Stage Partial R2                                  0.290       0.277       0.165       0.193       0.307        0.174
       Region Dummies                  no           yes         no          yes         yes         yes         yes          yes
       Observations                    146          146         146         146         146         146         146          146
     Notes: Robust standard errors in parentheses; * significant at 10%; ** significant at 5%; *** significant at 1%. All variables are
     averages over the period 2000-2007 and in natural logs. Variable definitions and sources are described in detail in the text.
                                                    Table 6. Panel Results, 1962-2007

                                         (1)          (2)         (3)          (4)            (5)          (6)         (7)         (8)

                                                  Five-Year Averages                                   Ten-Year Averages

       Dependent Variable: (Log) Fertility Rate

       (Log) Female Labor             -0.60*** -0.54***        -0.24***      -0.20**       -0.61*** -0.58***        -0.27***     -0.23**
       Need of Exports                 (0.09)   (0.10)          (0.09)        (0.09)        (0.10)   (0.12)          (0.10)       (0.11)
       (Log) Openness                   -0.01  -0.15***          -0.01         0.00          -0.01  -0.15***          -0.01        0.01
                                       (0.03)   (0.04)          (0.03)        (0.03)        (0.03)   (0.05)          (0.04)       (0.04)




44
       (Log) GDP per capita           -0.35*** -0.35***        -0.19***     -0.18***       -0.35*** -0.37***        -0.20***    -0.20***
                                       (0.02)   (0.05)          (0.04)        (0.05)        (0.02)   (0.06)          (0.05)       (0.05)
       (Log) Female                                                            0.01                                                0.00
       Educational Attainment                                                 (0.04)                                              (0.04)

       Country FE                        no           yes         yes         yes             no          yes          yes         yes
       Year FE                           no           no          yes         yes             no          no           yes         yes
       R2                               0.594        0.889       0.936       0.934           0.602       0.899        0.942       0.940
       Observations                     1,254        1,254       1,254       1,109            630         630          630         557
     Notes: Standard errors clustered at the country level in parentheses; * significant at 10%; ** significant at 5%; *** significant at 1%.
     All of the variables are 5-year averages (left panel) or 10-year averages (right panel) over the time periods spanning 1962-2007, and in
     natural logs. Variable definitions and sources are described in detail in the text.
                    Table 7. Alternative Specifications and Controls: Cross-Sectional 2SLS Results, 2000-2007
                                                      (1)         (2)     (3)      (4)      (5)      (6)
                          Dependent Variable: (Log) Fertility Rate
                          (Log) F LN X                        -0.51*** -0.58*** -0.42*** -0.37*** -0.54***
                                                                (0.13)  (0.14)   (0.15)   (0.14)   (0.14)
                          F LN X − F LN I          -0.02***
                                                     (0.01)
                          (Log) Openness              0.05       0.04    0.04     0.02     -0.03    0.04
                                                     (0.04)     (0.05)  (0.05)   (0.03)   (0.05)   (0.03)
                          (Log) GDP per capita     -0.24*** -0.20*** -0.23*** -0.14*** -0.24*** -0.22***
                                                     (0.03)     (0.03)  (0.04)   (0.04)   (0.03)   (0.03)
                          (Log) Female                         -0.13**
                          Educational Attainment                (0.06)
                          Child Labor Indicator                        0.01***
                                                                        (0.00)
                          (log) Infant Mortality                                0.12***
                                                                                 (0.04)




45
                          Gini Coeff                                                      0.62**
                                                                                          (0.30)
                          Polity 2 Indicator                                                        0.00
                                                                                                   (0.00)
                          Constant                  3.31*** 4.55*** 4.85*** 3.18*** 4.34*** 4.53***
                                                     (0.28)     (0.61)  (0.78)   (0.76)   (0.60)   (0.59)




                          (Log) Predicted F LN X                   1.77***     1.69***    1.70***     1.77***    1.68***
                                                                    (0.26)      (0.33)     (0.30)      (0.33)     (0.27)
                          Predicted F LN X              1.62***
                                                         (0.31)
                          F-test                         26.59      48.14       25.92      31.81       29.38      38.88
                          First Stage Partial R2         0.205      0.319       0.275      0.254       0.291      0.271
                          Region Dummies                  yes        yes         yes        yes         yes        yes
                          Observations                    146        126         103        145         103        145
     Notes: Robust standard errors in parentheses; * significant at 10%; ** significant at 5%; *** significant at 1%. All variables are averages
     over the period 2000-2007. Variable definitions and sources are described in detail in the text.
                                    Table 8. Subsamples: Cross-Sectional 2SLS Results, 2000-2007

                                                    (1)         (2)             (3)            (4)                      (5)
                   Sample:                          no          no            no Sub-     no Middle East             No mining
                                                  outliers     OECD        Saharan Africa & North Africa             exporters

                   Dependent Variable: (Log) Fertility Rate

                   (Log) Female Labor            -0.78***     -0.59***         -0.76***             -0.52***          -0.55***
                   Need of Exports                (0.24)       (0.16)            (0.20)               (0.14)            (0.15)
                   (Log) Openness                  0.03         0.07*             0.05                 0.01              0.02
                                                  (0.04)       (0.04)            (0.06)               (0.03)            (0.03)
                   (Log) GDP per capita          -0.20***     -0.29***         -0.23***             -0.23***          -0.23***
                                                  (0.03)       (0.03)            (0.03)               (0.03)            (0.03)




46
                   Constant                      5.18***      5.41***           5.71***              4.71***           4.75***
                                                  (0.90)       (0.64)            (0.87)               (0.58)            (0.57)

                                                                                   First Stage


                   (Log) Predicted FLNX           1.20***     1.77***          1.74***              1.73***            1.79***
                                                   (0.21)      (0.30)           (0.28)               (0.29)             (0.30)
                   F-test                          31.69       34.79            39.15                36.17              36.33
                   First Stage Partial R2          0.167       0.269             0.28                0.282              0.268

                   Region Dummies                   yes          yes              yes                  yes               yes
                   Observations                     136          125              105                  130               136
     Notes: Robust standard errors in parentheses; * significant at 10%; ** significant at 5%; *** significant at 1%. All variables are averages
     over the period 2000-2007. Variable definitions and sources are described in detail in the text.
                 Table 9. Other Decades: Cross-Sectional 2SLS Results
                                            (1)          (2)         (3)          (4)
                                           1960s        1970s       1980s        1990s

           Dependent Variable: (Log) Fertility Rate

           (Log) Female Labor              0.05        -0.63***    -0.86*** -0.68***
           Need of Exports                (0.14)        (0.24)      (0.22)   (0.14)
           (Log) Openness                 0.07**         -0.02       -0.02    0.04
                                          (0.03)        (0.03)      (0.03)   (0.03)
           (Log) GDP per capita          -0.18***      -0.19***    -0.26*** -0.24***
                                          (0.04)        (0.03)      (0.03)   (0.02)
           Constant                      2.54***       4.58***     5.97*** 5.20***
                                          (0.62)        (0.86)      (0.76)   (0.54)

                                                           First Stage

           (Log) Predicted FLNX           1.30***      1.23***     1.33***      1.64***
                                           (0.32)       (0.28)      (0.28)       (0.23)
           F-test                          16.95        20.12       22.43        53.07
           First Stage Partial R2          0.276        0.263       0.284        0.336

           Region Dummies                   yes          yes         yes          yes
           Observations                     96           119         120          142
Notes: Robust standard errors in parentheses; * significant at 10%; ** significant at 5%; *** signif-
icant at 1%. All variables are decadal averages. Variable definitions and sources are described in
detail in the text.




                                                  47
                            Figure 1. Partial Correlation Between Fertility and F LN X
                  .5




                                                                    GTM
                                       TJK
                           PNGAFG        TKM
                                                   MYS
                                                  OMN        IRL
                                           NOR
                                           AGO
                                            SAU
                                                          FRA
                                                         LAO
                                                         PHLDNK
                                          GIN
                                    KAZ IRQ  TCD FIN
                                                    SWENLD
                                                       BELGBR PAK
                                         BOL
                                         YEM     NERMLI
                                                  UGA
                                                  NZL
                                                    KGZ             TURISR HND       KHM
                                             PRY  ZMB     USA
                                     AUSNGA
                                VEN AZE LBY              BFA
                                               ARE BEN CHE                DOM
           Ln(Fertility)




                                    MOZ
                                     COG                      MWI       JOR           HTI
                                          CMR SEN
                                          KWT           CIV
                                                  PAN AUT         SLE     SWZ
                                  GAB        RWA
                                             ARG GMB             KEN
                            MRT        ECU
                                        PER     UZB DEU ETH
                0




                                         JAMCOL IDNTZA
                                                   MEXNAMESP SOM
                                            SDN EST           ITA
                                                             GRCPRT          ALB
                                            GNB
                                           IND       ARM EGY
                                                    NPL
                                                   SYR                         SLV
                                 CHL                      CRI
                                       LBR          CAFSVNURY                    MDG
                                                 SGP
                                               BRA    THA             NICBWA
                                                 GHA
                                                CANCZE  HUN
                                                      BDI   VNM
                                                           HRV
                                                           BLR
                                       GEO
                                                ZWEJPN
                                               TGO            MKD
                                                              ERI
                                  TTO RUS     LVASVK
                                                  ZAF POLLTU LKA
                                                               CHN
                                         DZA                                                  LSO
                                                MNG         BGR             MAR
                                                                          BGD
                                                                   ROM
                                                   KOR                          TUN
                                      UKR IRN              MDA
                                                                LBN
                                                   BIH     CUB HKG
                  −.5




                                                                                        MUS

                             −.5                      0                       .5                    1
                                                            Ln(FLNXc)

Notes: This figure displays the partial correlation between F LN X and fertility, in logs, after controlling for
openness, per capita income, and regional dummies (see Column 2 of Table 5).




                                                             48
          Figure 2. First Stage: Partial Correlation between F LN Xc and F\
                                                                          LN X c
                   1




                                                                                                      LSO

                                                                                                     MUS
                                                                                KHM       HTI

                                                                          MDG
                         .5




                                                                                      TUN SLV
          Actual Ln(FLNXc)




                                                                               ALB
                                                                             HND   MAR  DOM
                                                                                       BGD
                                                                     BWA                 SWZ
                                                                                 JORGTM             ISR
                                                                          NIC
                                                                                  TUR
                                                                                 ROM
                                                                                   KEN SLE                  HKG
                                                                                     PRT            LBN
                                                                        SOM CHN
                                                                        PAK
                                                                      IRL         MKD
                                                                                  ERILKA ITA
                                                                                 GRC
                                                                                BGR     VNM
                                                                                           MWI
                                                                                          ETH
                                                                            BLR  DNK
                                                                               HRV  CUB
                                                                                    MDA
                                                                                      CHE
                                                                                        EGY
                                                                  LAO URY CRI FRA ESP  GBR  USA
                                                                                          PHL
                                               NAM                           LTUCIVHUN
                                                                                  SVN
                                                                                   DEU BFA
                                                                        MLI   AUT
                                                                              BEN
                                                                               ARMTHA NLD
                                                                                      BEL
                                                                                     POL        BDI
           0




                                                            CAF  KGZ
                                                               SWE         NPL
                                                                             MEXTZA
                                                                             BIHZAF        KORJPN
                                                                                         SYR
                                                                                         GMB
                                                                                   CZE UGA
                                                OMN    NZL FINEST   ZMB
                                                                  PANNER  MYS
                                                                        SVK         GHA                     SGP
                                          MNG                CAN ARE         ZWE
                                                                           UZB     IDN SEN
                                                                                     TGO
                                                                   ARG  BRA
                                                                       LVA
                                                                    PRY
                                                                     TCD
                                                                     SDNGNB  COL               RWA
                                                            SAU              CMR
                                                                           IND   IRNKWT
                                            LBY         NOR
                                                        AGO      DZA PERGEO JAMNGA
                                                          BOLTKMLBR
                                                            RUS           ECU GIN
                                                                         YEM
                                           AUS COG             TJK            UKR  IRQ
                                                                        MOZ AZE
                                    GAB                                             TTO
                                                    KAZ            CHL
                                                                   VEN
                   −.5




                                                              AFG
                                          MRT
                                                PNG

                              −.3            −.2            −.1             0                   .1            .2
                                                     Instrument (Predicted Ln(FLNXc))

Notes: This figure presents the partial correlation plot from the first stage regression between the actual
value of F LN Xc and the instrument.




                                                                  49
 Table A1. An Illustration of the Instrumentation Strategy

Sector   Exporter    Destination   Distance Exports    F Li

Apparel Canada           EU          1000      2500    0.66
Apparel Canada           US         1000      4500     0.66
Apparel Australia        EU         10000       850    0.66
Apparel Australia        US         10000       415    0.66
Metals  Canada           EU          1000     25000    0.12
Metals  Canada           US          1000     15000    0.12
Metals  Australia        EU         10000      1000    0.12
Metals  Australia        US         10000      1150    0.12




                              50
   Table A2. Variation in Gravity Coefficients Across Sectors

Coefficient                  Mean     Std. Dev.    Min     Max

Ln(Distancecd )              -1.152     0.308      -2.419 -0.102
Ln(P opc )                   -0.136     0.450      -1.780 0.514
Ln(Areac )                   -0.110     0.272      -0.486 0.927
Ln(P opd )                    0.672     0.276       0.132  1.769
Ln(Aread )                   -0.113     0.139      -0.720 0.151
Landlockedcd                 -0.619     0.518      -2.526 2.218
Bordercd                      0.655     3.678     -13.116 6.507
Bordercd × Ln(Distancecd )    0.178     0.258      -0.396 1.294
Bordercd × Ln(P opc )         0.315     0.234      -0.280 1.221
Bordercd × Ln(Areac )        -0.227     0.194      -1.146 0.492
Bordercd × Ln(P opd )        -0.189     0.204      -0.649 0.797
Bordercd × Ln(Aread )         0.003     0.131      -0.525 0.319
Bordercd × Landlockedcd       0.416     0.419      -1.394 1.687




                              51
                                       Table A3. FLFP: Cross-Sectional Results, 2000-2007

                                                                (1)        (2)        (3)           (4)          (5)        (6)
                                                                OLS       2SLS        OLS          2SLS         2SLS       2SLS
         Dependent Variable: (Log) FLFP
         (Log) F LN X                                            0.08      0.19     2.13***        4.13**     -1.07***    1.79**
                                                                (0.11)    (0.19)     (0.80)        (1.66)      (0.41)     (0.76)
         (Log) F LN X*(log) GDP per capita                                          -0.25**       -0.45**
                                                                                     (0.10)        (0.18)
         (Log) F LN X * (log) Fertility                                                                        1.24***
                                                                                                                (0.41)
         (Log) Fertility                                                                                      -4.07***
                                                                                                                (1.39)
         (Log) F LN X * (ln) Fem. Educ. Attainment                                                                        -0.88**




52
                                                                                                                           (0.40)
         (Log) Fem. Educ. Attainment                                                                                       2.90**
                                                                                                                           (1.28)
         (Log) Openness                                         0.04        0.04    0.85***       1.52**        0.05         0.02
                                                               (0.03)     (0.03)     (0.32)       (0.60)       (0.04)      (0.05)
         (Log) GDP per capita                                   -0.01      -0.02      -0.01        -0.02        0.00        -0.05
                                                               (0.06)     (0.06)     (0.05)       (0.06)       (0.06)      (0.05)
         Constant                                              -0.96*    -1.98**    -7.77***    -15.23***       1.98      -6.31**
                                                               (0.54)     (0.86)     (2.72)       (5.65)       (1.48)      (2.49)
         R2                                                     0.567                 0.588
         Region Dummies                                          yes       yes         yes          yes          yes        yes
         Observations                                            146       146         146          146          146        126
     Notes: Robust standard errors in parentheses; * significant at 10%; ** significant at 5%; *** significant at 1%. All variables are
     averages over the period 2000-2007. Variable definitions and sources are described in detail in the text.
          Figure A1. Female Formal Labor Market Equilibrium

wF                                         wF
                          !"#$%&                                            !"#$%&
                          +,--./&&                                          +,--./&&




                               !"#$%&                                           !"#$%&
                               '()"*'&                                          '()"*'&

                               1 - λN                                           1 - λN
      0*1(%2$%&+$.,3$*&                                       4$%*(%&+$.,3$*&


      Figure A2. Equilibrium Female Labor Force Participation

     Nc

     1
     λ
                        N −c (N c )




                                                N c (N −c )




                                                          1      Nc
                                                          λ

                                      53
                        Figure A3. Impact of F LN X on FLFP by Quartile




                                       2
                             Coefficient on FLNX
                             0         −1     1




                                                   First         Second            Third            Fourth
                                                                     Income Quartile


                                                               (a) By Income
                                       3
                                       2
                             Coefficient on FLNX
                                0      −1
                                       −2   1




                                                   First         Second               Third         Fourth
                                                                     Fertility Quartile


                                                              (b) By Fertility
                                       2
                             Coefficient on FLNX
                              0        −1      1




                                                   First        Second              Third           Fourth
                                                           Female Educational Attainment Quartile


                                        (c) By Educational Attainment
Notes: This figure displays the quartile-specific coefficients on F LN X in the 2SLS regressions with log
FLFP as the dependent variable, and the controls/regional dummies as in Table A3. Panel (a) displays the
coefficients by income quartile, panel (b) by fertility quartile, and panel (c) by female educational attainment
quartile.
                                                                         54
