                              NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                       THE WELFARE EFFECTS OF NUDGES:
               A CASE STUDY OF ENERGY USE SOCIAL COMPARISONS

                                         Hunt Allcott
                                        Judd B. Kessler

                                      Working Paper 21671
                              http://www.nber.org/papers/w21671


                    NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                             1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                               Cambridge, MA 02138
                                   October 2015




We are grateful to Paula Pedro for outstanding research management, and we thank Opower and
Central Hudson Gas and Electric for productive collaboration and helpful feedback. We also
thank Nava Ashraf, Stefano DellaVigna, Avi Feller, Michael Greenstone, Ben Handel, Guido
Imbens, Kelsey Jack, David Laibson, John List, Todd Rogers, Dmitry Taubinsky, and seminar
participants at the 2017 ASSA Annual Meeting, Berkeley, Chicago Booth, the Consumer
Financial Protection Bureau, Cornell, Duke, Harvard, Microsoft Research, New York University,
Stanford, Stanford Institute for Theoretical Economics, the University of Hawaii, Wesleyan, the
World Bank, and Yale for comments. We are grateful to the Sloan Foundation and the Jameel
Poverty Action Lab for grant funding. This RCT was registered in the American Economic
Association Registry for randomized control trials under trial number 713. Code to replicate the
analysis is available from Hunt Allcott's website. The views expressed herein are those of the
authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.

© 2015 by Hunt Allcott and Judd B. Kessler. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to
exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit,
including © notice, is given to the source.
The Welfare Effects of Nudges: A Case Study of Energy Use Social Comparisons
Hunt Allcott and Judd B. Kessler
NBER Working Paper No. 21671
October 2015, Revised March 2017
JEL No. C44,C53,D12,L94,Q41,Q48

                                         ABSTRACT

“Nudge”-style interventions are often deemed “successful” if they cause large behavior change,
but they are rarely subjected to full social welfare evaluations. We combine a field experiment
with a simple theoretical framework to evaluate the welfare effects of one especially policy-
relevant intervention, home energy social comparison reports. In our sample, the reports increase
social welfare, although traditional evaluation approaches overstate welfare gains by a factor of
3.7. Overall, the welfare gains from home energy reports might be overstated by $620 million.
We develop a prediction algorithm for optimal targeting; this would double the welfare gains.


Hunt Allcott
Department of Economics
New York University
19 W. 4th Street, 6th Floor
New York, NY 10012
and NBER
hunt.allcott@nyu.edu

Judd B. Kessler
The Wharton School
University of Pennsylvania
3620 Locust Walk
Philadelphia, PA 19104
and NBER
judd.kessler@wharton.upenn.edu




A randomized controlled trials registry entry is available at
https://www.socialscienceregistry.org/trials/713
A Code for replication is available at
https://www.dropbox.com/s/l2m8l55o3wnuexi/AllcottKessler_Replication.zip?dl=0
 The Welfare Effects of Nudges: A Case Study of Energy Use Social
                                               Comparisons
                                    Hunt Allcott and Judd B. Kessler∗

                                              February 26, 2017



                                                    Abstract

          “Nudge”-style interventions are often deemed “successful” if they cause large behavior change,
      but they are rarely subjected to full social welfare evaluations. We combine a field experiment
      with a simple theoretical framework to evaluate the welfare effects of one especially policy-relevant
      intervention, home energy social comparison reports. In our sample, the reports increase social
      welfare, although traditional evaluation approaches overstate welfare gains by a factor of 3.7.
      Overall, the welfare gains from home energy reports might be overstated by $620 million. We
      develop a prediction algorithm for optimal targeting; this would double the welfare gains.

         JEL Codes: C44, C53, D12, L94, Q41, Q48.
         Keywords: Behavioral interventions, energy efficiency, machine learning, program evaluation,
      randomized field experiments, smart defaults, social comparisons, welfare analysis.
         ——————————————————————————–———————————


Policymakers and academics are increasingly interested in “nudges,” such as information provision,
reminders, social comparisons, default options, and commitment contracts, which can affect behavior
without changing prices or restricting choice sets. Nudges are being used to encourage a variety of
privately-beneficial and socially-beneficial behaviors, such as healthy eating, exercise, organ dona-
tion, charitable giving, retirement savings, and environmental conservation. The US, British, and
  ∗
    Allcott: New York University, NBER, E2e, JPAL, and ideas42. hunt.allcott@nyu.edu. Kessler: Wharton, NBER,
and JPAL. judd.kessler@wharton.upenn.edu. We are grateful to Paula Pedro for outstanding research management,
and we thank Opower and Central Hudson Gas and Electric for productive collaboration and helpful feedback. We also
thank Nava Ashraf, Stefano DellaVigna, Avi Feller, Michael Greenstone, Ben Handel, Guido Imbens, Kelsey Jack, David
Laibson, John List, Todd Rogers, Dmitry Taubinsky, and seminar participants at the 2017 ASSA Annual Meeting,
Berkeley, Chicago Booth, the Consumer Financial Protection Bureau, Cornell, Duke, Harvard, Microsoft Research,
New York University, Stanford, Stanford Institute for Theoretical Economics, the University of Hawaii, Wesleyan, the
World Bank, and Yale for comments. We are grateful to the Sloan Foundation and the Jameel Poverty Action Lab for
grant funding. This RCT was registered in the American Economic Association Registry for randomized control trials
under trial number 713. Code to replicate the analysis is available from Hunt Allcott’s website.




                                                         1
Australian governments, among others, have set up “nudge units” to infuse these ideas into the policy
process.1 A growing list of academic papers evaluate nudge-style interventions in various domains.2
    With only a few exceptions discussed below, nudges are typically evaluated based on the mag-
nitude of behavior change or on cost effectiveness. When a nudge significantly increases a positive
behavior at low cost, policymakers often advocate that it be broadly adopted. A full social welfare
evaluation could produce different policy prescriptions, however, because people being nudged often
experience two types of benefits and/or costs that typical evaluations do not consider. First, nudge
recipients often incur costs in order to change behavior. For example, people who quit smoking
save money on cigarettes but give up any enjoyment from smoking, and healthy eating might mean
paying more for vegetables and giving up tasty desserts.3 Second, the nudge itself may directly
impose positive or negative utility. For example, seeing cigarette warning labels with graphic images
of smoking-related diseases can be unpleasant, and body weight report cards could make children
feel guilty or uncomfortable. Building on Caplin (2003) and Loewenstein and O’Donoghue (2006),
Glaeser (2006) argues that many nudges are essentially emotional taxes that reduce utility but do
not raise revenues.
    This paper presents a social welfare evaluation of Home Energy Reports (HERs), one-page letters
that compare a household’s energy use to that of its neighbors and provide energy conservation tips.
While HERs are just one case study, they are one of the most prominent and frequently-studied
nudges. As of mid-2015, Opower, the leading HER provider, was working with 95 utility companies
in nine countries, sending HERs regularly to 15 million households. There has been significant
academic interest in HERs, including seminal studies by Schultz et al. (2007) and Nolan et al.
(2008) and many follow-on evaluations of social comparisons and other “behavior-based” energy
conservation interventions.4 There are also a plethora of industry studies and regulatory evaluations
of such programs.5
    These existing evaluations of behavior-based energy conservation programs often make policy
recommendations by comparing program implementation costs to the value of energy saved. This
approach is so well-established that energy industry regulators have a name for it: the “program
   1
     In September 2015, the US “nudge unit,” the Social and Behavioral Sciences Team, released results from 15
experiments, and President Obama signed an executive order that directs federal agencies to use behavioral insights
when they “may yield substantial improvements in social welfare and program outcomes” (EOP 2015). See Whitehead
et al. (2014) for an overview of the influence of nudge units worldwide.
   2
     One indicator of academic interest is that the book Nudge (Thaler and Sunstein 2008) has been cited more than
7000 times.
   3
     Of course, if the policymaker has correctly designated a “good” behavior to nudge people toward, this typically
means that the behavior change generates net benefits for the individual. However, the magnitude of these net benefits
would ideally be calculated and weighed against a nudge’s other costs and benefits.
   4
     Academic papers on energy use social comparison reports include Kantola, Syme, and Campbell (1984), Allcott
(2011, 2015), Ayres, Raseman, and Shih (2013), Costa and Kahn (2013), Dolan and Metcalfe (2013), Allcott and
Rogers (2014), and Sudarshan (2014). Delmas, Fischlein, and Asensio (2013) review 156 published field trials studying
social comparisons and other informational interventions to induce energy conservation.
   5
     These include Violette, Provencher, and Klos (2009), Ashby et al. (2012), Integral Analytics (2012), KEMA (2012),
Opinion Dynamics (2012), and Perry and Woehleke (2013), among many others.



                                                          2
administrator cost test.” As with most evaluations of other nudges, this ignores benefits and costs
(other than energy cost savings) experienced by nudge recipients. For example, what financial costs
did consumers incur to generate the observed energy savings (e.g., to install improved insulation)?
What is the cost of time devoted to turning off lights or adjusting thermostats? What is the value
of comfort from better-insulated homes or the discomfort from setting thermostats to energy-saving
temperatures? Are there meaningful psychological benefits or costs of using social comparisons to
inspire or guilt people into conserving energy?
   Home Energy Reports have two features that we leverage to conduct a social welfare analysis that
considers the full range of the nudge’s benefits and costs. First, they are a private good that can be
sold. Second, the standard policy is to deliver them regularly (e.g., every two months) over several
years. These two features mean that it is both possible and policy-relevant to measure willingness-
to-pay (WTP) for future HERs in a sample of experienced past recipients. In simple terms, our
approach is to send people one year of HERs, each of which has a similar structure but includes new
conservation tips and updated energy use feedback, and then ask them how much they are willing
to pay to receive HERs for a second year. Because these people have experience with HERs from
the first year, we respect their WTP as an accurate measure of their welfare from receiving more
of them. We then use standard economic tools to evaluate the welfare effects of the second year
of HERs, including effects on consumer welfare along with implementation costs and reductions in
uninternalized externalities.
   More specifically, we study a program providing HERs to about 10,000 residential natural gas
consumers at a utility in upstate New York over the 2014-2015 and 2015-2016 winter heating seasons.
At the end of winter 2014-2015, we surveyed all HER recipients by mail and phone with multiple
price lists (MPLs) that trade off next winter’s HERs with checks for different amounts of money. We
designed the MPL to allow negative WTP as well as positive WTP, as some households opt out of
HER programs even though the reports are free. The MPLs were incentive-compatible: depending
on their responses, each household received a check from the utility and/or more HERs in winter
2015-2016. The initial HER treatment group was randomly assigned from a larger population as part
of a randomized control trial, so we can easily estimate the effects of HERs on energy use, which we
then translate to a value of uninternalized externalities using parameters such as the social cost of
carbon.
   We find that the average household is willing to pay just under $3 for a second year of Home
Energy Reports. While most people like HERs, 34 percent have weakly negative WTP — that is,
they prefer not to be nudged even if the nudge is free. In support of our revealed preference approach,
the data suggest that WTP is a reliable measure of how much people like HERs: for example, WTP
is highly correlated with qualitative evaluations of the HERs and beliefs about savings made possible
by future HERs. We estimate that WTP equals about 57 percent of retail energy cost savings,
meaning that the remaining 43 percent represents net financial, time, comfort, and psychological
costs required to generate the energy savings. This high ratio of energy savings to costs suggests

                                                  3
that, leaving aside the implementation cost, HERs provide privately-useful conservation information
and/or psychological benefits. However, this 43 percent “non-energy cost” is not included in previous
HER evaluations, nor in most evaluations of similar nudges in other domains.
       Our main estimates suggest that the second year of this HER program increases social welfare by
$0.77 per household. However, the standard approach of ignoring non-energy costs overstates this
welfare gain by a factor of 3.7. We find the same qualitative results in a more speculative calculation
where we generalize the 43 percent non-energy cost rule of thumb to the full course of a typical
HER program: under this assumption, the typical program likely increases welfare, but ignoring
non-energy costs overstates welfare gains by a factor of two. Since HERs have been delivered to
millions of households worldwide, this adds up quickly: across all HER programs implemented as of
January 2017, the social welfare gains could be overstated by $620 million.
       The nudge’s welfare effects are driven down by the fact that almost 60 percent of nudge recipients
are not willing to pay the marginal social cost of the nudge, including many who have negative WTP.
On the other hand, one in five recipients is willing to pay at least $9, which is 4.8 times larger than
marginal social cost. A natural response to such heterogeneous valuations would be to price the nudge
at marginal social cost and let people opt in if they want to. In this context, however, inertia is
extremely powerful.6 We show that even under generous assumptions, an opt-in program is unlikely
to enroll enough people to be preferable to the current opt-out approach. Instead, we train a simple
machine learning algorithm to set a “smart default” — that is, to target the program at the types of
consumers for whom nudging generates the largest social benefits. The smart default approach can
double the welfare gains, holding constant the number of nudge recipients.
       These results have important but nuanced implications for energy policy. Many utilities send
HERs to help comply with regulations called Energy Efficiency Portfolio Standards (EEPS), which
require utilities to induce a specific quantity of energy savings each year. While this paper finds that
net benefits of HERs are less than previously reported, benefit-cost analyses of alternative energy
efficiency programs such as home retrofits also may suffer from systematic biases.7 Thus, substituting
to alternative programs that have not been subjected to a complete social welfare analysis may not
be better than continuing an HER program. At a minimum, our results suggest that there is much
work to be done to correctly measure the welfare effects of energy efficiency programs.
       We are not the first or only researchers to consider the welfare effects of nudges. A handful
of previous empirical and theoretical analyses of behaviorally-motivated policies have recognized
the difference between effects on behavior and effects on welfare, including Carroll, Choi, Laibson,
   6
     HERs involve much lower stakes than other contexts where defaults have been shown to have significant power,
such as health insurance and retirement savings plans as studied by Madrian and Shea (2001), Kling et al. (2012),
Handel (2013), Ericson (2014), and others
   7
     One potential source of systematic bias is that actual energy savings may be different than simulation-based
assumptions; see Nadel and Keating (1991) and more recent studies such as Allcott and Greenstone (2015) and Fowlie,
Greenstone, and Wolfram (2015). A second source of bias is that according to Kushler et al. (2012), only 30 percent of
energy efficiency programs measure non-energy benefits and costs such as the financial, time, and utility costs discussed
above. Depending on the program, these factors could bias welfare estimates in either direction.


                                                           4
Madrian, and Metrick (2009) and Bernheim, Fradkin, and Popov (2015) on optimal retirement
savings plan defaults; Ito, Ida, and Tanaka (2015) on peak electricity use; Handel (2013) on insurance
plan choice; Ambuehl, Bernheim, and Lusardi (2014) on financial education; Bhattacharya, Garber,
and Goldhaber-Fiebert (2015) on exercise commitment contracts; and Reyniers and Bhalla (2013)
and Cain, Dana, and Newman (2014) on charitable giving. There is an active literature debating the
welfare gains from cigarette graphic warning labels, including Weimer, Vining, and Thomas (2009),
FDA (2011), Chaloupka et al. (2014), Ashley, Nardinelli, and Lavaty (2015), Chaloupka, Gruber,
and Warner (2015), Cutler, Jessup, Kenkel, and Starr (2015), Jin, Kenkel, Liu, and Wang (2015),
and others. Even within these papers that are grounded in a welfare framework, however, most do
not actually implement an empirical social welfare analysis of a nudge because actually quantifying
consumer welfare can be so challenging.
    Although not a study of a nudge intervention, DellaVigna, List, and Malmendier (2012) is similar
in spirit: they point out that charitable donation appeals could increase utility by activating warm
glow of donors or instead decrease utility by imposing social pressure. They combine an “avoidance
design” — measuring whether people avoid opportunities to donate — with a structural model,
concluding that door-to-door fundraising drives can reduce welfare even as they raise money for
charity. Herberich, List, and Price (2012) use the same design to show that both altruism and
social pressure motivate people to buy energy efficient lightbulbs from door-to-door salespeople, and
Andreoni, Rao, and Trachtman (2011) and Trachtman et al. (2015) use a different avoidance design
to study motivations for charitable giving, although none of these latter three papers includes a social
welfare analysis. Avoidance designs achieve the same conceptual goal as our MPL: both allow the
analyst to observe people opting in or out of a nudge (or opportunity to donate) at some cost. Our
MPL design is especially useful, however, because it immediately gives a WTP, whereas avoidance
behaviors require additional assumptions or structural estimates to be translated into dollars.
    Section I formally defines a “nudge” and derives a welfare effect formula. Sections II and III
present the experimental design and data. Sections IV and V present the empirical results and social
welfare calculation. Section VI evaluates targeting and opt-in policies, and Section VII concludes.


I     Theoretical Framework
This section lays out a simple theoretical framework that formalizes what we mean by a “nudge”
and derives an equation for welfare effects.

I.A    Consumers and Producers
We model a population of P heterogeneous consumers who derive utility from consuming numeraire
good x and a continuous choice e, which in our application is energy use. With slight modifications
to the below, e could also represent healthful eating, exercise, using preventive health care, charitable


                                                   5
giving, or other actions. e generates consumption utility f (e; α), where α is a taste parameter. To
capture imperfect information or behavioral bias, we allow a factor γ that affects choice but not
experienced utility. For example, γ could represent noise in a signal of an unknown production
function for health or household energy services, or it could represent a mistake in evaluating the
private net benefits of e, perhaps due to inattention or present bias. Consumers have perceived
consumption utility fˆ(e; α, γ), which may or may not equal f (e; α).
   In the model, e is produced at constant marginal cost ce and sold at uniform price pe , giving
markup πe = pe − ce per unit. e imposes constant externality φe per unit. Consumers have income
y and pay lump-sum tax T to the government.
   We include a “moral utility” term M = m − µe. Following Levitt and List (2007), moral utility
arises when actions impose externalities, are subject to social norms, or are scrutinized by others.
This concept is especially appropriate for our setting, where energy production causes environmental
externalities and Home Energy Reports scrutinize energy use and present social norms. The moral
price µ can be thought of as a “psychological tax” or “moral tax” on e, as in Glaeser (2006, 2014)
and Loewenstein and O’Donoghue (2006), or as fear of future consequences of e, as in Caplin (2003).
   More positive µ can also represent a moral subsidy for reducing e. To model a moral subsidy,
imagine that consumers receive utility µ for every unit of e not consumed, up to ms , where ms > e.
Moral utility is then M = µ(ms −e), which equals m−µe when we set m = µms . This framework can
also allow moral utility to depend on consumption relative to a social norm s: if M = ms − µ(e − s),
this equals m − µe when we set m = ms + µs. m also captures any “windfall” utility change, if
recipients like or dislike the nudge regardless of e.
   Let the vector θ = {y, α, γ, m, µ} summarize all factors that vary across consumers. We assume
that utility is quasilinear in x, so fˆ0 > 0, fˆ00 < 0, fˆ0 (0) = ∞, and the consumer maximizes


                                 max Û (θ) = x + fˆ(e; α, γ) + m − µe,                          (1)
                                  x,e

subject to budget constraint


                                            y − T ≥ x + epe .                                    (2)

   Consumers’ equilibrium choice of e, denoted ẽ(θ), is determined by the following first-order
condition:


                                          fˆ0 (ẽ; α, γ) − µ = pe .                              (3)

   This equation shows that increasing the moral price µ can have the same effect on behavior as
increasing the price pe . However, we discuss below how a price increase vs. a moral price increase
are very different from a welfare perspective.
   Two market failures can cause equilibrium ẽ(θ) to differ from the social optimum. First, γ


                                                     6
(imperfect information or other factors) affects choice but not experienced utility — in other words,
consumers set ẽ based on fˆ(e; α, γ) instead of f (e; α). Second, there is a pricing distortion: price pe
may differ from social marginal cost ce + φe because of the externality φe and markup πe . In the
first best, pe = ce + φe and the consumer would maximize experienced utility, which is


                                     U (θ) = x + f (e; α) + m − µe.                                   (4)

I.B    Nudges
The policymaker can implement a nudge at marginal cost cn per consumer plus fixed cost Fn , giving
total cost Cn = P cn + Fn . The policymaker maintains a balanced budget using lump-sum tax
T = Cn /P . We formalize the nudge as a binary instrument N ∈ {1, 0} that changes consumers’ γ,
m, and µ. Specifically, each consumer has possibly different potential outcomes θN for N = 0 vs.
N = 1, in which γ, m, and µ could differ. We define Θ = {θ0 , θ1 } and let F (Θ) denote its distribution.
In words, a nudge provides information, reduces bias, and/or persuades people by activating moral
utility. This is intended to be consistent with the practical examples of Thaler and Sunstein (2008),
and it is closely analogous to the formal definition in Farhi and Gabaix (2015).

I.C    Private and Social Welfare Effects of Nudges
We define “pre-tax consumer welfare” as V (θN ) = U (θN ) + T , and we use ∆ to represent effects of
a nudge, e.g. ∆V ≡ V (θ1 ) − V (θ0 ). The effect of the nudge on pre-tax consumer welfare is


                                     ∆V = −∆ẽ · pe + ∆f + ∆M.                                        (5)

This equation shows that an energy conservation nudge, for example, affects consumers by saving
them money, changing the amount of household “energy services” they enjoy, and by changing how
they feel about their energy use.
   Social welfare is consumer welfare plus the pricing distortion times the behavior change:

                                        Z
                             W (N ) =        U (θN ) + (πe − φe )ẽ(θN ) dF (Θ).                      (6)

   The effect of the nudge on social welfare is


                                        R
                              ∆W =          ∆V + (πe − φe )∆ẽ dF (Θ) − Cn .                          (7)




                                                       7
   The first term in Equation (7) reflects the net benefit to consumers, ignoring the fact that they
must pay for the nudge through the lump-sum tax. The final term Cn then accounts for the cost of
the nudge.
   Nudges with the same effect on behavior ∆ẽ and the same cost Cn , and thus the same cost
effectiveness, can have very different effects on consumer welfare, and thus very different social
welfare effects. Figure 1 helps present several distinct mechanisms through which demand could
shift from D0 to D1 , giving the same ∆ẽ < 0 as the equilibrium shifts from point a to point g.
First, imagine that there is no moral utility, and the nudge only sets fˆ = f , i.e. it only provides
information or eliminates bias. In this example, D0 represents perceived fˆ, while D1 represents true
f . The nudge saves consumers money −∆ẽ · pe (rectangle acdg), which is only partially offset by
reduction in consumption utility f (e; α) (trapezoid bcdg). To a first order approximation, the nudge
                    (∆ẽ) 2
generates ∆V ≈ − 21 de/dp e
                            > 0; that is, it eliminates deadweight loss triangle abg.
                        ˆ
   Now imagine that f = f without the nudge, and the nudge only raises the moral price from
µ0 = 0 to µ1 , generating the same ∆ẽ. In this example, D0 reflects consumption utility f (e; α), both
with and without the nudge. As in the first example, this saves consumers money −∆ẽ · pe , but this
is outweighed by consumption utility loss shown by trapezoid acdh. In addition, moral utility M
decreases by µ1 ẽ(θ1 ), which is area ghji. In sum, the moral tax reduces consumer welfare by the same
                                       1 (∆ẽ)2
amount as a standard tax: ∆V =         2 de/dpe   − µ1 ẽ(θ1 ) < 0, i.e. trapezoid agij. Unlike a standard tax,
however, the moral tax does not generate revenues — it simply reduces utility. The welfare effect is
negative even if the first-best ẽ is achieved.
   Alternatively, the nudge could be a moral subsidy on every unit of e not consumed up to ms .
                                                                 1 (∆ẽ)2
In this case, consumer welfare would change by ∆V =              2 de/dpe   + µ1 (ms − ẽ(θ1 )) > 0, i.e. trapezoid
aklg. More broadly, the nudge can have unbounded positive or negative effects on ∆V unless further
restrictions are placed on m.

                Figure 1: Illustrating the Effects of a Nudge on Consumer Welfare


                              j
                                    D0
                              i
                                      D1          h

                                                  g          a
                         pe
                                                                     k

                         $                                   b
                                                                     l
                                              d              c
                                  e                                ms

                                                         8
     This discussion highlights how traditional cost effectiveness metrics can be misleading guides for
policy decisions: large behavior change ∆ẽ and low implementation cost Cn are neither necessary
nor sufficient for a nudge to increase welfare.

I.D     Estimation
In the remainder of the paper, we estimate the social welfare effect ∆W of a specific nudge: Home
Energy Reports. In this application, a retailer sells e with decreasing block pricing, and one could
also imagine heterogeneous or non-linear prices in other applications. To accommodate those cases,
                                                                                     R
we can write the effect of the nudge on the retailer’s net revenues as ∆Π instead of   πe ∆ẽ dF (Θ).
This gives a more general version of Equation (7):
                                       Z
                                ∆W =       ∆V − φe ∆ẽ dF (Θ) + ∆Π − Cn .                           (8)

     We estimate the change in energy use ∆ẽ and retailer net revenues ∆Π by implementing HERs as
a randomized control trial. We use outside estimates of energy use externalities φe , and we estimate
nudge implementation cost Cn from accounting data. To estimate the change in consumer welfare
∆V , we elicit willingness-to-pay for the nudge. In doing this, we assume that our experimental design
correctly elicits WTP and that consumers are “sophisticated” in the sense that their WTP for the
nudge equals its true effect on their welfare. Sections II-IV present evidence on the plausibility of
this assumption, and we formalize it before performing the welfare analysis in Section V.


II     Experimental Design
The Opower Home Energy Report is a one-page letter (front and back) with two key features illus-
trated in Figure 2. The Social Comparison Module in Panel (a) compares a household’s energy use to
that of its 100 geographically nearest neighbors in similar house sizes whose energy use meters were
read on approximately the same date. In the neighbor comparison graphs, “All Neighbors” refers to
the mean of the neighbor distribution, while “Efficient Neighbors” refers to the 20th percentile. To
the right of the three-bar neighbor comparison graph is a box presenting “injunctive norms” intended
to signal virtuous behavior (Schultz et al. 2007): consumers earn one smiley face for using less than
their mean neighbor and two smiley faces for using less than their Efficient Neighbors. The Action
Steps Module in Panel (b) gives energy conservation tips; these suggestions are tailored to each
household based on past usage patterns. The HERs are thus designed to both provide information
and activate “moral utility.”




                                                    9
                                                                                                                                       Account number: 1234567890
                                                                                                                                       Report period: 11/23/14–12/21/14
                 1515 N. Courthouse Road, Floor 8
                 Arlington, VA 22201-2909
                                                                                                                                       This report gives you context on your energy use
                                                                                                                                       to help you make smart energy-saving decisions.

                                                                                                                                       For a full list of energy-saving products and
                                                                                                                                       services for purchase, including rebates from
                                                                                                                                       UtilityCo, visit utilityco.com/rebates        .

                                                                                                                                       If you have questions or no longer want to receive
                                                                                                                                       reports, call 555-555-5555.
                                           BOB SMITH
                                           555 MAIN STREET
                                               Figure 2: The Opower Home Energy Report
                                           ANYTOWN, ST 12345




                  Last Month Neighbor Comparison                                                      You used 42% more natural gas than your efficient neighbors.




                                                                                                                                                             How you're doing:
                 Efficient Neighbors                                                                 19 Therms*

                                                                                                                                                            Great
                 YOU                                                                                                27
                                                                                                                                                            GOOD
                 All Neighbors                                                                                       28
                                                                                                                                                            More than average

                 * Therms: Standard unit of measuring heat energy



                                                                                                All Neighbors: Approximately 100 occupied,             Efficient Neighbors: The most efficient
                 Who are your Neighbors?                                                        nearby homes that are similar in size to yours         20 percent from the “All Neighbors” group
                                                                                                (avg 1,517 sq ft)




                  Last 12 Months Neighbor Comparison                                                            You used 81% more natural gas than your efficient neighbors.
                                                                                                                         This costs you about $229 extra per year.

                          80         < 2013 2014 >




                          60
                                          Do you need help heating your home?
                 Therms




                          40              Don’t let bill trouble prevent you from keeping your home
                                          and family warm this winter. The Low-Income Home Energy
                                          Assistance Program (LIHEAP) can help eligible customers
                          20              pay current or past-due heating bills or help restore power
                                          that has been shut off.
                                     DEC             JAN           FEB           MAR              APR        MAY          JUN        JUL         AUG      SEP        OCT         NOV
                                          Apply for winter assistance at utilityco.com/rebates.
                                  Key:        You      All Neighbors Efficient Neighbors
                                          or call 555-555-5555.


                                                                                    Turn over for savings
                                                                           (a) Social  Comparison Module

                               Personalized tips | For a complete list of energy saving investments and smart purchases, visit utilityco.com/rebates.


                               Quick Fix                                                          Smart Purchase                                   Smart Purchase
                               Something you can do right now                                     An affordable way to save more                   An affordable way to save more

                                  Open your shades on winter                                         Program your thermostat                           Weatherstrip windows and
                                  days                                                               A programmable thermostat                         doors
                                  Taking advantage of winter's                                       can automatically adjust your                     Windows and doors can be
                                  direct sunlight can make a dent                                    heat or air conditioning when                     responsible for up to 25% of
                                  in your heating costs. Open                                        you're away, then return to your                  heat loss in winter for a typical
                                  blinds and other window                                            preferred temperature when                        home.
                                  treatments during the day to                                       you're home to enjoy it.                          If you're comfortable doing the
                                  capture free heat and light.
                                                                                                     If you don't already have a                       task yourself, you can
                                  South-facing windows have the                                      programmable thermostat, look                     weatherize your home in just a
                                  most potential for heat gain,                                      for one at your local home                        few hours. Seal windows for
                                  and the sun is most intense                                        improvement store. For comfort                    about $1 each with rope caulk,
                                  from 9 a.m. to 3 p.m.                                              and convenience, be sure to                       or install more permanent
                                                                                                     program your thermostat with                      weatherstripping for $8-$10 per
                                  When you let the sun in,
                                                                                                     energy-efficient settings.                        window. Also, install sweeps at
                                  remember to lower the
                                                                                                                                                       the bottom of exterior doors.
                                  thermostat by a few degrees.                                       If you need help installing or
                                  These two steps combined are                                       programming your thermostat,                      A professional can help you
                                  what save money and energy.                                        consult your manual or call the                   with this work if you prefer.
                                                                                                     manufacturer for assistance.
                            SAVE UP TO                                                          SAVE UP TO                                         SAVE UP TO

                            $
                                10    PER YEAR
                                                                                                $
                                                                                                    65    PER YEAR
                                                                                                                                                   $
                                                                                                                                                       10    PER YEAR




                                      (b) Action Steps Module
Notes: The Home Energy Report is a one-page (front and back) letter including the Social Comparison Module
in Panel (a) and the Action Steps Module in Panel (b).
                          utilityco.com/energyreports | 555-555-5555 | energyreports@utilityco.com                                                                               © 2012-2015 Opower

                          Printed on 10% post-consumer recycled paper using water-based inks.




                                                                                                                   10
   As of mid-2015, Opower had implemented HER programs at 95 utilities in nine countries. We
focus on one program at Central Hudson Gas and Electric, which serves 300,000 electric customers
and 78,000 natural gas customers in eight New York counties. Like 23 other states, New York has an
Energy Efficiency Portfolio Standard, which requires that utilities cause consumers to reduce energy
demand by a specified amount each year (ACEEE 2015). As part of compliance with the standard,
Central Hudson had already planned a multi-year Home Energy Report program for residential
natural gas customers. Central Hudson and Opower agreed to modify the program to incorporate
this study.
   Figure 3 summarizes the experimental design. Starting with an eligible population of 19,929
households that were not included in one of Central Hudson’s several previous HER programs,
Opower randomly assigned half to treatment and half to control. The treatment group received up
to four HERs during the winter “heating season” from late October 2014 through late April 2015.
Central Hudson employees read each household’s natural gas meter every two months, and an HER
was generated and mailed shortly after each meter read in order to provide timely and relevant
information. Some households received fewer than four HERs for standard technical reasons such as
not having enough neighbors to generate valid comparisons. Like almost all other HER programs,
this is an “opt out” program, so households continue to receive HERs unless they contact the utility
to opt out. Sixteen households had opted out by September 2015, and thus did not receive reports
in the program’s second year. Households also stop receiving HERs if they move addresses.


                                Figure 3: Experimental Design

                                          Treatment Groups
                                          19,929 households
                                              1/2        1/2
                       Report Recipient                         Control
                       1/3           2/3
                    Base group Follow-up
                     (first mail group
                   survey only)

                                         Process
                   1. Four Reports (October 2014-April 2015)
                   2. First mail survey (in final Report)
                   3. Follow-up mail survey (own envelope, May 2015)
                   4. Phone survey (June-August 2015)
                   5. Next four Reports and/or check (October 2015-April 2016)




                                                    11
   Opower included our one-page survey and postage-paid Business Reply Mail return envelope
in the same envelope as the final HER of the 2014-2015 heating season. Figure 4 reproduces the
survey. The first seven questions were a multiple price list (MPL) that asked recipients to trade off
four more HERs with checks for different amounts of money. The responses can be used to bound
willingness-to-pay. For example, consumers who prefer “four more Home Energy Reports plus a $9
check” instead of “a $10 check” value the four HERs at $1 or more. Consumers who prefer “a $10
check” instead of “four more Home Energy Reports plus a $5 check” value the four HERs at $5 or
less. A consumer who answered as in these two examples therefore has WTP between $1 and $5.
   In typical HER programs, including this one, a few consumers dislike HERs enough to take the
time to opt out. If time has any positive value, this implies a strictly negative WTP for HERs for
these consumers. To correctly measure the distribution of WTP in such an opt-out program, it is
thus necessary to allow consumers to reveal negative WTP. We designed the MPL to do this, by
asking consumers to choose between “four more HERs plus a $10 check” and checks of less than $10.
For example, consumers who choose “a check for $9” instead of “four more HERs plus a $10 check”
are giving up $1 to not receive four more HERs, meaning that their WTP must be no greater than
$-1. Answers to the seven-question MPL place a respondent’s WTP into eight ranges, which are
symmetric about zero: (−∞, −9], [−9, −5], [−5, −1], [−1, 0], [0, 1], [1, 5], [5, 9], and [9, ∞).
   The survey letters included three variations intended to remind consumers of different features
of the HERs. Figure 4 was the “Standard” version. In the “Comparison” version, the sentence
“Remember that Home Energy Reports compare your energy use to your neighbors’ use”
was added after “we want to know what you think about them” in the introductory paragraph. In
the Environmental version, “Remember that Home Energy Reports help you to reduce your
environmental impact” was added in that same place.
   The survey’s final question was, “Think back to when you received your first Home Energy
Report. Did you find that you used more or less energy than you thought?” This measures the
extent to which HERs caused consumers to update beliefs about relative usage.
   A randomly-selected two-thirds of HER recipients were sent a follow-up mail survey on May 26th,
2015. We call this group the “follow-up group,” while the other one-third is the “base group.” This
follow-up survey was not part of an HER and was sent through a separate vendor, so the outbound
envelope had a different originating address than the HERs. The survey and Business Reply Mail
return envelope were identical to the first mail survey.




                                                     12
                                                    Figure 4: Mail Survey


                                                                                                                        Account Number: xxxx-xxxx-xx-x


                                       Tell us what you think — and earn a check for up to $10!
                                       Central Hudson has been sending you Home Energy Reports since last fall, and we want to
                                       know what you think about them. Would you take a moment to complete the survey below?
                                       For each question, please fill in one box with your answer.

                                       What happens next?
                                           1.	When you’re finished, mail the survey back to us in the enclosed prepaid envelope.
                                           2.	We will use a lottery to draw one of the first seven questions, and we’ll mail you what you
                                               chose in that question — either a check or a check plus four more Home Energy Reports.

                                       Thank you!
                                       Your participation will help us make these reports even more useful for you. If you have any
                                       questions, please email us at HERSurvey@cenhud.com or call (845) 486-5221.




1.                                                      $10
                                                                 4 more Home Energy
                                                                                                                          $1
                                               4
     Which would you prefer?                        +
                                                                 Reports PLUS a $10 check
                                                                                                           OR                   A $1 check




2.                                                      $10
                                                                 4 more Home Energy
                                                                                                                          $5
                                               4
     Which would you prefer?                        +
                                                                 Reports PLUS a $10 check
                                                                                                           OR                   A $5 check




3.                                                      $10
                                                                 4 more Home Energy
                                                                                                                          $9
                                               4
     Which would you prefer?                        +
                                                                 Reports PLUS a $10 check
                                                                                                           OR                   A $9 check




4.                                                      $10
                                                                 4 more Home Energy
                                                                                                                        $10
                                               4
     Which would you prefer?                        +
                                                                 Reports PLUS a $10 check
                                                                                                           OR                    A $10 check




5.                                                          $9
                                                                 4 more Home Energy
                                                                                                                        $10
                                                4
     Which would you prefer?                        +
                                                                 Reports PLUS a $9 check
                                                                                                           OR                    A $10 check




6.                                                          $5
                                                                 4 more Home Energy
                                                                                                                        $10
                                                4
     Which would you prefer?                        +
                                                                 Reports PLUS a $5 check
                                                                                                           OR                    A $10 check




7.                                                          $1
                                                                 4 more Home Energy
                                                                                                                        $10
                                                4
     Which would you prefer?                            +
                                                                 Reports PLUS a $1 check
                                                                                                           OR                    A $10 check




8.   Think back to when you received
     your first Home Energy Report. Did
     you find that you used more or less      Much less            Somewhat less            About what I thought    Somewhat more            Much more
     energy than you thought?
                                                                                                                   CHGE_0009_WELCOME_LETTER_SURVEYA




                                                                         13
       In June, July, and early August 2015, an independent survey research firm surveyed the entire
HER treatment group by phone. Each phone number was called up to eight times until the house-
hold completed the survey or declined to participate. The beginning of the phone survey parallels
the mail survey, except that we used a three-question version of the same MPL that dynamically
eliminated questions whose answers were implied by earlier answers.8 We then asked a belief update
question parallel to the mail survey and a series of additional questions to elicit beliefs about energy
cost savings and qualitative evaluations of the HERs. Appendix A presents the full phone survey
questionnaire. A condensed version is:

   1. [Multiple price list]

   2. Did your first Report say you were using more or less than you thought?

   3. Do you think that receiving four more Reports this fall and winter would help you reduce your
         natural gas use by even a small amount?

          (a) If Yes: How much money do you think you would save on your natural gas bills if you
             receive four more Reports?

   4. How much money do you think the average household has saved since last fall?

   5. How would you like the Reports if they didn’t have the neighbor comparison graph?

   6. Do the Reports make you feel inspired, pressured, neither, or both?

   7. Do the Reports make you feel proud, guilty, neither, or both?

   8. Do you agree/disagree with: “The Reports gave useful information that helped me conserve
         energy.”

   9. Do you have any other comments about the Reports that you’d like to share?

If the phone survey respondent reported that he or she had already returned the mail survey, the
phone survey skipped directly to question 3. Questions 6 and 7 were designed to measure whether the
HERs tend to generate positive or negative affect, to provide suggestive evidence on whether HERs
affect “moral utility” or act as a psychological tax or subsidy. The words “inspired,” “proud,” and
“guilty,” were drawn from the Positive and Negative Affect Schedule (Watson, Clark, and Tellegan
1988), a standard measure in psychology. We added the word “pressured” because we hypothesized
that it might be relevant in this context.
   8
    We began by asking question 4 from the mail survey. If the respondent preferred HERs+a $10 check, we asked
question 6. If the respondent preferred HERs+a $5 check on question 6, we asked question 7, whereas if the respondent
preferred a $10 check on question 6, we asked question 5. If the respondent preferred a $10 check on question 4, we
asked question 2. If the respondent preferred HERs+a $10 check on question 2, we asked question 3, whereas if the
respondent preferred a $5 check on question 2, we asked question 1.


                                                         14
       Both the mail and phone MPLs clearly stated at the outset that they were incentive-compatible.
The mail survey stated, “We will use a lottery to draw one of the first seven questions, and we’ll mail
you what you chose in that question.” The phone survey script stated, “These are real questions:
Central Hudson will use a lottery to pick one question and will actually mail you what you chose.”
Once all survey responses were collected, we randomly selected one of the seven MPL questions for
each respondent, and the respondent received what he or she had chosen in that question: either
a check from Central Hudson or a check plus four more HERs in the program’s second winter.9
As a result of their survey responses, 146 households were dropped from the program’s second year,
including all households who responded on all seven MPL questions that they preferred not to receive
HERs. The consequences of non-response were not communicated to households in the survey or
otherwise. In practice, households that did not respond to the survey did not receive a check and
did receive HERs over the 2015-2016 winter heating season.
       Our design elicits WTP for the program’s second year, and thus allows a welfare evaluation only
of the second year. Why study only the second year of a program? First, the revealed preference
approach that is central to the paper — that is, taking WTP seriously as a measure of consumer
welfare — is much more plausible when consumers have experience with the nudge they are evalu-
ating. Second, while most utilities that currently send HERs to households do so for multiple years,
our analysis helps address an active debate about how long to continue treating the same households
with HERs.
       Relatedly, one might wonder whether the first few HERs provide the bulk of informational or
motivational benefits of an HER program. Perhaps WTP would be much higher for the first HER
or first few HERs? It is not clear that this intuition is correct. Allcott and Rogers (2014) show that
continued HERs cause incremental conservation even after receiving eight to 24 reports over two
years, implying that there is additional value well after the first year. The fact that additional HERs
continue to affect energy consumption likely arises both because additional HERs are a motivational
reminder and because they provide new information. For example, about half of households see their
ranking relative to their mean neighbor or Efficient Neighbors change across reports over a given year
of the Central Hudson program we study.10 Furthermore, the energy conservation tips change with
every report. It is thus unlikely that the first few HERs provide the bulk of the benefits, and it is not
obvious the extent to which consumers would value the first few HERs vs. later HERs differently.
This discussion highlights why it is both interesting and relevant to evaluate the program’s second
year.
   9
     Because Central Hudson needed to continue sending HERs to most households to satisfy regulatory requirements
under the Energy Efficiency Portfolio Standard, we placed 98.6 percent probability on the first question, on which 94
percent of respondents chose HERs. The remaining six questions were each selected with 0.2 percent probability.
  10
     These changes occur largely because of standard month-to-month variation in household energy use, not due to
conservation actions induced by the HERs. The average treatment effect of HERs is very small relative to the standard
within-household and between-household variation.




                                                         15
III     Data
There are five data sources: the utility’s natural gas bill data, neighbor comparisons, customer
demographic data, mail surveys, and phone surveys.
    We observe natural gas use for each household in treatment or control for all meter read dates
between July 1, 2013, and September 23, 2016. Central Hudson reads customers’ natural gas meters
on very regular bi-monthly cycles: 94 percent of billing period durations are between 55 and 70 days.
Households that move do not appear in the energy bill data (and do not receive HERs) after they
move.
    The key feature of the Social Comparison Module in Panel (a) of Figure 2 is a bar graph com-
paring the household’s use on its previous bill to the mean and 20th percentile of the distribution of
neighbors’ use. We observe that mean and 20th percentile for all HERs, including HERs that control
group households would have received.
    Table 1 presents demographic variable summary statistics. All variables other than baseline use
and hybrid auto share are from a demographic data vendor and are matched to the utility account
holder. These variables are from a combination of public records, survey responses, online and offline
purchases, and statistical predictions, and most are likely measured with error. Some households in
the population could not be matched to demographic data, in which case we use mean imputation.
We made every effort to acquire the best data possible, because measurement error and missing data
make our inverse probability weights and prediction algorithms less effective.
    These data may overestimate household income, but the population is relatively wealthy: accord-
ing to Census data, the mean household is in a census block group with median household income of
$64,000. Green consumer is a binary measure of environmentalism based on income, age, and pur-
chases of organic food, energy efficient appliances, and environmentally responsible brands. Wildlife
donor is an indicator for whether the consumer has contributed to animal or wildlife causes. These
two variables could proxy for environmentalism and thus interest in energy conservation. Home im-
provement is an indicator for home improvement transactions or product registrations, which could
proxy for interest in making energy-saving improvements in response to HERs.
    Our household covariates, denoted X, are these same variables, except that we take natural logs
of income, net worth, house value, age, and house age.11 Appendix Tables A1 and A2 confirm that
these covariates are not more correlated with HER recipient group or survey group assignment than
would be expected by chance.
  11
     Some households have negative net worth, so before taking the natural log, we add a constant to all observations
such that the minimum value is $1.




                                                         16
                      Table 1: Demographic Variable Summary Statistics

                 Variable                    Non-missing Mean Standard Min Max
                                            Observations           Deviation
                   Baseline use (ccf/day)      19,921       2.12       1.67         0    19.1
                   Income ($000s)              15,557       94.4       81.9       10     450
                   Net worth ($000s)           15,557       195        288        -30   1500
                   House value ($000s)         16,741       271        173        18    2527
                   Education (years)           19,475       13.6       2.44       10      18
                   Male                        16,811       0.51       0.50         0      1
                   Age                         17,282       50.7       16.1       19      99
                   Retired                     16,728       0.04       0.20         0      1
                   Married                     15,406       0.59       0.49         0      1
                   Rent                        17,561       0.30       0.46        0       1
                   Single family home          17,734       0.68       0.46         0      1
                   House age                   14,885       59.7       40.2         0    115
                   Democrat                    18,080       0.16       0.55        -1      1
                   Hybrid auto share           19,728       1.03       2.78        0     18.2
                   Green consumer              18,883       0.15       0.35        0       1
                   Wildlife donor              16,728       0.06       0.24         0      1
                   Profit score                19,784       0.00       1.00      -1.65 2.09
                   Buyer score                 14,967       0.00       1.00      -2.03 1.47
                   Mail responder              17,734       0.47       0.46         0      1
                   Home improvement            16,728       0.13       0.33         0      1
Notes: This table summarizes the demographic variables. Baseline use is mean natural gas use (in hundred
cubic feet (ccf) per day) between July 2013 and June 2014. Hybrid auto share is the share (from 0-100) of
vehicles registered in the census tract in 2013 that were hybrids. All other variables are from a demographic
data provider. Education is top-coded at 18 years for people with any graduate degree. Democrat takes value
1 for Democrats and -1 for Republicans. Green consumer is a binary measure of environmentalism based
on income, age, and purchases of organic food, energy efficient appliances, and environmentally responsible
brands. Wildlife donor is an indicator for whether the consumer has contributed to animal or wildlife causes.
Profit score and buyer score measure the consumer’s likelihood of paying debts and making purchases; we
normalize both to mean 0, standard deviation 1. Mail responder is an indicator for whether anyone in the
household has purchased by direct mail. Home improvement is an indicator for home improvement transactions
or product registrations.


   Table 2 summarizes response rates. Households that were sent the follow-up mail survey were
more than twice as likely to respond as base group households, which only received the survey in
their final Home Energy Report. 899 households (9.5 percent of households that were surveyed)
responded to the mail survey, and 1690 households (17.9 percent) completed the phone survey. 2312
households (24.5 percent) responded to one or both surveys. This overall response rate is lower than
official government surveys such as the Current Population Survey, but higher than most other non-
government surveys, and indeed higher than we expected. We discuss our strategy for extrapolating
to the population of non-respondents in Section IV.B.



                                                     17
                                                                Table 2: Survey Response Rates

                                                                                                                    Response rate (%)
                                                        Mail survey                                                       9.5
                                                          Base mail survey group                                           4.5
                                                          Follow-up mail survey group                                     12.0
                                                        Phone survey                                                      17.9
                                                        Both mail and phone surveys                                        2.9
                                                        Mail and/or phone surveys                                         24.5




                                        Figure 5: Qualitative Evaluations of Home Energy Reports


                       How would you like Reports without neighbor comparisons?                                                The Reports gave useful information
             40




                                                                                                      50       40
                       30
   Percent of respondents




                                                                                          Percent of respondents
                                                                                                       30
            20




                                                                                             20
             10




                                                                                                      10
             0




                                                                                                      0




                            Much        Somewhat      About       Somewhat    Much                                  Strongly      Disagree       Neither         Agree   Strongly
                            less          less      the same        more      more                                  disagree                                              agree


                                       Do the Reports make you feel ...                                                         Do the Reports make you feel ...
                60




                                                                                                      60
                                                                                          Percent of respondents
   Percent of respondents
                    40




                                                                                                          40
    20




                                                                                          20
                0




                                                                                                      0




                            Inspired        Pressured          Neither       Both                                     Proud             Guilty             Neither       Both



Notes: This figure presents qualitative evaluations of Home Energy Reports from the phone survey.




        Figure 5 summarizes responses to the qualitative evaluations of the HERs from the phone survey.
Forty-nine percent would like HERs less if the neighbor comparisons were removed, against only 11

                                                                                     18
percent who would like them more. Seventy-three percent of respondents agree or strongly agree
that HERs provide useful information. For most respondents, the HERs did not generate positive or
negative affect: 57 percent said that the HERs made them feel neither “inspired” nor “pressured,”
and 63 percent said that HERs made them feel neither “proud” nor “guilty.” When the HERs did
induce some positive or negative affect, it was much more likely to be positive (inspired or proud)
instead of negative (pressured or guilty). These qualitative results suggest that most people “like”
HERs, i.e. that they would want HERs if they were free.

III.A       Constructing Willingness-to-Pay
Complete and internally-consistent responses to the multiple price list allow us to place each re-
spondent’s willingness-to-pay into one of eight ranges. For simplicity, we assign one unique WTP
for each range. For the six interior ranges, we assign the mean of the endpoints. For example, we
assign a WTP of $-3 for all responses on [−5, −1] and a WTP of $0.50 for all responses on [0, 1]. For
the unbounded ranges, i.e. WTP less than $-9 or greater than $9, we assume that the conditional
distribution of WTP is triangular, with initial density equal to the average density on the adjacent
range.12 This gives $14.45 and $-12.31, respectively, as the conditional mean WTPs on [9, ∞) and
(−∞ − 9]. We also present results under alternative assumptions.
       For the 2.9 percent of households that responded to both the phone and mail surveys, we use
the phone survey WTP in order to be consistent with the phone survey’s additional qualitative
questions. For the 87 households that returned more than one mail survey with valid WTP, we use
the first survey we received. These two sets of households with multiple survey responses provide an
opportunity to show the stability of our WTP elicitations within a household, both within the same
MPL format (i.e., mail vs. mail) and across different formats (i.e., mail vs. phone). We therefore
give them special attention in Section III.B.

III.B       Do the Surveys Correctly Measure Willingness-to-Pay?
While standard in academic economics and lab settings, multiple price list surveys are relatively
unusual in field settings. One concern in designing this study was that respondents would not
understand the MPL, rendering WTP estimates noisy or meaningless. We devoted substantial effort
to designing easily-understandable surveys and piloting the mail and phone instruments. Table
3 shows that the vast majority of returned mail surveys were filled out in a way that allows us to
construct a valid WTP. 14.7 percent of mail surveys were incomplete, usually because the respondent
  12
     For example, the density on [5, 9] is 2.49 percent of respondents per dollar, and the mass above $9 is 20.30 percent
of respondents. We assume that this 20.30 percent of respondents is distributed triangular on [9, ∞), with maximum
density of 2.49 percent per dollar at $9 decreasing to zero density above some upper bound. This gives an upper bound
of $25.34. The mean of WTP on [9, ∞) is thus $14.45. The mean WTP on (−∞ − 9] is determined by an analogous
calculation, given that the density on [−9, −5] is 1.27 percent per dollar and the mass below $-9 is 6.32 percent. We
will also present welfare estimates under alternative assumptions.



                                                           19
answered only one of the seven questions. 11.1 percent of phone respondents heard the introduction
to the MPL but terminated the interview before completing all three questions. Only 2.1 percent
of mail MPL responses were complete and internally inconsistent. Three mail MPL responses (0.3
percent) were both incomplete and internally inconsistent. Because the phone MPL was shortened
by not asking questions whose answers were implied by previous responses, there was no opportunity
to be internally inconsistent on the phone survey. These figures suggest that consumers generally
understood the MPL and gave meaningful answers.13


                          Table 3: Multiple Price List Response Statistics

                                                                             Mail    Phone
                          Percent incomplete                                 14.7     11.1
                          Percent complete and internally inconsistent       2.1      N/A
                          Percent complete and internally consistent         83.2     88.9




    In addition, WTP relates to other survey responses in expected ways. WTP is very strongly
correlated with the qualitative assessments of the HERs from questions 3-9 of the phone survey.
As would be expected, WTP is strongly positively correlated with reporting that future HERs
would save them more money (question 3), feeling inspired and proud (questions 6 and 7), agreeing
that HERs give useful information (question 8), and with positive additional comments about the
HERs (question 9).14 Also as expected, WTP is strongly negatively correlated with preferring
that HERs not have neighbor comparisons (question 5) and with feeling pressured (question 6).
The only result that we did not expect was that feeling guilty is positively associated with WTP,
but the relationship is not significant after conditioning on the customer’s expected savings, which
suggests that consumers do not like guilt per se — they like guilt only because it helps them reduce
expenditures. See Appendix Table A4 for formal results.
    As we detail below, 34 percent of respondents reported negative WTP. In Appendix Table A5,
we confirm that negative WTP is strongly associated with the same set of qualitative assessments in
expected ways. Furthermore, all six households that opted out and also responded to the survey had
   13
      We listened to about 25 of the early phone survey interviews. Because the MPL questions are unusual, respondents
would sometimes pause to process the first question but would then provide a considered answer to that and the next
two MPL questions.
   14
      456 phone survey respondents offered comments in response to our open-ended question 9. Of these, 170 were
positive, such as “They’re terrific. I like the way they’re laid out and easy to understand,” and “I think you did it
right. It has all the information owners need. I think it’s an excellent idea,” and “Detailed and a great thing. Helps
me monitor my usage.” 213 were neutral on the HERs, often including complaints about high energy prices. 73 were
negative, such as “I do not understand it; it does not make sense,” and “It’s a waste of paper. If they did not send
those reports maybe they could lower the delivery charges,” and “The money would be better spent reducing the cost
of energy rather than sending the reports.”



                                                         20
negative WTP. These strong correlations build confidence that both the MPL and the qualitative
questions elicited meaningful responses.
   87 households returned more than one mail survey with valid WTP. These could have been filled
out by different people in the same household, or by one person who wanted to ensure that his or
her response was received. Thus, one might expect responses to be correlated, but not perfectly
correlated. WTP is indeed very highly correlated across the two responses within these households,
implying that people understood the mail MPL well enough that responses were consistent within a
person or household. See Appendix Table A6 for formal results.
   277 households responded to both the phone and mail surveys, of which 224 have valid WTP
from both surveys and 259 responded to the belief update question on both surveys. Because the
phone survey called for skipping these questions if the respondent reported already returning the
mail survey, it seems likely that duplicate mail and phone responses came from different people in
the same household. Here again, one might thus expect responses to be correlated, but not perfectly
correlated. Appendix Table A6 confirms this: WTP, an indicator for negative WTP, and belief
updates are all strongly correlated within household across the mail and phone surveys. WTP and
answers to the belief update question within household are almost equally strongly correlated across
the mail and phone surveys, which suggests that the MPL questions to elicit WTP were no more
confusing or cognitively demanding than the belief update question, where responses were on the
familiar Likert scale. Across the 224 households with valid WTP from both surveys, the mean WTP
and the share of negative WTPs are almost exactly identical between the mail and phone surveys.
This implies that the survey formats did not generate differential biases in mean WTP.
   In general, these results suggest that respondents understood the MPLs and that the survey
instruments correctly elicited WTP. Here we address some remaining concerns about how well our
MPL measure elicited WTP.
   First, time discounting could affect WTP. For example, if respondents have annual discount rates
of six percent and thought that checks would arrive six months before the HERs’ benefits, their
WTP would be about three percent lower than if they thought that checks would arrive at the same
time as the benefits. Such a small difference would not be enough to meaningfully affect the welfare
calculations below. Conceptually, we want all components of welfare to be discounted to the time
at which the implementation costs are incurred for the second year of HERs. In practice, the checks
were sent in December 2015, although we intentionally did not say this on the survey because we
did not want to make time discounting salient.
   Second, WTP might be lower if paying out of pocket instead of trading off against an unexpected
windfall from a check. If this results from a behavioral bias, it is not obvious what WTP to respect
for welfare analysis.
   Third, WTP might be higher with per-month subscription pricing instead of a one-time check.
Because the monetary amounts are small and respondents pay for HERs from a future windfall
instead of from their existing funds, it is unlikely that credit constraints could explain a preference

                                                  21
for subscription payments. If WTP differs with subscription pricing vs. a one-time check due to a
behavioral bias such as focusing bias (Koszegi and Szeidl 2013), it is again not clear what WTP to
respect for welfare analysis.
   Fourth, Beauchamp et al. (2015) demonstrate a compromise effect in multiple price lists — that
is, that people tend to favor the middle option of an MPL. Because our phone MPL questions were
given sequentially, however, this concern does not apply to our phone MPL. As mentioned above,
the mean WTPs for the phone and mail MPLs are indistinguishable for households that responded
to both surveys, suggesting that the mail MPL is also unaffected by a compromise effect.
   Models of contextual inference, such as Kamenica (2008), suggest two reasons why our mail MPL
would not be biased by a compromise effect. First, there is little imperfect information: the MPL
asks simple questions about a familiar good and, unlike Beauchamp et al. (2015), there are no risky
prospects that could increase cognitive complexity. Second, consumers were unlikely to infer that
they are “middlebrow” relative to the bounds of the MPL: the distribution of responses suggests that
the first two questions had relatively obvious answers (very few people were willing to pay significant
amounts to avoid HERs) while the last two questions did not (many people were in the top two
WTP ranges).


IV     Empirical Analysis
In this section, we estimate parameters needed for the welfare analysis prescribed by Equation (8).
We begin by estimating the treatment effects on energy use ∆ẽ and on Central Hudson’s net revenues
∆Π. We then calculate average WTP, which will be our measure of the consumer welfare effects.
   Before estimating treatment effects and calculating WTP, it is important to clarify the target
population and time period for which we want the estimates to be relevant. The survey elicits
willingness-to-pay for the second year of HERs, and we thus want to evaluate the welfare effects of
the program’s second year in the population of households that would normally (in the absence of
our experiment) receive reports in that year. We denote this target population as Pn . As reported
above, 16 households had opted out before the second year began, and another 146 households were
dropped from the second year due to their survey responses. Pn excludes the former 16 but includes
the latter 146. We will also present alternative estimates valid for the smaller subset of households
that responded to the survey and did not opt out, which we denote as Ps .
   At times, constructing estimates for one or both of these target populations requires extrapolation,
for example extrapolating WTP from the subset of survey respondents to Pn . Our primary approach
in these cases is to use inverse probability weights (IPWs) to re-weight a sample to match a target on
observable characteristics. Specifically, we use probit regressions presented in Appendix Table A7 to
estimate Pr(Hi = 1|Xi ; P) using data from target population P, where Hi is an indicator for whether
                                                                 h               i−1
observation i is in the sample, and then construct sample weights P̂r(Hi = 1|Xi )    . Of course, we



                                                  22
are not able to correct for unobservable differences between sample and target populations, and we
discuss this issue further below.

IV.A        Effects on Energy Use
To estimate the effect of Home Energy Reports on energy use, we limit the sample to post-treatment
data and control for pre-treatment usage. The first HERs were generated on October 13th, 2014,
and first HERs had been generated for 61 percent of households by November 3rd, and 98 percent
by December 8th. Post-treatment is defined as any meter read after November 1, 2014.
       Yit is household i’s average natural gas use (in hundred cubic feet (ccf) per day) over the billing
period ending on date t, and Ti is an indicator for whether household i was randomly assigned to the
initial recipient group. We define Sst as indicators for whether date t falls within a group of months
s, which we will implement in two different ways below, and we allow treatment effect τs to vary by
s. We define the baseline period as the earliest 365 days in the data: July 1, 2013 through June 30,
2014. Ỹit is “baseline usage” — more specifically, the average daily usage from the meter read in
the baseline period that most closely corresponds to billing date t. For example, if t is October 14,
2015, Ỹit is the average daily usage from the meter read date closest to October 14, 2013. Because
meters are read on a very regular bi-monthly basis, we have fairly precise matches that help account
for seasonality.15 νm allows separate coefficients on Ỹit by the month of sample that contains date t,
and ωm is a vector of month of sample indicators. The estimating equation is:

                                               X
                                       Yit =        τs Sst Ti + νm Ỹit + ωm + εit .                                     (9)
                                                s

       Standard errors are clustered by household to allow for arbitrary serial correlation.
       In Figure 6, the thick grey line plots control group mean usage in each month of the sample,
illustrating considerable seasonality. Usage is lowest during the bimonthly billing periods ending in
July through October, and usage is about five times higher during the bimonthly billing periods
ending in November through June. The thin black line and confidence intervals are estimates of
treatment effects τs , where s here indexes each pair of months after the baseline period ends on
June 30, 2014. The several months of pre-treatment observations allow us to test for spurious pre-
treatment effects, and there are indeed zero statistical effects for meters read in July through October
2014. There are also zero statistical effects for meters read in November and December. We then
see strong seasonality in the treatment effects: as much as a 0.05 ccf per day reduction in the winter
periods, and zero statistical effects in any of the summer billing periods ending in July through
October. This seasonality is standard in natural gas energy conservation programs: households
  15
     Since natural gas is primarily used for heating, usage is highly seasonal, as illustrated in Figure 6. Thus, controlling
for seasonal fluctuations is crucial for improving statistical efficiency. Note that estimating in logs and transforming the
percent savings back into levels is not a consistent estimator of the level of average savings due to Jensen’s Inequality.
For this reason, Allcott (2011, 2015) and Allcott and Rogers (2014) estimate effects in levels.



                                                             23
cannot conserve much natural gas when they are not using much in the first place.

                                 Figure 6: Effects of Home Energy Reports on Natural Gas Use




                                                                                                    .05
                          6

                                            Treatment begins
           Control mean usage (ccf/day)
                                     5




                                                                                                    Treatment effect (ccf/day)
                              4




                                                                                                                       0
                        3




                                                                                                       -.05
           1      2




                                                                                                    -.1
                          0




                               Jul 2014      Jan 2015      Jul 2015        Jan 2016      Jul 2016
                                                        Month of meter read

                                             Control mean                      Treatment effect
                                             95% confidence interval


Notes: This figure presents estimates of Equation (9), allowing the treatment effect to vary across two-month
periods. Dependent variable is natural gas use in ccf/day, where “ccf” means hundred cubic feet. For context,
the average marginal retail price is $0.99/ccf during the program’s first winter and $0.80/ccf during the
program’s second winter. Observations weighted by billing period duration. Confidence intervals are based
on robust standard errors, clustered by household.


   Table 4 presents estimates of Equation (9). In all columns, we weight each observation of daily
usage by the duration of the billing period, which gives average treatment effects in ccf/day. In
columns 3 and 4, we multiply this duration weight by additional household weights for extrapolation,
as discussed below. As suggested by the graphical results in Figure 6, we estimate separate treatment
effects for four month groups s = {1, 2, 3, 4}: winter (November-June) of 2014-2015, summer (July-
October) of 2015, winter of 2015-2016, and summer of 2016, respectively. Column 1 presents intent-
to-treat effects: the average effect over time for households assigned to the treatment group.
   As discussed above, we are also interested in estimating the causal impact of the second year of
HERs on target populations Pn and Ps . Conceptually, the ideal way to estimate this would be to
compare households that were randomly assigned to receive a second year of HERs to households
that received only the first year, using a design similar to Allcott and Rogers (2014). This was not
feasible due to regulatory constraints — and, in any event, such estimates would not have been very


                                                                 24
precise at this sample size. Instead, we maintain a “no persistence” assumption, i.e. that HERs
sent during a given winter only affect energy use in that same winter. To our knowledge, there is
no published evidence on whether HERs have persistent effects on natural gas use, although our
assumption is consistent with the results of Allcott and Rogers (2014) for electricity.16 For a reason
that will become clear in Section V, this assumption turns out to have very little effect on our welfare
analysis, although we will also explore alternative assumptions.


                 Table 4: Effects of Home Energy Reports on Natural Gas Use

                                                   (1)             (2)         (3)             (4)
               Specification:                     OLS               IV          IV              IV
               Assigned to treatment ×           -0.0228         -0.0228     -0.0230         -0.0249
                 winter 2014-2015              (0.0117)*        (0.0117)*   (0.0118)*       (0.0128)*
               Assigned to treatment×           0.00611          0.00611     0.00618         0.00836
                 summer 2015                   (0.00807)        (0.00807)   (0.00809)       (0.00938)
               Assigned to treatment ×           -0.0264
                 winter 2015-2016             (0.0115)**
               Assigned to treatment×           0.00581
                 summer 2016                    (0.0112)
               2nd-year recipient ×                           -0.0269      -0.0271         -0.0315
                 winter 2015-2016                           (0.0117)**   (0.0117)**     (0.0121)***
               2nd-year recipient ×                          0.00592      0.00584         0.00399
                 summer 2016                                 (0.0114)     (0.0114)        (0.0110)
               Observations                   200,540         200,540     200,540         200,540
               R2                               0.853          0.853        0.853           0.859
               Weights                        Duration       Duration   Duration × Duration ×
                                                                        IPW for Pn IPW for Ps
Notes: This table presents estimates of Equation (9), using post-treatment data only. Dependent variable is
natural gas use in hundred cubic feet (ccf) per day. For context, control group sample mean usage is 2.07
ccf/day, and the average marginal retail price is $0.99/ccf during the program’s first winter and $0.80/ccf during
the program’s second winter. Columns 2-4 are IV regressions, where we instrument for 2nd-year recipient ×
winter 2015-2016 and 2nd-year recipient × summer 2016 with Assigned to treatment × winter 2015-2016 and
Assigned to treatment × summer 2016. Columns 1 and 2 weight by billing period duration. Column 3 weights
by duration times a household weight that matches the compliers to the target population Pn of treatment
group households that did not opt out before the second year. Column 4 weights by duration times a household
weight that matches the compliers to the target population Ps of treatment group households that did not
opt out and returned a survey with valid willingness-to-pay. Robust standard errors, clustered by household,
in parentheses. *, **, ***: statistically significant with 90, 95, and 99 percent confidence, respectively.



  16
     Allcott and Rogers (2014) find that the effects of the first four HERs quickly decay away, which is consistent with
the “no persistence” assumption. Allcott and Rogers (2014) also find persistent effects of HERs on electricity use after
discontinuing treatment, but this is in samples where most households had received 24 HERs over two years, which is
much more extensive than the first year or two of the Central Hudson program. The finding of zero effects in summer
2015 and summer 2016 is also consistent with the “no persistence” assumption, although certainly not dispositive.



                                                           25
       Define Ri as an indicator for whether household i was sent HERs in the program’s second year.
Ri = Ti , except that Ri = 0 for the 162 households that opted out or were dropped due to survey
responses. Column 2 presents results of an instrumental variables (IV) regression where instead of
the second year winter and summer treatment assignment indicators S3 Ti and S4 Ti in Equation (9),
we substitute S3 Ri and S4 Ri and then instrument with S3 Ti and S4 Ti . Under the “no persistence”
assumption, this IV regression delivers the local average treatment effects of the second year of HERs.
Because there are no always-takers (i.e., no households would receive HERs in the absence of the
program), Ri = 1 is an indicator for being a complier.
       In column 3, we re-weight compliers have the same observable characteristics as target population
Pn , the households that would normally receive reports in the program’s second year.17 In column
4, we re-weight compliers to match Ps , the subset of households that responded to the survey and
did not opt out.18 We use τ̂3 , the coefficients for winter 2015-2016, as our estimates of ∆ẽ for the
welfare analysis. To economize on notation, we will denote the winter 2015-2016 treatment effect τ3
simply as τ for the rest of the paper.
       The estimates are almost exactly the same in the first three columns: zero statistical effects in
the summers, and reductions of 0.026 to 0.027 ccf per day in winter 2015-2016. The re-weighting and
IV estimation hardly change the estimates because 98.4 percent of households are compliers, and
only 0.08 percent of households opted out. The estimated energy savings are slightly — although
not statistically significantly — larger in column 4, which suggests that survey respondents have
somewhat larger energy savings, perhaps because they are more engaged with the HERs. Control
group usage averages 2.35 ccf/day in winter 2015-2016, so the treatment effects in columns 1-3
amount to about 1.1 percent of counterfactual usage.19
       As noted briefly in Section I.D, Central Hudson sells natural gas using a decreasing block price
schedule. Variable retail prices have three components: a constant marginal natural gas supply
charge, which directly passes through Central Hudson’s cost to acquire gas from wholesale pipelines,
plus additional constant marginal fees and taxes, plus decreasing marginal “delivery charges.” The
only cost to Central Hudson that is variable with respect to a customer’s gas use is the gas acquisition
cost; the remaining variable charges help Central Hudson to recover fixed costs such as maintenance,
customer service, meter reading, and billing. The fact that variable prices are always higher than
the gas acquisition cost motivates our model’s inclusion of retailer net revenues Π. Because of
  17
      Specifically, we weight observations by billing period duration times a household weight, where the household weight
                                                                                                      h                 i−1
is the inverse predicted probability of being a complier for households in the population Pn , P̂r(Ri = 1|Xi ; Pn )         .
This uses probit estimates from column 9 of Appendix Table A7.
   18
      Specifically, we weight households by the ratio of the predicted probability of responding to the survey with valid
WTP to the predicted probability of being a complier, P̂r(H         i =1|Xi ;Pn )
                                                               P̂r(Ri =1|Xi ;Pn )
                                                                                  , where Hi is an indicator for whether the
household responded to the survey and has valid WTP. The numerator of this weight is predicted from estimates in
column 7 of Appendix Table A7, while the denominator is from column 9.
   19
      In percent terms, this is somewhat less than the typical effect of HERs on electricity use (Allcott 2015), but
Opower’s natural gas-focused programs typically have smaller percent effects than their electricity-focused programs.




                                                             26
decreasing block pricing, the effects of HERs on retail expenditures (or retailer net revenues) are
not simply the energy use effects multiplied by a constant retail price (or markup). Instead, we
must separately estimate regressions analogous to those in Table 4, except with different dependent
variables: daily average retail gas expenditures or daily average contribution to retailer net revenues
(i.e. the difference between retail expenditures and wholesale acquisition costs), respectively.
   Appendix Tables A9 and A10 present the full results. For winter 2015-2016, we estimate that the
average treatment effects on retail expenditures and retailer net revenues for target population Pn
(in column 3) are $-0.0202 per day and $-0.0104 per day, respectively. There were 243 days between
November 1, 2015 and June 30, 2016, so these estimates imply that HERs reduced retail expenditures
by $0.0202 × 243 ≈ $4.91 and reduced Central Hudson’s net revenues by $0.0104 × 243 ≈ $2.53 for
the average household in the program’s second year. For population Ps , the estimated average retail
expenditure reduction is $5.61, and the estimated average net revenue reduction is $2.84. These net
revenue effects are our estimates of ∆Π for welfare analysis.
   The average markup on the natural gas that households conserved as a result of receiving HERs,
i.e. the average marginal markup, is π̂e ≡ ∆Π/∆ẽ. Dividing the regression coefficients in each of the
four columns, the estimated average marginal markup is close to π̂e ≈ $0.38 per ccf.

IV.B     Willingness-to-Pay
Figure 7 presents the distribution of WTP, with separate bars for the mail and phone survey re-
sponses. Fewer households responded via mail, so all mail bars are shorter. Mail respondents also
have slightly higher willingness-to-pay, with relatively less density in the negative range and more
in the positive range. Across all respondents, 34 percent reported weakly negative WTP, although
most of that group is close to indifferent: 56 percent of negative WTPs are between $0 and $-1. This
dispersion in WTP, and in particular the result that a meaningful share of the population is willing
to pay to avoid being nudged, motivates the analysis of opt-in programs and targeting in Section VI.
   Table 5 presents correlates of WTP. To simplify the presentation of the many X covariates,
column 1 presents the post-Lasso estimator — that is, we use Lasso for variable selection, then
present the OLS regression of WTP on the selected covariates; see Belloni and Chernozhukov (2013).
The correlations are sensible: retirees have lower WTP, perhaps because of lower cash flow or less
environmental concern, as do renters, likely because they do not have the ability or incentive to make
energy-saving capital stock changes in response to HERs.
   To give intuition for how our re-weighting on observables using IPWs affects estimated WTP,
column 2 of Table 5 presents marginal effects of probit estimates of how the WTP predictors from
column 1 are associated with whether a household responds and has valid WTP. The fact that four
out of the six coefficients have the same signs in columns 1 vs. 2 suggests that survey responders
may be slightly positively selected on observables, although one mechanism that works against this
is that retirees have lower WTP but are more likely to respond to the survey.


                                                  27
                    Figure 7: Willingness-to-Pay for Home Energy Reports




                               15
                    Percent of respondents
                     5         0     10




                                             -9 or less [-9,-5]   [-5,-1]   [-1,0]   [0,1]    [1,5]   [5,9]   9 or more

                                                                            Mail             Phone


Notes: This figure presents the histogram of willingness-to-pay for four more Home Energy Reports, with all
survey responses weighted equally.


             Table 5: Correlates of WTP and Their Correlation with Response

                                                           (1)          (2)
                                                   Dependent variable:
                                                         WTP       Have WTP
                                                   ln(Income)
                                                        0.0603        0.0295
                                                        (0.244)      (0.0225)
                                 Retired                 -1.588        0.182
                                                       (0.812)* (0.0751)**
                                 Married                  0.683      -0.00765
                                                       (0.414)*      (0.0368)
                                 Rent                    -0.780       -0.114
                                                       (0.443)* (0.0399)***
                                 Single family home       0.322       0.0629
                                                        (0.424)     (0.0382)*
                                 Buyer score              0.342       0.0500
                                                        (0.219)    (0.0199)**
                                 Observations             2137         9439
Notes: Column 1 presents estimates from a post-Lasso estimator, in which OLS is run on covariates selected
by Lasso, using equally-weighted observations. For the Lasso estimates only, each variable is normalized to
standard deviation one. Column 2 presents marginal effects probit estimates from a model where the same
selected covariates are used to predict whether a household responds to a survey and has valid WTP. Robust
standard errors in parentheses. *, **, ***: statistically significant with 90, 95, and 99 percent confidence,
respectively.



                                                                              28
   Table 6 presents estimates of mean WTP, with standard errors in parentheses. Column 1 presents
unweighted estimates, while column 2 uses row-specific IPWs to weight each row’s sample to match
target population Pn on observables. Mail survey responses are divided in two different ways: house-
holds randomly assigned to the base vs. follow-up groups and households that actually returned the
first survey vs. the follow-up survey. The bottom row of Panel A reports that the unweighted mean
WTP for the 24.5 percent of households that returned the survey is $2.97. When re-weighted on
observables to match Pn , the mean falls to $2.81, confirming that respondents are slightly positively
selected on observables. We use this row of estimates as the base case for welfare analysis.

                        Table 6: Estimates of Mean Willingness-to-Pay

                                                             (1)              (2)
                                                         Unweighted         Weighted
                                         Panel A: Mean WTP
                   Mail                                     3.40               3.27
                     (standard error)                      (0.26)              (0.3)
                     Base group                             4.32               3.66
                                                           (0.57)             (0.62)
                     Follow-up group                        3.22               3.11
                                                           (0.29)             (0.33)
                     Returned first survey                  4.36               3.97
                                                           (0.35)             (0.42)
                     Returned follow-up survey              2.58               2.63
                                                           (0.37)             (0.41)
                   Phone                                    2.79               2.67
                                                           (0.18)             (0.19)
                   Combined                                 2.97               2.81
                                                           (0.16)             (0.16)

                                   Panel B: p-Values of Differences
                   Base vs. follow-up mail                       0.117        0.490
                   Returned first vs. returned follow-up mail    0.001        0.024
                   Mail vs. phone                                0.059        0.081
                     Base group vs. phone                        0.026        0.160
                     Follow-up group vs. phone                   0.213        0.224
                     Returned first survey vs. phone             0.000        0.004
                     Returned follow-up survey vs. phone         0.606        0.925
Notes: Samples exclude households that opted out before the program’s second year. Estimates in column 2
are weighted to match the target population of treatment group households that did not opt out before the
program’s second year.


   Table 6 shows that respondents to the first mail survey are positively selected. Unweighted mean
WTP is somewhat higher for the randomly-assigned base group vs. follow-up group ($4.32 vs. $3.22,
p ≈ 0.117), and mean WTP is much higher for households in either group that returned the first mail


                                                   29
survey vs. those that returned only the follow-up survey ($4.36 vs. $2.58, p ≈ 0.001). This positive
selection is almost mechanical: people who do not open and read HERs likely have WTP closer to
zero than people who do, and the former group would not have even seen the first mail survey.
    By contrast, the phone survey and follow-up mail survey, which was sent from a different outbound
address and was not part of an HER, are not subject to this form of positive selection. Indeed,
unweighted mean WTP is statistically and economically very similar for phone survey vs. follow-up
mail survey respondents ($2.79 vs. $2.58, p ≈ 0.606), and the weighted means are almost identical
($2.67 vs. $2.63, p ≈ 0.925). This implies that these two samples are either not selected from
non-respondents or that they have the same sample selection bias despite coming from two different
forms of contact (mail vs. phone). Appendix Table A11 presents suggestive evidence in favor of the
former explanation, showing that WTP does not vary statistically or economically for households
that responded on earlier vs. later phone survey attempts. Extending this logic suggests that phone
survey non-responders, who would in theory have responded on some eventual phone survey attempt,
would have similar mean WTP. (This argument draws on the intensive follow-up approach used by
DiNardo, McCrary, and Sanbonmatsu (2006) and others.) These results build confidence that we
can extrapolate from the phone survey and the follow-up mail survey to the target population Pn .
    If respondents to the first mail survey are positively selected on unobservables but the remainder
of mail and phone survey respondents are selected only on observables, then an unbiased estimate
of mean WTP for the full HER recipient population can be constructed by giving first mail survey
respondents weight of one (representing themselves only), and re-weighting phone and follow-up mail
respondents to match the remaining HER recipients on observables.20 We do this by repeating the
previous IPW exercise but fixing the weights of first mail survey respondents to one. This gives a
predicted population mean WTP of $2.68, not far from the full-sample weighted estimate of $2.81.
    While we do not take lightly the extrapolation from survey respondents to the full target popu-
lation Pn , this discussion suggests that we have several reasonable approaches that generate similar
results. If the reader believes that survey respondents are positively selected on unobservables, this
would only reinforce the paper’s main argument that traditional evaluation approaches overstate
welfare gains. Readers who remain concerned about either positive or negative selection can also
focus on the welfare evaluation for the subsample of survey respondents Ps .

IV.B.1      Measuring Moral Utility

Our model in Section I includes a moral utility term that does not appear explicitly in most models.
Does moral utility have any empirical content? And if so, are social comparisons a moral tax on
  20
     More precisely, denote S1 as the set of households that responded to the first mail survey, and denote Hi as an
indicator for whether household i responded to any survey and has valid WTP. Further denote P̂r(Hi |Xi ; Pn \S1 ) as the
conditional probability that a household in the population Pn excluding S1 has valid WTP. We can fit this probability
using estimates in column 8 of Appendix Table A7. If wi is WTP for household i and Nn = 9948 is the number        of
                                                                        P           P                    wi
households in target population Pn , the predicted target mean WTP is     i∈S1 wi +   i∈{Pn \S1 } P̂r(H |X ;P \S ) /Nn .
                                                                                                      i   i   n   1




                                                          30
“bad” behavior, as suggested by the concerns of Glaeser (2006) and others? The model generates
four predictions that allow us to shed light on these questions. Note that this section is not necessary
for our welfare calculations, and it requires additional speculative assumptions. While we believe
exploring moral utility is valuable to better understand how and why nudges like HERs are effective,
readers may choose to skip directly to Section V.
       First, if there is no moral utility, then a nudge that does not affect behavior will not affect
consumer welfare. To see this, recall from Equation (5) that consumer welfare change is ∆V =
−∆ẽ · pe + ∆f + ∆M . If there is no behavior change, then −∆ẽ · pe + ∆f = 0. If ∆M = 0 also,
then ∆V = 0, so WTP should be zero. 39 percent of respondents to question 3 on the phone survey
predicted that future HERs would not help them reduce their natural gas use “by even a small
amount.” These consumers have wide dispersion in WTP, with observations in all eight ranges and
standard deviation just as large as for respondents predicting non-zero savings. Moral utility, or
some other unmodeled factor unrelated to financial gain or consumption utility, is needed to explain
this non-zero WTP for consumers predicting zero behavior change.
       Second, if HERs act only as a moral tax, i.e. they increase the moral price µ but have no other
effect, then ∆V < 0. As we saw above, however, average WTP is positive. HERs almost certainly
have a meaningful informational component, and we saw above that 73 percent of phone survey
respondents agree that HERs give useful energy conservation information. Thus, it is clear that
HERs do not act only as a moral tax.
       Third, if HERs increase the moral price µ, this should tend to decrease moral utility more
for heavy users (or for relatively heavy users, in a formulation where moral utility depends on
consumption relative to the social norm). Intuitively, a moral price increase hurts heavy users
more because it accrues over more inframarginal units — just as an actual price change affects
expenditures more for high-demand consumers.21 Testing this requires us to measure ∆M . The
phone survey questions asking consumers if HERs made them feel inspired, pressured, proud, or
guilty were designed to help proxy for positive and negative aspects of moral utility. Define Ai as
a vector of four indicator variables capturing individual i’s responses to those four affect questions,
and define Ei as expected savings from question 3. We regress WTP wi on Ai and Ei in the sample
of phone survey respondents:


                                           wi = β0 + βE Ei + βA Ai + i .                                               (10)

       This is a rough empirical analogue to Equation (5), in which wi proxies for ∆V , βE Ei proxies for
  21
   This requires a bound on the usage decrease for heavier users relative to lighter users. Intuitively, if the existing
moral price was positive and heavy users decrease usage by much more than light users, heavy users could gain
moral utility relative to light users by reducing inframarginal moral utility losses. Formally, decompose ∆M into
                                             d∆M                d∆ẽ
∆M = ∆m − ∆µ · ẽ(θ1 ) − µ0 · ∆ẽ and take dẽ(θ 1)
                                                    = −∆µ − µ0 dẽ(θ 1)
                                                                        . We think of the moral price µ as being weakly
                             d∆M          d∆ẽ       ∆µ
positive. If µ0 > 0, then dẽ(θ1)
                                  < 0 if dẽ(θ1)
                                                 >   µ0
                                                        ,   i.e. if behavior change does not increase too much in ẽ(θ1 ). If
         d∆M
µ0 = 0, dẽ(θ1 ) < 0 holds unambiguously.



                                                               31
−∆ẽ · pe + ∆f (under the assumption that ∆f scales proportionally with savings −∆ẽ · pe ), and βA Ai
proxies for ∆Mi . See Appendix Table A12 for formal results. Estimates show that expected savings
Ei is strongly positively associated with WTP, while feeling inspired and pressured, respectively, are
positively and negatively conditionally associated with WTP with greater than 90 percent confidence.
Using these estimates, we fit ∆M
                              d i = β̂A Ai .
     The first row of Table 7 presents results of univariate regressions of seven different variables on
mean usage in winter 2014-2015, measured in ccf/day. In the context of the model, this usage variable
is ẽ(θ1 ). Column 1 reports that a one ccf/day increase in usage is unconditionally associated with
a $0.188 increase in WTP. Heavier users expect higher savings, are more likely to report negative
affect (feeling pressured or guilty), and are less likely to report positive affect (feeling inspired or
proud). Column 7 reports that heavier usage is associated with reduced moral utility ∆M      d i . This
suggests that the HERs do increase µ. Results are similar when regressing the same outcomes on
baseline usage instead of post-treatment usage.
   In Section I, we remarked that our model nests a model in which moral utility depends on the
perceived social norm s: M = ms − µ(e − s). The variable “Mean comparison” is an empirical
analogue of (e − s): it is the average difference between own natural gas usage and mean neighbor
usage on the first winter of HERs. Households with higher “Mean comparison” were informed that
they were relatively heavy users. Substituting (e − s) for e in the model generates the analogous
prediction that if ∆µ > 0, then (e − s) should be negatively correlated with ∆M . The second row of
Table 7 confirms that this is the case empirically: relatively heavier users report more negative affect,
less positive affect, and have lower fitted moral utility ∆M
                                                          d i . Results are similar when regressing the
same outcomes on (e − s) from only the first HER.

                                 Table 7: Measuring Moral Utility

                        (1)         (2)          (3)            (4)            (5)            (6)            (7)
                                 Expected
                       WTP        savings      Inspired       Pressured        Proud         Guilty          ∆M
                                                                                                             d
 Mean usage            0.188       0.658        -0.0130        0.0128         -0.0411        0.0180        -0.0417
                    (0.0773)**   (0.257)**   (0.00478)***   (0.00366)***   (0.00451)***   (0.00401)***   (0.0156)***

 Mean comparison         0.246         1.208         -0.0369         0.0364         -0.0974         0.0402   -0.120
                        (0.157)      (0.547)** (0.00985)*** (0.00792)*** (0.0108)*** (0.00830)*** (0.0316)***
Notes: This table presents results of univariate regressions of the dependent variable in each column on the
independent variable in each row. “Mean usage” is mean natural gas usage in ccf/day in winter 2014-2015.
“Mean comparison” is the average difference (in 1000s of ccf) between own natural gas usage and mean
neighbor usage on the HERs in winter 2014-2015. Observations are weighted to match the target population
of treatment group households that did not opt out before the program’s second year. Robust standard errors
in parentheses. *, **, ***: statistically significant with 90, 95, and 99 percent confidence, respectively.

   We also find that WTP is $0.69 lower (p ≈ 0.076) for the randomly-assigned “Comparison” survey
version that reminds people that the HERs compare their energy use to their neighbors’ use. This is
consistent with the hypothesis that social comparisons are the part of the HERs that reduce moral

                                                   32
utility. The “Environmental” version does not statistically significantly affect WTP. See Appendix
Table A13 for formal results.
    A fourth prediction is that if ∆µ > 0 but ∆m = 0, then ∆M < 0. In words, if a nudge
increases the moral price but provides no other utility windfall, then it will decrease moral utility.
Alternatively, however, a nudge can both increase the moral price and provide some additional utility
∆m. In fact, the mean ∆M d i fitted from above is $0.95, because as shown in Figure 5, more people
reported positive affect than negative affect. This suggests that ∆m > 0.
    In simple terms, these results show that heavier users are less likely to say that the HERs make
them feel good, and more likely to say that the HERs make them feel bad. In the context of our
model, this means that HERs do seem to increase the “moral price” of energy use. This would seem
to be consistent with Glaeser’s (2006) concern. However, more people report positive affect than
negative affect, and overall average WTP is positive. In the context of our model, this means that
HERs are not only a moral tax. Instead, they also provide information and a positive affect windfall
∆m > 0.


V     Welfare
In this section, we use the empirical estimates of energy savings and WTP to calibrate the wel-
fare formula from Equation (8). Before doing this, we make explicit our key revealed preference
assumption and calibrate the implementation cost and externality parameters.

V.A       Revealed Preference Assumption
Our key assumption is that consumer i’s WTP wi equals the consumer welfare change ∆Vi from the
second year of the HER program:


                                             ∆Vi = wi .                                          (11)

    This assumption is only plausible in situations where consumers are well-informed about what the
nudge is and, if the nudge addresses behavioral biases, are “sophisticated” about those biases. For
example, the assumption would not hold for naive hyperbolic discounters evaluating a commitment
device or for individuals who are uninformed about the benefits and costs of a choice that is being
nudged. On the other hand, the assumption would hold for people evaluating information in a rational
information acquisition model or for sophisticated hyperbolic discounters evaluating a commitment
device.
    We chose HERs as our application because we believe that this assumption is particularly plau-
sible in this context. After receiving several HERs, each of which is different but follows a similar
structure, consumers are well-informed about what HERs are and have a good sense of how future
HERs would further inform or motivate them. Unlike other settings where we might expect experts

                                                 33
to be better informed about welfare (see, e.g., Bronnenberg et al. (2015)), HER customers are the
best equipped to know the personal value they receive from the reports.22
       As noted above, because WTP wi is for the second year of HERs, our welfare analysis is relevant
only to the program’s second year. As discussed in Section II, the second year is particularly relevant
to study.

V.B        Implementation Cost and Externality Parameters
The welfare analysis requires two additional parameters: implementation cost Cn and externality φe .
       We calculate nudge implementation cost Cn using an accounting analysis detailed in Appendix
D.B. The per-household marginal cost of the program’s second year is cn ≈ $2.06, almost entirely
for printing and mailing HERs. Opower and Central Hudson also incur an estimated $16,339 per
year in costs to manage ongoing programs. Central Hudson has three HER programs in addition to
the one we study, for a total of four programs and about 100,000 recipient households.23 Some of
the ongoing management costs are effectively fixed costs per program, whereas others do not depend
on the number of programs. In our primary estimates, we allocate the $16,339 equally to each of
Central Hudson’s 100,000 recipient households, giving Fn /P ≈ $0.16/household. We also present an
alternative calculation in which these costs are allocated equally to each of the four programs, giving
Fn ≈ $4085 per program. The number of households to be nudged in our program’s second year (i.e.
Pn , the set of recipient households that did not opt out) is P = 9948. This would give Fn /P ≈ $0.41
per household in the program we study.
       To calculate externality φe , we include local air pollution and carbon dioxide externalities from
natural gas combustion as well as methane externalities from the natural gas supply chain. For
local air pollutants, we consider nitrogen oxides, particulate matter, and sulfur dioxide. We use
the EPA (1995) AP-42 emission factors and marginal damages from Holland et al. (2015), whose
key assumptions are a $6 million value of a statistical life and a fine particulate dose response
function from Pope et al. (2002). Holland et al. provided us with county-specific marginal damages
relevant for ground-level emissions (i.e., homes instead of power plant smokestacks), and we take
the mean across counties, weighting by the number of households in the HER experiment. Local
air pollutant damages amount to $0.045/ccf. Using results from the U.S. Government Interagency
Working Group on the Social Cost of Carbon (2013), we use a $40 social cost of carbon, which
translates to $0.264/ccf damages from natural gas combustion. Drawing on Howarth et al. (2012)
  22
      Appendix D.A provides additional evidence on two biases that might be relevant in this context. There is suggestive
evidence that consumers overestimate the energy savings caused by HERs, which could bias WTP upward relative to
the true ∆Vi , thus causing our calculation to overstate welfare gains. There is also suggestive evidence that consumers
are overconfident, by which we mean that they tend to underestimate their own energy use before the arrival of the
first HER. However, there is no evidence that this optimism affects WTP.
   23
      Different programs are well-defined in the sense that they have different specific customer sub-populations in
recipient and control groups. Different programs start at different times, may focus on different fuels (e.g., households
that purchase electricity but not natural gas), and have custom-designed elements on the HERs.



                                                           34
and Abrahams et al. (2015), we assume that three percent of natural gas escapes during drilling
and transportation before arriving in homes. We translate this to carbon dioxide equivalents using
a methane global warming potential of 34 from the Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change
(Myhre et al. 2013), giving an additional $0.10/ccf externality. Thus, the total environmental
externality φe is $0.045+$0.264+$0.10≈$0.41 per ccf.
       As the welfare formulas from Section I show, the social welfare effects of energy conservation that
the consumer does not internalize are the retailer net revenue and externality effects: ∆Π − φe ∆ẽ.
Using that π̂e ≡ ∆Π/∆ẽ, this can also be written as the average pricing distortion (which is the
average marginal markup minus the environmental externality) times the amount of conservation:
(π̂e − φe )∆ẽ. Intuitively, we can think of energy conservation as reducing environmental externalities
by amount φe ∆ẽ, but also imposing a pecuniary externality π̂e ∆ẽ on other consumers, who now
must contribute more to the retailer’s fixed cost recovery.24 This insight is not new (see Davis
and Muehlegger (2010)), and Central Hudson’s pricing structure is not unusual: Central Hudson’s
retail markup is closely comparable to the 40 percent average markup for residential and commercial
natural gas consumers nationwide, as calculated by Davis and Muehlegger (2010).25
       For many readers, the intuitive case is that π̂e − φe < 0, so the average marginal energy price is
below social marginal cost, and energy conservation benefits others in society. On the other hand,
if π̂e − φe > 0, then the energy price is actually above social marginal cost, and energy conservation
imposes a net burden on others in society. If π̂e − φe = 0, then the energy price is not distorted
on average. In the latter case, Equation (8) shows that the nudge’s welfare effect is just the private
benefits net of the nudge implementation cost.
       We estimated in Section IV.A that the average markup on natural gas conserved by HERs was
approximately π̂e ≈ $0.38. This implies that π̂e − φe ≈ $-0.03/ccf, so the average marginal retail
gas price happens to be very close to social marginal cost. As Davis and Muehlegger (2010) point
out, although this is sensitive to the social cost of carbon and other externality damage parameters,
it significantly diminishes the argument that energy efficiency programs are needed as second best
substitutes for getting prices right. Instead, natural gas conservation programs in this context are
justified primarily to the extent that they address market failures such as imperfect information or
otherwise increase consumer welfare. Welfare gains from the nudge will need to be driven primarily
  24
      Central Hudson’s profits are regulated by the New York Public Service Commission. If profits fall short of the
allowed amount, Central Hudson is allowed to make this up in future years through higher retail prices. In our model
and welfare estimates, we directly count retailer net revenues. Given that profit is in fact held constant by varying
future retail prices, and this price variation in turn generates deadweight loss, the true welfare effects of HERs are
lower (higher) than our estimates if future marginal retail prices are higher (lower) than marginal social cost.
   25
      Because the extensive margin (natural gas connections) is highly inelastic, while the intensive margin (natural gas
use) is more moderately inelastic, the Ramsey-Boiteux framework suggests that it would be more economically efficient
to pass through fixed costs as fixed monthly charges and set constant marginal prices. There are various justifications
for amortizing fixed costs into marginal prices using either linear pricing or decreasing block pricing, including horizontal
and vertical equity (Borenstein and Davis 2012), and the allocative impact of this distortion is mitigated if consumers
respond to average instead of marginal prices (Ito 2014). Regardless of whether this rate structure is desirable, retailer
net revenue effects ∆Π still enter the welfare calculation.



                                                             35
by private gains to nudge recipients rather than by uninternalized social benefits.
   This calculation also helps to understand why the “no persistence” assumption is relatively
innocuous: the welfare estimates will not be very sensitive to energy savings estimates because
estimated energy savings are almost irrelevant for the welfare calculation. As long as the average
marginal markup π̂e approximately equals the externality φe , any changes in ∆ẽ will affect the
externality reduction φe ∆ẽ and retailer net revenues π̂e ∆ẽ by approximately offsetting amounts.

V.C     Results
Table 8 presents the welfare analysis of the program’s second year. Columns 1 and 2 present results
after reweighting the samples to match Pn , the target population of treatment group households that
did not opt out before the program’s second year. These columns use energy savings from column
3 of Table 4 and WTP from column 2 of Table 6. Columns 3 and 4 present results for Ps , the
target population of MPL respondents with valid WTP that did not opt out. These columns use
energy savings from column 4 of Table 4 and WTP from column 1 of Table 6. Columns 1 and 2 are
noteworthy because they evaluate the full policy, while Columns 3 and 4 are noteworthy because we
do not have to re-weight observations in calculating average WTP.
    Panel A presents benefits and costs other than consumer welfare. For target population Pn ,
the conservation induced by HERs reduces environmental externalities by $2.71 per household and
decreases Central Hudson’s net revenues by $2.53 per household. The social welfare effect excluding
consumer welfare is externality reduction minus retailer net revenue loss minus implementation cost,
or $2.71-$2.53-$2.22 ≈ $-2.04 for target population Pn .
   Panel B completes the social welfare estimates by adding in WTP as the measure of consumer
welfare gain. Columns 1 and 3 present WTP, while columns 2 and 4 present the resulting social
welfare estimate using Equation (8). The first row presents the base case. WTP is $2.81 and $2.97
for target populations Pn and Ps , respectively, as we found in Table 6. The social welfare effects are
$0.77 and $1.06 per household for the full population and for MPL respondents, respectively.
   The multiple price list survey allows us to bound each respondent’s WTP, but we made particular
assumptions to go from bounds to point estimates. The next four rows of Panel B consider sensitivity
to alternative assumptions. The second, third, and fourth rows of Panel B implement alternative
assumptions for mean WTP at the endpoints of the MPL (i.e., mean WTP for those consumers with
WTP below -$9 or above $9). The second row assumes a uniform distribution of WTP beyond the
endpoints, with density equal to the density on the adjacent WTP bin. This gives mean WTPs of
$13.08 and -$11.48 for the upper and lower endpoints, respectively. The next two rows use $12 or $15
as heuristic benchmarks. All three of these alternative assumptions give lower mean WTP, so less
positive welfare effects. Because only 27 percent of respondents have WTP at one of the endpoints,
this alone does not significantly change mean WTP. The fifth row of Panel B uses the bounds of
each interval closest to zero—for example, all consumers with WTP between $-5 and $-1 are assigned
WTP = $-1.


                                                  36
       The next two rows of Panel B consider alternative adjustments for survey non-response when
extrapolating WTP to the full HER recipient population. In Section IV.B, we speculated that if
there is a non-response bias, it is likely positive. Under the extreme assumption that non-respondents
have zero WTP, mean WTP would be $0.60, and welfare effects would be $-1.44 per HER recipient.
We view this as an unrealistically conservative assumption.26 When we assume that mean WTP is
$2.68, as calculated by the alternative weighting procedure in which respondents to the first mail
survey have weights fixed to one, welfare gains are $0.64 per recipient.

           Table 8: Social Welfare Effects of a Second Year of Home Energy Reports

                                                    (1)         (2)     (3)           (4)
         Target population:                       All HER Recipients   MPL Respondents
                Panel A: Benefits and Costs Other than Consumer Welfare ($/recipient)
         Externality reduction                           2.71                 3.15
         (-) Retailer net revenue loss                   2.53                 2.84
         (-) Implementation cost                         2.22                 2.22
         (=) ∆Welfare, excluding consumer welfare       -2.04                -1.92

                    Panel B: Mean WTP and Social Welfare Effect ($/recipient)
      Assumption                                    Mean WTP ∆Welfare Mean WTP ∆Welfare
      Base case                                         2.81          0.77        2.97         1.06
      Uniform WTP at MPL endpoints                      2.59         0.55         2.74         0.82
      WTP = {-12,12} at MPL endpoints                   2.34         0.30         2.48         0.56
      WTP = {-15,15} at MPL endpoints                   2.76         0.72         2.92         1.01
      WTP bounds closest to zero                        1.61         -0.43        1.70        -0.21
      Non-respondents have WTP = 0                      0.60         -1.44
      Weight = 1 for first mail respondents             2.68         0.64
      Fixed costs equally allocated                     2.81         0.53         2.97         0.81
      Gas savings 100% larger                           2.81         0.95         2.97         1.36
Notes: Columns 1 and 2 present results after reweighting the samples to match Pn , the target population of
treatment group households that did not opt out before the program’s second year. These columns use energy
savings from column 3 of Table 4, retailer net revenue loss from column 3 of Appendix Table A10, and WTP
from column 2 of Table 6. Columns 3 and 4 present results for Ps , the target population of MPL respondents
that did not opt out. These columns use energy savings from column 4 of Table 4, retailer net revenue loss
from column 4 of Table A10, and WTP from column 1 of Table 6. Using Equation (8), ∆Welfare in columns
2 and 4 is consumer welfare gain + externality reduction - retailer net revenue loss - implementation cost,
where Mean WTP in columns 1 and 3 is our measure of the consumer welfare gain.


       The next row uses the higher average implementation cost Cn if the fixed costs of continuing
programs are allocated equally to each of Central Hudson’s four ongoing programs. This penalizes
small programs and benefits large ones. While this cost allocation assumption is likely too extreme,
  26
    Although EPA (2006) reports that 44 percent of unsolicited mail is not read, HERs arrive in utility branded
envelopes. Since utilities typically send bills or other important communications, open rates are likely to be much
higher than standard unsolicited mail. Just under five percent of phone survey respondents reported not remembering
HERs.


                                                        37
it’s certainly true that at some point an HER program would not be large enough to generate enough
social surplus to outweigh the program-level fixed costs. If implementation costs were 35 percent
higher, externality damages were 29 percent lower, or WTP were 28 percent lower, the base case
social welfare point estimate would be negative.
   Because (π̂e −φe ) ≈ 0, i.e. average marginal retail prices are very close to true social marginal cost,
the social welfare effect depends very little on estimated energy savings ∆ẽ. Thus, both sampling
error in our energy savings estimates and the “no persistence” assumption make little difference in
our welfare estimates. The final row in Panel B of Table 8 presents an alternative scenario where
we double both the externality reduction and retailer net revenue loss assumptions. This affects the
welfare estimates for the two target populations by $0.18 and $0.30.
   We can also be more precise about the impact of sampling error. Applying the Delta method
to the energy savings estimates in Table 4, the 95 percent confidence interval on welfare effects for
                          ˆ ) · 243 · (φe − π̂e ) ≈ $0.16 in either direction, where τ refers to the
target Pn extends 1.96 · SE(τ
winter 2015-2016 treatment effect (in ccf/day) and 243 is the number of days in winter 2015-2016.
WTP estimates in Table 6 are relatively precisely estimated, with a 95 percent confidence interval
that extends $0.31 in either direction for both the weighted and unweighted estimates.
   Figure 8 illustrates our base case welfare analysis, weighted for the HER recipient population.
The demand curve is drawn to be consistent with the assumptions used to code WTP from the
MPL responses: WTP is distributed triangular on the highest and lowest ranges and uniform on
the six interior ranges of the MPL. “Expected marginal social cost” of the nudge, i.e. the marginal
implementation cost net of the average uninternalized social benefit cn − 243τ̂ (π̂e − φe ), is approx-
imately $1.88 per household. The net social welfare effect is the area between the demand curve
and expected marginal social cost, i.e. the lightly shaded area minus the darkly shaded area, minus
fixed cost Fn . Leaving aside the variation in ∆ẽ across households, which is less relevant because
(π̂e − φe ) ≈ 0, the social welfare effect trades off the gains to the 41 percent of consumers willing
to pay more than $1.88 with the losses to the 59 percent of consumers that are not. The consumer
surplus in the lightly shaded area is large, and 20 percent of people are willing to pay at least $9,
which is 4.8 times larger than expected marginal social cost. This figure motivates the opt-in and
targeting analysis in Section VI: perhaps the nudge policy can be modified to avoid the loss in the
darkly shaded area.




                                                   38
                             Figure 8: Social Welfare Analysis: Graphical


                  20


                                 Home Energy Report demand curve
                  10




                                                                   Expected marginal social cost
              $
                  0
                  -10
                  -20




                        0           .2               .4             .6                 .8               1
                                                    Share of population

                                              Welfare gain                 Welfare loss


Notes: This figure presents a graphical version of the base case welfare analysis weighted for target population
of HER recipients that did not opt out before the program’s second year, corresponding to columns 1 and 2
of Table 8.




V.D        Discussion: Why Measuring Consumer Welfare Matters
Using the consumer welfare formula in Equation (5), the difference between mean WTP ($2.81) and
retail energy expenditure savings ($4.91) implies that consumers in population Pn incur an average of
$2.10 in net utility costs, which we call “non-energy costs” for shorthand.27 This benefit/cost ratio
of $4.91/$2.10 ≈ 2.34 implies that leaving aside implementation costs Cn , HERs generate highly
privately-beneficial energy savings for recipients. However, these energy savings do not accrue to
consumers for free.
       This is important because HERs and other behavior-based energy efficiency programs are evalu-
ated for regulatory compliance purposes using institutionalized program evaluation approaches that
ignore non-energy costs. Specifically, these programs are evaluated using what’s called a “program
  27
    Natural gas prices dropped sharply in April 2015, after most of the winter 2014-2015 heating season but before our
surveys were conducted. Instead of using realized savings, we could instead use consumers’ predictions of future retail
energy cost savings from the phone survey. Mean expected savings is larger than the observed $4.91, so this would
imply larger non-energy costs, which further reinforces our arguments in this section.


                                                          39
administrator cost” metric, which considers energy savings and program implementation costs but
does not consider non-energy costs incurred by consumers. In other words, the energy industry
evaluates HERs and similar behavior-based programs as if they allow consumers to somehow achieve
energy savings with no effort or cost whatsoever. In the context of a smoking cessation program,
this is analogous to assuming that the only effect on consumer welfare is to save people money on
buying cigarettes.
   How does ignoring non-energy costs affect the social welfare calculation in Table 8? If we set
∆V ≈ $4.91, the welfare gain is $2.87 per recipient — 3.7 times larger than our base case estimate
of $0.77 per household. In other contexts, it is easy to imagine that this could change whether or
not a nudge is determined to be welfare enhancing.
   Evaluating only the program’s second year leaves open the question of whether the full program
(from beginning to end) is welfare enhancing. In particular, there are fixed costs to begin a program
that do not enter Fn , the fixed cost of continuing an existing program. Furthermore, there have
been many different Home Energy Report programs with very different energy savings effects. In
Appendix D.C, we provide a speculative, back-of-the envelope calculation under the assumptions
that Opower’s price reflects the cost of a full program and that non-energy costs are $2.10/$4.91
≈ 43% of total retail energy savings. We consider the full life of a typical Opower program, using
energy savings estimates from Allcott and Rogers (2014). Our estimates suggest that the typical full
program is welfare enhancing, but ignoring non-energy costs overstates welfare gains by a factor of
two.
   Given that Home Energy Reports have been sent to millions of households around the world,
these program evaluation discrepancies add up very quickly. Appendix D.C extends our speculative
calculation to show that when we aggregate over all the energy saved through HERs as of January
2017, the standard program evaluation approach (ignoring non-energy costs) suggests social welfare
gains of $1.22 billion. Accounting for our estimate of non-energy costs decreases that estimate to
$600 million. Thus, we estimate that failing to account for non-energy costs causes the social value
of these nudges to be overstated by $620 million.


VI     Allocating Nudges: Opt-In vs. Smart Defaults
Figure 7 shows that WTP for HERs is highly heterogeneous. The effect of HERs on energy use
may be heterogeneous as well. Can better allocation of this nudge improve its social welfare effects?
We consider two approaches: an opt-in program and a machine learning algorithm that targets the
nudge to maximize social welfare.




                                                 40
VI.A     Opt-In Programs
A natural reaction to heterogeneous valuations of a good or service is that it should be priced at
social marginal cost, and consumers should be allowed to buy or not buy as they wish. We begin by
evaluating that idea. For simplicity, we assume that the average energy savings of consumers that
opt into HERs equals the estimated average treatment effect τ̂3 from Table 4. We then set the price
at expected social marginal cost, i.e. cn − 243τ̂ (π̂e − φe ) ≈ $1.88.
   Table 9 presents results. Column 1 presents the percent of population receiving HERs, while
Columns 2-4 present the mean natural gas use change, WTP, and social welfare change per recipient
household, respectively. Column 5 presents the aggregate social welfare effect across all 19,929
households, which is (column 1)/100 × (column 4) × (19,929/1000). Row 1 presents the existing
opt-out program as a benchmark.
   Row 2 presents the welfare effects of an opt-in program assuming zero inertia — that is, we
assume that all consumers opt into the second year of HERs if and only if they are willing to pay
more than the $1.88 price. Under this assumption, 41 percent of consumers opt in, and they have
mean WTP of $9.78. The total social welfare gain in column 5 is eight times larger than for the
existing program, even though fewer households are included. This dramatic improvement arises
because a significant number of consumers with low or negative WTP no longer are nudged.
   Opower has run one opt-in program in the U.S., at a large utility called American Electric Power
in Ohio. They aggressively marketed free HERs to 250,000 customers, of whom only 1.5 percent opted
in. Although the Ohio population could be different, the low opt-in rate suggests that default effects
are very powerful in this context. In other words, even though there are many people who value the
nudge at more than its price, switching costs or other forms of inertia prevent most of them from
opting in. Given results from Madrian and Shea (2001), Kling et al. (2012), Handel (2013), Ericson
(2014), and others showing the power of inertia in high-stakes choices such as retirement savings
plans and health insurance, it is very plausible that inertia could be powerful in low-stakes decisions
such as whether to receive Home Energy Reports. This implies that the zero inertia assumption in
row 2 is unrealistic.
   We explore the importance of inertia under three assumptions. First, 1.5 percent of consumers
opt in, as in Ohio. Second, consumers opt in if and only if their WTP is larger than a switching
cost, so the 1.5 percent that opt in will be drawn from the right tail of the WTP distribution. Third,
the switching cost is not welfare-relevant — in other words, an implied switching cost arises from
factors such as imperfect information, not because of a material transaction cost. These latter two
assumptions give a best-case scenario for welfare gains for a given switching cost.
   Row 3 shows that even under this best-case scenario, the welfare gains from an opt-in program
are $5,100 — one-third less than for the current opt-out program in row 1. Even though mean
WTP of nudge recipients is high, substantial potential consumer welfare gains are lost because many
high-WTP consumers do not opt in. Furthermore, the fixed implementation cost Fn is spread across


                                                   41
a small number of recipients.

                          Table 9: Opt-In and Smart Defaults: Results

                                            (1)             (2)            (3)        (4)         (5)
                                       Percent of       Mean gas          Mean      Welfare     Total
                                        population      use change        WTP        effect    welfare
                                         receiving         (ccf/           ($/        ($/       effect
     Row Policy                            HERs       recipient-day) recipient) recipient) ($000s)
     1     Existing opt-out program         50            -0.027           2.81       0.77        7.7
     2     Opt-in; zero switching cost      41            -0.027           9.78       7.42       60.7
     3     Opt-in; 1.5% opt-in rate         1.5           -0.027           24.5      16.93        5.1
     4     Targeted on energy savings       50            -0.050           3.08       1.19       11.9
     5     Targeted on WTP                  50            -0.040           3.30       1.34       13.4
     6     Targeted on welfare              50            -0.048           3.42       1.51       15.1
Notes: Column 5 presents the aggregate social welfare effect across all 19,929 households, which is (column
1)/100 × (column 4) × (19,929/1000).


VI.B     Targeted Opt-Out Programs
The importance of both heterogeneity and inertia suggests a different policy approach: an opt-out
program that targets consumers who would generate large welfare gains and excludes consumers who
would not.
   Formally, we want to derive a statistical decision rule δ : X → {0, 1} that maps household
covariates from space X to treatment assignment {0, 1} in order to maximize objective L(δ). We hold
the number of recipient households constant at 50 percent of the 19,929-household population and
compare the results of maximizing three different objectives: energy conservation, where Lτ (δτ ) =
P                                                                 P
  i −τi δτ (Xi ), consumer welfare (i.e. WTP), where LCW (δCW ) =   i wi δCW (Xi ), and social welfare,
                           P
where LW (δW ) = −Fn + i (wi + (π̂e − φe )τi − cn ) δW (Xi ).
   This is a standard prediction problem, in which additional flexibility in the functional form of
δ(Xi ) allows more precise in-sample fit but worsens out-of-sample performance. Intuitively, if we
predict WTP w using sufficiently flexible functions of X, we can appear to perfectly predict WTP,
allowing a targeting algorithm that appears to perfectly allocate the nudge to high-WTP consumers
in one sample but would perform poorly in another sample. To avoid such overfitting, we use cross-
validation. Specifically, we take the following steps.
   First, we randomly partition the sample of 19,929 households into five subsamples of equal size.
For each subsample (the test set), we fit machine learning algorithms that predict ŵ|X i and τ̂ |X i
using the other four subsamples (the training set), and project ŵ|X i and τ̂ |X i back into the test
set. This gives out-of-sample predictions of ŵ|X i and τ̂ |X i for all observations.
   In that first step, we use several different algorithms to predict ŵ|X i and τ̂ |X i , choosing the ones
that deliver the highest values of objectives LCW and Lτ , respectively, as evaluated in the third step


                                                    42
described below. To predict ŵ|X i , we use elastic nets (Zou and Hastie 2005), as this delivers slightly
higher LCW than ridge regression and random forests. To predict τ̂ |X i , we use gradient forests
(Athey, Tibshirani, and Wager 2017), as this delivers significantly higher Lτ than the approach of
Imai and Strauss (2013). We tuned the algorithms separately within each training set. Appendix
Table A17 presents performance statistics and optimal tuning parameters for the machine learning
algorithms that we tested.
   Second, we set δτ , δCW , and δW equal to 1 for the halves of the population with above-median
values of predicted savings −τ̂ |X i , WTP ŵ|X i , and welfare gain ŵ|X i + (π̂e − φe )τ̂ |X i , respectively.
These three sets of households maximize the predicted values of the three objectives Lτ , LCW , and
LW , respectively, subject to the constraint that half of households are treated.
   Third, we evaluate the performance of the targeting algorithms by estimating average WTP and
the winter 2015-2016 treatment effect τ̂ using only the subsamples with δT , δCW , and δW equal to 1.
   Rows 4-6 present results when maximizing energy savings, WTP, and welfare, respectively. Com-
paring rows 1 vs. 6 of column 4 shows that targeting on welfare can approximately double the
program’s total welfare gains, moving from $0.77 to $1.51 per recipient. Interestingly, there is lim-
ited tradeoff when targeting on the different objectives: maximizing energy savings also increases
average WTP, and vice-versa.
   To help interpret the results of the prediction algorithms, Figure 9 presents differences in mean
X variables (normalized into standard deviations) between targeted and non-targeted households
for each of the three maximands in rows 4-6. The figure shows that all three algorithms target
similar households: for most variables, all three bars extend in the same direction. This explains
why there is limited tradeoff between maximizing WTP and maximizing energy savings. The fact
that WTP and energy savings are positively correlated with the same observables implies that WTP
and energy savings are themselves positively correlated, unless they have strong opposite correlations
with unobservables.
   A positive correlation between WTP and energy savings has two interesting implications. First,
this is again consistent with the idea that the informational channel outweighs the moral tax channel
in generating behavior change: as discussed in Section IV.B.1, if the moral tax channel were more
active, the households with the largest behavior change would likely have the lowest WTP. Second, at
least in this population, existing policies such as Energy Efficiency Portfolio Standards that encourage
utilities to target households that generate the largest energy savings also tend to encourage targeting
that is beneficial from a social welfare perspective. Of course, this result is purely accidental —
policies would ideally be written to explicitly encourage targeting to maximize welfare.
   When comparing opt-in and targeted opt-out policies, the typical comparative static is that more
consumer inertia favors a targeted policy, while poor ability to predict welfare favors an opt-in policy.
The remarkable feature of these results is that even with generous assumptions about the welfare
gains from an opt-in policy, inertia is such a large barrier that a targeted opt-out policy is preferred.



                                                      43
 Figure 9: Demographic Differences Between Targeted and Non-Targeted Households


                  Baseline use
                        Income
                      Net worth
                  House value
                     Education
                            Male
                            Age
                        Retired
                        Married
                            Rent
            Single family home
                    House age
                      Democrat
             Hybrid auto share
              Green consumer
                 Wildlife donor
                    Profit score
                   Buyer score
                Mail responder
            Home improvement


                                    -.5                0                  .5                 1
                                   Mean(targeted) - Mean(not targeted) (standard deviations)

                                            Target energy savings              Target WTP
                                            Target welfare


Notes: We use the machine learning algorithm to target 50 percent of the Central Hudson program population,
maximizing energy savings, willingness-to-pay, or welfare. This figure presents the normalized difference in
means between targeted and non-targeted households for each of these three maximands, in standard deviation
units.




VII      Conclusion
Many economists recognize the importance of evaluating nudge-style interventions on the basis of
social welfare, not just behavior change. Nevertheless, it is often difficult to actually quantify the
full consumer welfare effects of a given nudge. Our main contribution is to develop and implement
an experimental design that allows for an empirical social welfare analysis in a case study of one
prominent nudge.
   There are three main takeaways. First, we find significant individual-level heterogeneity in will-
ingness to pay for the nudge, including a significant minority of consumers who prefer not to be
nudged. This implies large welfare gains from using prediction for “smart defaults.” Second, despite
the worries of Glaeser (2006) and others, social comparison nudges need not only act as an emo-
tional tax on “bad” behavior. We find evidence that in addition to increasing the moral price, HERs
work by providing both information and additional windfall utility through positive affect. Third,

                                                     44
the nudge we study increases welfare. However, this welfare gain comes with costs to consumers
that typically go unmeasured, and ignoring these “non-energy costs” would cause the analyst to
overstate social welfare gains by a factor of 3.7. A speculative extrapolation of our results suggests
that the overall social value of HERs may be overstated by $620 million. These results highlight the
importance of measuring the full welfare effects of nudges.




References
Abrahams, Leslie S., Constantine Samaras, W. Michael Griffin, and H. Scott Matthews. 2015. “Life
    Cycle Greenhouse Gas Emissions From U.S. Liquefied Natural Gas Exports: Implications for
    End Uses.” Environmental Science and Technology 49: 3237-3245.
ACEEE (American Council for an Energy-Efficient Economy). 2015. “State Energy Efficiency Re-
    source Standards (EERS): April 2015.” Available from http://aceee.org/sites/default/files/eers-
    04072015.pdf. Accessed August 5, 2015.
Allcott, Hunt. 2011. “Social Norms and Energy Conservation.” Journal of Public Economics 95
    (9-10): 1082–95.
Allcott, Hunt. 2013. “The Welfare Effects of Misperceived Product Costs: Data and Calibrations
    from the Automobile Market.” American Economic Journal: Economic Policy 5 (3): 30-66.
Allcott, Hunt. 2015. “Site Selection Bias in Program Evaluation.” Quarterly Journal of Economics
    130 (3): 1117-1165.
Allcott, Hunt, and Michael Greenstone. 2015. “Measuring the Welfare Effects of Energy Efficiency
    Programs.” Working Paper, New York University.
Allcott, Hunt, and Todd Rogers. 2014. “The Short-Run and Long-Run Effects of Behavioral Inter-
    ventions: Experimental Evidence from Energy Conservation.” American Economic Review 104
    (10): 3003-37.
Ambuehl, Sandro, B. Douglas Bernheim, and Annamaria Lusardi. 2014. “The Effect of Financial
    Education on the Quality of Decision Making.” NBER Working Paper No. 20618 (October).
Andreoni, James, Justin M. Rao, and Hannah Trachtman.. 2011. “Avoiding the Ask: A Field
    Experiment on Altruism, Empathy, and Charitable Giving.” NBER Working Paper No. 17648.
Ashby, Kira, Hilary Forster, Bruce Ceniceros, Bobbi Wilhelm, Kim Friebel, Rachel Henschel, and
    Shahana Samiullah. 2012. “Green with Envy: Neighbor Comparisons and Social Norms in Five
    Home Energy Report Programs.” http://www.aceee.org/files/proceedings/2012/data/papers/0193-
    000218.pdf (accessed September 2013).
Ashley, Elizabeth M., Clark Nardinelli, and Rosemarie A. Lavaty. 2015. “Estimating the Benefits of
    Public Health Policies that Reduce Harmful Consumption.” Health Economics 24 (5): 617-624.
Athey, Susan, Julie Tibshirani, and Stefan Wager. 2017. “Solving Heterogeneous Estimating Equa-
    tions with Gradient Forests.” Working Paper, Stanford University (January). Available from

                                                 45
    https://arxiv.org/pdf/1610.01271v2.pdf
Attari, Shahzeen, Michael DeKay, Cliff Davidson, and Wandi Bruine de Bruin. 2010. “Public
    Perceptions of Energy Consumption and Savings.” Proceedings of the National Academy of
    Sciences 107 (37): 16054–16059.
Ayres, Ian, Sophie Raseman, and Alice Shih. 2013. “Evidence from Two Large Field Experiments
    that Peer Comparison Feedback Can Reduce Residential Energy Usage.” Journal of Law, Eco-
    nomics, and Organization 29 (5): 992–1022.
Beauchamp, Jonathan P., Daniel J. Benjamin, Christopher Chabris, and David I. Laibson. 2015.
    “Controlling for Compromise Effects Debiases Estimates of Preference Parameters.” Working
    Paper, Harvard University.
Belloni, Alexandre, and Victor Chernozhukov. 2013. “Least Squares After Model Selection in High-
    Dimensional Sparse Models.” Bernoulli 19 (2): 521-547.
Bernheim, B. Douglas, Andrey Fradkin, and Igor Popov. 2015. “The Welfare Economics of Default
    Options in 401(k) Plans.” American Economic Review, 105 (9): 2798-2837.
Borenstein, Severin, and Lucas W. Davis. 2012. “The Equity and Efficiency of Two-Part Tariffs in
    U.S. Natural Gas Markets.” Journal of Law and Economics, 55 (1): 75-128.
Bronnenberg, Bart, Jean-Pierre Dube, Matthew Gentzkow, and Jesse Shapiro. 2015. “Do Phar-
    macists Buy Bayer? Sophisticated Shoppers and the Brand Premium.” Quarterly Journal of
    Economics, 130 (4): 1669-1726.
Brunnermeier, Markus K., and Jonathan A. Parker. 2005. “Optimal Expectations.” American
    Economic Review 95 (4): 1092-1118.
Caplin, Andrew (2003). “Fear as a Policy Instrument.” In George Loewenstein, Daniel Read,
    and Roy Baumeister, Eds, Time and Decision: Economic and Psychological perspectives in
    Intertemporal Choice. New York, NY: Russel Sage.
Carroll, Gabriel, James Choi, David Laibson, Brigitte Madrian, and Andrew Metrick. 2009. “Op-
    timal Defaults and Active Decisions: Theory and Evidence from 401(k) Saving.” Quarterly
    Journal of Economics 124 (4): 1639-1674.
Chaloupka, Frank J., Kenneth E. Warner, Daron Acemoglu, Jonathan Gruber, Fritz Laux, Wendy
    Max, Joseph Newhouse, Thomas Schelling, and Jody Sindelar. 2014. “An Evaluation of The
    FDA’s Analysis of the Costs and Benefits of the Graphic Warning Label Regulation.” Tobacco
    Control 0: 1-8.
Chaloupka, Frank J., Gruber, Jonathan & Warner, Kenneth E. 2015. “Accounting for “Lost Plea-
    sure” in a Cost–Benefit Analysis of Government Regulation: The Case of the FDA’s Proposed
    Cigarette Labeling Regulation.” Annals of Intern Medicine, 162 (1): 64.
Costa, Dora L., and Matthew E. Kahn. 2013. “Energy Conservation ‘Nudges’ and Environmentalist
    Ideology: Evidence from a Randomized Residential Electricity Field Experiment.” Journal of
    the European Economic Association 11 (3): 680–702.



                                               46
Cutler, David M., Amber Jessup, Donald Kenkel, and Martha A. Starr. 2015. “Valuing Regulations
    Affecting Addictive or Habitual Goods.” Journal of Benefit-Cost Analysis 6 (2): 247-280.
Davis, Lucas, and Erich Muehlegger. 2010. “Do Americans Consume Too Little Natural Gas? An
    Empirical Test of Marginal Cost Pricing.” RAND Journal of Economics 41 (4): 791-801.
DellaVigna, Stefano, John List, and Ulrike Malmendier. 2012. “Testing for Altruism and Social
    Pressure in Charitable Giving.” Quarterly Journal of Economics 127 (1): 1-56.
Delmas, Magali A., Miriam Fischlein, and Omar I. Asensio. 2013. “Information Strategies and
    Energy Conservation Behavior: A Meta-Analysis of Experimental Studies from 1975 to 2012.”
    Energy Policy 61: 729-739.
DiNardo, John, Justin McCrary, and Lisa Sanbonmatsu. 2006. “Constructive Proposals for Dealing
    with Attrition: An Empirical Example.” Working Paper.
Dolan, Paul and Robert Metcalfe. 2013. “Neighbors, Knowledge, and Nuggets: Two Natural Field
    Experiments on the Role of Incentives on Energy Conservation.” Centre for Economic Perfor-
    mance Discussion Paper No. 1222.
EOP (Executive Office of the President). 2015. “Executive Order – Using Behavioral Science Insights
    to Better Serve the American People.” Available from https://www.whitehouse.gov/the-press-
    office/2015/09/15/executive-order-using-behavioral-science-insights-better-serve-american. Ac-
    cessed September 26, 2015.
EPA (U.S. Environmental Protection Agency). 1995. “AP 42, Fifth Edition: Compilation of Air
    Pollutant Emission Factors, Volume 1: Stationary Point and Area Sources. Chapter 1: External
    Combustion Sources.” Available from http://www.epa.gov/ttn/chief/ap42/ch01/index.html.
    Accessed June 12, 2015.
Ericson, Keith M. Marzilli. 2014. “Consumer Inertia and Firm Pricing in the Medicare Part D
    Prescription Drug Insurance Exchange.” American Economic Journal: Economic Policy, 6(1):
    38-64.
Farhi, Emmanuel, and Xavier Gabaix. 2015. “Optimal Taxation with Behavioral Agents.” Working
    Paper, New York University (August).
FDA (U.S. Food and Drug Administration). 2011. “Required Warnings for Cigarette Packages and
    Advertisements, Final Rule.” Federal Register, 76, 36628–36777.
Fowlie, Meredith, Michael Greenstone, and Catherine Wolfram. 2015. “Do Energy Efficiency In-
    vestments Deliver? Evidence from the Weatherization Assistance Program.” Working Paper,
    University of Chicago (June).
Glaeser, Edward. 2006. Paternalism and Psychology. University of Chicago Law Review. 73:133-156.
Glaeser, Edward. 2014. The Supply of Environmentalism: Psychological Interventions and Eco-
    nomics. Review of Environmental Economics and Policy. 8(2):208-229.
Handel, Benjamin R. 2013. “Adverse Selection and Inertia in Health Insurance Markets: When
    Nudging Hurts.” American Economic Review 103 (7): 2643-2682.



                                                47
Heckman, James J. 1979. “Sample Selection Bias as a Specification Error.” Econometrica 47 (1):
    153-161.
Herberich, David H., John A. List, and Michael K. Price. 2012. “How Many Economists Does It
    Take to Change a Light Bulb? A Natural Field Experiment on Technology Adoption.” Working
    Paper.
Holland, Stephen, Erin Mansur, Nicholas Muller, and Andrew Yates. 2015. “Measuring the Spatial
    Heterogeneity in Environmental Externalities from Driving: A Comparison of Gasoline and
    Electric Vehicles.” NBER Working Paper No. 21291 (June).
Howarth, Robert, Drew Shindell, Renee Santoro, Anthony Ingraffea, Nathan Phillips, and Amy
    Townsend-Small. 2012. “Methane Emissions from Natural Gas Systems.” Available from
    http://www.eeb.cornell.edu/howarth/publications/Howarth et al 2012 National Climate Assessment.pdf.
    Accessed August 15, 2015.
Imai, Kosuke and Marc Ratkovic. 2013. “Estimating Treatment Effect Heterogeneity in Randomized
    Program Evaluation.” Annals of Applied Statistics 7 (1): 443-470.
Integral Analytics. 2012. “Sacramento Municipal Utility District Home Energy Report Program.”
    http://www.integralanalytics.com/ia/Portals/0/FinalSMUDHERSEval2012v4.pdf (accessed Septem-
    ber 2013).
Interagency Working Group on the Social Cost of Carbon, United States Government. 2013. “Tech-
    nical Support Document: Technical Update of the Social Cost of Carbon for Regulatory Impact
    Analysis Under Executive Order 12866.” Available from https://www.whitehouse.gov/sites/default/files/omb/
    Accessed July 26, 2015.
Ito, Koichiro. 2014. “Do Consumers Respond to Marginal or Average Price? Evidence from Non-
    linear Electricity Pricing.” American Economic Review 104 (2): 537-563.
Ito, Koichiro, Tanakori Ida, and Makoto Tanaka. 2015. “The Persistence of Moral Suasion and
    Economic Incentives: Field Experimental Evidence from Energy Demand.” Working Paper,
    University of Chicago (April).
Jin, Lawrence, Don Kenkel, Feng Liu, and Hua Wang. 2015. “Retrospective and Prospective Benefit-
    Cost Analyses of U.S. Anti-Smoking Policies.” Journal of Benefit-Cost Analysis 6 (1): 154-186.
Kamenica, Emir. 2008. “Contextual Inference in Markets: On the Informational Content of Product
    Lines.” American Economic Review 98 (5): 2127-2149.
Kantola, S. J., G. J. Syme, and N. A. Campbell. 1984. “Cognitive Dissonance and Energy Conser-
    vation.” Journal of Applied Psychology 69 (3): 416-421.
Keuring van Elektrotechnische Materialen te Arnhem (KEMA). 2012. “Puget Sound Energy’s Home
    Energy Reports Program: Three Year Impact, Behavioral and Process Evaluation.” Madison,
    Wisconsin: DNV KEMA Energy and Sustainability.
Kling, Jeffrey R., Sendhil Mullainathan, Eldar Shafir, Lee C. Vermeulen, and Marian V. Wrobel.
    2012. “Comparison Friction: Experimental Evidence from Medicare Drug Plans.” Quarterly
    Journal of Economics 127 (1): 199-235.

                                               48
Koszegi, Botond, and Adam Szeidl. 2013. “A Model of Focusing in Economic Choice.” Quarterly
    Journal of Economics 128 (1): 53–104.
Kushler, Martin, Seth Nowak, and Patti Witte. 2012. “A National Survey of State Policies and Prac-
    tices for the Evaluation of Ratepayer-Funded Energy Efficiency Programs.” American Council
    for an Energy-Efficient Economy Report Number U122.
Larrick, Richard, and Jack Soll. 2008. “The MPG Illusion.” Science 320 (5883): 1593-1594.
Madrian, Brigitte C., and Dennis F. Shea. 2001. The Power of Suggestion: Inertia in 401(k)
    Participation and Savings Behavior.” Quarterly Journal of Economics 116 (4): 1149-1187.
Myhre, G., D. Shindell, F.-M. Bréon, W. Collins, J. Fuglestvedt, J. Huang, D. Koch, J.-F. Lamar-
    que, D. Lee, B. Mendoza, T. Nakajima, A. Robock, G. Stephens, T. Takemura and H. Zhang.
    2013. “Anthropogenic and Natural Radiative Forcing.” In: Climate Change 2013: The Physical
    Science Basis. Contribution of Working Group I to the Fifth Assessment Report of the Inter-
    governmental Panel on Climate Change [Stocker, T.F., D. Qin, G.-K. Plattner, M. Tignor, S.K.
    Allen, J. Boschung, A. Nauels, Y. Xia, V. Bex and P.M. Midgley (eds.)]. Cambridge University
    Press, Cambridge, United Kingdom and New York, NY, USA.
Nadel, Steven, and Kenneth Keating. 1991. “Engineering Estimates vs. Impact Evaluation Results:
    How Do They Compare and Why?” American Council for an Energy-Efficient Economy Report
    Number U915.
Nolan, Jessica M., Wesley Schultz, Robert B. Cialdini, Noah J. Goldstein, and Vladas Griskevicius.
    2008. “Normative Influence is Underdetected.” Personality and Social Psychology Bulletin 34
    (7): 913–923.
Opinion Dynamics. 2012. “Massachusetts Three Year Cross-Cutting Behavioral Program Evaluation
    Integrated Report.” Waltham, MA: Opinion Dynamics Corporation.
Opower. 2014. “Prospectus.” Available from http://www.nasdaq.com/markets/ipos/filing.ashx?filingid=9465802.
    Accessed September 26, 2015.
Oster, Emily, Ira Shoulson, and E. Ray Dorsey. 2013. “Optimal Expectations and Limited Medical
    Testing: Evidence from Huntington Disease.” American Economic Review 103 (2): 804-830.
Perry, Michael, and Sarah Woehleke. 2013. “Evaluation of Pacific Gas and Electric Company’s
    Home Energy Report Initiative for the 2010–2012 Program.” San Francisco: Freeman, Sullivan,
    and Company.
Pope, C. Arden, Richard T. Burnett, Michael J. Thun, Eugenia, E. Calle, Daniel Krewski, Kazuhiko
    Ito, and George D. Thurston. 2002. “Lung Cancer, Cardiopulmonary Mortality, and Long-term
    Exposure to Fine Particulate Air Pollution.” Journal of the American Medical Association 287
    (9): 1132-1141.
Schultz, P. Wesley, Jessica M. Nolan, Robert B. Cialdini, Noah J. Goldstein, and Vladas Griskevicius.
    2007. “The Constructive, Destructive, and Reconstructive Power of Social Norms.” Psychological
    Science 18 (5): 429–434.



                                                 49
Sudarshan, Anant. 2014. “Nudges in the Marketplace: Using Peer Comparisons and Incentives to Re-
    duce Household Electricity Consumption.” Working Paper. http://www.anantsudarshan.com/uploads/1/0/2/6
Thaler, Richard, and Cass R. Sunstein. 2008. Nudge: Improving Decisions about Health, Wealth,
    and Happiness. New Haven: Yale University Press.
Trachtman, Hannah, Andrew Steinkruger, Mackenzie Wood, Adam Wooster, James Andreoni, James
    J. Murphy, and Justin M. Rao. 2015. “Fair Weather Avoidance: Unpacking the Costs and
    Benefits of “Avoiding the Ask.”” Journal of the Economic Science Association 1 (1): 8-14.
Violette, Daniel, Provencher, Bill, and Mary Klos. 2009. “Impact Evaluation of Positive Energy
    SMUD Pilot Study.” Boulder, CO: Summit Blue Consulting, LLC.
Watson, David, Lee Anna Clark, and Auke Tellegen. 1988. “Development and Validation of Brief
    Measures of Positive and Negative Affect: The PANAS Scales.” Journal of Personality and
    Social Psychology 54: 1063-1070.
Weimer, David L., Aidan R. Vining, and Randall K. Thomas. 2009. “Cost-Benefit Analysis Involving
    Addictive Goods: Contingent Valuation to Estimate Willingness-to-Pay for Smoking Cessation.”
    Health Economics 18 (2): 181-202.
Whitehead, Mark, Rhys Jones, Rachel Howell, Rachel Lilley, and Jessica Pykett. 2014. “Assessing
    the Global Impact of the Behavioral Sciences on Public Policy.” https://changingbehaviours.files.wordpress.com
Zou, Hui, and Trevor Hastie. 2005. “Regularization and Variable Selection via the Elastic Net.”
    Journal of the Royal Statistical Society, Series B 67(2): 301-320.




                                                50
Online Appendix                                                           Allcott and Kessler


                         Online Appendix: Not for Publication



        The Welfare Effects of Nudges: A Case Study of Energy Use Social Comparisons

                              Hunt Allcott and Judd B. Kessler




                                             51
Online Appendix                                                                   Allcott and Kessler


A     Phone Survey Questionnaire
Below is the phone survey questionnaire. Programming notes and comments are in italics. Bolded
headers are for organizational purposes and were not read.
     Introduction
     Hi. I am calling on behalf of Central Hudson Gas and Electric, your local utility. Central Hudson
has been sending you Home Energy Reports since last fall, and we want to know what you think
about them. Do you have about two minutes to answer some questions? If yes, Central Hudson will
send you a check for up to $10.
     If asked, “What is a Home Energy Report?”, say: “Home Energy Reports are one-page letters
that compare your natural gas use to your neighbors’ use and provide energy conservation tips.
Central Hudson sent up to four of these reports to the address on the account associated with this
phone number between late fall 2014 and early spring 2015. Do you recall receiving any Home Energy
Reports in the past nine months?”

    • If “Yes”, continue to Question 1.

    • If “No”, or if the customer otherwise says “I don’t remember receiving any Home Energy
      Reports,” say: “Is there someone else in the household who may have seen these reports come
      in the mail? If so, may I speak to him or her?” If there is no one else who might have seen the
      reports, terminate call and code response as “Does not remember Home Energy Reports.” If
      there is someone else but not available, record that person’s name and attempt to call him/her
      later.

     If the caller indicates that he/she has already answered these questions in a mail survey, then
skip questions 1 and 2 and say: “Thank you for responding to our mail survey. We have a couple of
follow-up questions that are better to ask by phone.” Then continue to Question 3.
     Question 1
     To start, I’m going to ask three questions where you’ll choose between some combination of
continuing Home Energy Reports and receiving checks for different amounts of money. These are
unusual questions, but they’re designed to tell us how much you value the Reports. These are real
questions: Central Hudson will use a lottery to pick one question and will actually mail you what
you chose, so please answer carefully.
     Survey Version B only: “Remember that Home Energy Reports compare your energy use to
your neighbors’ use.
     Survey Version C only: “Remember that Home Energy Reports help you to reduce your envi-
ronmental impact.”
     a. Which would you prefer: 4 more Home Energy Reports PLUS a $10 check, OR a $1 check?

                                                 52
Online Appendix                                                                Allcott and Kessler


    b. Which would you prefer: 4 more Home Energy Reports PLUS a $10 check, OR a $5 check?
    c. Which would you prefer: 4 more Home Energy Reports PLUS a $10 check, OR a $9 check?
    d. Which would you prefer: 4 more Home Energy Reports PLUS a $10 check, OR a $10 check?
    e. Which would you prefer: 4 more Home Energy Reports PLUS a $9 check, OR a $10 check?
    f. Which would you prefer: 4 more Home Energy Reports PLUS a $5 check, OR a $10 check?
    g. Which would you prefer: 4 more Home Energy Reports PLUS a $1 check, OR a $10 check?
    If consumers have consistent preferences, we would not need to ask all seven MPL questions
because answers to some imply answers to others. Questions 1a-1g were asked in the following order:
    Ask 1d first
    If 1d=”HER+$10”, then 1f
    If 1f=”HER+$5”, then 1g
    If 1f=”$10”, then 1e
    If 1d=”$10”, then 1b
    If 1b=”HER+$10”, then 1c
    If 1b=”$5”, then 1a
    Question 2
    Think back to when you received your first Home Energy Report. Did the Report say that you
were using more or less energy than you thought?
    a. Much less than I thought
    b. Somewhat less than I thought
    c. About what I thought
    d. Somewhat more than I thought
    e. Much more than I thought
    Question 3
    Do you think that receiving four more Home Energy Reports this fall and winter would help
you reduce your natural gas use by even a small amount?
    a. Yes
    b. No
    If Yes: How much money do you think you would save on your natural gas bills if you receive
four more Reports compared to if you do not receive them?
    If necessary: “We just want to know your best guess.”
    Note to enumerators: Prompt for a dollar value, not a percentage. If necessary: “I’m supposed
to ask for your best guess of how many dollars you’d save in total.”
    Question 4
    Since last fall, Central Hudson sent up to four Home Energy Reports to many households like
yours. For the average household, how much money do you think these Reports have helped them
save on their natural gas bills?

                                                53
Online Appendix                                                               Allcott and Kessler


    If necessary: “We just want to know your best guess.”
    Note to enumerators: Prompt for a dollar value, not a percentage. If necessary: “I’m supposed
to ask for your best guess of total dollar savings since last fall.”

    Question 5
    How would you like the Reports if they did not have the bar graph comparing your energy use
to your neighbors’ use?
    a. Much less
    b. Somewhat less
    c. About the same
    d. Somewhat more
    e. Much more

    Question 6
    Some people feel either inspired or pressured when they see their Home Energy Reports. Did
you feel inspired, pressured, neither, or both?
    a. Inspired
    b. Pressured
    c. Neither
    d. Both

    Question 7
    Some people feel either proud or guilty when they see their Home Energy Reports. Did you feel
proud, guilty, neither, or both?
    a. Proud
    b. Guilty
    c. Neither
    d. Both

    Question 8
    To what extent do you agree or disagree with the following statement: “The Home Energy
Reports gave useful information that helped me conserve energy.”
    a. Strongly agree
    b. Agree
    c. Neither
    d. Disagree
    e. Strongly disagree

    Question 9
    Do you have any other comments about the Home Energy Reports that you’d like to share?
    Open response, please write down as much as possible.


                                                   54
                                                                                                                                                      Online Appendix
     B     Data Appendix

                                                       Table A1: Balance Tests (Page 1)

                               (1)        (2)        (3)        (4)        (5)        (6)        (7)        (8)        (9)        (10)
      Dependent variable:    Baseline ln(Income) ln(Net       ln(House Education     Male      ln(Age)    Retired    Married     Rent
                                use              worth)        value)  (years)
                             (ccf/day)
                                           Panel A: Home Energy Report Recipient/Control
      Recipient               0.013      -0.011   0.0058   -0.029  -0.032   -0.0026  -0.0044               0.0028     -0.0064    0.0039
                             (0.024)    (0.012)   (0.024) (0.029) (0.035)  (0.0077) (0.0051)              (0.0030)   (0.0079)   (0.0069)
      Observations           19,921     19,927    15,557  16,741  19,475     16,811   17,282               16,728      15,406    17,561

                                                             Panel B: Survey Group
      Mail follow-up           -0.027      0.0073     -0.054      -0.043    -0.0076     0.0093     -0.0092    -0.012    0.0068       -0.012
                              (0.037)     (0.018)    (0.036)     (0.044)    (0.054)    (0.012)    (0.0078) (0.0050)** (0.012)       (0.011)
55




      Comparison cue           -0.039     0.00063     -0.043      -0.062     -0.025     -0.014      0.0015   0.0057    -0.00061      -0.011
                              (0.043)     (0.021)    (0.042)     (0.051)    (0.063)    (0.014)    (0.0090) (0.0054)     (0.014)     (0.012)
      Environmental cue         0.011      0.0056      0.012      -0.049     0.0016     -0.018      0.015      0.011     0.0058     -0.0100
                              (0.043)     (0.021)    (0.042)     (0.051)    (0.063)    (0.014) (0.0090)* (0.0055)** (0.014)         (0.012)
      Observations              9436        9439       7466        7965       9226       8036        8251      8004       7255        8371
      F-test p-value             0.54       0.97       0.26        0.45       0.97       0.46        0.18      0.023      0.91        0.53
     Notes: This table presents tests of balance on observables between randomly-assigned groups. Samples in Panel A include the full HER recipient
     and control groups, while samples in Panel B are limited to the households that were sent Home Energy Reports and were thus eligible for
     our surveys. Observation counts differ between columns because regressions include only non-missing observations of the dependent variable.
     Robust standard errors in parentheses. *, **, ***: statistically significant with 90, 95, and 99 percent confidence, respectively.




                                                                                                                                                      Allcott and Kessler
                                                                                                                                                      Online Appendix
                                                       Table A2: Balance Tests (Page 2)

                               (11)       (12)       (13)       (14)       (15)       (16)       (17)       (18)       (19)       (20)
      Dependent variable:     Single    ln(House Democrat Hybrid          Green     Wildlife    Profit     Buyer     Mail re-    Home
                              family      age)             auto            con-     donor       score      score     sponder      im-
                               home                        share          sumer                                                  prove-
                                                                                                                                 ment
                                                                                                                                interest
                                           Panel A: Home Energy Report Recipient/Control
      Recipient               0.0018     -0.032   0.0018   0.021   0.0042   0.0033  -0.0033                -0.022     -0.012   0.00024
                             (0.0070)   (0.016)* (0.0082) (0.047) (0.0052) (0.0036) (0.014)               (0.016)    (0.0069)* (0.0051)
      Observations            17,734     14,885   18,080  19,728   18,883   16,728   19,784               14,967      17,734    16,728

                                                             Panel B: Survey Group
      Mail follow-up          -0.0097       -0.021    0.0037     0.0013     -0.0053    -0.0094      0.018     -0.017     0.0017      -0.025
                              (0.011)      (0.025)    (0.013)    (0.053)   (0.0081) (0.0058)      (0.022)    (0.025)    (0.011) (0.0081)***
      Comparison cue           0.0048       -0.047   -0.00065      -0.10     0.0058    -0.0035     -0.022    0.0036      -0.012     -0.0037
56




                              (0.012)      (0.029)    (0.015)    (0.071)   (0.0094) (0.0066)      (0.025)    (0.029)    (0.012)    (0.0092)
      Environmental cue        0.011        -0.048    0.0038       -0.18    -0.0056    -0.0045     0.010      -0.014    -0.0079     -0.0015
                              (0.012)     (0.029)*    (0.015)     (0.13)   (0.0092) (0.0066)      (0.026)    (0.029)    (0.012)    (0.0092)
      Observations              8464         7109      8617        9340       8977      8004        9377       7143       8464        8004
      F-test p-value            0.67         0.23       0.98        0.35      0.59       0.36        0.49      0.84       0.80        0.020
     Notes: This table presents tests of balance on observables between randomly-assigned groups. Samples in Panel A include the full HER recipient
     and control groups, while samples in Panel B are limited to the households that were sent Home Energy Reports and were thus eligible for
     our surveys. Observation counts differ between columns because regressions include only non-missing observations of the dependent variable.
     Robust standard errors in parentheses. *, **, ***: statistically significant with 90, 95, and 99 percent confidence, respectively.




                                                                                                                                                      Allcott and Kessler
Online Appendix                                                                       Allcott and Kessler


                        Table A3: Survey Response Counts by Attempt

                                                      (1)     (2)
                                          Attempt Mail Phone
                                          1          402      523
                                          2          497      358
                                          3                   229
                                          4                   172
                                          5                   163
                                          6                    83
                                          7                    80
                                          8                    80
                                          Overall    899     1690
Notes: For the mail survey, attempt 1 refers to the survey included in the final Home Energy Report, and
attempt 2 refers to the follow-up survey sent to 2/3 of households. For the phone survey, attempt refers to
the number of times that the phone number was called before completing the survey.




                                                    57
Online Appendix                                                                          Allcott and Kessler


    Table A4: Correlations of Willingness-to-Pay with Qualitative Survey Responses

                                     (1)           (2)         (3)         (4)          (5)         (6)
    Expected savings                 0.11
                                 (0.0089)***
    Like without comparisons                      -1.05
                                                (0.16)***
    Useful info                                                2.26
                                                            (0.18)***
    Inspired                                                               3.36
                                                                        (0.38)***
    Pressured                                                              -1.02
                                                                         (0.50)**
    Proud                                                                              1.18
                                                                                    (0.41)***
    Guilty                                                                             1.39
                                                                                    (0.49)***
    Positive comment                                                                                4.34
                                                                                                 (0.44)***
     Observations                   1365          1581        1570         1571        1571         2137
     R2                             0.094         0.026       0.093       0.047        0.011       0.042
Notes: Data are the unweighted sample of phone survey responses. Dependent variable is willingness-to-pay.
The independent variables in columns 1-6 are from questions 3, 5, 8, 6, 7, and 9, respectively. Expected
savings is winsorized at $50. Columns 2 and 3 consider the five-point Likert scale responses to questions 5 and
8, which we code as integers {−2, −1, 0, 1, 2}. The sample in column 6 includes both mail and phone survey
respondents: the phone survey enumerators transcribed responses to question 9, and we also transcribed the 30
unsolicited comments written on the mail survey. The variable “Positive comment” takes value 1 for positive
comments about HERs, -1 for negative comments, and 0 for neutral or no comments. Sample sizes vary due
to item non-response. Robust standard errors in parentheses. *, **, ***: statistically significant with 90, 95,
and 99 percent confidence, respectively.




                                                      58
Online Appendix                                                                         Allcott and Kessler


Table A5: Correlations of Negative Willingness-to-Pay with Qualitative Survey Re-
sponses

                                  (1)           (2)           (3)          (4)          (5)         (6)
 Expected savings               -0.0059
                             (0.00057)***
 Like without comparisons                      0.059
                                            (0.011)***
 Useful info                                                  -0.14
                                                           (0.011)***
 Inspired                                                                  -0.18
                                                                        (0.024)***
 Pressured                                                                  0.10
                                                                        (0.034)***
 Proud                                                                                   -0.11
                                                                                     (0.027)***
 Guilty                                                                                 -0.026
                                                                                       (0.033)
 Positive comment                                                                                   -0.22
                                                                                                 (0.026)***
  Observations                       1365          1581         1570          1571     1571         2137
  R2                                0.070         0.019        0.089          0.037    0.011        0.025
Notes: Data are the unweighted sample of phone survey responses. Dependent variable is an indicator for
negative willingness-to-pay. The independent variables in columns 1-6 are from questions 3, 5, 8, 6, 7, and
9, respectively. Expected savings is winsorized at $50. Columns 2 and 3 consider the five-point Likert scale
responses to questions 5 and 8, which we code as integers {−2, −1, 0, 1, 2}. The sample in column 6 includes
both mail and phone survey respondents: the phone survey enumerators transcribed responses to question
9, and we also transcribed the 30 unsolicited comments written on the mail survey. The variable “Positive
comment” takes value 1 for positive comments about HERs, -1 for negative comments, and 0 for neutral or
no comments. Sample sizes vary due to item non-response. Robust standard errors in parentheses. *, **, ***:
statistically significant with 90, 95, and 99 percent confidence, respectively.




                                                      59
Online Appendix                                                                       Allcott and Kessler


               Table A6: Within-Household Correlations of Survey Responses

                                       (1)              (2)               (3)                  (4)
                                  WTP from first     WTP from         1(WTP from       Belief update from
 Dependent variable                mail survey      phone survey    phone survey<0)      phone survey
 WTP from second mail survey          0.819
                                   (0.080)***
 WTP from mail survey                                   0.440
                                                     (0.072)***
 1(WTP from mail survey<0)                                                0.362
                                                                       (0.071)***
 Belief update from mail survey                                                                     0.500
                                                                                                 (0.064)***
  Observations                               87               224               224                  259
    2
  R                                        0.584             0.206             0.132                0.217
Notes: The sample for column 1 is households that returned more than one mail survey with valid WTP. The
sample for columns 2-4 is households that responded to both mail and phone surveys. Robust standard errors
in parentheses. *, **, ***: statistically significant with 90, 95, and 99 percent confidence, respectively.




                                                    60
Online Appendix                        Allcott and Kessler


C    Appendix to Empirical Estimates




                               61
                                                                                                                                                           Online Appendix
                                                   Table A7: Inverse Probability Weights (Page 1)

                            (1)           (2)             (3)             (4)              (5)            (6)         (7)          (8)          (9)
                        Have WTP     Have WTP,        Have WTP,       Have WTP        Have WTP        Have WTP     Have WTP     Have WTP;    Received
                        from Paper     Assigned        Assigned        from Base     from Follow-up   from Phone                Base Mail     Second
      Dependent var:                    to Base       to Follow-up        Mail            Mail                                   Excluded      Year
      Baseline use        -0.358        -0.0985         -0.258           -0.308          -0.0556        0.765        0.541        0.795       0.0182
                         (0.161)**     (0.0592)*       (0.149)*        (0.110)***        (0.117)      (0.225)***   (0.255)**    (0.242)***    (0.0706)
      ln(Income)          -0.306        -0.171          -0.115          -0.0962          -0.210         -0.624       -0.398       -0.137      -0.0492
                          (0.457)       (0.175)         (0.419)         (0.309)          (0.336)        (0.661)     (0.744)      (0.716)      (0.216)
      ln(Net worth)       0.0841        0.0691          0.0191           0.212           -0.116         -0.0450     -0.0159       -0.285       -0.202
                          (0.289)       (0.110)         (0.267)         (0.194)          (0.214)        (0.395)     (0.445)      (0.427)      (0.135)
      ln(House value)     -0.180        0.0255          -0.211          -0.0824          -0.0950        -0.117       -0.140      -0.0774      0.0807
                          (0.158)      (0.0595)         (0.145)         (0.106)          (0.116)        (0.230)     (0.255)      (0.246)      (0.0770)
      Education            0.554        0.133            0.410           0.295            0.240         0.416        0.776        0.533       -0.00590
                        (0.110)***   (0.0388)***      (0.102)***      (0.0745)***     (0.0802)***      (0.166)**   (0.185)***   (0.179)***    (0.0474)
      Male                -0.240        0.0661          -0.317           -0.250         0.00731         0.290        -0.126      -0.0476      -0.0277
                          (0.550)       (0.221)         (0.500)         (0.372)          (0.403)        (0.812)     (0.906)      (0.875)      (0.248)
62




      ln(Age)              1.598        0.328            1.257           0.799            0.747         1.069        2.187        1.438        -0.737
                          (1.012)       (0.389)         (0.928)         (0.690)          (0.739)        (1.452)     (1.621)      (1.558)      (0.458)
      Retired              0.593        0.207            0.323          -0.00655          0.544         1.049        1.696        2.163        -1.108
                          (1.309)       (0.487)         (1.199)         (0.852)          (0.969)        (2.103)     (2.339)      (2.297)     (0.520)**
      Married             -0.123        0.160           -0.265           0.0575          -0.153         -0.975       -1.384       -1.443       0.933
                          (0.681)       (0.247)         (0.631)         (0.444)          (0.518)        (0.989)     (1.102)      (1.061)     (0.305)***
      Rent                 0.210        0.138           0.0469           0.149           0.0390         -2.209       -2.097       -2.317       -0.409
                          (0.799)       (0.311)         (0.735)         (0.541)          (0.595)       (1.112)**    (1.253)*     (1.202)*     (0.308)
                                                                   (table continues on next page)
     Notes: This table presents probit estimates used to construct inverse probability weights. We report marginal effects, with coefficients multiplied
     by 100 for readability. In all columns other than column 8, the sample is all households assigned to the initial HER recipient group that did




                                                                                                                                                           Allcott and Kessler
     not opt out before the 2nd year. In column 8, the sample is the same except excluding households that returned the first mail survey. Robust
     standard errors in parentheses. *, **, ***: statistically significant with 90, 95, and 99 percent confidence, respectively.
                                                                                                                                                            Online Appendix
                                                Table A8: Inverse Probability Weights (Page 2)

                               (1)           (2)            (3)            (4)             (5)             (6)          (7)           (8)          (9)
                           Have WTP      Have WTP,      Have WTP,      Have WTP        Have WTP        Have WTP     Have WTP      Have WTP;     Received
                           from Paper     Assigned       Assigned       from Base    from Follow-up   from Phone                   Base Mail     Second
      Dependent var:                       to Base      to Follow-up      Mail            Mail                                     Excluded       Year
      Single family           0.880         0.294          0.584          0.310           0.566          -0.374        -0.304        -0.488       0.0787
                             (0.708)       (0.273)        (0.649)        (0.462)         (0.539)         (1.011)      (1.129)       (1.086)      (0.290)
      ln(House age)           -0.803       -0.0767         -0.717         -0.329         -0.460          -0.997        -1.513        -1.191      -0.0472
                            (0.305)***     (0.124)      (0.277)***       (0.204)        (0.224)**       (0.453)**    (0.507)***    (0.492)**     (0.153)
      Democrat                0.447         0.326          0.127          0.296           0.129          0.902         1.148         0.866        0.260
                             (0.461)       (0.181)*       (0.419)        (0.308)         (0.339)         (0.720)      (0.798)       (0.778)      (0.204)
      Hybrid auto share       0.116         0.0262        0.0857         0.0873          0.0143          0.445         0.479         0.404       -0.0331
                             (0.0829)      (0.0302)       (0.0763)      (0.0505)*       (0.0656)       (0.123)***    (0.139)***    (0.135)***    (0.0342)
      Green consumer          -0.470        -0.160         -0.302         -0.696          0.256          0.816         0.440         0.941        0.150
                             (0.728)       (0.293)        (0.662)        (0.491)         (0.531)         (1.115)      (1.244)       (1.205)      (0.340)
      Wildlife donor          3.425         1.056          2.216          2.549           0.537          3.212         5.825         3.342        0.543
                            (1.151)***    (0.442)**      (1.050)**     (0.735)***        (0.870)        (1.823)*     (2.040)***     (2.019)*     (0.548)
63




      Profit score            1.952         0.0559         1.854          0.696           1.209          1.171         2.433         1.896        -0.411
                            (0.392)***     (0.138)      (0.363)***     (0.261)***      (0.291)***       (0.574)**    (0.642)***    (0.618)***   (0.176)**
      Buyer score             0.858         0.185          0.655          0.586           0.267          -0.164        0.513        -0.0173       0.140
                            (0.374)**      (0.141)        (0.345)*      (0.244)**        (0.282)         (0.539)      (0.607)       (0.584)      (0.160)
      Mail responder          0.333         0.0517         0.278         -0.0196          0.363          -0.739        -0.359        -0.442       -0.164
                             (0.638)       (0.244)        (0.585)        (0.422)         (0.473)         (0.957)      (1.065)       (1.030)      (0.289)
      Home improvement        0.322         -0.322         0.620          -0.397          0.725          1.630         1.224         1.564        0.0255
                             (0.892)       (0.382)        (0.800)        (0.598)         (0.648)         (1.332)      (1.500)       (1.451)      (0.401)
      Observations             9948         9948           9948           9948            9948            9948          9948         9548         9948
     Notes: This table presents probit estimates used to construct inverse probability weights. We report marginal effects, with coefficients multiplied
     by 100 for readability. In all columns other than column 8, the sample is all households assigned to the initial HER recipient group that did




                                                                                                                                                            Allcott and Kessler
     not opt out before the 2nd year. In column 8, the sample is the same except excluding households that returned the first mail survey. Robust
     standard errors in parentheses. *, **, ***: statistically significant with 90, 95, and 99 percent confidence, respectively.
Online Appendix                                                                         Allcott and Kessler


    Table A9: Effects of Home Energy Reports on Retail Natural Gas Expenditures

                                              (1)               (2)        (3)           (4)
             Specification:                  OLS                 IV         IV            IV
             Assigned to treatment ×        -0.0197           -0.0197    -0.0199       -0.0206
               winter 2014-2015            (0.0120)          (0.0120)   (0.0120)*     (0.0129)
             Assigned to treatment×        0.00432           0.00432     0.00436      0.00566
               summer 2015                (0.00686)         (0.00685)   (0.00687)    (0.00770)
             Assigned to treatment ×        -0.0197
               winter 2015-2016          (0.00982)**
             Assigned to treatment×        0.00440
               summer 2016                 (0.0101)
             2nd-year recipient ×                          -0.0200          -0.0202    -0.0231
               winter 2015-2016                         (0.01000)**       (0.0100)** (0.0102)**
             2nd-year recipient ×                         0.00449          0.00438    0.00309
               summer 2016                                (0.0103)         (0.0103)   (0.0101)
             Observations                     200,540     200,540          200,540    200,540
             R2                                0.871        0.871            0.871      0.878
             Weights                         Duration    Duration        Duration × Duration ×
                                                                         IPW for Pn IPW for Ps
Notes: This table presents estimates of Equation (9), using post-treatment data only. Dependent variable
is retail natural gas expenditures in dollars per day. For context, control group sample mean expenditure is
$2.59/day. Columns 2-4 are IV regressions, where we instrument for 2nd-year recipient × winter 2015-2016 and
2nd-year recipient × summer 2016 with Assigned to treatment × winter 2015-2016 and Assigned to treatment
× summer 2016. Columns 1 and 2 weight by billing period duration. Column 3 weights by duration times a
household weight that matches the compliers to the target population Pn of treatment group households that
did not opt out before the second year. Column 4 weights by duration times a household weight that matches
the compliers to the target population Ps of treatment group households that did not opt out and returned
a survey with valid willingness-to-pay. Robust standard errors, clustered by household, in parentheses. *, **,
***: statistically significant with 90, 95, and 99 percent confidence, respectively.




                                                       64
Online Appendix                                                                             Allcott and Kessler


Table A10: Effects of Home Energy Reports on Contribution to Retailer Net Revenue

                                                 (1)              (2)         (3)           (4)
               Specification:                   OLS                IV         IV            IV
               Assigned to treatment ×        -0.00820         -0.00820    -0.00825      -0.00806
                 winter 2014-2015            (0.00557)        (0.00557)   (0.00557)     (0.00580)
               Assigned to treatment×         0.00263           0.00263    0.00265       0.00324
                 summer 2015                 (0.00420)        (0.00420)   (0.00421)     (0.00467)
               Assigned to treatment ×         -0.0102
                 winter 2015-2016           (0.00582)*
               Assigned to treatment×         0.00257
                 summer 2016                 (0.00635)
               2nd-year recipient ×                         -0.0104           -0.0104        -0.0117
                 winter 2015-2016                         (0.00593)*        (0.00593)*     (0.00597)*
               2nd-year recipient ×                         0.00262           0.00254        0.00196
                 summer 2016                               (0.00648)         (0.00648)      (0.00645)
               Observations                      200,540    200,540           200,540        200,540
               R2                                 0.831      0.831             0.831          0.839
               Weights                          Duration   Duration        Duration × Duration ×
                                                                           IPW for Pn IPW for Ps
Notes: This table presents estimates of Equation (9), using post-treatment data only. Dependent variable is
contribution to retailer net revenue (i.e. the difference between retail expenditures and wholesale acquisition
costs for household i’s gas bill on date t) in dollars per day. For context, control group sample mean contribution
is $1.59/day. Columns 2-4 are IV regressions, where we instrument for 2nd-year recipient × winter 2015-
2016 and 2nd-year recipient × summer 2016 with Assigned to treatment × winter 2015-2016 and Assigned
to treatment × summer 2016. Columns 1 and 2 weight by billing period duration. Column 3 weights by
duration times a household weight that matches the compliers to the target population Pn of treatment group
households that did not opt out before the second year. Column 4 weights by duration times a household
weight that matches the compliers to the target population Ps of treatment group households that did not
opt out and returned a survey with valid willingness-to-pay. Robust standard errors, clustered by household,
in parentheses. *, **, ***: statistically significant with 90, 95, and 99 percent confidence, respectively.




   Table A11: Correlation of Willingness-to-Pay with Phone Survey Responsiveness

                                                                    (1)           (2)
                         Completed survey attempt number          0.0229        0.0651
                                                                 (0.0885)      (0.0901)
                           Observations                            1609          1609
                           Weights                                 Equal    IPW for Pn
Notes: Dependent variable is willingness-to-pay, sample is all phone survey respondents. For the phone survey,
each respondent was dialed up to eight times; the independent variable is the attempt number on which the
survey was completed. Column 2 re-weights observations to match Pn , the target population of treatment
group households that did not opt out before the program’s second year. Robust standard errors in parentheses.
*, **, ***: statistically significant with 90, 95, and 99 percent confidence, respectively.



                                                         65
Online Appendix                                                                            Allcott and Kessler


                                    Table A12: Fitting Moral Utility

                                                                    (1)
                                       Expected savings           0.0870
                                                              (0.00930)***
                                         Inspired                  2.800
                                                               (0.452)***
                                         Pressured                -1.224
                                                                (0.594)**
                                         Proud                     0.119
                                                                 (0.473)
                                         Guilty                    0.662
                                                                 (0.563)
                                         Observations              1350
                                           2
                                         R                         0.122
Notes: Dependent variable is willingness-to-pay. Expected savings is winsorized at $50. Sample includes only
phone survey respondents with non-missing data. Observations are weighted to match the target population
of treatment group households that did not opt out before the program’s second year. Robust standard errors
in parentheses. *, **, ***: statistically significant with 90, 95, and 99 percent confidence, respectively.


                   Table A13: Effect of Survey Version on Willingness-to-Pay

                                                                (1)        (2)        (3)        (4)
            Comparison version                                -0.686     -0.693     -0.661     -0.658
                                                            (0.386)*   (0.384)*   (0.390)* (0.387)*
            Environmental version                             -0.211     -0.155     -0.190     -0.143
                                                             (0.386)    (0.388)    (0.394)    (0.399)
            Mean comparison                                                          0.106    0.0391
                                                                                   (0.215)    (0.286)
            Comparison version×Mean comparison                                      0.111      0.184
                                                                                   (0.317)    (0.319)
            Environmental version×Mean comparison                                  0.0530     0.0403
                                                                                   (0.347)    (0.354)
            Observations                                      2137        2137       2137       2137
            Include X covariates                               No         Yes         No        Yes
Notes: Dependent variable is willingness-to-pay. “Mean comparison” is the average difference (in 1000s of ccf)
between own natural gas usage and mean neighbor usage on the HERs in winter 2014-2015. Robust standard
errors in parentheses. *, **, ***: statistically significant with 90, 95, and 99 percent confidence, respectively.




                                                       66
Online Appendix                                                                                Allcott and Kessler


D     Appendix to Welfare Estimates
D.A     Testing for Biased Beliefs and Optimism Bias
For the welfare analysis, we assume that WTP equals consumer utility gain. In this context, we
could imagine two reasons why this might fail: biased beliefs and optimism bias.
     By biased beliefs, we mean that consumers might systematically underestimate or overestimate
the energy cost savings resulting from their conservation efforts. Consumers likely know the monetary
and non-monetary costs of their efforts, such as the time to adjust the thermostat or the money to
install energy-saving windows, but resulting energy savings can be quite difficult to infer given that
gas bills fluctuate substantially across months and years. There is empirical evidence to support this
concern: Pronin, Berger, and Molouki (2007) and Nolan et al. (2008) find that people underestimate
the motivational power of social norm messaging, and Larrick and Soll (2008), Attari et al. (2010),
and Allcott (2013) explore various belief biases related to energy costs.

              Figure A1: Beliefs About Savings Caused by Home Energy Reports
                    1
                    .8
           Cumulative density
              .4    .2 .6




                                    True average savings in winter 2014-2015
                    0




                                0                 50                 100               150          200
                                                         Retail gas cost savings ($)

                                                        Own future              Average past


Notes: This figure presents the unweighted distribution of responses to the following phone survey questions:
“How much money do you think you would save on your natural gas bills if you receive four more Reports?”
and “For the average household, how much money do you think these Reports have helped them save on their
natural gas bills?” True average savings in winter 2014-2015 was $4.77 per household.




                                                                 67
Online Appendix                                                                     Allcott and Kessler


    To test this, the phone survey asked respondents how much money they thought they would
save on their natural gas bills if they received four more HERs, as well as how much money they
thought the average HER recipient had saved since last fall. Figure A1 shows that both the median
and mean respondents overstate gas cost savings relative to the true average treatment effect. This
suggests that if anything, biased beliefs could bias WTP upward instead of downward. However, we
treat this result very cautiously, given that these questions were not incentive-compatible and stated
beliefs are highly dispersed.
    A second and more controversial reason why WTP might not equal consumer welfare gain has
to do with optimism bias. Oster, Shoulson, and Dorsey (2013) show that people at high risk of
Huntington disease do not get tested despite the fact that knowledge of disease status leads to very
different life choices. They propose a model based on Brunnermeier and Parker (2005) in which people
optimally choose beliefs while trading off the utility gain from optimistic beliefs with the utility loss
from suboptimal actions. Bracha and Brown (2012) develop an alternative model in which optimism
bias is constrained by the cost of holding incorrect beliefs. Evaluating information provision in these
models requires the analyst to take a stand on whether to recognize optimistically biased beliefs
as true utility. In these models, optimistically biased consumers may not experience a utility gain
from exogenously-provided information, even though it would lead to more accurate beliefs and
(in Brunnermeier and Parker’s model) improved decision making. If current Home Energy Report
recipients derive utility from incorrectly believing that they use less energy than their neighbors
and want to remain incorrectly optimistic about their relative energy use in the future, this might
reduce their WTP for HERs, and perhaps the utility loss from correcting optimism bias should not
be counted as a “true” utility loss.
    Even without taking a stand on this issue, we can provide suggestive tests of whether optimism
bias affects WTP. On both the mail and phone surveys, we asked people whether their first HER
told them they were using more or less energy than they thought. We hypothesize that people who
want to be optimistic in the future are more likely to have been optimistic in the past. The initial
belief update should thus be negatively correlated with WTP if optimism affects WTP. People gave
meaningful responses: the belief update variable is positively correlated with baseline usage, usage
relative to neighbors on the first HER, and reporting that they would like the HERs more if they
did not have social comparisons. More people report underestimating their energy use than report
overestimating. However, Appendix Table A14 shows that the belief update is not associated with
WTP, either unconditionally or conditional on X.




                                                   68
Online Appendix                                                                        Allcott and Kessler


       Table A14: Correlation of Willingness-to-Pay with Pre-Treatment Optimism

                                                             (1)       (2)
                                  Belief update            0.0540 0.0532
                                                          (0.134) (0.138)
                                  Observations              2102      2102
                                  Include X covariates       No       Yes
Notes: This table presents regressions of WTP on the belief update using unweighted responses from both
mail and phone surveys. Belief update is from question 8 on the mail survey and question 2 on the phone
survey: “Think back to when you received your first Home Energy Report. Did the Report say that you were
using more or less energy than you thought?” Responses are on a five-point Likert-style scale from “much
less than I thought” to “much more than I thought,” and we code these as integers from -2 to +2. Robust
standard errors in parentheses. *, **, ***: statistically significant with 90, 95, and 99 percent confidence,
respectively.




                                                     69
Online Appendix                                                                    Allcott and Kessler


D.B      Program Implementation Cost
Home Energy Report programs have setup costs, per-household marginal costs, and annual fixed
costs.   In evaluating a program’s second year, we ignore setup costs.        Panel A of Table A15
presents the per-household annual marginal costs. Based on a high-volume price quote from PFL
(www.PrintingForLess.com), we assume $0.4926 per HER for printing and mailing. This uses the
appropriate printing and paper quality, production speed, and shipping method for HERs. HER
recipients occasionally call the utility to ask questions, complain, or opt out of HERs. Opower data
show that HER recipients typically call with 0.5 percent probability per year and that these calls
cost the utility $5 per call to answer. We estimate $0.01 per household for server space to store data,
and $0.05 to purchase household-level demographic data to enhance the HERs. Overall, we estimate
that the per-household marginal cost for one year of a program involving four HERs is $2.06.
     Panel B of Table A15 presents the per-utility annual costs that are fixed with respect to the
number of households. Opower reported an estimated 51 hours of program design and reporting
time for a client like Central Hudson. In addition, Central Hudson and Opower have in-person
meetings approximately every quarter, and short phone meetings most weeks. We assume that
Opower staff cost $85 per hour, on the basis of a $118,097 nationwide median annual salary for
“program managers” (see http://www1.salary.com/Program-Manager-Salary.html) multiplied by a
1.5 loading factor to account for health insurance, vacation, and other benefits and divided by 2080
hours per year. Central Hudson reported to us that their fully-loaded staff time for this project costs
$62.64 per hour. Total utility-level fixed costs are $16,339.
     Central Hudson has four HER programs — the natural gas program we study, plus three others
— with a total of about 100,000 households in treatment. Some of the per-utility fixed costs such
as program design and reporting likely would increase with the number of programs, whereas others
such as travel time for quarterly meetings likely would not. If the fixed cost is allocated equally
to each of Central Hudson’s 100,000 recipient households, this gives $0.16 per household. Given
that the second year of the program we study includes 9948 households that were allocated to the
treatment group and did not opt out, this would sum to $1625. Alternatively, if the fixed cost is
allocated equally to each program, this is $4,085 per program. Allocating this $4,085 equally across
the 9948 recipient households gives $0.41 per household.




                                                  70
Online Appendix                                                                  Allcott and Kessler


                              Table A15: Implementation Cost Estimates

          Item                             Explanation                               Cost ($)
                              Panel A: Per-Household Annual Marginal Costs
          Printing and mailing             $0.4926/HER × 4 HERS                       1.97
          Utility call center              0.5% call probability × $5/call            0.025
          Server space                     $0.01 per recipient household               0.01
          Demographic data                 $0.05 per recipient household               0.05

          Total                                                                        2.06

                                Panel B: Per-Utility Annual Fixed Costs
                                           Opower ($85/hour)
          Program design and reporting    51 hours                                    4,335
          Quarterly meetings (time)       8 hours/quarter× 2 people                   5,440
          Quarterly meetings (travel)     $250/quarter × 2 people                     2,000
          Weekly phone meetings           20 minutes/week × 1 person                  1,473

                                          Central Hudson ($62.64/hour)
          Quarterly meetings                 2 hours/quarter× 4 people                2,004
          Weekly phone meetings              20 minutes/week × 1 person               1,086

          Total                                                                      16,339

         Annual fixed cost per household Central Hudson has ∼100,000 HER recipients    0.16
         Annual fixed cost per program   Central Hudson has four HER programs          4,085
Notes: This table presents the implementation costs for an ongoing Opower Home Energy Report program.
See text for details.


D.C       Speculative Evaluation of a Typical Full Home Energy Report Program
In this appendix, we address two shortcomings of the welfare evaluation in Table 8. First, Table 8
evaluates only the second year of a Home Energy Report program. Second, it evaluates one specific
HER program, which may or may not be typical.
       Table A16 evaluates the full course of a typical Home Energy Report program. We use the
energy savings from “site 2” studied by Allcott and Rogers (2014), an electricity-focused program
with savings approximately equal to the average savings of other Opower programs. Using Table
8 from Allcott and Rogers (2014), four years of Home Energy Reports are projected to save 1875
kilowatt-hours (kWh) in total per household, including significant savings after the program ends. At
the 2014 national average electricity price of $0.125/kWh, this amounts to $234 dollars, as shown in
Panel A.28 We assume that the long-run marginal source of electricity is a combined cycle gas plant,
with cost and heat rate characteristics from the U.S. Energy Information Administration’s Annual
 28
      See http://www.eia.gov/electricity/monthly/pdf/epm.pdf.



                                                        71
Online Appendix                                                                                 Allcott and Kessler


Energy Outlook.29 This gives energy acquisition cost savings of $176 and externality reduction of
$53, using the externality damage assumptions detailed in the body of this paper. Subtracting
acquisition cost savings from retail electricity cost savings gives a retailer net revenue loss of $58.
       For implementation cost, we use the price that Opower charges utilities, which is about $8 per
household per year for six HERs. We assume that this covers costs to set up and operate the HER
program as well as relevant overhead costs for sales, marketing, and research and development.30
       Panel B shows the consumer welfare and social welfare effect of the program under two as-
sumptions. In column 1, we ignore non-energy costs, assuming that ∆V = −∆ẽ · pe . In column
2, we adjust for non-energy costs using our estimate that ∆V ≈ −∆ẽ · pe × 0.57. Failing to adjust
for non-energy costs overstates social welfare gains by a factor of 2.0. We label this calculation as
“speculative” because it hinges on the assumption that ∆V ≈ −∆ẽ · pe × 0.57.
       These numbers grow very large when aggregated across the many households worldwide that
have received home energy reports. As of January 2017, opower.com reports that Opower participant
households have saved 11.6 billion kWh of energy. The total effects are thus 11.6 × 109 /1875 ≈ 6
million times those reported in the table. Thus, if one ignores non-energy costs, one would calculate
that the total social welfare gains from HERs was $1.22 billion, whereas adjusting for our estimate of
non-energy costs gives an estimate of $600 million. Thus, this rough calculation suggests that ignoring
non-energy costs causes the total social welfare gains for home energy reports to be overstated by
$620 million.

          Table A16: Social Welfare Effects of a Full Home Energy Report Program

                                                          (1)            (2)
               Panel A: Benefits and Costs Other than Consumer Welfare ($/recipient)
             (+) Externality reduction                           53
             (-) Retailer net revenue loss                       58
                     Retail electricity cost savings            234
                     Electricity acquisition cost savings       176
             (-) Implementation cost                             32
             (=) ∆Welfare, excluding consumer welfare           -37

                 Panel B: Consumer Welfare and Social Welfare Effect ($/recipient)
           Assumption:                           ∆V = −∆ẽ · pe ∆V ≈ −∆ẽ · pe × 0.57
           Consumer welfare gain (∆V )                234                 134
           ∆Welfare                                   197                 97
Notes: See text for details.




  29
    http://www.eia.gov/forecasts/aeo/electricity generation.cfm
  30
    Opower (2014) reports that the company has a 65 percent gross margin in 2013, which would suggest that the price
overstates program implementation cost. On the other hand, the company operated at a net loss through that year,
suggesting that the gross margin is actually not sufficient to cover sales, marketing, R&D, and other relevant overhead.


                                                          72
Online Appendix                                                                            Allcott and Kessler


E     Machine Learning Intermediate Results

      Table A17: Machine Learning: Tuning Parameters and Performance Statistics
                                     Panel A: Tuning Parameters
                             (1)       (2)        (3)              (4)                       (5)         (6)
                                                Elastic      Random Forest                Imai and    Imai and
                            Ridge    Elastic      Net          Number of                  Ratkovic    Ratkovic
                          Regression  Net     Fraction of  Candidate Variables             (2013)      (2013)
 Training Set Number          λ         λ    Full Solution    at Each Split                  λ1          λ2
 1                          2726      500          0.1              3                       -5.19       -5.06
 2                          2730      500         0.15              3                       -5.14       -4.82
 3                          1581        1         0.15              1                       -5.23       -5.14
 4                          1480      200         0.15              1                       -5.02       -5.25
 5                          2698       10         0.2               1                       -5.22       -5.55
                       Panel B: Performance Statistics When Predicting WTP
                                                    (1)        (2)
                                              Average WTP     Root
                                             Conditional on   Mean-
                                              Above-Median   Squared
                               Method        Predicted WTP    Error
                               Elastic net         3.32        7.28
                               Ridge               3.29        7.28
                               Random forest       3.19        7.29
                 Panel C: Performance Statistics When Predicting Energy Savings
                                                                  (1)
                                                               Average
                                                          Winter 2015-2016
                                                          Treatment Effect
                                                           Conditional on
                                                            Above-Median
                                    Method                 Predicted Effect
                                    Gradient forest             0.0528
                                    Imai and Ratkovic           0.0039
Notes: See Section VI for details. In step 1 described in the text, we partitioned the sample into five test sets
and predicted WTP and energy savings in each test set using training data from the other four. Panel A
presents the optimal tuning parameters in each of the five training sets. For ridge regression, we used the R
package ridge.cv. For elastic nets, we used the train script from the caret package. For random forests, we
used tuneRF. For Imai and Ratkovic (2013), we used FindIt. For Athey, Imbens, and Tibshirani (2016), we
used gradient.forest. Panel B presents performance statistics for the three algorithms used to predict WTP.
We used the elastic net predictions for step 2 of the targeting procedure because it performed best on the
metric in column 1. Panel C presents performance statistics for the two algorithms used to predict winter
2015-2016 energy savings. We used the gradient forest predictions for step 2 of the targeting procedure
because it performed best on this metric.




                                                       73
