NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

THE CHOICE CHANNEL OF FINANCIAL INNOVATION
Felipe S. Iachan
Plamen T. Nenov
Alp Simsek
Working Paper 21686
http://www.nber.org/papers/w21686

NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
October 2015, Revised January 2020

We would like to thank Marios Angeletos, Ricardo Caballero, Nicolae Garleanu, Simon Gilchrist,
Bernard Herskovic, Ron Kaniel, Chen Lian, Andrei Shleifer, and participants at numerous
conferences and seminars for helpful comments. Masao Fukui, Rafael C. Araujo, and Cecilie
Øiulfstad provided outstanding research assistance. Simsek acknowledges support from the
National Science Foundation (NSF) under Grant Number SES-1455319. Any opinions, findings,
conclusions or recommendations expressed in this material are those of the authors and do not
necessarily reflect the views of the NSF or the National Bureau of Economic Research. Iachan
acknowledges that this study was financed in part by the Coordenação de Aperfeiçoamento de
Pessoal de Nível Superior - Brasil (CAPES) - Finance Code 001.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.
© 2015 by Felipe S. Iachan, Plamen T. Nenov, and Alp Simsek. All rights reserved. Short
sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission
provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.

The Choice Channel of Financial Innovation
Felipe S. Iachan, Plamen T. Nenov, and Alp Simsek
NBER Working Paper No. 21686
October 2015, Revised January 2020
JEL No. E21,E43,E44,G11,G12
ABSTRACT
Financial innovation in recent decades has expanded portfolio choice. We investigate how greater
choice affects investors’ savings and asset returns. We establish a choice channel by which
greater portfolio choice increases investors’ savings—by enabling them to earn the aggregate risk
premium or to take speculative positions. In equilibrium, portfolio customization (access to risky
assets beyond the market portfolio) reduces the risk-free rate. Participation (access to the market
portfolio) reduces the risk premium but typically increases the risk-free rate. Empirically, stock
market participants in the U.S. save more than nonparticipants, and have increasingly dispersed
portfolio returns, consistent with the choice channel.

Felipe S. Iachan
FGV EPGE
Praia de Botafogo, 190/1115
Rio de Janeiro, RJ, Brazil
fiachan@gmail.com
Plamen T. Nenov
Norwegian Business School (BI)
Nydalsveien 37 0484 Oslo, Norway
plamen.nenov@bi.no

Alp Simsek
Department of Economics, E52-552
MIT
50 Memorial Drive
Cambridge, MA 02142
and NBER
asimsek@mit.edu

A latest version of the paper is available at
https://www.dropbox.com/s/tvi2imjct966r7h/financialInnovationSaving.pdf?dl=0

Stock Market Participation

.6
fraction
.4
.5

1970

.9
.5 .6 .7 .8
share of funds

.7

.8

number of funds (log)
6 7 8 9 10

.9

Mutual Funds and ETFs

1975

1980

1985

1990

1995

2000

2005

2010

2015

year
funds (log)

Top 5 fund styles (share)

.2

billions US$ (log)
7
8
9
10

11

.3

ET Derivatives Amt. Outstanding

1950

1970

1990

2010

year

1985

unweighted

income-weighted

wealth-weighted

1990

1995

2000
year

2005

2010

2015

Figure 1: The left panel shows the fraction of households in the U.S. that invested in stocks
over the period 1947-2013. The right top panel shows the number of mutual funds and
exchange-traded funds in the U.S and the share of the top 5 fund styles. The right bottom
panel plots the amount of outstanding exchange traded derivatives (in year 2000 U.S. dollars).
Sources: Authors’calculations using data from the Michigan Survey of Consumer Finances
(1947-1977), the PSID (1984), and the Survey of Consumer Finances (1989-2013)); CRSP
Mutual Funds Database; Bank for International Settlements.
Financial innovation in recent decades has vastly increased households’portfolio choices.
In the 1950s, a typical household in the U.S. had limited choice in constructing her savings
portfolio. She could hold bank deposits, and perhaps save in her own house, but mutual
funds and well-diversi…ed equity positions were out of reach. These days, largely due to
…nancial innovation, a comparable household has inexpensive access to a rich set of …nancial
instruments. The left panel of Figure 1 shows that stock market participation in the U.S.
has increased from about 10% of households in the early 1950s to more than 50% (in wealthweighted terms, about 90%) by the end of the 1990s. Portfolio customization has also
increased: households can choose from a plethora of passive or active mutual funds, hedge
funds, retirement funds, or ETFs. They can also construct their own portfolios by trading
stocks, bonds, or derivatives at low transaction costs. The right panels of Figure 1 show
that mutual funds with di¤erent investment styles and exchange-traded derivatives, both
of which facilitate portfolio customization, have been growing rapidly since the early 1980s
(until the recent …nancial crisis).

1

A natural question is how innovations that expand portfolio choice a¤ect investors’
consumption-savings decisions and asset prices. A traditional macroeconomics literature
that studies precautionary savings predicts that, with greater portfolio choice, investors
should save less (see, for instance, Bewley, 1977, Huggett, 1993, Aiyagari, 1994). The idea
is that uninsured background risks induce agents to save for precautionary reasons. Therefore, greater portfolio choice that improves the sharing (or hedging) of background risks
should reduce desired savings. For instance, when investors participate in the stock market,
they could hedge their labor income risks by reducing their positions in the companies or
industries in which they are employed. This would typically reduce desired savings, and
in equilibrium, also increase interest rates (see Elul, 1997 for a formalization and Carvajal
et al., 2012 for a recent contribution).
While precautionary saving is certainly important, empirical evidence suggests that
greater portfolio choice does not necessarily lead to improved sharing of background risks.
Most investors tend to overinvest in domestic stocks (French and Poterba, 1991), as well as
in own company or related stocks (e.g., Benartzi, 2001; Poterba, 2003; Døskeland and Hvide,
2011). If stock market participants do not hedge their background risks, they might also not
lower their savings. Figure 2 illustrates using data from the Panel Study of Income Dynamics (PSID) that the U.S. households that participate in the stock market have on average a
considerably higher saving rate than nonparticipants (and the di¤erence remains signi…cant
after including various controls such as income and wealth). Moreover, while there is a wellknown negative trend in saving rates since the 1980s, the trend has been much weaker for
participants. Put di¤erently, stock market participants have increased their saving relative
to nonparticipants since the 1980s.
Motivated by this evidence, we o¤er an alternative channel by which greater portfolio
choice— in the form of market participation or customization— increases investors’savings. In
our model, investors with standard Epstein-Zin preferences hold assets to transfer wealth to
a future period. Investors optimally choose saving portfolios that consist of the risk-free asset
and various risky assets. Each investor has access to the risk-free asset, but investors have
limited and (possibly) heterogeneous access to risky assets. We capture …nancial innovation
as an improvement in investors’access sets. We also allow the investors to have heterogeneous
beliefs about risky asset returns, which provides one rationale for portfolio customization.
In benchmark models with homogeneous beliefs, investors would only need one risky asset—
2

.2
.15
Active Saving Rate
0
.05
.1
-.05

1984

1989

1994

1999

2004

2009

Year
Non-stock owners
Linear fit - non-stocks owners

Stock owners
Linear fit - stock owners

Figure 2: Saving and stock market participation. Source: Panel Study of Income Dynamics
Wealth Supplement.
namely, the market portfolio— to construct their optimal portfolios. In contrast, investors
in our model will demand customized portfolios because they will speculate based on their
di¤erent beliefs.
Our main result delineates two assumptions under which greater portfolio choice increases
savings. First, we take the elasticity of intertemporal substitution (EIS) to be greater than
one, which we view as a modeling device to generate a savings function that is increasing
in asset returns (see Section 2). Second, we assume that …nancial innovation does not
provide additional bene…ts in terms of hedging the investor’s background risks such as income
‡uctuations. We then show that greater choice induces the investor to save more. This
result has a simple intuition. Greater portfolio choice increases the investor’s perceived riskadjusted return, either by enabling her to earn the aggregate risk premium (in the case of
market participation) or by allowing her to take speculative positions (in the case of portfolio
customization). As long as the savings function is increasing in asset returns, the investor
responds by increasing her savings. Put di¤erently, with greater choice in …nancial markets,
saving becomes more attractive, and the investor does more of it.
How does the choice channel a¤ect asset prices and returns in equilibrium? We theoretically address this question using a canonical case of our model in which the available …nancial
assets consist of a market portfolio of all cash ‡ows and several other risky assets in zero net
3

supply. We also assume a log-normal approximation for portfolio returns (as in Campbell
and Viceira, 2002), which leads to a tractable mean-variance analysis. Greater choice, which
increases investors’ savings, exerts an upward pressure on asset prices. However, …nancial
innovation might also generate relative price changes across asset classes. The net e¤ect on
each price depends on the type of innovation.
Our main asset pricing result concerns portfolio customization, which we capture with
improved access to an arbitrary subset of the risky assets other than the market portfolio.
Under a symmetry assumption on investors’ beliefs, we show that greater customization
reduces the risk-free rate while leaving risk premia unchanged. In particular, customization
reduces the expected return on each (risk-free or risky) asset. For intuition, imagine …nancial
assets as a forest that contains several types of trees (a metaphor for individual stocks,
industries, or mutual funds with di¤erent managers or strategies). Customization enables
investors to expand their positions in the trees about which they are optimistic (relative
to the average investor), while reducing their positions in other trees. Moreover, for every
relatively optimistic investor that buys a particular tree, there are relatively pessimistic
investors that sell that tree. Consequently, investors collectively like the forest more, in view
of the choice channel, but the relative appeal of individual trees remains unchanged. We
show that this logic is general and implies that customization increases the valuation (and
reduces the expected return) of each tree in tandem.
We also analyze the asset pricing implications of greater market participation, modeled as
an improvement in investors’access to the market portfolio. Participation tends to increase
asset prices in view of the choice channel, but it also increases the demand for risky assets
relative to the safe asset. We …nd that these relative demand e¤ects are strong, whereas the
choice channel is relatively weak in this context. In particular, while greater participation
always reduces the risk premium, it typically increases the risk-free rate— unlike greater
customization.
As we explain in Section 3.4, our asset pricing results can shed some light on the dynamics
of the interest rate in the U.S. both in the decades before and after the 1980s due to di¤erent
types of choice-expanding innovations taking place during the two periods. There are of
course many other contributing factors to these trends that are left out of our analysis.
Therefore, in our empirical analysis we focus largely on the cross-sectional implications for
investors’savings.
4

.16
.14
Std. deviation
.1
.12
.08
.06
1984

1989

1994

1999

2004

2009

Year
Std. dev. of returns

Fitted values

Figure 3: Trends in the cross-sectional standard deviation of (implicit) return on wealth
among stock holders (excluding business owners). See Online Appendix D for an adjustment
that deals with the data frequency.
We investigate two testable implications using household saving and balance sheet data
from the PSID. First, the choice channel predicts that stock market participants save more
than nonparticipants— and more so in recent years that feature greater customization opportunities. Empirically, we …nd that the positive association between stock market participation and saving illustrated in Figure 2 remains after controlling for demographic characteristics, education, income, wealth, and household …xed e¤ects; as well as after instrumenting for
participation using lagged participation. In addition, the widening di¤erence in the saving
of participants and non-participants is robust to a number of controls including education,
income and wealth.
Second, the choice channel also predicts that greater customization opportunities in recent years increase the dispersion of portfolio returns for stock market participants. Figure 3
illustrates that the cross-sectional standard deviation of the portfolio returns of stock holders has indeed increased in recent years. We show that the trend is not driven by business
owners, and it is robust to controlling for investors’risk taking (portfolio share of stocks),
demographics, income, and total wealth. Consistent with an increase in customization and
speculation, similar households seem to receive more dispersed portfolio returns in recent
years.

5

The rest of the paper is organized as follows. After discussing the related literature,
we present in Section 1 an example that illustrates the choice channel and motivates the
rest of our analysis. Section 2 introduces the basic environment and establishes the choice
channel. Section 3 extends the basic framework into a general equilibrium model with
endogenous prices, establishing our asset pricing results on market participation and portfolio
customization. Section 4 presents our empirical results and Section 5 concludes. Appendix
A contains selected extensions and proofs omitted from the main text. Online Appendices
B and C contain the remaining extensions and proofs, and Online Appendix D contains the
details of our empirical analysis.
Related literature. Our paper is related to a large body of “precautionary savings”
literature, which can be divided into two strands based on the sources of risks. The …rst
strand, which we discussed earlier, focuses on background risks such as income ‡uctuations.
A second strand examines investment (rate-of-return) risks, and emphasizes that enabling
…rms (or entrepreneurs) to share these risks can increase aggregate investment. The logic
is similar to our choice channel and relies on a relatively large elasticity of intertemporal
substitution. However, our results are di¤erent because we analyze households’savings as
opposed to …rms’investment. Consequently, we show that …nancial innovation can reduce the
interest rate, whereas this literature emphasizes that …nancial innovation can raise investment
while still increasing the interest rate (see Angeletos and Calvet, 2006 and Angeletos, 2007).
In addition, we show that portfolio customization increases savings due to speculation as
opposed to risk sharing.
In parallel and independent work, Guzman and Stiglitz (2016) and Ehling et al. (2018)
also analyze households’consumption and savings decisions in environments with belief disagreements. Guzman and Stiglitz (2016) emphasize that disagreements increase investors’
perceived wealth, which they refer to as pseudo-wealth, and argue that pseudo-wealth can
generate business cycle ‡uctuations. We emphasize the case in which the substitution e¤ect
dominates the wealth e¤ect and we analyze the longer run implications for asset returns as
opposed to business cycle ‡uctuations. Ehling et al. (2018) analyze more speci…cally how
belief disagreements about the in‡ation rate a¤ect the real interest rate, focusing on the case
in which the wealth e¤ect dominates (as in Guzman and Stiglitz, 2016). Relatedly, Schmidt
and Toda (2018) analyze investors’ consumption and savings decisions in response to bad
6

news. As one example of bad news, they consider the shrinkage of investment opportunities,
which leads to a result that is similar to our choice channel. We emphasize …nancial innovation as opposed to news as the driving force behind the change in investors’choice sets. We
also obtain several general equilibrium results for asset returns.
Our paper is part of a literature that analyzes the asset pricing implications of …nancial
innovation in an environment with belief disagreements.1 Fostel and Geanakoplos (2016)
focus on …nancial innovations that relax collateral constraints, which enable investors to selfselect into tranches they value relatively more and raise the price of the underlying collateral
(as well as investment). While the logic of this result is similar to our choice channel,
the testable implications are di¤erent. Our analysis does not rely on collateral constraints,
allowing us to focus on plain-vanilla saving decisions, whereas the analysis in Fostel and
Geanakoplos (2016) might be more relevant for households that borrow to purchase a house
or a durable good. We also focus on the risk-free rate whereas most of this literature takes
the risk-free rate as given and focuses on the relative price of a single risky asset.
Another strand of this literature emphasizes that belief disagreements and speculation
can increase portfolio risks, and more so with …nancial innovation (see, for instance, Simsek,
2013b; Kondor and Koszegi, 2017). We show that speculation can also increase savings. Our
analysis is positive and complements the papers that focus on normative issues surrounding
speculation (e.g., Brunnermeier et al. (2014); Gilboa et al. (2014); Posner and Weyl (2013);
Dávila (2017); Heyerdahl-Larsen and Walden (2017)). More broadly, our paper is part of a
large literature that analyzes the e¤ects of belief disagreements on …nancial markets.2
Our paper is also related to an empirical household …nance literature that analyzes
whether …nancial innovation can mitigate some households’ reluctance to save. We discuss these papers and how they relate to the choice channel in Section 4.4. We contribute to
this literature by providing new empirical evidence that suggests stock market participation
1
See, for instance, Fostel and Geanakoplos (2012); Simsek (2013a); Geerolf (2017); Gong and Phelan
(2016); Buss et al. (2017). More broadly, there is a vast literature on …nancial innovation and asset prices. In
addition to the papers mentioned earlier, see, e.g., Allen and Gale (1994); Calvet et al. (2004); Brunnermeier
and Sannikov (2014).
2
An incomplete list includes Lintner, 1969; Miller, 1977; Harrison and Kreps, 1978; Varian, 1985; Harris
and Raviv, 1993; Detemple and Murthy, 1994; Chen et al., 2002; Scheinkman and Xiong, 2003; Buraschi and
Jiltsov, 2006; Jouini and Napp, 2007; Dumas et al., 2009; Xiong and Yan, 2009; Geanakoplos, 2010; Banerjee
and Kremer, 2010; Hong and Sraer, 2016; Barberis et al., 2018; Cao, 2017; Dumas et al., 2017; Caballero
and Simsek, 2017.

7

is associated with higher savings.
Finally, we contribute to a literature on limited stock market participation.3 We theoretically and empirically analyze the e¤ect of participation on savings, while also investigating
its asset pricing implications. Our result that greater participation reduces the risk premium is well known (see, for instance, Mankiw and Zeldes, 1991). The result that greater
participation increases the risk-free rate is more novel. Basak and Cuoco (1998) obtain a
similar result in a dynamic environment in which participants’ consumption share evolves
endogenously, and nonparticipants are restricted to have log utility.

1

A Motivating Example

We …rst present a simple example that illustrates the choice channel and provides the motivation for our more general model. Consider an economy with two dates, t 2 f0; 1g, and
a single consumption good. At date 1, the economy can be in one of two states, denoted
by z 2 fshine; raing. There is a …nancial asset in unit supply that represents claims to
all output in period 1. We refer to this asset as the market portfolio and denote it with
subscript m. Its payo¤ at date 1 is normalized to one (which does not depend on the state
for simplicity).
There are two types of investors which we refer to as “optimists”and “pessimists,”with
heterogeneous prior beliefs about the state z, denoted by q opt (z) and q pes (z). Optimists
assign a higher probability to the shine state, q opt (shine) > q pes (shine). Investors have
time-separable risk-neutral preferences and have a discount factor of one between dates 0
and 1; they simply maximize the sum of their own expected consumption across the two
dates.
They can take long or short positions in the available …nancial assets, as long as they
obtain nonnegative consumption at each date and state. Investors have large endowments
of the consumption good and equal endowments of the market portfolio at date 0, and have
no endowment of the consumption good at date 1.
First, suppose the only available …nancial asset is the market portfolio. In this case, the
3

An incomplete list includes Heaton and Lucas (1999); Attanasio et al. (2002); Vissing-Jørgensen and
Attanasio (2003); Cao et al. (2005); Gomes and Michaelides (2008); Guvenen (2009); Favilukis (2013); Calvet
et al. (2017).

8

equilibrium price of the market portfolio equals its constant payo¤, Pm = 1, which re‡ects
the investors’common valuation. At this price, investors are indi¤erent between consuming
and saving.
Next, suppose that, thanks to …nancial innovation, there is also an Arrow-Debreu security
for the shine state in zero net supply, denoted by s, that has payo¤ 's (shine) = 1 and
's (rain) = 0. Together with the market portfolio, this security completes the …nancial
market. Speci…cally, investors can also construct a synthetic Arrow-Debreu security for the
rain state by buying one unit of the market portfolio and selling one unit of s.
In equilibrium, optimists invest only in the Arrow-Debreu security for the shine state,
as they assign a relatively high probability to this state, q opt (shine) > q pes (shine) (and
they invest zero and consume nothing in the other state). Consequently, optimists are
indi¤erent to hold this security, which implies, Ps = q opt (shine) : Analogously, pessimists
are indi¤erent to hold the synthetic Arrow-Debreu security for the rain state, which implies,
Pm Ps = q pes (rain). Combining these expressions, the price of the market portfolio is,
Pm = q opt (shine) + q pes (rain) > 1,
where the inequality follows since q opt (shine) > q pes (shine) = 1 q pes (rain).
Comparing the two cases shows that …nancial innovation increases the price of the market
portfolio. Intuitively, providing investors with greater portfolio choice makes saving more
attractive, since investors self-select into holding assets or portfolios in which they perceive
greater returns. If prices did not change, investors would increase their savings (because
they have linear utility that ensures their savings increase in returns). We refer to this
e¤ect as the choice channel of …nancial innovation. In equilibrium, greater desired savings
translate into greater asset prices (and lower asset returns according to the average belief).
We next systematically analyze a more general model and establish the robustness of the
choice channel as well as its asset-pricing implications for di¤erent types of innovation.

2

The Choice Channel and Savings

Consider an economy with two dates, t 2 f0; 1g, and a single consumption good (see Remark
1 later in the section on how to interpret our two period model in a dynamic context). The

9

uncertainty is described by the realization of the random variable, z 2Z. There are …nancial
assets denoted by the subscript j 2 ff g [ J, which make a nonnegative payo¤ at date 1.
We use 'j (z) to denote the asset payo¤ in state z. The asset f captures the risk-free asset
that makes a constant payment in all states, 'f (z) = 1 > 0 for each z. The set J captures
risky assets. We assume (until Section 3) that the state space Z is …nite, and the vectors,
'j (z) z2Z for j 2 ff g [ J, are linearly independent so that each asset is non-redundant.
Each asset is traded in a competitive market at some price, Pj > 0. In this section, we take
these prices as given and analyze how …nancial innovation that expands an investor’s choices
a¤ects her savings. We endogenize the prices in Section 3.
Speci…cally, consider an investor (denoted by superscript i) that starts with some endowment of the consumption good at date 0, denoted by Y0 > 0, as well as some positions on
P
…nancial assets, fx 1;j gj . We denote her …nancial wealth by W0 = j x 1;j Pj . The investor
also receives some endowment of the consumption good in state z of date 1, denoted by
L (z), which can be thought of as her labor (or other non-…nancial) income. The investor
can invest in the risk-free asset f , as well as an exogenous and potentially limited subset of
risky …nancial assets, J i J, which we refer to as her access set. We will formally capture
the choice-expanding …nancial innovations by exogenously enlarging the investor’s access set.
To simplify the notation, we assume throughout that investors are identical except, possibly,
for their access sets and their beliefs about z (as we describe below).
The investor chooses her consumption and total asset holdings at date 0, denoted by C0
and A0 , as well as positions in …nancial assets in her access set, fxj gj2ff g[J i , to solve,
max

C0 ;A0 ;fxj gj2ff g[J i

s.t.
and

(1)

U0 (C0 ; (C1 (z))Z )

C0 + A0 = Y0 + W0 where A0 =
C1 (z) = L (z) +

X

j2ff g[J i

X

Pj xj ,

j2ff g[J i

xj 'j (z) for each z 2 Z.

Here, C1 (z) denotes the total wealth in state z of date 1, which the investor consumes because
there is no subsequent period. The second line captures her budget constraint at date 0 in
terms of consumption and asset holdings. Note that the investor can take unrestricted long
or short positions (we allow for short-selling constraints in Online Appendix B.3).

10

We assume the investor has recursive Epstein-Zin preferences, given by,
1 1="

U0 =
where U1 =

C0
1

1="

1

1 1="

+

E i C1 (z)1

U1
1

1=(1

1

1="
)

,

(2)

.

Here, " and denote, respectively, the elasticity of intertemporal substitution (EIS) and the
coe¢ cient of risk aversion. The expectation operator, E i [ ], is speci…c to the investor since
we allow for heterogeneous beliefs about z. We also assume the beliefs are dogmatic in the
sense that investors do not change their beliefs after they observe the prices. We will use
belief disagreements of this type to capture investors’demand for customized assets.
It is well known that the presence of background risks, L (z), when combined with
Epstein-Zin preferences, creates a precautionary savings motive. A traditional macroeconomic literature has focused on this precautionary component of savings, and argued that
…nancial innovation should reduce overall savings. We derive a version of this argument in
Online Appendix B.1. Intuitively, if …nancial innovation provides investors with new opportunities to hedge their background risks, then this weakens their precautionary savings
motive. If several other assumptions are added— so as to keep the nonprecautionary part of
the savings constant— then …nancial innovation also reduces overall savings.
Set against this traditional benchmark, we investigate the e¤ect of …nancial innovation
on investors’ nonprecautionary savings. To this end, we assume …nancial innovation does
not provide the investor with additional opportunities to hedge background risks.
P
Assumption 1. There exists scalars, flj gj2ff g[J i , such that L (z) = j2ff g[J i lj 'j (z) for
each z 2 Z.
The assumption holds when the investor’s future endowment is constant. It is also satis…ed if
the investor’s future endowment is perfectly correlated with a combination of the risky assets
in her access set. Therefore, …nancial innovation that expands the set J i does not bring any
additional risk-sharing bene…ts. While Assumption 1 provides analytical tractability, it is
not strictly necessary. As we show in Appendix A.1 with a numerical exercise, our main
result continues to apply when there are uninsurable background risks, as long as …nancial
innovation does not substantially a¤ect the investors’ability to hedge those risks.
We next present our main result that formalizes the choice channel. We capture choice11

expanding innovations as an expansion of the investor’s access set from some J i;old to a
o
n
i;old
i;old
i;old
i;new
i;old
and C0i;new ; Ai;new
; xi;new
greater set J
J . We let C0 ; A0 ; xj
0
j
j
j

denote the solution to investor’s problem (1) corresponding to, respectively, the old and the
new access sets. Note that the investor’s savings is equal to the change in investors’asset
holdings within the period [cf. Eq. (1)],
S0i = Y0

C0i = Ai0

W0 =

X

xij

xi

1;j

Pj :

(3)

j2ff g[J

Since asset prices (and thus, W0 ) are held constant, the savings is determined by the desired
asset holdings, Ai0 .
Proposition 1 (Choice Channel). Suppose Assumption 1 holds and " > 1 (so that the
investor’s asset holdings are increasing in the interest rate). Then, …nancial innovation increases the investor’s asset holdings (and thus, savings), Ai;new
Ai;old
, with strict inequality
0
0
i;new
if xj
6= 0 for some j 2 J i;new n J i;old .
The result establishes conditions under which greater portfolio choice induces the investor
to save more. Moreover, the inequality is strict as long as the investor takes a nonzero position
on some new asset— so that the assets are not completely redundant from her perspective.
We provide a sketch proof for this result (completed in Appendix A.2), which is also
useful for understanding the intuition. Suppose that the investor has zero future endowment, L (z) = 0: As we show in the appendix, this is without loss of generality, in view of
Assumption 1, since an investor with non-zero future labor endowment can be hypothetically
thought of as selling her endowment and repurchasing assets.
The investor’s problem can then be split into two parts. Conditional on asset holdings,
A0 , the investor solves the portfolio problem
V1 (A0 ) =
s.t.

X

max

fxj gff g[J i

E i C1 (z)1

1=(1

Pj xj = A0 and C1 (z) =

j2ff g[J i

)

(4)

;

X

xj 'j (z) .

j2ff g[J i

In turn, given the value function V1 ( ), she chooses asset holdings to solve the intertemporal

12

problem,
max (W0
A0

A0 )1

1="

+ (V1 (A0 ))1

1="

:

(5)

The result then follows from three observations. First, the portfolio problem is linearly
homogeneous, which implies that the value function is linear in asset holdings,
i
A0 :
V1 (A0 ) = Rce

(6)

i
We refer to Rce
as the investor’s certainty-equivalent return. Second, and most importantly,
i;old
i;new
, because it
Rce
…nancial innovation increases the certainty-equivalent return, Rce
expands the choice set of feasible portfolios. Third, in the intertemporal problem, a greater
risk-adjusted return implies an increase in asset holdings in view of the assumption " > 1.
Intuitively, with greater portfolio choice, the investor’s certainty-equivalent portfolio return increases. This creates substitution and income e¤ects. On the one hand, the investor
…nds saving more attractive, which induces her to save more. On the other hand, the investor
also feels richer, which induces her to consume more and save less. The substitution e¤ect
dominates, and …nancial innovation increases savings, whenever the EIS is su¢ ciently high.
As this intuition suggests, the result can be further generalized. The particular comparative statics we focus on, the expansion of the access set from J i;old to some J i;new , does not
play an important role beyond ensuring that the investor has greater choice. Any other …nancial innovation that expands the investor’s choice would lead to the same e¤ect. Financial
innovations that increase the investor’s marginal return without a¤ecting her choice would
also induce her to save more. For instance, …nancial innovation that decreases participation
or trading costs in a way to increase the net marginal return also increases savings.
Perhaps less obviously, …nancial innovations that improve market liquidity and enable the
investor to retrade more frequently would have the same e¤ect. To illustrate this, consider a
version of the model in which there is an intermediate date, t = 1=2, that features additional
states, s 2 S. These states a¤ect investors’ beliefs about the likelihood of payo¤-states,
z 2Z. The investor’s beliefs obey the law of iterated expectations, so the baseline analysis
is a special case in which the investors choose a buy-and-hold strategy and they keep the
same portfolio regardless of the state realization at the intermediate date. Now suppose
that, thanks to …nancial innovation, the investor can costlessly adjust her portfolio at the
intermediate date. The investor solves a version of problem (8) in which she chooses a

13

collection of portfolios for each state, fxj (s)gff g[J i
. It is then easy to see that the
s2S
expanded choice increases the investor’s perceived certainty-equivalent return on her …nancial
portfolio, Rce , which in turn induces her to increase her savings at date 0.
The result requires a relatively high EIS, which ensures that greater portfolio return
increases savings. Using di¤erent methodologies, empirical studies …nd a wide range of
estimates for the EIS (see Hall, 1988; Blundell et al., 1994; Attanasio and Browning, 1995;
Vissing-Jørgensen, 2002; Vissing-Jørgensen and Attanasio, 2003; Gruber, 2013). Most of the
studies assume that investors with separable or Epstein-Zin preferences fully observe the
changes in asset returns and make optimal decisions. Even though we also make the same
assumptions, some of these features are not central for our analysis. What is important is
that investors have an asset holding (or saving) function that is increasing in their perceived
marginal return. We believe this assumption is plausible. Moreover, under some behavioral
biases such as limited attention, investors can have an increasing asset holding function even
if their estimated EIS is below one.4 Thus, we view the condition, " > 1, as a simple way of
generating an increasing asset holding function.5
The result also exploits the irrelevance of background risks (Assumption 1), which enables
us to focus on nonprecautionary savings. A natural question is what happens when there
are some uninsurable background risks, so that …nancial innovation can a¤ect precautionary
savings. We address this concern in Appendix A.1 using a numerical example that also
features uninsurable labor income risk. An increase in the risk-adjusted portfolio return
(via greater choice) increases savings also in this context even in the presence of uninsurable
risk. For each level of the portfolio return gain, we also calculate the required decrease in
4
To illustrate this, consider an investor with Epstein-Zin preferences with " > 1 who makes consumption
and saving decisions over several periods. The investor has limited attention and observes the asset returns
only with some probability. In any period, if she observes the asset returns, then she follows a fully optimal
consumption plan. If she does not observe the returns, then she follows a default rule: say, she consumes
and saves according to her earlier plan (many other default rules would also work). This investor’s expected
asset holdings and savings would also increase in response to an increase in returns (albeit not as much as
in our model). Thus, our qualitative results would continue to apply in this setting. However, the investor’s
consumption growth would not increase by a large magnitude after a (surprise) increase in the interest rate.
Thus, an empirical strategy that focuses on consumption growth over a relatively short horizon and a fully
rational model will estimate ^" < 1.
5
Most of the recent asset pricing literature works with " > 1. This is because when " < 1 (and risk
aversion satis…es, > 1) the Epstein-Zin preferences lead to unintuitive and unrealistic predictions. For
instance, under this con…guration, an increase in the volatility of output growth would lead to an increase
in asset valuations (see Bansal and Yaron, 2004).

14

the uninsurable risk that would keep the investor’s overall savings constant (see Figure 8 in
the appendix). When the investor has relatively standard preferences (" = 1:5 and = 3),
and her portfolio return gains are calibrated using the Sharpe ratios observed in practice, it
takes a large decline in the uninsurable risk (more than 15 percent) to neutralize the choice
channel.
Remark 1 (Interpreting the Two Period Model). We view our two period model as capturing
a single portfolio choice and savings decision. Consequently, we also view the time length
between the two periods as corresponding to a typical planning horizon for investors when
they make their portfolio choice decisions (such as one year). In a dynamic setting, investors
would make many such decisions, but each decision would be subject to similar forces as
in our model. Hence, our model can be viewed as isolating mechanisms that are likely to
apply also in dynamic models. That said, dynamics would generate additional e¤ects that
could interfere with these mechanisms. A speci…c concern is the market selection hypothesis,
which posits that investors with less accurate beliefs will disappear in the long run (see Blume
and Easley (2006) for a formalization). In recent work, Borovicka (2018) shows that this
hypothesis does not necessarily apply when investors have Epstein-Zin preferences (as opposed
to separable preferences). In fact, he …nds that investors with di¤erent beliefs coexist for a
broad range of plausible parameterizations for the elasticity of substitution and relative risk
aversion (including the parameters that we use in our numerical analysis in Section 3.3).
This suggests that our results are likely to be robust to the market selection hypothesis.

3

The Choice Channel and Asset Returns

This section investigates how the choice channel a¤ects asset prices and returns in general
equilibrium. To facilitate analytical tractability, we make several simplifying assumptions.
We …rst describe these assumptions and de…ne the equilibrium. We then characterize the
equilibrium in two special cases that establish our general equilibrium results, respectively, for
market participation and portfolio customization. We also provide a numerical analysis that
illustrates the quantitative strength of these results. We conclude the section by discussing
the extent to which our results are consistent with the trends in asset returns in developed
countries in postwar years.
There are several types of investors denoted by i 2 I, with masses ni
0 that satisfy
15

P

ni = 1. Investors are identical in all dimensions (including their endowments) except
possibly their market access and beliefs. We make the following analogue of Assumption 1.
Assumption 1G . L (z) = 0 and " > 1.
i

As before, we normalize the future endowments to zero (see Section 2). We also assume the
EIS is relatively high so that the choice channel is operational.
To endogenize asset prices, we impose additional structure on asset supplies and payo¤s.
Each asset j 2 J is in …xed supply denoted by j
0. The uncertainty is now described
by a K 1 vector of continuous risk factors, z = (z1 ; :::; zK )0 (in particular, the state space
is now given by, Z = RK ). The log payo¤ of a risky asset j 2 J can be written as a linear
combination of the risk factors,
log 'j (z) = F0j z;
where Fj is a K 1 vector. We assume investors’beliefs for z are normally distributed.
Assumption 2. Investor i’s prior belief for z has a Normal distribution, N ( iz ; z ), where
K
i
is the mean vector and z is the K K positive de…nite covariance matrix. In
z 2 R
addition, the K jJj matrix of asset loadings, F = [Fj ]j2J , has full rank.
We also …nd it convenient to work with gross and log asset returns de…ned by, respectively,
Rj (z) 'j (z) =A0 and rj (z) log Rj (z). Assumption 2 implies that the investor believes
log asset returns are jointly normally distributed with mean and variance given by,
E i [rj ] = (Fj )0

i
z

log Pj and var frj gj2J =

F0

z F.

(7)

Note that investors can disagree on the mean of asset returns but they agree on the variance
of log returns (for simplicity). As before, belief disagreements are dogmatic.
We de…ne the investor’s gross and log portfolio returns by, respectively, Rp (z)
C1 (z) =A0 and rp (z)
log Rp (z). We also write the gross return as a weighted-average
P
of asset returns, Rp (z) = j2ff g[J i ! j Rj (z) (with portfolio weights, ! j
xj Pj =A0 , that
sum to one). Despite Assumption 2, the log portfolio return is not necessarily normally
distributed. For analytical tractability, we assume the investor optimizes her portfolio after
approximating it with a normal distribution as in Campbell and Viceira (2002). This reduces

16

the portfolio problem (4) to mean-variance optimization,
i
rce

rf = max ! 0J i
!J i

where

i
j

= E i [rj ] +

i
Ji
j

2

2

(! 0J i

(8)

J i !J i ) ;

rf for each j.

(9)

i
i
Here, rce
= log Rce
denotes the log of the investor’s certainty-equivalent return from asset
holdings [cf. Eq. (6)]. The variable ij denotes the investor’s perceived risk premium on
asset j (de…ned as log E i [Rj ] log Rf ). The vectors iJ i and ! iJ i denote, respectively, the
risk premia and the portfolio weights corresponding to the risky assets in the access set. The
matrix J i represents the restriction of the covariance matrix to assets in J i . The investor
chooses her portfolio weights on risky assets (with the residual weight invested in the risk-free
asset) to trade o¤ expected return with risk.
The portfolio approximation in (8) becomes exact in the continuous time limit. Over
longer horizons, it provides insights for optimal portfolio choice, and it is often used in applied
work.6 In our numerical analysis, which relies on a calibration with one-year horizon, we
also calculate the exact equilibrium and show that the approximation error is negligible (see
Section 3.3). Hence, the main role of the portfolio approximation is to provide analytical
tractability.
In particular, problem (8) has a closed form solution given by,

! iJ i =

1

1
Ji

i
Ji

i
and rce
= rf +

1
2

i 0
Ji

1
Ji

i
Ji .

(10)

It is easy to check that expanding the access set, J i , increases the investor’s certaintyi
equivalent return, rce
, as in the previous section.
As before, the investor chooses her consumption and savings to maximize the intertemporal utility function in (2) given the certainty-equivalent return from her portfolio problem.
The solution can be written as
"

Ai0

=a

i
rce

(Y0 + W0 ) where a (rce ) =

6

exp (rce (" 1))
.
1 + " exp (rce (" 1))

(11)

For instance, Campbell and Viceira (2002) use a similar framework to analyze portfolio allocation for
long-term investors.

17

Here, a (rce ) describes the investors’e¤ective asset holding as a fraction of wealth. It is an
increasing function, as in the previous section, in view of the assumption " > 1.
The asset market clearing conditions can then be written as,
j Pj

=

X

fijj2ff g[J i g

i
ni ! ij a rce
(Y0 + W0 ) for each j 2 ff g [ J,

P
where W0 = j Pj j for each i. Here, we used xi
symmetric endowments (by assumption).

1;j

=

j,

(12)

which follows since investors have

De…nition 1 (Equilibrium). Under Assumptions 1G and 2, an equilibrium, ! iJ i ; Ai0 i ; Pj ,
is a collection such that the investors’ beliefs for asset returns and premiums are given by
(7) and (9), their portfolio weights and certainty-equivalent returns are given by (10), their
asset holdings are given by (11), and the asset markets clear [cf. Eq. (12)].
The following result establishes the existence of an equilibrium.
Proposition 2 (Existence). Under Assumptions 1G and 2, there exists an equilibrium with
Pj > 0 for each j 2 ff g [ J.
At this level of generality, we cannot characterize the equilibrium much further. We
thus analyze a canonical case that can accommodate the key aspects of recent …nancial
innovations.
Assumption 3. There exist K risky assets in total, J = fm; 1; :::; K 1g. The asset m is
in positive supply, m > 0, while the remaining risky assets, as well as the risk-free asset are
in zero net supply, j = 0 for j 6= m.
The …rst part ensures that the risky assets are su¢ cient for spanning all combinations of the
K risk factors. The second part says that one of the risky assets correspond to the market
portfolio, denoted by m, that represents all of the cash ‡ows generated by the economy’s productive assets. The remaining risky assets, j 2 f1; ::; K 1g, enable investors to customize
their risk exposures.
We also impose some structure on investors’access sets and beliefs. Speci…cally, investors’
types have two dimensions, fi = (iA ; iB )gi . The sub-type iA 2 IA captures the variation in
investors’ access to …nancial assets, while the sub-type iB 2 IB (which itself is a vector)
captures the variation in beliefs. In particular, investors with type iB 2 IB have the mean
18

belief about risk factors, izB = z + iB , where we de…ne z as a reference belief (which will
also correspond to the average belief). We make the following assumptions on beliefs.
Assumption 4.(i) The mass of type i = (iA ; iB ) investors is ni = niA niB , where niA (resp.
P
P
niB ) denotes the mass with access type iA (resp. iB ), with iA niA = 1 (resp. iB niB = 1).
(ii) For each belief type, iB 2 IB , the opposite belief type also exists, iB 2 IB , and has
equal mass, niB = n iB for each iB 2 IB .
(iii) Investors do not disagree on the market portfolio: F0m iB = 0; for each iB 2 IB .
The …rst part says that investors’beliefs are drawn independently of their choice set. The
second part is a mild symmetry assumption on the cross-sectional belief distribution. The
last part is arguably restrictive but its main role is to provide analytical tractability; our
results hold numerically also in the absence of this assumption (see Section 3.2 and Appendix
B.3). This part also ensures that investors agree on the risk-premium on the market portfolio,
i
m for each i [cf. Eq. (9)].
m

3.1

Market Participation

We next use this setup to analyze how di¤erent types of choice-expanding innovations a¤ect
asset returns. We start by analyzing market participation, which we capture with access to
asset m. Formally, there are two access types, iA 2 fn; pg, where J n = ; and J p = fmg.
Type n investors (nonparticipants) have access only to the risk-free asset. Type p investors
(participants) also have access to asset m. The following result provides a closed-form
characterization of equilibrium. To state the result, note that investors’certainty-equivalent
iA ;iB
iA
returns do not depend on their beliefs, rce
= rce
, because they disagree on nonmarket
assets but the only available …nancial asset is the market portfolio (disagreements will play
an important role when we analyze customization).
Lemma 1. Consider the above setup with limited participation in the market portfolio. In
equilibrium, investors’allocations only depend on their access type iA 2 fp; ng and:
(i) Participants’and nonparticipants’certainty-equivalent returns are,
p
rce
= rf +

2
m

2

m

n
and rce

rf

p
n
p
n
Participants have greater return and savings, rce
> rce
and a (rce
) > a (rce
):

19

(13)

(ii) The market risk premium and the risk-free rate,

m
m Pm

Y0 +
where Pm = exp F0m

z

+

m

2

m Pm

rf

=

m

and rf , are the solution to,

np a (rf )
p
np a (rce
)

,

(14)

p
np ) a (rf ) + np a (rce
),

(15)

1+

m

= (1

1

m

.

The …rst part derives the implications for the choice channel in the context of market participation. Market access increases the certainty-equivalent return by enabling the investors
to earn the aggregate risk premium. All else equal, this also implies market participants save
more than nonparticipants.
The second part characterizes the asset returns. To understand Eq. (14), note that the
market risk premium with full participation would be given by m =
m . Limited participation increases the risk premium because aggregate risk is shared among fewer investors,
who require greater premium. Eq. (15) is a market clearing condition for all assets, which
equates the value of the market portfolio to the aggregate savings. The next result describes
how …nancial innovation that increases participation, np 2 [0; 1], a¤ects asset returns.
Proposition 3 (Increased Participation). Consider the equilibrium characterized in Lemma
1. Financial innovation that increases the relative mass of participants, np , decreases the
risk premium, m , as well as the expected return on the market portfolio, rf + m .
The e¤ect on the risk-free rate rf is theoretically ambiguous. In our numerical analysis,
we also …nd that greater participation typically increases the risk-free rate, rf (see Section
3.3).
The result on the return on the market portfolio follows from the choice channel. Increased access to the market portfolio increases aggregate savings, as illustrated by Eqs. (13)
and (15), which increases the valuation of all assets. The result on the risk premium follows
from improved aggregate risk sharing, as illustrated by Eq. (14). This also implies that
greater participation increases the value of risky assets relative to the safe asset, which is
why the result on the risk-free rate is theoretically ambiguous.

20

3.2

Portfolio Customization

We next present our main general equilibrium results on customization. Suppose all investors
have access to the market portfolio (for simplicity) but they might have limited access to
the remaining risky assets, j 2 f1; ::; K 1g. The practical counterpart of these assets can
be thought of as passive mutual funds or ETFs that specialize in certain styles or industries;
active mutual funds that implement heterogeneous strategies on investors’ behalf; direct
trading of individual stocks and bonds; or derivatives such as futures or options. These
…nancial instruments enable investors to construct customized portfolios, and increasingly
so in recent years (see Figure 1).
To capture these assets, suppose the access types are now given by, iA 2 f0; :::; K 1g,
such that J iA = fmg for iA = 0, and J iA = fm; 1; ::; iA g for iA 1. Therefore, iA denotes
the number of the non-market assets the investor has gained access to (in increasing order).
The following result provides a closed-form characterization of equilibrium. To state the
result, we de…ne the risk-premium on a risky asset as the weighted-average of risk premia
P
perceived by each investor, j = i ni ij [cf. Eq.(9)].
Lemma 2. Consider the above setting with limited portfolio customization (and full market
participation). In equilibrium:
(i) The certainty-equivalent return for each type (iA ; iB ) is,
(iA ;iB )
rce
= rf +

2
m

1
2

+

m

1
2

F0J iA iB

0

1
J iA

F0J iA iB .

(16)

Investors with greater access to customized assets have greater certainty-equivalent return
(i ;i )
(i ;i )
and savings, that is, rceA B and a rceA B are increasing in iA .
(ii) The risk premium on each risky asset satis…es,
j

=

jm

m,

where

m

=

m.

(17)

m

The risk-free rate is the solution to,
m Pm

Y0 +

m Pm

=

X

(iA ;iB )
;
niA niB a rce

i2I

21

(18)

where Pm = exp F0m

z

+

m

2

rf

m

.

The …rst part shows that, in view of the choice channel, access to customized assets
increases the certainty-equivalent return by enabling the investors to construct speculative
portfolios. All else equal, this also implies greater access to customized assets is associated
with greater savings.
In the second part, Eq. (17) shows that the risk premium on an asset is determined by
its “beta” with respect to the market portfolio. This is a standard asset pricing result that
would also obtain in a version of our model with common beliefs and complete customization. Therefore, for the purposes of characterizing the risk premia, or relative asset prices,
the unorthodox features of the model— belief heterogeneity and limited customization— can
be ignored. Intuitively, due to the linear portfolio demand in (10), the risk premia are
determined by the weighted-average belief (similar to Lintner (1969)).
On the other hand, belief heterogeneity and customization matter for absolute asset
prices. The next result characterizes how …nancial innovation that expands customization
opportunities a¤ects asset returns. We formalize increased customization by a shift of mass
from a type with less access to one with more access.
Proposition 4 (Increased Customization). Consider the equilibrium characterized in
1
Lemma 2. Consider …nancial innovation that increases the scope of customization, n
~ iA =
1
0
0
niA + n and n
~ iA = niA
n where i1A > i0A and n > 0. This change reduces the risk
free rate rf , leaves unchanged the average risk premia, f j gj2J , and decreases the average
expected return on risky assets, frf + j gj2J .
The result follows from the choice channel. Increased access to customized assets increases
aggregate savings, as illustrated by Eqs. (16) and (18), which increases the valuation of all
assets. Since the risk premia remain unchanged, higher prices translate into a decline in
the risk-free rate, as in Example 1. The di¤erence is that the current model features many
assets, and the price of all assets increase (expected returns decrease) in tandem.
In Online Appendix B.3, we show that the e¤ect of customization on the interest rate
formalized in Proposition 4 is robust to various extensions. First, we relax the third part
of Assumption 4 and allow for disagreement on the market portfolio. We use a numerical
example to show that the result is largely unchanged. Disagreement on the market portfolio
generates additional speculation that (typically) increases the certainty equivalent return and
22

reduces the risk-free rate further. Moreover, increase in customization (typically) exacerbates
speculation and reduces the risk-free rate also in this setting. We are unable to provide
an analytical result mainly because speculation on the market portfolio breaks down the
symmetry between optimists’and pessimists’returns in Eq. (16).7
Second, we introduce short-selling constraints on a subset of non-market risky assets and
generalize the result to this setting. Short-selling constraints generate additional e¤ects on
relative asset prices because risky assets that are subject to constraints are priced by the
investors that value them the most, as …rst emphasized by Miller (1977). However, these
e¤ects are there both before and after the expansion of customization, so the qualitative e¤ect
of customization on the interest rate remains unchanged. On the other hand, short-selling
constraints dampen speculation and therefore mitigate the quantitative e¤ects of greater
customization on the interest rate.
Third, we also show that the result is robust to allowing for aggregate investment in
capital (that endogenizes the supply of the market portfolio). Intuitively, the reduction in
the interest rate due to greater customization also generates an increase in investment. The
induced investment response does not overturn the initial decline in the interest rate but it
mitigates the impact, because some of the savings pressure is now absorbed by quantity of
capital as opposed to its price. Therefore, in this setting, the magnitude of the interest rate
decline also depends on the properties of the aggregate production function.

3.3

Numerical Illustration

We next quantify our results on participation and customization using a numerical example.
Suppose K = 2 so that there are two risk factors, denoted by fzm ; zs g. The risk factor, zm ,
captures systematic risks (“the market factor”): that is, the payo¤ of the market portfolio
is given by log 'm = zm . The remaining risk factor, zs , captures non-systematic risks (“the
speculative factor”). There is one non-market risky asset, which we denote by subscript s,
with payo¤ log 's = zs (“the speculative asset”).
7

Since the asset m is in positive supply, all investors are its natural buyers. Even if optimists did not
adjust their positions (relative to the average investor), their perceived return would be higher simply because they are already holding the market portfolio. Therefore, in equilibrium, optimists obtain a greater
certainty-equivalent return— and hold more assets— relative to pessimists. This asymmetry makes an analytical characterization di¢ cult.

23

We assume each investor is optimistic or pessimistic about the speculative factor. Specifically, there are two belief types, iB 2 f s ;
s g, that respectively think that the mean of
zs is given by s + s and s
s . All investors agree on the objective mean of the market
factor. With these assumptions, investors’beliefs satisfy Assumption 4 so the results in this
section apply.
In this example, there are three relevant access types, iA 2 fn; p; sg, where J n = ;; J p =
fmg and J s = fm; sg. Types n and p correspond to nonparticipants and participants without
access to the speculative asset. Type s corresponds to participants that have access to the
speculative assets in addition to the market portfolio. We consider an initial state in which
no one has access to the speculative asset, ns = 0, and only a fraction of investors have access
to the market portfolio, np ; nn 2 [0; 1] with np + nn = 1. Starting from this initial state,
we …rst illustrate Proposition 3 by analyzing an increase in np (where nn = 1 np ). We
then consider a situation in which everyone has access to the market portfolio, nn = 0, but a
fraction of investors also have access to the speculative asset, np ; ns 2 [0; 1] with np + ns = 1.
We illustrate Proposition 4 by analyzing an increase in ns (where np = 1 ns ).
To calibrate the initial fraction of participants, np 2 [0; 1], we rely on the left panel of
Figure 1 (the wealth-weighted measure), which illustrates that in 1960s around 50% of the
U.S. wealth portfolios included any stocks. We choose as our initial state a more conservative
number, np = 0:75, because even nonparticipants are arguably exposed to some aggregate
risk through their housing investments or labor income.
Throughout, we use the preference parameters, = 3 and " = 1:5, and we calibrate the
remaining parameters with a one-year time horizon (see Remark 1). The value " = 1:5 is
taken from Vissing-Jørgensen and Attanasio (2003) as an estimate for the EIS of stockholders.
The value = 3 is in the middle of values for the risk aversion coe¢ cient that are used when
one focuses on the volatility of the stock market index (as opposed to aggregate consumption)
to calibrate portfolio risks— essentially abstracting away from the equity premium puzzle
(see, for instance Cochrane, 2005, section 21.1).8 Similarly, we consider a value for the
p
13%. This leads to a yearly risk premium of
volatility of the market portfolio of
m
p
5% and a yearly Sharpe ratio of m =
m =
m
m = 0:4. The implied Sharpe ratio is
roughly consistent with the Sharpe ratio on the world equity index in dollars in recent decades
8

The volatility of consumption growth in the U.S. is around 1%, which leads to the equity premium puzzle
(with relatively standard parameters such as = 3).

24

(see, for instance, Calvet et al., 2007). We also calibrate the growth rate of log output and the
discount factor so that the yearly risk-free rate in the initial state (np = 0:75 and ns = 0) is
equal to the historical average of the real risk-free rate, rf = 1%. We relegate the calibration
of the disagreement parameter, s , to the part where we discuss customization (because this
parameter does not a¤ect the equilibrium with limited participation— see Lemma 1).
Quantitative e¤ects of greater participation The left panel of Figure 4 illustrates the
quantitative e¤ects of increasing market participation. The solid lines show that increased
participation reduces the risk premium and the expected return on the market portfolio,
consistent with Proposition 3, while also increasing the risk-free rate. The dashed lines
illustrate the solution with " = 1, which provides a useful comparison case. In this case,
the relative price e¤ects are still active but the absolute price e¤ects are absent since the
choice channel is shut down. Comparing this case with our calibration, " = 1:5, shows that
the choice channel from increased participation reduces asset returns by less than a half
percentage point. This e¤ect is too small to overturn the relative price e¤ect, which is close
to two percentage points. On net, greater participation increases the risk-free rate by about
one and a half percentage points.
The choice channel is relatively weak in this context partly because of crowd-out e¤ects
that tend to lower the average investor’s bene…t from participation. Greater np reduces
the risk premium, which reduces the return for investors that already participate [cfs. Eq.
(14) and (13)]. These investors react by reducing their asset holdings, which mitigates the
p
n
e¤ect of increased choice on asset prices. Speci…cally, the gains from participation, rce
rce
,
are decreasing in the extent of participation. This leads to a relatively small increase in
aggregate savings, whose e¤ect on the interest rate is easily dominated by the relative price
e¤ect.
Quantitative e¤ects of greater customization Next suppose all investors have access
to the market portfolio, nn = 0, and consider further …nancial innovation that increases the
fraction of investors that also have access to the speculative asset, ns 2 [0; 1]. Using Lemma
2, we have,
(
2
if iA = p,
rf + 2 mm
(iA ; s )
(iA ;
s)
(19)
rce
= rce
=
2
2
m
s
rf + 2 m + 2 s if iA = s.
25

0.08

0.08

0.07

0.07

0.06

0.06

0.05

0.05

0.04

0.04

0.03

0.03

0.02

0.02

0.01
0.75

0.01
0.8

0.85

0.9

0.95

1

0

0.2

0.4

0.6

0.8

1

Figure 4: The left panel (resp. the right panel) illustrates the e¤ect of increased participation
(resp. customization) on asset returns for the benchmark calibration " = 1:5 (solid lines)
and the comparison case " = 1 (dashed lines).
The …rst line is the certainty-equivalent return of investors that have access to the market
portfolio but not the speculative asset. The second line is the certainty-equivalent return of
investors that also have access to the speculative asset. Note that access to the speculative
asset increases the certainty-equivalent return as in Section 3.2.
As Eq. (19) illustrates, the key variable that modulates the strength of speculation is
p
the term,
s : the investor’s perceived Sharpe ratio on the speculative asset. We
s=
calibrate this term based on the empirical evidence provided by Calvet et al. (2007) using
the portfolio returns of Swedish households. They perform a decomposition of the variance
of portfolio returns and …nd that for households with the median total risk, more than half
of the variance (54.9%) is explained by idiosyncratic risks as opposed to systematic risks.
We take the Sharpe ratio on the speculative asset to be equal to the Sharpe ratio on the
p
market portfolio,
s = 0:4. This ensures that, when all risky assets are available,
s=
half of the portfolio variance for the investors in our model is driven by idiosyncratic risk.9
The right panel of Figure 4 illustrates the quantitative e¤ects of increasing portfolio
9

This can be viewed as a conservative calibration since the markets were arguably not fully developed
over the time period (1999-2002) in which Calvet et al. (2007) conducted their study.

26

customization. The x-axis corresponds to the fraction of investors that have access to the
speculative asset, ns 2 [0; 1]. Note that customization reduces the risk-free rate and leaves the
risk premium on the market portfolio constant, consistent with Proposition 4. Note also that
the e¤ects are quantitatively sizable. Going from zero customization to full customization
reduces the risk-free rate by almost one percentage point.10
Participation and customization in the exact equilibrium We next use this numerical example to investigate the extent to which the portfolio approximation we adopt in (8)
might be driving our results. In Section B.2, we de…ne and compute the exact equilibrium (in
which agents solve their portfolio problem exactly as opposed to relying on an approximation). Figure B.1 in Online Appendix B.2 replicates Figure 4 for the exact equilibrium. The
di¤erence between the approximate and the exact equilibria is very small (for each level of
participation or customization). Therefore, the e¤ect of greater participation or customization on asset returns remains qualitatively unchanged. This illustrates that, with relatively
short planning horizons (our calibration relies on a one-year horizon), the approximation
works well and its main role is to provide analytical tractability.

3.4

The Choice Channel and the Postwar Trends in Asset Returns

Our general equilibrium results are broadly consistent with the trends in asset returns in
developed countries in postwar years. To see this, note from Figure 1 that participation has
been the major force in earlier decades, whereas customization was dominant during later
decades. Figure 5 illustrates that the interest rate in the U.S. has been increasing and the
equity premium has been decreasing in the earlier period (pre 1990s), consistent with the left
panel of Figure 4. The same …gure also illustrates that the interest rate has been decreasing
in the later period (post 1980s), consistent with the right panel of Figure 4.11 There are of
course many other contributing factors to these trends that are left out of our analysis. Our
point is that choice-expanding innovations generate qualitative e¤ects on asset returns that
10

The numerical example in this section is only intended to give some sense of the magnitude of the e¤ect
of increased customization on the risk-free rate. The e¤ect is larger for greater disagreements, higher values
of the elasticity of intertemporal substitution, ", and lower values of the risk aversion coe¢ cient .
11
The equity premium has been relatively ‡at after 1980s, consistent with Figure 4, but it has been
increasing in more recent years for reasons that are arguably outside our analysis (such as safe asset scarcity).

27

Expected real return on equity

1950

2

Percent
4
6
8

Percent
-6 -3 0 3 6 9 12

10

Equity risk premium

1960

1970

1980
year

1990

2000

2010

1950

1960

1980
year

1990

2000

2010

1990

2000

2010

Ten-year real interest rate

1950

-2

Percent
0 2 4

Percent
-4 -2 0 2 4 6

6

One-year real interest rate

1970

1960

1970

1980
year

1990

2000

2010

1950

series

1960

1970

1980
year

trend

Figure 5: The plots are based on the authors’calculations using the methodology described
in Blanchard (1993) and annual returns data for the U.S. from Robert Shiller (available at
http://www.econ.yale.edu/ shiller/data.htm). The expected return on equity is calculated
by using the dividend yield and the (model- based) expected dividend growth.
are in line with these trends. We next turn to a more systematic empirical analysis that uses
household-level data to test the cross-sectional implications of the choice channel.

4

Empirical Support for the Choice Channel

This section presents a set of novel empirical facts that are consistent with the choice channel.
We focus on two testable implications. First, as we formalize in Lemma 1, the choice channel
predicts that (keeping all else equal) stock market participants save more than nonparticipants. Lemma 2 illustrates further that greater customization opportunities increase the
saving rate of stock market participants relative to nonparticipants (since the latter group
does not take advantage of customization opportunities). Therefore, we empirically investigate whether stock market participants in the U.S. save more than nonparticipants, and
whether the di¤erences increased in recent years that feature greater customization oppor-

28

tunities.12 Second, as we illustrate in Sections 3.2 and 3.3, the choice channel also predicts
that greater customization opportunities increase the dispersion of portfolio returns for stock
market participants. Thus, we empirically analyze whether the U.S. stock market participants’portfolio returns have become more dispersed over time. At the end of the section,
we also discuss evidence from the household …nance literature that provides further support
for the choice channel.

4.1

The data and the variables of interest

Our data comes from the wealth supplements of the Panel Survey of Income Dynamics
(PSID) between 1984 and 2011. These wealth supplements were administered with every
wave of the PSID from 1999 onward. Prior to these waves, they are also available for
1984, 1989, and 1994. The wealth supplements contain information on the balance sheets of
surveyed households. They survey asset holdings in several broad asset categories including
cash and transaction accounts, holdings of stocks of publicly traded companies, mutual
funds, private business or farm, home equity, other real estate, annuities and IRAs, vehicles,
and other savings. These asset holdings are de…ned net of any debt that they collateralize.
In addition, there is information about purchases and sales of assets in categories that are
subject to price changes (i.e. stock holdings, private business and other real estate) as well
as net transfers.13
Given this information, we can construct information on households’savings. Recall from
Section 2 that savings in our context is given by the sum of the changes in asset positions
within the period evaluated at …xed asset prices [cf. Eq. (3)]. Therefore, we construct a
measure of active savings, which takes into account investors’net reported asset purchases
and sales between surveys, but excludes passive capital gains on di¤erent asset categories.14
12

For the latter analysis, using nonparticipants as a control group is important because it helps to account
for many omitted and time-varying factors that in‡uence household savings (such as the interest rate).
13
The PSID is particularly suitable for studying saving behavior over long horizons relative to the Survey of
Consumer Finances (SCF), which is a cross-sectional survey that provides information on current household
wealth only or the Consumer Expenditure Survey (CEX), which has been shown to have a time-varying bias
in the measurement of consumption. See Bosworth et al. (2008) for additional details on the PSID wealth
supplement data, and for a detailed discussion of the advantages and disadvantages of using the PSID wealth
supplements to study saving behavior.
14
An alternative would be to measure savings from reported wealth changes over time. Active savings
that excludes capital gains is not only more appropriate from a theoretical point of view (see Eq. (3)), but it

29

As we are interested in savings relative to income, we construct an active saving rate in a
given year as the (annualized) amount of active savings between that year and the subsequent
survey year for the household divided by an average of the total income of the household
head in that year and the subsequent survey year.
In addition, we construct an indicator variable for stock market participation in a given
survey year based on the response to a survey question about stock and mutual fund ownership. We also construct a measure of the relative importance of stock holdings in the
household’s asset portfolio by constructing the share of stocks and mutual funds relative to
all assets, excluding the primary residence of homeowners.
Finally, we de…ne (implicit) return on wealth in the following way. First, we compute
the annualized (log) reported growth rate of wealth between two consecutive dates of the
wealth supplement. We then subtract our measure of (annualized) active savings divided
by wealth.15 Online Appendix D contains details on our sample restrictions and summary
statistics for the main variables.

4.2

Household savings by stock market participation

We …rst investigate whether stock market participation is associated with greater savings.
Figure 2 in the introduction illustrates that stock market participants on average have a
greater saving rate than nonparticipants in every survey year. We verify the robustness of
this result through regression analysis. Table 1 summarizes our results from regressing the
also arguably provides a cleaner estimate of households’savings intentions. Apart from measurement error,
active savings equals the di¤erence between the household’s income and consumption within the period. In
contrast, reported wealth changes also ‡uctuate due to the uncertainty in asset returns. Moreover, capital
gains are based on subjective price estimates, which introduces additional noise. Perhaps for these reasons,
several other papers in the literature also rely on active savings (see, e.g., Skinner (1996), Hurst et al. (1998),
and Dynan et al. (2004), among others). Our precise measure of active savings follows the de…nition provided
by the PSID between 1984 and 1989 (see Appendix D for details).
15
In continuous time, we have that
i
_ i (t) = ri (t) W i (t) + S i (t) =) ri (t) = d log W (t)
W
dt

si (t) ;

log Wt+
log Wt
S(t)
where si (t) = W
(t) is the ratio of active savings over wealth. As a consequence, rt;t+ =
i
i
st;t+ measures the return on wealth between dates t and t + . For the term st;t+ ; to deal with measurement problems, we use active savings between the two dates divided by average wealth across these
dates.

30

active saving rate on stock market participation and additional controls. The …rst column
shows that stock owners have a saving rate that is around 6 percentage points higher than
non-stockowners.
One concern with this …nding is that households with certain characteristics, such as
higher wealth or income, might both save more and participate more in the stock market.
The second column of Table 1 shows that the result is signi…cant after controlling for household wealth, the household head’s income, demographics (such as the log of age, gender, and
educational categories), and state-year …xed e¤ects. The third column shows the result is
also signi…cant within households: that is, the same household saves more in years in which
it holds stocks compared to years in which it does not hold stocks. The coe¢ cient declines
slightly (as expected from unobserved factors that might generate positive correlation between saving and stock market participation) but it remains economically large.
Another concern is that these results might be driven by reverse causality. For example,
a transitory saving pressure could be associated with the household choosing to participate
in the stock market (and thus save partly in stocks). We try to address this concern by
instrumenting for stock market participation using lagged stock market participation. If
saving shocks do not persist beyond a few years, instrumenting current stock market participation will alleviate the reverse causality problems. The last column of Table 1 summarizes
the results in this case. Even after instrumenting for stock market participation with lagged
participation, stock market participants save more than non-participants.16 17
We next investigate whether the di¤erence between stock market participants’and non16
Instrumenting with the second lag of stock market participation leads to similar results. Notice that the
coe¢ cient estimate actually increases when instrumenting with lagged participation relative to the estimate
in column (2). This is the opposite of the bias expected due to transitory saving pressures. One possible
explanation is an attenuation bias due to stock market participation being only measured at the time of
interview, while saving being measured over the two-year period between interviews. If households switch
between participation and nonparticipation over the two years, this switch introduces a classical measurement
error that creates an attenuation bias. Instrumenting with past participation alleviates the attenuation bias
(as long as the measurement errors in the past survey and the current survey are uncorrelated).
17
We have additionally instrumented for participation following Giannetti and Wang (2016), who show that
the incidence of corporate fraud in a state has a negative e¤ect of stock market participation by households
who live in that state. The authors’interpretation is that households that are exposed to corporate fraud
lose trust in the stock market.
We again obtain a positive coe¢ cient, con…rming the positive e¤ect of stock market participation on saving
uncovered from the OLS and …xed e¤ect estimation. However, the coe¢ cient is estimated less precisely in
this case, indicating a weak instrument concern.

31

Table 1: Saving and stock market participation.

(1)
(2)
(3)
stock mkt. participation 0.0583
0.0633
0.0471
(0.0061) (0.0061) (0.0129)
Additional controls
State-by-year FE
Household FE
Instrument for
participation
F statistic (…rst stage)
R2
Observations

No
No
No
No

Yes
Yes
No
No

Yes
Yes
Yes
No

0.006
17,118

0.062
16,582

0.321
14,656

(4)
0.1020
(0.0211)
Yes
Yes
No
lagged
participation
468.61
0.068
11,221

Notes. Standard errors in parenthesis. The standard errors are clustered at the state level. The active saving rate is de…ned as
the annualized amount of active savings between two survey years, divided by the average of the household head’s income in
the two survey years. Active savings are constructed by extending the de…nition of active savings in the PSID for the period
1984-1989 to later survey waves. Stock market participation is an indicator variable for whether the household holds shares
of publicly traded companies or mutual funds (outside of IRAs post 1999). Additional controls include log of the household
head’s income and total household wealth, an educational category for the household head, gender of the household head, log
of age for the household head. For speci…cation (3) the additional control include log of the household head’s income and total
household wealth, and log age of the household head. All regressions are weighted using the PSID sampling weights. ** denotes
signi…cance at 1%, and * denotes signi…cance at 5%.

participants’savings has been widening over time (due to greater customization opportunities
in recent years). Figure 2 in the introduction illustrates that while saving rates display a
strong negative time trend, the saving of stock owners has been either ‡at or only slightly decreasing on average over our sample period. One concern is that these trends might be driven
by other contemporaneous changes in household characteristics. For instance, if households
with higher income or wealth both save more and participate more in the stock market,
then rising income or wealth inequality over this period might have also widened the savings
gap between participants and nonparticipants. Our regression analysis, relegated to Online
Appendix D, addresses these and other concerns. We …nd that saving rates trend downwards, but participants save more and the gap widens over time. Moreover, the widening
gap between participants and nonparticipants is robust to controlling for household wealth
32

.25
.2
Std. deviation
.1
.15
.05

1984

1989

1994

1999

2004

2009

Year
1st quartile of stock share
2nd quartile of stock share
3rd quartile of stock share
4th quartile of stock share

Fitted values

Fitted values

Figure 6: Trends in the cross-sectional standard deviation of (implicit) return on wealth
among stock holders (excluding business owners) by quartile of share of wealth invested in
stocks.
and income as well as other household demographics and state …xed e¤ects.

4.3

Dispersion of portfolio returns

We next analyze whether the dispersion of the portfolio returns of stock market participants
has been increasing over time (due to greater customization opportunities that exacerbate
speculation). To alleviate concerns that the trends in return dispersion might be driven
by private equity holders, for this part of the empirical analysis we remove all households
that have held a farm or business in any survey year. Figure 3 in the introduction plots the
cross-sectional standard deviation of returns over time, and illustrates that there is a positive
trend. Figure 6 shows that the observation is robust to controlling for investor risk taking.
There, we divide households into bins with a …xed wealth share in stocks, and observe that
the return dispersion has been increasing within each bin. Moreover, the increase in return
dispersion is most pronounced for investors that have the highest share of stocks, consistent
with speculation being a driving force behind this trend.
One concern is that the trend in return dispersion might be driven by other contempo-

33

raneous trends unrelated to portfolio choice. For example, if individuals with higher income
or wealth earn higher returns, then the trend in return dispersion could be due to recent
increases in income and wealth inequality. Similarly, if portfolio returns vary with di¤erent
demographic characteristics (like age or education), then population aging or a higher share
of individuals with advanced degrees would also imply an increase in return dispersion. To
address these concerns, we …rst regress log returns on a number of controls (separately for
each year), including the demographics for the household head (such as log age, education
categories, and sex), log of the household head’s income, log of total household wealth, the
wealth share in stocks, and state …xed e¤ects. We then construct the cross-sectional standard
deviation of the residuals from this regression (for each year) as a measure of conditional
return dispersion. Figure 7 plots the resulting trends in conditional return dispersion. As
with the raw return dispersion, there is a clear positive trend.18
One potential issue that could be causing a spurious positive trend in return dispersion is
the change in the frequency of data availability. For the early years of our data, annualized
wealth growth is obtained by averaging across …ve years, while from 1999 onward, it is
obtained by averaging across two years. Figure D.1 in Online Appendix D addresses this
concern and con…rms the current …ndings.
In sum, our analysis suggests that the increase in portfolio return dispersion illustrated
in Figure 3 is a robust fact. It is also broadly consistent with the patterns documented
in Fagereng et al. (2016) for individual return heterogeneity based on data form Norway.
Beyond providing support for the choice channel, this fact is interesting in its own right. A
growing literature in macroeconomics has argued that heterogeneity in returns to …nancial
investments can help to explain the patterns of large and rapidly increasing wealth inequality
(see Benhabib et al., 2017; Bisin and Benhabib, 2017; Gabaix et al., 2016). Therefore, the
increase in the dispersion of portfolio returns might have important implications for the
dynamics of wealth inequality going forward.
Overall, the empirical results in this section are consistent with the choice channel.
18

Another possible driver of this trend is an increase in idiosyncratic volatility of individual stocks (as
documented in Campbell et al. (2001)) which may mechanically increase return dispersion when individuals
hold heterogeneous portfolios (without necessarily any change in portfolios). We believe this is unlikely to
explain our results because most of the increase in idiosyncratic volatility occurred during the 1960s and
1970s (see Figure 4 in Campbell et al. (2001)). Moreover, idiosyncratic return volatility actually decreased
in the early 2000s (Brandt et al. (2009)).

34

.14
.12
Std. deviation
.1
.08
.06

1984

1989

1994

1999

2004

2009

Year
Std. dev. of residual log returns

Fitted values

Figure 7: Trends in the cross-sectional standard deviation of residual (implicit) return on
wealth among stock holders (excluding business owners). The residual return is obtained
after regressing log return on demographics, income, wealth, wealth share in stocks, and
state …xed e¤ects.
Through the lens of the choice channel, market participants have a higher saving rate than
non-participants, and increasingly so in recent years, because expansions in portfolio choice
gradually enhance their perceived return from saving. Moreover, market participants have
highly dispersed portfolio returns, and increasingly so in recent years, because they use
incremental innovations to hold more customized portfolios driven by speculation.

4.4

Other evidence for the choice channel

In addition to the evidence we present, there are number of papers that document facts
that are consistent with the choice channel. A strand of the empirical household …nance
literature analyzes prize-linked savings (PLS) accounts— innovative products that introduce
a lottery-like component into returns from saving (see Kearney et al. (2010)). These products
increase savings in experiments (e.g., Filiz-Ozbay et al., 2015; Atalay et al., 2014) as well
as in real world settings (e.g., Cole et al., 2016). This fact can be reconciled with our
choice channel, under the assumption that households perceive a higher return from the PLS
account compared to a safe account with the same expected payo¤ (e.g., due to distorted

35

beliefs that overweight small probabilities). Our analysis also suggests that PLS accounts
that provide households with some choice can further boost savings.
Another related piece of evidence comes from Ameriks et al. (2003), who show that
households who spend more time on …nancial planning have considerably higher saving rate
and accumulate more …nancial wealth. This fact can be reconciled with our choice channel
under the assumption that portfolio customization (as well as market participation) takes
time and e¤ort. Planners who spend time to customize their portfolios have greater (perceived) return and save more (although there might also be other explanations as discussed
in Ameriks et al. (2003)).
A small household …nance literature investigates the e¤ect of greater portfolio choice
on retirement savings, and …nds mixed results. Consistent with our choice channel, Papke
(2004) …nds that households that are o¤ered some investment choice are 36 percent more
likely to participate in an employer-sponsored savings account (and they also contribute
a greater fraction of their income). On the other hand, Sethi-Iyengar et al. (2004) …nd
that the number of funds o¤ered in a retirement savings account is negatively correlated
with the participation rate. Their preferred explanation is “the choice overload”: the idea
that too much choice can overwhelm households and reduce their willingness to commit to
a particular option. While choice overload is a reasonable concern, we believe it can be
overcome by providing households with guidance or default plans (see Thaler and Sunstein,
2003).

5

Conclusion

Rapid …nancial innovation in recent years has vastly expanded portfolio choices for investors.
We investigate the implications of greater portfolio choice for investors’savings in an environment that features belief disagreements and speculation. Our main result establishes a
choice channel by which an investor that gains access to greater portfolio choices increases
her savings. The intuition is that greater choice provides the investor with greater riskadjusted return, by enabling her to earn the aggregate risk premium or to take speculative
positions. We also present new empirical evidence consistent with the choice channel. Our
analysis of the PSID suggests that stock market participation is associated with higher savings by U.S. households, and more so in recent years that feature greater opportunities for
36

customization and speculation. We also …nd that U.S. households’ portfolio returns have
become more dispersed in recent years, which is consistent with increased speculation due
to greater customization opportunities.
We also theoretically analyze the implications of the choice channel for asset returns. In
equilibrium, greater savings exert a generally downward pressure on asset returns, but the
precise e¤ects depend on the type of …nancial innovation. We show that greater portfolio
customization typically reduces the expected return on all assets, including the risk-free
rate, without a¤ecting the risk premia. We also …nd that greater participation reduces the
risk premium, but typically increases the risk-free interest rate. These results are broadly
consistent with trends in the risk free rate and the equity risk premium in postwar years,
although those trends also have many other contributing factors.
Our analysis has been purely positive, in part because the normative implications are
complex and context-dependent. The household …nance literature typically emphasizes that
a fraction of households might be saving too little due to behavioral biases such as hyperbolic
discounting, and explores ways to increase these household savings (as Carroll et al. (2009)
and Choi et al. (2002), for example). Our analysis suggests that providing households with
greater portfolio choice could improve welfare by countering other frictions that lower savings.
On the other hand, households with heterogeneous beliefs typically use greater choice to load
onto nonsystematic risks. The resulting rise in consumption risks reduces welfare according
to a belief-neutral criterion (see, for instance, Brunnermeier et al., 2014). Hence, the net
e¤ect of …nancial innovation on household welfare is likely to be ambiguous.
The welfare analysis is further complicated by the fact that household savings might
be associated with externalities. For instance, the recent macroeconomics literature on liquidity traps and secular stagnation suggests that households might be saving too much in
aggregate, since their savings lower the natural interest rate and increases the likelihood of
demand recessions. From this macro perspective, portfolio customization that lowers the
interest rate might be further welfare reducing. More generally, our analysis highlights that
…nancial innovation a¤ects investors’consumption and savings decisions, with implications
for aggregate demand. Economic agents that introduce or adopt these …nancial innovations do not internalize their e¤ects on aggregate demand, which might create ine¢ ciencies
(see Korinek and Simsek, 2016). We leave the analysis of the interaction between …nancial
innovation and aggregate demand externalities for future work.
37

A

Appendix A: Selected Extensions and Proofs

This appendix contains selected extensions and proofs for the analysis in the main text. Online
Appendices B and C contain, respectively, the omitted extensions and the omitted proofs.

A.1

Robustness of the choice channel to background risks

In the main text, we abstracted away from uninsurable background risks to simplify the exposition.
In this section, we consider a numerical example with uninsurable background risks. In this example,
…nancial innovation can a¤ect savings through the choice channel as well as the precautionary
channel, which enables us to make three points. First, we show that the choice channel continues
to hold even in the presence of uninsurable background risk, if …nancial innovation does not improve
the opportunities to hedge those risks. This illustrates that Assumption 1, under which we derived
the choice channel in Section 2, is made for analytical convenience and is not necessary for the
choice channel. Second, we consider the case in which …nancial innovation also provides some
risk-sharing bene…ts. We argue that the choice channel still dominates the precautionary channel
for plausible calibrations based on the portfolio Sharpe ratios observed in practice as well as the
empirical evidence on uninsurable risks and hedging opportunities in recent decades. Third, we
also illustrate that the relative strength of the choice and the precautionary channels varies with
risk aversion. The choice channel is especially powerful (and easily dominates the precautionary
channel) for investors that are more risk tolerant, whereas the precautionary channel is relatively
strong for investors that are more risk averse.
We consider a 2-by-2 set-up along the lines of Section 1, in a partial equilibrium context.
Suppose that there are four possible states of the world at t = 1 that jointly describe the labor
income realizations of an individual investor (High and Low) and the payo¤ realizations for a risky
asset (Up and Down). Therefore a state of the world is now given by, z 2 f(i; j)gi2fH;Lg;j2fU;Dg :

We assume that the investor’s t = 1 labor income realizations are independent of the payo¤

realizations of the risky asset. Also, we normalize the investor’s (expected) labor income at t = 0
and t = 1 to unity. Let

L

denote the dispersion between the High and the Low labor income

realizations. Therefore, the parameter

L

describes the amount of (residual) background risk that

the investor is exposed to. As in Section 2 we allow the investor to hold di¤erent beliefs about
the distribution of payo¤ realizations for the risky asset. Below we consider di¤erent perceived
distributions for the payo¤ realizations for the risky asset that lead to di¤erent perceived risk
premia and Sharpe ratios.
We consider two alternative asset structures for the investor’s access set and the amount of

38

4
0.0

0.6

05
0.

0.0
2

0

0.6

04
0.

3
0.0

2
0.0

1
0.0

0.0
1

0.5

0.5

0.4

3
0.0

1
0.0

0

2
0.0

0.3

.0
-0
1

Perceived Sharpe Ratio

0.04

0.03

0.02

0.01

0

0.2

0.03

0.02

0.01

2
-0.0

0.02

0

-0.01

0.01

0.1

-0.01

0.1

03

0
1
-0.0

0.2

02

1

Perceived Sharpe Ratio

0.

0.

.0
-0

0.4

0.3

0.
01

0

0

0
0.5

0.6

0.7

0.8

0.9

1

1.1

1.2

1.3

1.4

0
0.5

1.5

Uninsurable Labor Income Risk (Relative to Baseline)

0.6

0.7

0.8

0.9

1

1.1

1.2

1.3

1.4

1.5

Uninsurable Labor Income Risk (Relative to Baseline)

Figure 8: Changes in saving rates (in percentage points) after …nancial innovation that allows
an investor to invest in a risky asset with a given (perceived) Sharpe ratio (vertical axis),
and after changes in (residual) background risk (horizontal axis).
(residual) background risk. In the …rst case (baseline, before …nancial innovation), the investor
has access only to a riskless asset and has a certain amount of uninsurable background risk. In
the second case (after …nancial innovation), the investor has access to the risky asset and the
amount of uninsurable background risk changes. This change originates from a combination of new
hedging possibilities, which allow costless reductions in exposure (for simplicity, as standard in the
literature, idiosyncratic risk does not carry a premium), or because risk in the labor income process
itself changes. Notice that both forces can go in the same direction, when income processes become
safer, or go in opposite directions, when hedging is available for some components of background
risks, but income processes themselves become riskier.
We examine the change in saving between the second and …rst case in a number of alternative
scenarios based on the relative change in background risk and the premium (Sharpe ratio) that
the investor perceives. Apart from these free parameters we use the values of Rf =

1

= 1:01,

and " = 1:5 as in the numerical examples in Section 3.3. Finally, we set the background risk in
the baseline case to

L

= 0:15, which is in line with the standard deviation of idiosyncratic risk

estimated by Storesletten et al. (2004).19
The left panel in Figure 8 plots the resulting changes in saving for the benchmark case of
19

In addition, we set the initial …nancial wealth of the investor to half of his labor income. The results are
qualitatively similar for other choices of the investor’s initial …nancial wealth.

39

= 3 and alternative scenarios for the perceived Sharpe ratio and labor income risk. As the
…gure shows, holding the amount of uninsurable labor income risk …xed (the vertical dashed line) is
associated with an increase in saving when the investor gains access to more assets, irrespective of
the investor’s perceived Sharpe ratio. Therefore, the choice channel operates even in the presence
of uninsured idiosyncratic income risk. Two speci…c values for the perceived Sharpe ratio are of
particular interest (illustrated with two blue dots on the …gure) as they represent speci…c realistic
examples. The …rst is the Sharpe ratio on the market portfolio (at 0.4), and it shows that increase
in saving for an investor that moves from non-participation to participation in the stock market and
only holds the broad market portfolio. This induces an increase in saving of around 90 basis points
of current income given our numerical example. The second example is the (perceived) portfolio
Sharpe ratio (at 0.57) for an investor that can both invest in the market portfolio and also speculate
on his beliefs as parametrized in Section 3.3.20 In that case the investor increases his saving by
around 1.7 percentage points of current income.
Second, the …gure shows that saving tends to decrease only for large decreases in uninsurable
labor income risk (a decline of more than 15 percent) and whenever the investor is not too optimistic.
However, such a decline in uninsurable labor income risk would be counterfactually high given the
developments in risk-sharing possibilities and in uninsurable labor income risk in recent decades
discussed in the main text of the paper.
Third, we compare how the saving response varies with an investor’s risk tolerance. Speci…cally,
the right panel in Figure 8 shows the saving responses of an investor with a risk-aversion coe¢ cient of
= 2, so that the investor is more risk-tolerant relative to the investor in the benchmark exercise.
As the …gure shows, the magnitude of the saving response is higher for the more risk-tolerant
investor, since the choice channel is stronger in that case. Second, the reduction in uninsurable
background risk that is required for saving to remain constant is also larger for that investor. This
is due both to a relatively strong choice channel but also to a weaker precautionary channel in the
case of a more risk-tolerant investor. For example, for a risk-tolerant investor that gains access to
the market portfolio (an investment with a perceived Sharpe ratio of 0.4), the required decrease in
background risk is of more than 40 percent.
Last, increases in initial …nancial wealth and reductions in the dispersion of background risk
have consequences that are qualitatively equivalent to decreases in risk aversion. Increases in the
20

In the numerical example in that Section the investor can hold the market portfolio and an additional
speculative asset that loads on idiosyncratic risk. The perceived Sharpe ratio on the speculative asset equals
the market Sharpe ratio of 0.4. Since the two assets have
qindependent returns and the investor loads equally
on the two, the resulting portfolio Sharpe ratio equals

40

2

(0:4) + (0:4)

2

0:57:

estimates for the intertemporal elasticity of substitution, as expected, amplify the response of saving
rates to the perceived Sharpe ratio, bending the isoquants of saving to the left and decreasing the
distance between their levels.

A.2

Selected Proofs

In this section, we …rst present the proof of our main result, Proposition 1. We then present the
proofs of Lemmas 1 and 2, which help to establish our main results in Section 3. The remaining
proofs are relegated to Online Appendix C.
Proof of Proposition 1. Suppose that the investor has a positive future endowment, L (z),
~ (z) = 0, but instead with
and consider a hypothetical investor with zero future endowment, L
…nancial wealth,

X

~0 =
W

(x

1;j

+ lj ) Pj .

j2ff g[J i

In view of Assumption 1, given the optimal choice by the hypothetical investor, C~0 ; A~0 ; x
~j , the
optimal choice by the original investor can be deduced from,
X

C0 = C~0 ; A0 = A~0

lj Pj and xj = x
~j

lj for each j.

j2ff g[J i

As discussed in the body of the paper, the (hypothetical) investor’s problem can be split into
two parts. Conditional on asset holdings, A~0 , the investor maximizes her certainty-equivalent payo¤
at date 1. That is, she solves the portfolio problem (4). In turn, given the value function V1 ( ),
she chooses her asset holdings, A0 , by maximizing the intertemporal utility function in (2). It is
straightforward to verify that the portfolio problem in (4) is linearly homogeneous, so V1 ( ) is a
i ; which gives the investor’s certainty-equivalent return.
linear function. In particular, V1 (1) = Rce

The remainder of the proposition follows from the discussion in the main text.
Proof of Lemma 1.
!1 (

1
m ) ;rce (rf ;

m)

To simplify notation, we leave implicit the dependence of

and Pm (rf +

m)

on (rf ;

m ).

Using Eq. (10), type p investors’ portfolio

share and return are given by,
! pm =

m
m

p
and rce
= rf +

1
2

m

2
m,

p
n and since a (:) is an increasing function, it follows
establishing Eq. (13). Therefore, rce
> rf = rce

41

p
n ) : This shows part (i).
that a (rce
) > a (rce

To show part (ii), notice that the market clearing condition for the safe asset can be written as,
0 = np (1

p
! pm ) a (rce
) + (1

np ) a (rf ) .

Rearranging this expression implies Eq. (14). Finally, Eq. (15) follows by adding all of the market
clearing conditions (12).
It remains to show that the system in (14)

(15) has a unique solution. We establish this and

complete the proof in Online Appendix C.
Proof of Lemma 2. We de…ne the average portfolio share of an asset j among all investors
that have market access iA 2 IA as,
! ijA

=

P

(i ;i )

(i ;iB )

niB ! j A B a rceA
P
(i ;i )
niB a rceA B
I

IB

.

(A.1)

B

We will establish the existence of an equilibrium in which prices are uniquely characterized by part
(ii), investors’certainty-equivalent returns are given by Eq. (16), and their average portfolio shares
are given by,
! iJAiA =

1

1
J iA

J iA

= [! m ; 0; ::0]0 for each iA , where ! m =

m

.

(A.2)

m

Here, [! m ; 0; ::0] is a J iA -dimensional vector whose …rst entry is ! m and the remaining entries are
zero. Hence, in addition to the properties in the lemma, we claim that investors’average portfolio
shares are independent of the heterogeneity in beliefs or market access.
We …rst establish Eq. (A:2), given the prices characterized by part (ii) and the certaintyequivalent returns in (16). To prove this, consider an investor’s perceived risk premium for a risky
asset j, which can be written as,
(iA ;iB )
j

= (Fj )0

i
z

+

j

log Pj

2

rf =

j

+ F0j iB .

(A.3)

Using Eq. (10), her demand for the risky assets J iA (as a proportion of her wealth) is given by the
vector,
(i ;iB )

! J iAA

(iA ;iB )
a rce
=

1

1
J iA

J iA

(iA ;iB )
+ F0J iA iB a rce
.

In view of Eq. (16), investors of types (iA ; iB ) and (iA ; iB ) obtain exactly the same certainty-

42

equivalent return. Combining these observations, the average demand across belief types iB and
iB is given by,
(i ;iB )

! J iAA

(i ;iB )

(i ; iB )

a rceA

+ ! J iAA

(i ; iB )

a rceA

=

2

1

1
J iA

J iA a

(iA ;iB )
rce
.

Averaging across all belief types, and using the second part of Assumption 4, we further obtain,
X

(i ;iB )

niB ! J iAA

1

(iA ;iB )
a rce
=

1
J iA

0
@

J iA

iB

X
iB

1

(iA ;iB ) A
niB a rce
.

Using the de…nition of the average portfolio share in (A:1), we obtain ! iJAiA =

1

1
J iA

J iA .

Next

note that,
J iA

[! m ; 0; ::0]0

j

=

mj ! m

1

=

mj m

=

1

where the last equation uses the risk premia from part (ii). Applying
expression implies,

! iJAiA

1

1

=

J iA

J iA

j,

m

0

1
J iA

to both sides of the

= [! m ; 0; ::0] , proving Eq. (A:2).

We next check that the investors’ certainty-equivalent returns are given by Eq. (16). Using
Eqs. (10) and (A:3), we have,

1
2
1
= rf +
2
1
= rf +
2
1
= rf +
2

(iA ;iB )
rce
= rf +

J iA
0
J iA
0
J iA
2
m
m

0

+ F0J iA iB
1
J iA

J iA

1
J iA

1
2

+ F0J i iB
1
J iA

+ 2 F0J iA iB

[! m ; 0; ::0]0 +

+

J iA

0

F0J iA iB

1
2

F0J iA iB

1
J iA

0

1
J iA

J iA

+ F0J iA iB

0

1
J iA

F0J iA iB

F0J iA iB + F0J iA iB [! m ; 0; ::0]0

F0J iA iB ,

verifying Eq. (16). Here, the third line uses Eq. (A:2), and the last line uses the third part of
Assumption 4, which says (Fm )0 iB = 0 (no disagreement on the market portfolio). To show that
(i ;iB )

rceA

is increasing in iA , let i1A > i0A and notice that a direct extension of the revealed preference

argument underlying the Choice Channel (Proposition 1) to the case of a continuous state space
(i1 ;iB )
(i0 ;iB )
i1
i0
rceA
: Alternatively, a direct inspection of Eq.
implies that RceA
RceA , and hence, rceA
(16) and the observation that F0J iA (iB )

0

1
J iA

F0J iA (iB ) ; the square of the speculative Sharpe

ratio (Simsek, 2013b), is higher for the i1A investor also gives the same result. Finally, since a (:) is

43

(i1 ;iB )
an increasing function, it follows that a rceA

(i0 ;iB )
: This establishes part (i).
a rceA

Next note that part (ii) uniquely characterizes the equilibrium prices of all assets. We …nally
check that these prices satisfy the jJj + 1 market clearing conditions (12). The conditions for j 6= m

hold because ! ijA = 0 for each iA and j 6= m. To check the remaining conditions, substitute ! m = 1
in view of the risk premia given in part (ii). After this substitution, the market clearing condition
for asset f holds since each investor has a zero weight on the risk-free asset, ! f = 1

! m = 0. The

market clearing condition for asset m also holds, since the condition becomes identical to Eq. (18).
This establishes the existence of an equilibrium that satis…es the conditions in part (ii) along with
Eq. (A:2), completing the proof.

References
Aiyagari, S. R., 1994. Uninsured idiosyncratic risk and aggregate saving. The Quarterly Journal of
Economics, 659–684.
Allen, F., Gale, D., 1994. Financial innovation and risk sharing. MIT press.
Ameriks, J., Caplin, A., Leahy, J., 2003. Wealth accumulation and the propensity to plan. The
Quarterly Journal of Economics 118 (3), 1007–1047.
Angeletos, G.-M., 2007. Uninsured idiosyncratic investment risk and aggregate saving. Review of
Economic Dynamics 10 (1), 1–30.
Angeletos, G.-M., Calvet, L.-E., 2006. Idiosyncratic production risk, growth and the business cycle.
Journal of Monetary Economics 53 (6), 1095–1115.
Atalay, K., Bakhtiar, F., Cheung, S., Slonim, R., 2014. Savings and prize-linked savings accounts.
Journal of Economic Behavior & Organization 107, 86–106.
Attanasio, O. P., Banks, J., Tanner, S., 2002. Asset holding and consumption volatility. Journal of
political economy 110 (4), 771–792.
Attanasio, O. P., Browning, M., 1995. Consumption over the life cycle and over the business cycle.
The American Economic Review, 1118–1137.
Banerjee, S., Kremer, I., 2010. Disagreement and learning: Dynamic patterns of trade. The Journal
of Finance 65 (4), 1269–1302.

44

Bansal, R., Yaron, A., 2004. Risks for the long run: A potential resolution of asset pricing puzzles.
The Journal of Finance 59 (4), 1481–1509.
Barberis, N., Greenwood, R., Jin, L., Shleifer, A., 2018. Extrapolation and bubbles. Journal of
Financial Economics.
Basak, S., Cuoco, D., 1998. An equilibrium model with restricted stock market participation.
Review of Financial Studies 11 (2), 309–341.
Benartzi, S., 2001. Excessive extrapolation and the allocation of 401 (k) accounts to company stock.
Journal of Finance, 1747–1764.
Benhabib, J., Bisin, A., Luo, M., 2017. Wealth distribution and social mobility: A quantitative
analysis of u.s. data. Tech. rep., National Bureau of Economic Research.
Bewley, T., 1977. The permanent income hypothesis: A theoretical formulation. Journal of Economic Theory 16 (2), 252–292.
Bisin, A., Benhabib, J., 2017. Skewed wealth distributions: Theory and empirics. Journal of Economic Literature.
Blanchard, O. J., 1993. Movements in the equity premium. Brookings Papers on Economic Activity,
75–138.
Blume, L., Easley, D., 2006. If you’re so smart, why aren’t you rich? belief selection in complete
and incomplete markets. Econometrica 74 (4), 929–966.
Blundell, R., Browning, M., Meghir, C., 1994. Consumer demand and the life-cycle allocation of
household expenditures. The Review of Economic Studies 61 (1), 57–80.
Borovicka, J., 2018. Survival and long-run dynamics with heterogeneous beliefs under recursive
preferences. Journal of Political Economy Forthcoming.
Bosworth, B., Anders, S., et al., 2008. Saving and wealth accumulation in the psid, 1984-2005.
Brandt, M. W., Brav, A., Graham, J. R., Kumar, A., 2009. The idiosyncratic volatility puzzle:
Time trend or speculative episodes? The Review of Financial Studies 23 (2), 863–899.
Brunnermeier, M. K., Sannikov, Y., 2014. A macroeconomic model with a …nancial sector. The
American Economic Review 104 (2), 379–421.

45

Brunnermeier, M. K., Simsek, A., Xiong, W., 2014. A welfare criterion for models with distorted
beliefs. The Quarterly Journal of Economics 129 (4), 1753–1797.
Buraschi, A., Jiltsov, A., 2006. Model uncertainty and option markets with heterogeneous beliefs.
The Journal of Finance 61 (6), 2841–2897.
Buss, A., Uppal, R., Vilkov, G., 2017. Financial innovation and asset prices. Tech. rep., working
paper.
Caballero, R. J., Simsek, A., 2017. A risk-centric model of demand recessions and macroprudential
policy. Tech. rep., National Bureau of Economic Research.
Calvet, L., Celerier, C., Vallee, B., Sodini, P., 2017. Can …nancial innovation solve household
reluctance to take risk?
Calvet, L., Gonzalez-Eiras, M., Sodini, P., 2004. Financial innovation, market participation, and
asset prices. Journal of Financial and Quantitative Analysis 39 (03), 431–459.
Calvet, L. E., Campbell, J. Y., Sodini, P., 2007. Down or out: Assessing the welfare costs of
household investment mistakes. Journal of Political Economy 115 (5), 707–747.
Campbell, J. Y., Lettau, M., Malkiel, B. G., Xu, Y., 2001. Have individual stocks become more
volatile? an empirical exploration of idiosyncratic risk. The Journal of Finance 56 (1), 1–43.
Campbell, J. Y., Viceira, L. M., 2002. Strategic asset allocation: portfolio choice for long-term
investors. Oxford University Press.
Cao, D., 2017. Speculation and …nancial wealth distribution under belief heterogeneity. The Economic Journal.
Cao, H. H., Wang, T., Zhang, H. H., 2005. Model uncertainty, limited market participation, and
asset prices. Review of Financial Studies 18 (4), 1219–1251.
Carroll, G. D., Choi, J. J., Laibson, D., Madrian, B. C., Metrick, A., 2009. Optimal defaults and
active decisions. The Quarterly Journal of Economics 124 (4), 1639–1674.
Carvajal, A., Rostek, M., Weretka, M., 2012. Competition in …nancial innovation. Econometrica
80 (5), 1895–1936.

46

Chen, J., Hong, H., Stein, J. C., 2002. Breadth of ownership and stock returns. Journal of Financial
Economics 66 (2), 171–205.
Choi, J. J., Laibson, D., Madrian, B. C., Metrick, A., 2002. De…ned contribution pensions: Plan
rules, participant choices, and the path of least resistance. Tax policy and the economy 16,
67–113.
Cochrane, J. H., 2005. Asset Pricing. Princeton University Press.
Cole, S., Iverson, B., Tufano, P., 2016. Can gambling increase savings? empirical evidence on
prize-linked savings accounts.
Dávila, E., 2017. Optimal …nancial transaction taxes. Working Paper.
Detemple, J., Murthy, S., 1994. Intertemporal asset pricing with heterogeneous beliefs. Journal of
Economic Theory 62 (2), 294–320.
Døskeland, T. M., Hvide, H. K., 2011. Do individual investors have asymmetric information based
on work experience? The Journal of Finance 66 (3), 1011–1041.
Dumas, B., Kurshev, A., Uppal, R., 2009. Equilibrium portfolio strategies in the presence of sentiment risk and excess volatility. The Journal of Finance 64 (2), 579–629.
Dumas, B., Lewis, K. K., Osambela, E., 2017. Di¤erences of opinion and international equity
markets. The Review of Financial Studies 30 (3), 750–800.
Dynan, K. E., Skinner, J., Zeldes, S. P., 2004. Do the rich save more? Journal of Political Economy
112 (2), 397–444.
Ehling, P., Gallmeyer, M., Heyerdahl-Larsen, C., Illeditsch, P., 2018. Disagreement about in‡ation
and the yield curve. Journal of Financial Economics 127 (3), 459–484.
Elul, R., 1997. Financial innovation, precautionary saving and the risk-free rate. Journal of Mathematical Economics 27 (1), 113–131.
Fagereng, A., Guiso, L., Malacrino, D., Pistaferri, L., 2016. Heterogeneity and persistence in returns
to wealth. Working Paper.
Favilukis, J., 2013. Inequality, stock market participation, and the equity premium. Journal of
Financial Economics 107 (3), 740–759.

47

Filiz-Ozbay, E., Guryan, J., Hyndman, K., Kearney, M., Ozbay, E. Y., 2015. Do lottery payments
induce savings behavior? evidence from the lab. Journal of Public Economics 126, 1–24.
Fostel, A., Geanakoplos, J., 2012. Tranching, cds, and asset prices: How …nancial innovation can
cause bubbles and crashes. American Economic Journal: Macroeconomics 4 (1), 190–225.
Fostel, A., Geanakoplos, J., 2016. Financial innovation, collateral, and investment. American Economic Journal: Macroeconomics 8 (1), 242–284.
French, K. R., Poterba, J. M., 1991. Investor diversi…cation and international equity markets. The
American Economic Review 81 (2), 222.
Gabaix, X., Lasry, J.-M., Lions, P.-L., Moll, B., 2016. The dynamics of inequality. Econometrica
84 (6), 2071–2111.
Geanakoplos, J., 2010. The leverage cycle. In: NBER Macroeconomics Annual 2009, Volume 24.
University of Chicago Press, pp. 1–65.
Geerolf, F., 2017. Leverage and disagreement. Tech. rep., Working Paper.
Giannetti, M., Wang, T. Y., 2016. Corporate scandals and household stock market participation.
The Journal of Finance 71 (6), 2591–2636.
Gilboa, I., Samuelson, L., Schmeidler, D., 2014. No-betting-pareto dominance. Econometrica 82 (4),
1405–1442.
Gomes, F., Michaelides, A., 2008. Asset pricing with limited risk sharing and heterogeneous agents.
Review of Financial Studies 21 (1), 415–448.
Gong, F., Phelan, G., 2016. Debt collateralization, capital structure, and maximal leverage.
Gruber, J., 2013. A tax-based estimate of the elasticity of intertemporal substitution. Quarterly
Journal of Finance 3 (1), 1 –20.
Guvenen, F., 2009. A parsimonious macroeconomic model for asset pricing. Econometrica 77 (6),
1711–1750.
Guzman, M., Stiglitz, J. E., 2016. Pseudo-wealth and consumption ‡uctuations. Tech. rep., National
Bureau of Economic Research.

48

Hall, R. E., 1988. Intertemporal substitution in consumption. The Journal of Political Economy
96 (2), 339–357.
Harris, M., Raviv, A., 1993. Di¤erences of opinion make a horse race. Review of Financial studies
6 (3), 473–506.
Harrison, J. M., Kreps, D. M., 1978. Speculative investor behavior in a stock market with heterogeneous expectations. The Quarterly Journal of Economics, 323–336.
Heaton, J., Lucas, D., 1999. Stock prices and fundamentals. In: NBER Macroeconomics Annual
1999, Volume 14. MIT, pp. 213–264.
Heyerdahl-Larsen, C., Walden, J., 2017. Welfare in economies with production and heterogeneous
beliefs.
Hong, H., Sraer, D. A., 2016. Speculative betas. The Journal of Finance 71 (5), 2095–2144.
Huggett, M., 1993. The risk-free rate in heterogeneous-agent incomplete-insurance economies. Journal of economic Dynamics and Control 17 (5), 953–969.
Hurst, E., Luoh, M. C., Sta¤ord, F. P., Gale, W. G., 1998. The wealth dynamics of american
families, 1984-94. Brookings papers on Economic Activity 1998 (1), 267–337.
Jouini, E., Napp, C., 2007. Consensus consumer and intertemporal asset pricing with heterogeneous
beliefs. The Review of Economic Studies 74 (4), 1149–1174.
Kearney, M. S., Tufano, P., Guryan, J., Hurst, E., 2010. Making savers winners: An overview of
prize-linked savings products. Tech. rep., National Bureau of Economic Research.
Kondor, P., Koszegi, B., 2017. Financial choice and …nancial information.
Korinek, A., Simsek, A., 2016. Liquidity trap and excessive leverage. American Economic Review
106 (3), 699–738.
Lintner, J., 1969. The aggregation of investor’s diverse judgments and preferences in purely competitive security markets. Journal of …nancial and quantitative analysis 4 (04), 347–400.
Mankiw, N. G., Zeldes, S. P., 1991. The consumption of stockholders and nonstockholders. Journal
of Financial Economics 29 (1), 97–112.

49

Miller, E. M., 1977. Risk, uncertainty, and divergence of opinion. The Journal of Finance 32 (4),
1151–1168.
Papke, L. E., 2004. Individual …nancial decisions in retirement saving plans: the role of participantdirection. Journal of Public Economics 88 (1), 39–61.
Posner, E. A., Weyl, E. G., 2013. Bene…t-cost analysis for …nancial regulation. The American
Economic Review 103 (3), 393–397.
Poterba, J. M., 2003. Employer stock and 401 (k) plans. American Economic Review, 398–404.
Scheinkman, J. A., Xiong, W., 2003. Overcon…dence and speculative bubbles. Journal of Political
Economy 111 (6), 1183–1220.
Schmidt, L. D., Toda, A. A., 2018. Bad news and robust comparative statics for the elasticity of
intertemporal substitution. Working Paper.
Sethi-Iyengar, S., Huberman, G., Jiang, W., 2004. How much choice is too much? contributions to
401 (k) retirement plans. Pension design and structure: New lessons from behavioral …nance 83,
84–87.
Simsek, A., 2013a. Belief disagreements and collateral constraints. Econometrica 81 (1), 1–53.
Simsek, A., 2013b. Speculation and risk sharing with new …nancial assets*. Quarterly Journal of
Economics 128 (3).
Skinner, J. S., 1996. Is housing wealth a sideshow? In: Advances in the Economics of Aging.
University of Chicago Press, pp. 241–272.
Storesletten, K., Telmer, C. I., Yaron, A., 2004. Cyclical dynamics in idiosyncratic labor market
risk. Journal of Political Economy 112 (3), 695–717.
Thaler, R. H., Sunstein, C. R., 2003. Libertarian paternalism. The American Economic Review
93 (2), 175–179.
Varian, H. R., 1985. Divergence of opinion in complete markets: A note. The Journal of Finance
40 (1), 309–317.
Vissing-Jørgensen, A., 2002. Limited asset market participation and the elasticity of intertemporal
substitution. Journal of political Economy 110 (4), 825–853.

50

Vissing-Jørgensen, A., Attanasio, O. P., 2003. Stock-market participation, intertemporal substitution, and risk-aversion. American Economic Review, 383–391.
Xiong, W., Yan, H., 2009. Heterogeneous expectations and bond markets. The Review of Financial
Studies 23 (4), 1433–1466.

51

Online Appendices: Not for Publication

B

Online Appendix B: Omitted Extensions

In this appendix, we present various extensions of the analysis in the main text. The proofs are
relegated to Online Appendix C.

B.1

Background risks and the precautionary channel

In the main text, we focused on the cases in which investors e¤ectively do not face any background
risks so that they do not have precautionary savings concerns. We next illustrate the e¤ect of
…nancial innovation in an environment with precautionary savings. We isolate an alternative precautionary channel of …nancial innovation and contrast it with our choice channel. We also obtain
a testable implication of the precautionary channel with respect to market participation, which we
empirically analyze in Section 4.
Isolating the precautionary channel requires putting additional structure on the model. To this
end, we replace Assumption 1 with the following set of assumptions.
Assumption 1P .
(i) Investors share the same beliefs, E i [ ] = E [ ] for some common E [ ].
(ii) There exists a stochastic discount factor, (M (z))z2Z , that prices each asset, that is,
Pj = E M (z) 'j (z) for each j 2 J,
(iii) Investors’background risks are orthogonal to the stochastic discount factor,
cov [L (z) M (z)] = 0 for each i.
Here, the …rst assumption rules out speculation (and the income and the substitution e¤ects
that it generates). While speculation plays a central role for the choice channel, it is typically
assumed away in traditional analyses that rely on rational (and thus, common) expectations. The
second assumption is a no arbitrage condition. The third assumption holds if the background risks
are idiosyncratic (and thus, uncorrelated with aggregate risk)— the typical case analyzed in the
literature. Finally, we also set the elasticity of substitution to one, to ensure that the choice
channel is completely shut down.

52

Proposition 5 (Precautionary Channel). Suppose Assumption 1P holds and " = 1. Suppose
also that investors initially only have access to the risk-free asset, that is, J old = ff g, and that

…nancial innovation completes the market, that is, jJj = jZj. Then, …nancial innovation reduces
the investor’s asset holdings (and thus, savings), Ai;new
0

Ai;old
.
0

The result establishes conditions under which …nancial innovation induces the investor to save
less— consistent with much of the precautionary savings literature (see the references in the introduction). Intuitively, when markets are incomplete, the investor saves for precautionary reasons.
This is because she faces some background risks, and the constant elasticity preferences satisfy
the prudence condition. Financial innovation enables the investor to hedge her risks. By doing
so, it alleviates the precautionary demand for saving, thereby reducing savings. Depending on the
stochastic discount factor, …nancial innovation can also increase the investors’risk-adjusted return
(even if there are no belief disagreements) by enabling her to participate in aggregate risk sharing.
The assumption, " = 1, ensures that the substitution and the income e¤ects exactly cancel, so that
the precautionary channel is the only in‡uence on saving.21 The result also focuses on a speci…c
type of innovation that takes the investor from the risk-free asset to a fully complete market. This
is a technical requirement that enables us to obtain a theoretical result. The economic insights
should apply more broadly as long as …nancial innovation provides new opportunities to hedge
background risks.

B.2

Exact solutions to the portfolio problem and equilibrium

Section 3 assumes that the agents’ asset demand is given by an approximate solution to their
portfolio problem. In this section, we solve for an alternative equilibrium, under the assumption
that agents solve an exact version of that problem. In this exact version, portfolio weights and
asset demand functions do not admit closed-form solutions, so we resort to a numeric approach.
We …rst de…ne an exact equilibrium as follows.
De…nition 2 (Exact Equilibrium). Under Assumptions 1G and 2, an exact equilibrium,
! iJ i ; Ai0 i ; Pj , is a collection such that the investors’ beliefs for asset returns are given by (7),
their portfolio weights are obtained from the solution to (4) using the de…nition ! ij =

P

Pj xij
i ,
|^2J i Pj xj

their asset holdings (Ai0 ) are given by the solution to problem (5) taking as given the certainty
i A , and the asset markets clear [cf. Eq. (12)].
equivalent implicit in V1 (A0 ) = Rce
0
21

If there is no aggregate risk, as in Aiyagari (1994), then the …rst part of Assumption 1P is su¢ cient to
shut down the choice channel. In this special case, the result can be generalized beyond "i = 1.

53

0.08

0.08

0.07

0.07

0.06

0.06

0.05

0.05

0.04

0.04

0.03

0.03

0.02

0.02

0.01

0.01

0
0.75

0
0.8

0.85

0.9

0.95

1

0

0.2

0.4

0.6

0.8

1

Figure B.1: Comparison of equilibrium interest rates and risk premia under the exact solution
to the portfolio problem (solid lines) and the second-order approximation (dashed lines).
The environment we study is otherwise identical to Section 3.3. Figure B.1 compares the exact
and approximate equilibrium solutions for varying degrees of participation (n p ) and customization
(ns ). The exact equilibrium risk premium and risk-free rate are displayed in solid lines, while
the approximate solutions from Section 3.3 are displayed in dashed lines. The approximation error
is small. The responses of the riskless rate and the risk premium to the comparative statics
remain largely unchanged: participation leads to a decreasing risk premium and increasing interest
rate, while customization leads to a decreasing interest rate. In the exact solution, increased
customization leads to a minor increase in risk premia, originating from third and higher order
terms in preferences.

B.3

Robustness of the e¤ect of customization on the interest rate

Proposition 4 in Section 3.2 characterizes the e¤ect of increasing portfolio customization on asset
returns in a relatively stylized setting with strong assumptions. In this section, we show that
the e¤ect on the interest rate is robust to relaxing many of these assumptions. We …rst illustrate
(numerically) that allowing for disagreement on the market portfolio does not overturn the e¤ect on
the interest rate. We then show that the result is also robust to allowing for short-selling constraints.
Finally, we introduce investment into the model and show that the e¤ect on the interest rate holds

54

0.055

0.05

0.045

0.04

0.035

0.03

0.025

0.02

0.015

0.01

0.005
0

0.1

0.2

0.3

0.4

0.5

0.6

0.7

0.8

0.9

1

Figure B.2: E¤ect of customization when there is disagreement on the market portfolio.
also in this setting.

B.3.1

Customization with disagreement on the market portfolio

Recall that we rule out disagreement on the market portfolio (see the third part of Assumption
4). Absent this assumption, the e¤ect of customization is largely unchanged in our numerical
simulations, even though we are unable to prove an analytical result. To see this, consider the
numerical example we analyze in Section 3.3 with the only di¤erence being that investors also
disagree about the market portfolio. Speci…cally, an investor who is optimistic (resp. pessimistic)
about the speculative asset is also optimistic (resp. pessimistic) about the market portfolio,
m+

m

(resp.

m

s

=

m

market portfolio by assuming,

m)

for some
p
m=
m =

m

s

m

=

> 0. We calibrate the level of disagreement on the
p
s=
s , so that the extent of disagreement on the

market portfolio (normalized by risk) is the same as the extent of disagreement on the speculative
asset. As in Sections 3.2 and 3.3, we assume everyone has access to the market portfolio, nn = 0,
and numerically investigate the e¤ect of increasing the fraction of investors that have access to the
speculative asset in addition to the market portfolio, ns 2 [0; 1].

Figure B.2 illustrates the results of increased customization in this case. Compared to the

earlier case with

m

= 0, the risk-free rate is uniformly lower. The risk premium is also slightly

lower, but the di¤erence is not discernible. More importantly, increased customization reduces the
risk-free rate and does not have a discernible e¤ect on the risk premium, as in Proposition 4, even

55

though the third part of Assumption 4 is violated.
When investors disagree on the market portfolio, they take speculative positions on the market
portfolio as well as the speculative asset. This generates an additional increase in their certaintyequivalent returns and reduces the risk-free rate further. However, speculation on the market
portfolio also breaks the symmetry between optimists’and pessimists’returns in Eq. (19). Since
the asset m is in positive supply, all investors are its natural buyers. Even if optimists did not adjust
their positions (relative to the average investor), their perceived return would be higher simply
because they are already holding the market portfolio. Therefore, in equilibrium, optimists have a
greater (perceived) certainty-equivalent return— and hold more assets— relative to pessimists. This
asymmetry implies that belief disagreements can potentially also a¤ect relative asset prices and
risk premia, which makes a theoretical characterization di¢ cult. However, for empirically relevant
parameters, these asymmetric e¤ects are very small, as illustrated by Figure B.2, and the e¤ect of
greater customization remains qualitatively unchanged.

B.3.2

Customization with short-selling constraints

In our model, we assume the investors can short sell the risky assets without constraints. When
short-selling constraints bind on some assets, there are additional complications but the e¤ect of
customization on the interest rate remains qualitatively unchanged.22 To see this, suppose the
~ f1; ::; K 1g. Formally, the
investors cannot short sell a fraction of the nonmarket assets , J

portfolio problem (8) features an additional constraint,
! ij

~
0 for each j 2 J.

(B.1)

We continue to make all of the other assumptions in Lemma 2 (including no disagreement on the
market portfolio). We also assume niA > 0 for each iA 2 IA , that is, there is a positive mass of
investors of each access type (even before customization improves the market access).

The following lemma characterizes 2
the equilibrium with3short-selling constraints. To state the
~ ~i
J~iA
J A
0
5 for any investor with market access
result, we de…ne the notation J iA = 4
~ ~i
i
~
J

J

A

22

A nJ

We should note that our modeling strategy makes short selling seem more relevant than it would be in
practice. For tractability, we assume there is a single asset m in positive net supply, and nonmarket assets
j 6= m are in zero net supply. Thus, an investor who would like to reduce her exposure to a nonmarket asset
is required to short sell. In practice, most nonmarket assets (such as stocks or bonds) would be in positive
net supply. An investor who is pessimistic about these assets could simply not include them in her portfolio.
The short-selling constraints would start to bind only if the investor is substantially pessimistic.

56

~ We also let ~ ~iA denote the j-th row of ~ ~iA .
iA , where J~iA = J iA \ J.
J
j;J
Lemma 3. Consider the setting in Lemma 2 with the short-selling constraints in (B:1). Then, in
equilibrium, the risk premia satisfy

j

where

m

=

m

and

=

(

(iA ;iB )
j

jm
m
jm

m

m
0

Fj i B

max(iA ;iB )
~

j;J~iA

(iA ;iB )
solution to Eq. (18), where rce
satis…es
(iA ;iB )
rce
= rf +

Here,

(iA ;iB )
j

2
m

2

m

+

1
2

~
for j 2
= JnJ
,
~
for j 2 J

m
(iA ;iB )
j

1
~
J iA nJ

FJ iA nJ~

F0J iA nJ~ (iB )

0

0

(B.2)

iB . The risk-free rate is the unique

1
~
J iA nJ

F0J iA nJ~ (iB ) .

(B.3)

captures an investor’s excess valuation of the asset relative to the average investor.

The …rst part says that the asset is now priced by the investor that has the highest valuation. Hence,
short-selling constraints change the characterization of relative asset prices. However, they leave
the characterization of the risk-free rate largely unchanged. In particular, the second part says
that the risk-free rate is determined by Eq. (18) as before. The di¤erence is that the investors’
certainty-equivalent returns are determined as if the assets on which the short-selling constraints
bind are not available for trade (see (B:3)). This is intuitively because short-selling constraints
dampen speculation.
Lemma 3 leads to the following generalization of Proposition 4.
Proposition 6 (Customization with Short Selling Constraints). Consider the setting in Lemma 2
with the short-selling constraints in (B:1). Consider …nancial innovation that increases the scope
1

1

of customization for some market participants, n
~ iA = n iA +
and

0

0

n and n
~ iA = n iA

n where i1A > i0A

n > 0. This change reduces the risk free rate rf , and leaves unchanged the average risk

premia, f

j gj2J .

The result follows by observing that increasing the scope of customization does not a¤ect
the characterization of the risk premia in (B:2). This is because the maximum excess valuation,
max(iA ;iB )

(iA ;iB )
,
j

remains unchanged before and after the innovation. In contrast, greater cus-

tomization does a¤ect the characterization of the risk-free rate by enabling more speculation, which
reduces the risk-free interest rate as in Proposition 4.

57

B.3.3

Customization with investment

In the main text, we examined the asset pricing implications of …nancial innovations in an environment with a …xed supply of the market portfolio, m, given by

m

> 0. We next show that the e¤ect

of customization on the interest rate continues to hold if there is investment and

m

is determined

endogenously.
Suppose that the output of the economy at date t = 1 is produced via a constant returns to scale
neoclassical production function Y1 =

(z) G (K; L). Here, we assume that

is a Hicks-neutral

productivity shock that satis…es,
0

log

(z) = Fm z:

Investors in this economy are also workers and supply one unit of labor inelastically. Therefore,
we modify Assumption 1G slightly to allow for a positive t = 1 endowment by investors. We also
maintain the structure of investors’market access and beliefs from Section 3.2.
The economy starts with zero units of capital at time 0. Capital is produced at time 0 by a
competitive sector of investment goods …rms that can convert one unit of consumption good at
time 0 into one unit of capital at time 1. Since this is only a two-period model, we assume that the
capital depreciates fully after use at time 1. Capital and labor are rented at time 1 by a competitive
sector of production …rms that have access to the production technology of the economy. Given
linearity in the investment good technology and production technology for the …nal good, both
types of …rms earn zero pro…ts in equilibrium.
We use a similar equilibrium concept for this economy as our “approximate equilibrium”notion
in De…nition 1 but add additional market clearing conditions that capture the endogeneity of
investment. In equilibrium, the price of a unit of capital at t = 0 equals its cost of production
(namely unity). In addition, the supply of the market portfolio,

m,

equals the supply of capital

K. Thus, the price of the market portfolio also equals the price of capital, Pm = 1. Finally, there
is market clearing in the labor market.
We let Rm (
given supply

m

m)

=

GK (

. We let rm (

m ; 1)
m)

denote the gross return on the market portfolio in equilibrium

denote the log return. Then, the expected log return is given by,

E [rm (

m )]

= E [log ] + log GK (

m ; 1) ,

Note also that (log) expected return on the market portfolio is equal to the sum of the risk-free
rate and the risk premium,
E [rm (

m )]

+

m

2

58

= rf +

m.

Here,

m

= var ( ) denotes the variance of the market portfolio as in the main text. Combining

the last two equations yields the key equation of the characterization,
log GK (

m ; 1)

+

m

+ E [log ]

2

= rf +

m.

(B.4)

The terms in parentheses are exogenous variables. Hence, the equation says that the supply of
capital,

m,

is decreasing in the return on the market portfolio, rf +

premium on the market portfolio,

m,

m.

As we will see, the risk

will also be determined by exogenous variables. Hence, the

equation implies that a lower interest rate, rf , increases the equilibrium supply of capital,

m.

To characterize the rest of the equilibrium, we denote the equilibrium wage rate at time 1 by
w(

m)

=

GL (

m ; 1).

Notice that, given the assumption of a Hicks-neutral productivity shock,

, the return on the market portfolio and the wage rate are perfectly positively correlated. Since
all investors are assumed to have access to the market portfolio, it follows that agents in this
economy do not face uninsurable background risks. In particular, the investor’s labor endowment
is equivalent to holding

GL (
GK (

m ;1)
m ;1)

units of the market portfolio. Therefore, investor i’s e¤ective

wealth at time 0 is given by,
~ i = Y0 + GL (
W
0
GK (

m ; 1)
m ; 1)

Pm = Y0 +

GL (
GK (

m ; 1)
m ; 1)

:

i is the investor’s (log)
i W
~ i , where rce
The investor’s e¤ective asset holding is given by A~i0 = ai rce
0

certainty-equivalent return as before. It follows that the investor’s savings are given by,
i
~i
W
Ai0 = ai rce
0

GL (
GK (

m ; 1)
m ; 1)

:

The asset market clearing conditions can then be written as,
j Pj

=

X

i
~ 0i
ni ! ij ai rce
W

fijj2ff g[J i g

GL (
GK (

m ; 1)
m ; 1)

.

(B.5)

The following result characterizes the equilibrium.
Lemma 4. Consider the setting with limited portfolio customization (and full market participation)
and endogenous investment. In equilibrium, the aggregate risk premium on each risky asset satis…es
j

=

jm
m

m,

where

m

=

m.

The supply of the market portfolio,

59

m,

and the risk-free rate, rf ,

are jointly determined by Eq. (B:4) and
m

+

Y0 +

GL (
GK (
GL (
GK (

m ;1)
m ;1)
m ;1)
m ;1)

=

X

(iA ;iB )
niA niB a rce
;

(B.6)

i2I

where the certainty-equivalent return for an investor with type (iA ; iB ) is given by Eq. (16) as in
the main text.
Compared to Lemma 2, the only di¤erence is that the supply of the market portfolio,

m,

is

endogenous and inversely related to the interest rate according to (B:4). This leads to the following
result, which generalizes Proposition 4 to this setting.
Proposition 7. Consider the equilibrium characterized in Lemma 4. Consider …nancial innovation
1

1

that increases the scope of customization for some investors, n
~ iA = n iA +
where

i1A

>

i0A

and

0

0

n and n
~ iA = n iA

n,

n > 0. This change reduces the risk free rate rf and the expected return on

risky assets E [rj ], j 2 J and leaves unchanged the average risk premia. It also increases aggregate
investment and the supply of the market portfolio,

m.

As with the case of a …xed supply of the market portfolio, increased customization decreases the
returns on all assets in the economy. In this case, the lower required returns (or the lower hurdle
rates) also translate into greater investment and increased supply,

m.

It is illustrative to consider

how the two responses compare. The proof in Online Appendix C implies that,
@rf @ m
GKK
=
=
:
@ n @ n
GK
Therefore, the relative response depends on properties of the aggregate production function. Speci…cally, if capital and labor are perfect substitutes in production, then
margin responds. If they are perfect complements, then

GKK
GK

GKK
GK

= 0, and only the quantity

! 1, and there is only a price re-

spond. In between, the relative response should depend on the elasticity of substitution between
capital and labor.

C

Online Appendix C: Omitted Proofs

In this appendix, we …rst present the proofs for the results in the main text, which are not included
in Appendix A.2. We then present the proofs for the results in Online Appendix B.

60

C.1

Proofs of results in the main text

Proof of Proposition 1. Included in Appendix A.2.
Proof of Proposition 2. The equilibrium is described by the following system of equations.
j Pj

=
fi

j

X

i
ni ! ij ai rce

Y0i + W0i

j2ff g[J i g

for each j 2 ff g [ J,

where returns and risk premia are related to prices according to,
E i [rj ] = (Fj )0
i
j

i
z

log Pj

j

= E i [rj ] +

rf
2
and investors’asset demands and savings are determined by,
1
! iJ i = i J i1 iJ i
i
rce
= rf +

1
2 i

i 0
Ji
i
i "

i

a

i
rce

=
1+

1
Ji

i
Ji

i "i
exp rce

i
i "

1

i ("i
exp (rce

.
1))

Note that a lower price Pj increases the return and the risk premium on asset j, which tends to
increase the demand for that asset. We are looking for a vector, P =fPj gj2ff g[J , that ensures all
asset markets are simultaneously in equilibrium.

We work with a truncated economy, where prices satisfy Pj
are only interested in su¢ ciently large

for each asset j 2 ff g [ J. We

so that the truncation becomes inconsequential. First, let

us de…ne extended portfolio weights over assets that agent i cannot trade, so that
(

!
^ ij (P )
For P

! ij (P ) ; whenever j 2 ff g [ J i
0; otherwise.

0 we have individual excess demand for asset j 2 ff g [ J de…ned as
zji

(P )

!^ij (P )
Pj

Ai0 (P )

xi

1;j

(C.1)

and we analogously de…ne the excess demand for consumption at date t = 0 as z0i (P ) ci0 (P )
P i i
Y0i : Aggregate excess demands are then simply de…ned as zj (P )
i n zj (P ) and z0 (P )
P i i
P
i n z0 (P ). Walras’Law, i.e., z0 (P ) +
j2J Pj zj (P ) = 0 can be trivially veri…ed from individual

61

optimality.
First,
n we impose a lower bound on prices ^ >
o 0, which we successively relax later. De…ne
jJj
S^
P 2 R++ jPj ^ and Pj
; 8j 2 ff g [ J which is compact and convex. We are only
interested in

> ^ as to ensure the non-emptiness of S^.

We next de…ne a continuous price updating function. Let each entry, which describes the update
to the price of asset j 2 J, be de…ned by
Pjupd (P; ^)

8
>
<
>
:

^; if zj (P ) < ^
Pj + zj (P ) ; if ^

Pj

Pj
:

zj (P )

(C.2)

; if zj (P ) >

n
o
Then, let the function P upd (P; ^) : S^ ! S^ be de…ned as P upd (P; ^) = Pjupd (P; ^)

j2ff g[J

. As

excess demand functions are continuous, so is the function P upd ( ; ^), which maps the non-empty,
convex, and compact set S^ into itself. From Brouwer’s Fixed Point Theorem, there exists P ^ 2 S^
such that Pjupd P ^; ^ = P ^:

We now take a sequence f^k gk2N such that ^k ! 0. Let P ^k

k2N

be the associated sequence

of …xed points. As each price lies in [0; ] that sequence is bounded and admits a converging
subsequence. To save on notation, assume we have selected suchnsubsequence from the start.
o
jJj
; 8 ff g [ J .
De…ne its limit by P = P1 ; P2 ; :::; PjJj . Naturally P 2 [k S^k = P 2 R+ jPj
jJj

We now show that P 2 R++ .

Consider the case with Pj = 0 for risky assets, which w.l.o.g. we call assets 1; ::; m, while

the riskless rate remains bounded away from zero. In this case, the risk premia for assets 1; ::; m
approach +1, and the risk premia for the remaining assets remain …nite. Consider all investors
that have access to at least one of the assets 1; ::; m and call that set Ir!1 . It is easy to check that
each of these investors have rce ! 1, and thus, they save all their wealth.
P

Now consider the net demand for assets that comes from these investors only, zjIr!1

i2Ir!1

ni zji (P ). We claim that regardless of how the prices for 1; ::; m approach 0 (or conversely,

regardless of the risk premia approach in…nity), there exists at least one asset within 1; ::; m such
that the total demand from these investors for that asset becomes unboundedly positive. Since the
demand from the other investors is …nite, this will provide a contradiction.
Let us rewrite risk premia along the sequence. Take a given agent i 2 Ir!1 , then the (indi-

vidually perceived) risk-premium

i;k
j

P ^k on any asset j 2 J can be appropriately rewritten as

62

i;k
j

=

i;k

^ i;k
j where

i;k

:=

P

i;k
j

j

denotes a norm and

^ i;k
j

k

i;k
j
i;k k

n
o
denotes the j th entry of a normalized risk-premium vector.23 The vector ^ i;k = ^ i;k
j

j2J

to the surface of the unit ball centered at zero.
As that surface is a compact set, ^ i;k

belongs

admits a converging subsequence, which we can index
o
, from which we can extract a subsequence
by ki 2 N. That forms another price sequence P ^ki
k2N n

to ensure that the analogously de…ned vector ^
that Ir!1

0

i ;ki

ki 2N

0

converges for any second agent i 2 Ir!1 . Given
is …nite, this step can be iteratively repeated until a subsequence, indexed by k~ 2 N, is
~

~

extracted and ensures that each ^ i;k converges. Additionally, for each i 2 Ir!1 , limk!1
^ i;k = ^ ,
~
i.e., the limit of the normalized risk-premia are the same and independent of i 2 Ir!1 , since
disagreements are bounded, while at least one return goes to in…nity.
~

Take a given agent i 2 Ir!1 . De…ne ^ i;Jik and ^ Ji to be respectively the restriction of the
~

normalized risk premia vectors ^ i;k and ^ to the assets that agent i can trade. Notice that along
that subsequence portfolio weights of the form ! iJ i P ^k~

=

1
i

~
1 i;k
^
J i Ji

~
i;k

are optimal from

equation (10). Therefore, we take the following limit of an inner product
lim

~
k!1

*

1
Ji

from the positive-de…niteness of
to …nd

~
^ i;Jik ;

+

! iJ i P ^k~
~
i;k

=

1
i

0

^ Ji

1
^
J i Ji

>0

and the fact that ^ Ji is not null. It follows that it is possible

> 0 and a su¢ ciently large element k such that
*

^;

!
^ i P ^k~
~
i;k

+

> ;

whenever i 2 Ir!1 and k~ > k. Given that Ai0 P ^k~ is bounded from below for su¢ ciently high k~
for all i 2 Ir!1 , there exists

1

*

>0

^;

X

n

i

Ai0

P

^k~

i2Ir!1

23

!
^ i P ^k~
~
i;k

+

>

1;

As prices are converging to zero, there are …nitely many elements with
subsequence that disregards these.

63

(C.3)
P

j

i;k
j

= 0. We can move to a

for all k~ > k. This directly implies that there exists one asset j 2 f1; :::; mg such that
P
^k~
i i
!
^ i P ^k~ grows without bounds. It follows that excess demand for that asi2Ir!1 n A0 P
~ From (C.2) this means that
set is unbounded along the subsequence that is indexed by k.
Pjupd P ^k ; ^k =

in…nitely many times as k ! 1, reaching a contradiction with Pj = 0.

Suppose now, towards a di¤erent contradiction, that rf ! 1. Using arguments similar to the
previous ones, it is possible to select a subsequence, indexed by k~ 2 N, in which the risk premium,

P ^k~ , perceived by each agent i 2 I for each asset j 2 J either converges to a …nite constant,

i
j

diverges to +1 or diverges to

time and in the same direction.

1. Also, a premium can only diverge for all agents at the same

First, we deal with the case in which no premium diverges. In this situation, each asset price
converges to zero. Adding equations C.1 over agents and assets, properly multiplied by prices and
individual population shares, we get
X

^

Pj k~ ni zji P ^k~ =

i;j

X
i;j

h
ni !^ij P ^k~ Ai0 P ^k~

^

Pj k~ xi

1;j

i

;

which after simpli…cations leads to
X

^

Pj k~ zj P ^k~ =

j

X

X

ni Ai0 P ^k~

i

As P ^k~ ! 0, the right hand side converges to

^

Pj k~ ni xi

1;j :

i;j

P

in

iY i
0

> 0. As a consequence, the excess demand

for at least one asset j needs to approach +1 along a subsequence. Along this subsequence then
Pjupd P; ^k~ =

in…nitely often, leading to a contradiction of the zero price limit.

For the case in which some premia diverge, we still obtain
lim Ai0 P ^k~

~
k!1

and

X
j

^

Pj k~ ni xi

^

Pj k~ zj P ^k~ !

1;j

X

= Y0i > 0

ni Y0i > 0

If P ^k~ ! 0, we …nd the same contradiction as before. Therefore, for at least one asset j 2 J, we
^

need to have Pj k~ ! Pj 6= 0 which implies that

~
i;k
j

!

1 for each i 2 I. We can therefore follow

all the previous steps leading to C.3, with the exception that ^ can now have negative entries.
0

This means that we can …nd a subsequence and an asset j 2 J, such that either
zj 0 P ^k~ !

1 or

~
i;k
0
j

~
i;k
0
j

!

1 and

! +1 and zj 0 P ^k~ ! +1. For the latter case, we would reach the

64

same contradiction as before since zj 0 P ^k~ ! +1 implies that Pjupd
P ^k ; ^k =
0

in…nitely many

times which contradicts positive in…nity limits for both the riskless rate and the risk premium on
^

0

j . Therefore, we need to rule out the former situation. Given that Pj k~ ! Pj > 0,
^ j 0 6= 0 together imply that Pj 0 > 0. But from (C.2), zj 0 P

^k~

many times with ^k~ ! 0, reaching a contradiction with Pj 0 > 0.

!

1 implies

^
Pj k~0

~
i;k
j

!

1 and

= ^k~ in…nitely

We have, therefore, ruled out any possibility that Pj = 0 for some asset j 2 J [ ff g. We still

need to show that for su¢ ciently high

, market clearing is ensured in all markets at prices P .
0, it is possible to …nd a su¢ ciently high k^ and 2 > 0, such that

Given that Pj

Pj^k >

2

> ^k ;

^ As a consequence, from (C.2), for k > k,
^ P ^k 0 and zj P ^k
for all k > k.
0.
j
h
i
P
i
Additionally, for each i 2 I, C0i P ^k 2 0; Y0i +
j x 1 ; j implying that
X

ni xi

1;j

i;j

For

2

>

P

in

iY i,
0

X

^

Pj k~ zj P ^k~

j

X

ni Y0i :

i

it follows that z P ^k~ ! z (P ) = 0 ensuring market-clearing in the limit

and existence of a Walrasian Equilibrium.

To establish the remaining proofs, we state a useful lemma that concerns the asset holding
function de…ned in (11), which we replicate here
"

a (rce ) =

1+

exp (rce (" 1))
.
"
exp (rce (" 1))

Lemma 5. Whenever " > 1, the semi-elasticity

0

a (rce )
a(rce )

is decreasing in rce .

Proof. From the Euler Equation in logarithmic form
log a (rce )

log (1

a (rce )) = " log

+ ("

1) rce

thus di¤erentiating with respect to rce and simplifying
0

a (rce )
= ("
a (rce )

1) (1

65

a (rce ))

(C.4)

so

0

a (rce )
a(rce )

is decreasing in a and therefore in rce , whenever " > 1.

Proof of Lemma 1. This proof is mostly included in Appendix A.2. There, we establish Eqs.
(14)

(15). It remains to prove that this system of equations has a unique solution.

Toward that end let us …rst de…ne the average level of savings out of wealth as a (rf ;
p
np a (rce
)+(1

np ) a (rf ) ; and the relative value of the asset endowment as v (rf +

m)

p
m; n )
m Pm
Y0 + m P m :

Combined they characterize
'1 (rf ;

p
m; n )

0

Notice that v (rf + m ) / Y0 v (rf +
@' (r ; m ;np )
0
and 1 @f m
= @@am v > 0.

p
m; n )

a (rf ;
m)

v (rf +

m) :

< 0. As a consequence,

@'1 (rf ; m ;np )
@rf

=

@a
@rf

0

v > 0,

Additionally, we de…ne
p
m; n )

'2 (rf ;

np (1

An equilibrium then is a solution to '1 (rf ;
Notice then that,
0 =) (1

@'2
@rf

=

np (1

(1 np ) a(rf )
p
np a(rce
)

! pm ) =

0

! pm ) a
and

whenever " > 1, given Lemma 5. Last,
(1

! pm ) < 0 whenever '2 = 0.
As a consequence, locus '1 (rf ;

'2 (rf ;

m

; np )

p
m; n ) =
p
) + (1
(rce

@'2
@rf
@'2
@ m

p
m; n )

p
! pm ) a (rce
) + (1

np ) a

@! pm
@ m

= 0:

(rf ) : Additionally, '2 (rf ;

np ) a (rf )

= (1
=

p
m; n )

'2 (rf ;
0

np ) a (rf ) :

0

0

p
rce
p
rce

a (rf )

a

a(rf )

a( )
0
! pm ) a

p
np a (rce
) + np (1

(

= 0 is downward slopping in (rf ;

)

p
m; n )

=

which is positive
p

p @rce
(rce
) @ m < 0 since

m )-space

while locus

= 0 is upward slopping. Both loci are characterized by continuous functions. We

@'1
p
m ; n ) = 0, with @ m 6= 0, and the Implicit Function Theorem to de…ne a de'
creasing function m1 ( ) of the interest rate rf over the …rst locus. We then look for a solution
'
to '2 rf ; m1 (rf ) ; np = 0, where the left-hand side is a strictly increasing function of rf . The

can use '1 (rf ;

existence of a solution is guaranteed by Proposition 2 and uniqueness follows from strict monotonicity.
Proof of Proposition 3 Let J
"

drf
dnp
d m
dnp

#

=

1
J

"

@'1
@rf
@'2
@rf

"

@'2
@ m
@'2
@rf

@'1
@ m
@'2
@ m

#

@'1
@ m
@'1
@rf

66

and
#"

J

< 0 denote its determinant. Then,

p
a (rce
)

a (rf )
a(rf )
np

#

:

Therefore,
d [rf +
dnp

d m
dnp
m]

< 0: Also,
p
/ (a (rce
)

=

p
(a (rce
)

a (rf ))

@'2
@ m

@'2
@rf

a (rf ))

@'2
@ m

@'2
@rf

+

@'1
@ m

+

p
a (rce
)
p
a (rce
)

a (rf )
np
!
0
a (rf ) (1 np )
(a (rf ))2 < 0
a (rf )
np

@'1
@rf

0

again using Lemma 5.
Proof of Lemma 2. Included in Appendix A.2.
Proof of Proposition 4. To show this result, notice …rst that part (i) of Lemma 2 implies
(i0 ;iB )
(i1 ;iB )
: Next, re-write (18) as
rceA
that rceA
X

(iA ;iB )
niA niB a rce

i2I

m Pm

Y0 +

m Pm
(i ;iB )

and notice that the left-hand side is increasing in rf , since rceA

=0

(C.5)

is increasing in rf and a (:) is an

increasing function, so the …rst term is increasing in rf , and also Pm is decreasing in rf , so the second
P
(i0 ;iB )
(i1 ;iB )
(i ;i )
, it follows that i2I niA niB a rceA B
rceA
term is also increasing in rf : Finally, since rceA

is increasing in
in

n; and so, the left-hand side of (C:5) is increasing in

n: Hence, rf is decreasing

n:
Showing that f

j gj2J

remain unchanged follows directly from Lemma 2, part (ii). Finally,

showing that the average expected return on risky assets decreases follows from the behavior of rf
and f

C.2

j gj2J :

Proofs of results in Online Appendix B

Proof of Proposition 5. Let Rf = 1=Pf denote the risk-free return. First consider the case after
…nancial innovation. Since the market is complete, the background risks are e¤ectively tradable .
Thus, Assumption 1 holds and the analysis is similar to the proof of Proposition 1. In view of Assumption 1P , the value of the investors’background risks is given by, E [M (z) L (z)] = E [L (z)] =Rf .
Using this observation, and following similar steps as before, we obtain (assuming an interior solution),
Ai;new
+
0

E [L (z)]
=
Rf
1+

67

W0 +

E [L (z)]
Rf

.

(C.6)

In view of the assumption, " = 1, the desired total asset holdings is a constant fraction of the
investor’s total lifetime wealth. The calculation of the desired total assets as well as the total
lifetime wealth also include the implicit background income.
Next consider the case before …nancial innovation. The investor’s problem can be written as,

max

log (W0

A0

A0 ) +

log V1 ,

h
E (A0 Rf + L (z))1

s.t. V1 =

i

1=(1

)

.

Assuming an interior condition, the optimality condition implies,
1
W0

=

Ai;old
0

=

Rf

2

1
1
V E4
i;old
V1 1
A0 + L (z)
1

Rf
Rf
Ai;old
0

E
=

Rf

1
h
E C1 (z)1

+ L (z)
iE

1

1
C1 (z)

3
5

2

E4

1
Ai;old
0

+ L (z)

3
5

.

(C.7)

Rf + L (z). Next note that C1 (z) and C1 (z)
Here, the last line substitutes, C1 (z) = Ai;old
0

are

negatively correlated, and strictly so if C1 (z) is not constant. In particular, we have,
cov C1 (z) ; C1 (z)

h
= E C1 (z)1

i

E [C1 (z)] E C1 (z)

0,

with strict inequality whenever C1 (z) is not constant. Combining this observation with Eq. (C:7),
we obtain,

1
W0

Ai;old
0

Rf

After rearranging terms, this implies,
Ai;old
+
0

1
1
i.
= Rf h
i;old
E [C1 (z)]
E A0 Rf + L (z)

E [L (z)]
Rf

1+

Comparing Eqs. (C:6) and (C:8) implies Ai;old
0

W0 +

E [L (z)]
Rf

.

(C.8)

Ai;new
, with strict inequality if C1i;old (z) is not
0

constant.

68

Proof of Lemma 3. First, we show that given prices characterized by Eqs. (B:2), (18),
and (B:3), the average portfolio shares for investors with market access iA , are independent of
the heterogeneity in beliefs or market access and satisfy Eq. (A:2) : An investor’s perceived risk
premium for a risky asset j is
(iA ;iB )
j

0

i
z

= Fj

+ ((

j )=2)

log Pj

rf =

j

0

+ Fj iB :

(C.9)

The …rst-order conditions for the investor can be written as
(iA ;iB )
J iA ! J iA

(iA ;iB )
J iA

+

(iA ;iB )
J iA

= 0;

(C.10)

(iA ;iB )
J iA

(i ;i )
consists of a jJ~iA j-by-1 vector J~iAA B of Lagrange multipliers for the respective short~
selling constraints and a jJ iA nJj-by-1
vector of zeros for the assets that do not have short-selling

where

constraints. Substituting for

(iA ;iB )
j

J iA

(i ;iB )

Next, we show that ! J iAA

from (C.9), we have,

0

(iA ;iB )
J iA ! J iA

+ FJ iA iB

0

(i ;i )

= 0jJ~iA j ; ! J iAA nBJ~

(i ;i )

! J iAA =BJ~ =

1

1

(iA ;iB )
J iA

= 0:

(C.11)

0

satis…es the FOCs in (C.11), where

~
J iA nJ

~
J iA nJ

+

+ FJ iA nJ~

0

iB

;

(C.12)

~ we have
To show this, …rst note that for assets in J iA nJ
~
J iA nJ

+ FJ iA nJ~

0

(iA ;iB )
~ ! J iA nJ
~
J iA nJ

iB

= 0;

(i ;i )

(i ;i )

which is satis…ed given the de…nition of ! J iAA nBJ~ . Also, notice that the individual weights in ! J iAA nBJ~
~ assets
are equivalent to the optimal individual portfolio weights in an equilibrium in which only JnJ
~ of
are available, with risk premia given in (B:2), and the individual investor iA has access to J iA nJ

those. Therefore, the results from Lemma 2 apply for the average portfolio weights, ! iJAiA =J~ , across
investor with di¤erent beliefs, and so, a version of Eq. (A:2) holds for these average weights. This
in turn implies that we can simplify (C.12) to
(i ;i )

! J iAA =BJ~ = ! iJAiA =J~ +

1

1
~
J iA nJ

69

FJ iA nJ~

0

iB :

For assets j 2 J~iA , these weights imply that
(iA ;iB )
j

=
=
=

0

0

Fj i B

j

j

~ ~i ! (iiA ;iB )
~
J A J A nJ

Fj i B
"

j

+

jm
m
m

j

~
~ ~i ! iAi
~ + J~iA
J A J A =J
0

Fj i B

~

j;J~iA

1
~
J iA nJ

where the last inequality follows given the equilibrium values of

1
~
J iA nJ

FJ iA nJ~

FJ iA nJ~
j

0

0

iB
j

#

0;

iB

in (B:2).

To show the rest of the lemma, we use the observation that the individual portfolio weights
on assets without short-selling constraints are equivalent to those in an equilibrium in which only
~ assets are available, with risk premia given in (B:2), and the individual investor iA has access
JnJ
~ of those. Therefore, an application of Lemma 2 implies that the investors’ certaintyto J iA nJ

equivalent returns are given by equation (B:3). Finally, Lemma 2 implies that Eqs. (B:2), (18),

and (B:3) uniquely characterize the equilibrium prices on all assets and also all market clearing
conditions are satis…ed at these prices.
~ follows by observing that investors’portfolio
Proof of Proposition 6. The result on assets JnJ
weights and certainty-equivalent returns are equivalent to those in an equilibrium in which only
~ assets are available, and an individual investor with market access iA has access to J iA nJ
~ of
JnJ
~ available assets. The result on the
those, and applying Proposition 4 to the environment with JnJ
~ follow by applying Lemma 3 before and after customization, and observing that
remaining assets J
max(iA ;iB )

(iA ;iB )
j

is the same in both cases.

Proof of Lemma 4. We proceed along the lines of the proof of Lemma 2. Speci…cally, we
show that there exists an equilibrium in which the risk premia, risk-free rate, and the supply of the
market portfolio are uniquely determined by the equations stated in the proposition. First, observe
that the endogenous supply of the market portfolio does not a¤ect any investor’s portfolio problem
directly, but only indirectly through the equilibrium prices. Therefore, given equilibrium prices,
average portfolio shares for investors with market access iA 2 IA , ! iJAiA , de…ned in (A.1) still satisfy

(A.2) and investors’certainty-equivalent returns are given by (16).

Next, note that the equations stated in the proposition still uniquely characterize the equilibrium
returns of all assets and the supply of the market portfolio. To see this, notice that after substituting
m

=

m,

Eq. (B:4) describes a downward sloping relation between rf and

m

in (rf ;

m )-space.

In addition, condition (B.6) describes an upward sloping relation, since the left-hand side of (B.6) is

70

increasing in

m

given that Y0

m

in equilibrium, and the right-hand side of (B.6) is increasing in

rf since a (:) is assumed to be an increasing function. Also, there exists a solution to these equations
since by (B.6) and an Inada condition for the production function, lim
lim

m !Y0

rf (

m)

= 1:

m !0

rf (

m)

=

1 and also

Finally, we check that these returns and the supply of the market portfolio satisfy the market
clearing conditions (B.5). The market clearing conditions for j 6= m are clearly satis…ed since

! ijA = 0, for each iA and j 6= m. The market clearing condition for the risk-free asset is also
satis…ed since ! m = 1 and ! f = 1

! m , so each investor has a zero weight on the risk-free asset.

Finally, the market clearing condition for asset m is equivalent to (B.6), so it also holds.
(i1 ;iB )
Proof of Proposition 7. First, as in Proposition 4, we have rceA

(i0 ;iB )
rceA
. Next, we

re-write (B.6) as
X

iA iB

n n a

m

(iA ;iB )
rce

+

Y0 +

i2I

GL (
GK (
GL (
GK (

m ;1)
m ;1)
m ;1)

= 0.

m ;1)

Implicitly di¤erentiating this equation (while keeping rf constant), we obtain,
P

iB

@ m
/
@ n
Y0 +
Here, we use the fact that
4 shows that rf and

m

@
@

m

(i1 ;iB )
niB a rceA

GL (
GK (

GL (
GK (

m ;1)
m ;1)

m ;1)
m ;1)

+

GL (
GK (

@
@

(i0 ;iB )
a rceA

m

0 and

m

m ;1)
m ;1)

0.
(Y0

(C.13)

m)

Y0 in equilibrium. The proof of Lemma

are jointly determined by Eqs. (B:4) and (B.6), which are respectively

downward and upward sloping in (rf ;

m )-space.

Eq. (C.13) implies that an increase in

n leads

to an upward shift in relation (B.6). This in turn implies that the equilibrium value of rf declines
and the value of

m

increases. By part (i) of Lemma 4, the decline in rf translates into a decline

in the expected return on all assets.

D

Online Appendix D: Data details and additional
analysis

The PSID makes a distinction between family units and household units. Throughout the paper
we will use the term households to refer to family units.

71

Active saving de…nition
We construct active saving by following the de…nition used in the PSID to construct active saving
between 1984 and 1989. The general idea behind the active savings that the PSID constructs is to
sum all net active asset purchases. For example, to obtain net active purchases of stocks, the PSID
takes the amount of stocks purchased since 1984 and subtracts the amount of stocks sold since
1984. Similarly, to obtain net purchases of other real estate, they take the value of other real estate
purchased since 1984 and subtract the value of other real estate sold since 1984. For the assets
for which measures of net active purchases are not available, the PSID takes the change in wealth
between the di¤erent survey periods and subtracts from it the change in values of assets for which
there is available information (such as home value, stocks, farm and business, etc.). Finally, the
PSID removes changes of assets and debt due to changes in the household, as well as inheritances,
since those are arguably not active savings. We use the same method to construct active savings
between subsequent survey waves.
Formally, active saving during that period is generated by summing total wealth in 1989, the
1984 home value (unless the household has moved), the 1989 value of private annuities, equity in
other real estate in 1984, equity in a farm or business in 1984, the value of stocks held in 1984, the
value of other real estate purchased since 1984, the cost of additions and repairs to real estate since
1984, the amount invested in own business or farm since 1984, the amount of stocks purchased
since 1984, assets removed by movers out of the household since 1984, and debts added by movers
into the household since 1984. Out of this one subtracts total wealth in 1984, the 1989 home value,
equity in other real estate in 1989, equity in a farm or business in 1989, the value of stocks held in
1989, the value of annuities and pensions cashed in since 1984, the value of other real estate sold
since 1984, the value of farm or business sold since 1984, the value of stocks sold since 1984, debts
removed by movers out of the household since 1984, assets added by movers into the household
since 1984, and the inheritances received since 1984.24

Sample selection
We make the following sample restrictions. We look at households whose head is between 25 and
65 years old and who have positive net worth. In addition, we remove households with extremely
low incomes by …rst removing zero-income heads and then removing heads with income below
the 20th percentile. We remove such low income households because their active savings tend
24

In case the household has moved between 1984 and 1989 the PSID constructs separate capital gains for
each home owned. For simplicity, we drop households that have moved in between survey waves.

72

Table D.1: Summary Statistics
Variable
Observations Mean Std. Dev. Min
Max
active saving rate
17,118
.037
.341
-1.193 1.142
stock mkt. participation
17,118
.288
.453
0
1
share of assets in stocks
15,393
.113
.237
0
1
income (log)
17,118
10.734
.608
9.10 13.869
wealth (log)
17,118
11.061
1.666
0
17.737
age
17,118
43.083
9.871
25
64

to be extremely volatile. Furthermore, we remove outliers by excluding the top and bottom 10
percent of the saving rate distribution in a given survey year. We opt for a relatively aggressive
trimming procedure to alleviate measurement error problems since wealth and saving components
are self-reported in the PSID. All of our results about the saving behavior of participants versus
non-participants are present with a more conservative trimming choice. Finally, we also drop
household-year observations that are not in subsequent survey waves and households that do not
reside in the 50 US states plus the District of Columbia.
We are left with an unbalanced panel of household saving and stock market participation variables containing 6,410 unique households between 1984 and 2011 with a total of 17,118 householdyear observations. Table D.1 contains summary statistics for our main variables of interest.
In addition for our analysis of return dispersion we remove outliers in the implicit log return
by excluding the top and bottom 10 percent of log returns in a given survey year. We also remove
households that have owned a farm or business in any survey year. A more conservative trimming
procedure leads to an increase in the level of return dispersion without a¤ecting the positive time
trend, which is the focus of our analysis.

Additional data analysis
Trends in savings Column 1 documents that the widening gap in savings between market
participants and nonparticipants is robust to the inclusion of demographics, wealth controls and
state …xed e¤ects. While statistical signi…cance is lost in the presence of household …xed e¤ects,
due to an increase in standard errors, the magnitude of the coe¢ cient on the evolution of the gap
is largely unchanged.
In columns 3 and 4, we study how savings comove with respect to an alternative, continuous

73

measure of participation: the share of the household’s assets that is invested in stocks (excluding
their primary residence). To focus on the intensive margin, we also restrict the analysis to stock
market participants. There is a widening gap in saving rates based on this measure, even after
controlling for household wealth, household head income and demographics, and household …xed
e¤ects. The share of wealth in stocks can be seen as a proxy of the household’s risk tolerance.
Through the lens of the choice channel, the saving of more risk tolerant investors increases relative
to less risk tolerant investors as …nancial innovation accumulates.25

Trends in return dispersion One potential issue that could be causing a spurious positive
trend in return dispersion (Figure 3) is the change in the frequency of data availability. For the
early years of our data, annualized wealth growth is obtained by averaging across …ve years, while
from 1999 onward, it is obtained by averaging across two years. Away from perfect autocorrelation
in annual returns, this mechanically lowers the measured cross-sectional dispersion in the …rst half
of the period relative to the second half.
A conservative adjustment for this problem is to assume independence of household returns
across years and multiply the dispersion measures by the square root of …ve for the …rst period,
and by the square root of two for the second. In this way, we obtain measures of annual return
dispersion from the original dispersion of annual averages.26 Figure D.1 replicates Figure 3 after
this adjustment. Similarly, Figure D.2 replicates Figure 7 after this adjustment. The conclusions
are unchanged.

25

For the same beliefs, certainty equivalent returns are always higher for more risk tolerant agents. A
formalization of this result was present in a previous working paper version and is available upon request.
26
This adjustment is conservative because any alternative (constant) yearly return autocorrelation would
require multiplication by smaller proportional factors and generate steeper positive trends.

74

.22
Std. deviation
.18
.2
.16
1984

1989

1994

1999

2004

2009

Year
Std. dev. of returns (adjusted)

Fitted values

.14

.15

Std. deviation
.16
.17

.18

.19

Figure D.1: Trends in dispersion of (implicit) returns on wealth among stock holders (excluding business owners). Adjusted averages.

1984

1989

1994

1999

2004

2009

Year
Std. dev. of res idual log returns (adjus ted)

Fitted values

Figure D.2: Trends in conditional standard deviation of (implicit) returns on wealth among
stock holders (excluding business owners). Adjusted averages.

75

Table D.2: Trends in saving and stock market participation.

(1)
0.0308
(0.0098)

(2)
0.0168
(0.0248)

year

-0.0027
(0.0005)

-0.0027 -0.0029
(0.0055) (0.0005)

stock market
participation year

0.0019
(0.0008)

0.0015
(0.0016)

stock mkt. participation

(3)

(4)

-0.0018
(0.0057)

share of assets
in stocks

0.0430
(0.0189)

0.0399
(0.0392)

share of assets
in stocks year

0.0056
(0.0015)

0.0078
(0.0026)

Yes
No
0.021
14,934

Yes
Yes
0.286
13,069

Additional controls
Household FE
R2
Observations

Yes
No
0.018
16,610

Yes
Yes
0.274
14,696

Notes. Standard errors in parenthesis. The standard errors are clustered at the state level. The active saving rate is de…ned as
the annualized amount of active savings between two survey years, divided by the average of the household head’s income in
the two survey years. Active savings are constructed by extending the de…nition of active savings in the PSID for the period
1984-1989 to later survey waves. Year denotes the year of the survey relative to 1984 (the …rst year in the sample). Stock
market participation is an indicator variable for whether the household holds shares of publicly traded companies or mutual
funds (outside of IRAs post 1999). Share of assets in stocks is de…ned as the value of stocks (held outside of IRAs post 1999)
relative to the value of all household assets, excluding the value of the household’s primary residence. Additional controls include
log of the household head’s income and total household wealth, an educational category for the household head, gender of the
household head, log of age for the household head and state of residence. For speci…cations (2) and (4) the additional control
include log of the household head’s income and total household wealth, and log age of the household head. All regressions are
weighted using the PSID sampling weights. ** denotes signi…cance at 1%, and * denotes signi…cance at 5%.

76

