                                NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                          ROSCA MEETS FORMAL CREDIT MARKET

                                            Hanming Fang
                                             Rongzhu Ke
                                             Li-An Zhou

                                        Working Paper 21683
                                http://www.nber.org/papers/w21683


                      NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                               1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                 Cambridge, MA 02138
                                     October 2015




We would like to thank Jiahua Che, Larry Samuelson, Robert Townsend and seminar participants
at Wisconsin-Madison, Duke, Shanghai Jiaotong University and Hong Kong University for useful
comments and discussions. Any remaining errors are our own. Fang would like to acknowledge the
financial support from National Science Foundation Grant SES-1122902. Ke gratefully acknowledges
the financial support from Hong Kong Research Grant Council (Project # CUHK 447111). The views
expressed herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau
of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.

© 2015 by Hanming Fang, Rongzhu Ke, and Li-An Zhou. All rights reserved. Short sections of text,
not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit,
including © notice, is given to the source.
Rosca Meets Formal Credit Market
Hanming Fang, Rongzhu Ke, and Li-An Zhou
NBER Working Paper No. 21683
October 2015
JEL No. D44,G21,O16,O17

                                               ABSTRACT

Rotating Savings and Credit Association (Rosca) is an important informal financial institution in many
parts of the world used by participants to share income risks. What is the role of Rosca when formal
credit market is introduced? We develop a model in which risk-averse participants attempt to hedge
against their private income shocks with access to both Rosca and the formal credit and investigate
their interactions. Using the gap of the borrowing and saving interest rates as a measure of the imperfectness
of the credit market, we compare three cases: (i) Rosca without credit market; (ii) Rosca with a perfect
credit market; (iii) Rosca with an imperfect credit market. We show that a perfect credit market completely
crowds out the role of Rosca. However, when credit market is present but imperfect, we show that
Rosca and the formal credit market can complement each other in improving social welfare. Interestingly,
we find that the social welfare in an environment with both Rosca and formal credit market does not
necessarily increase monotonically as the imperfectness of the credit market converges to zero.


Hanming Fang                                          Li-An Zhou
Department of Economics                               Guanghua School of Management
University of Pennsylvania                            Peking University
3718 Locust Walk                                      Beijing 100871
Philadelphia, PA 19104                                CHINA
and NBER                                              zhoula@gsm.pku.edu.cn
hanming.fang@econ.upenn.edu

Rongzhu Ke
Department of Economics
Chinese University of Hong Kong
Shatin N.T., Hong Kong
CHINA
rzke@cuhk.edu.hk
1        Introduction
    Rotating savings and credit associations (Roscas) are important informal financial institutions
around the world. Most common in developing countries, they are also popular among immigrant
groups in the United States.1 All Roscas share the following common feature: a group of individuals,
most likely closely connected in some social networks, commit to contribute a fixed sum of money
into a “pot” in each of the equally-spaced periods during the life of the Rosca; in each period, the
“pot” is then allocated to one of its members through some mechanism. The mechanism through
which the “pot” is allocated is one of the key dimensions of the many variations of how Roscas
operate around the world, as documented by the classic anthropological studies of Roscas by Geertz
(1962) and Ardener (1964).
    Two main varieties are random Rosca and bidding Rosca.2 In a random Rosca, the pot in each
period is allocated to one of the members determined by the draw of lots, with earlier winners
excluded from latter draws until each member of the Rosca has received the pot once. In a bid-
ding Rosca, auctions are used to determine the priority of accessing the pot. In each period, the
individual who bids more than the competitors in the form of a pledge of higher contributions to
the Rosca is chosen to access the pot. As in the random Rosca, the earlier winners are excluded
from latter auctions. In a seminal paper, Besley, Coate and Loury (1993) provide rigorous compar-
isons of random and bidding Roscas in an environment where individuals save for the purchase of
indivisible durable goods where the agents cannot save or borrow by their own. Besley, Coate and
Loury (1994) further compare the efficiency properties of allocations achieved by random and bid-
ding Roscas and those achieved with a credit market, and with efficient allocations more generally.
They find that neither form of Rosca is efficient.3
    So far almost all existing studies on Rosca have assumed that Rosca participants do not have
access to formal credit markets. By formal credit markets, we mean that an individual can borrow
and save at interest rates that are independent of the realizations of her income and the income of
the fellow members in their social network. If borrowing and saving interest rates are identical, we
say that the credit market is “perfect;”4 and if the borrowing interest rate is higher than the saving
interest rate, we say that the financial market is “imperfect;” moreover, we use the borrowing-saving
    1
    Roscas are called by many different names around the world. They are called Hui in China, chit funds in India,
Susu in Ghana, tontines in Senegal, cheetu in Sri Lanka, to name a few examples. Light (1972) and Bonnett (1981)
respectively documented the use of Roscas among Korean and West India immigrants in the United States. See also
Adams and Canavesi de Sahonero (1989), Aleem (1990), Kimuyu (1999) for the use of Roscas in Bolivia, Pakistan
and East Africa respectively.
    2
    Other forms of allocation mechanisms are described in Ardener (1964), but random and bidding Roscas are the
two most common mechanisms.
    3
        See also Kovsted and Lyk-Jesen (1999) who study Rosca as a form of savings for lumpy investment.
    4
    The notion of “perfect credit market” used in our paper differs from the concept of “complete market” which
means that there are Arrow-Debru securities for every contingency, and accordingly interest rates will differ by the
state of nature.



                                                           1
interest rate gap as a measure of the “imperfectness” of the credit market: the larger the gap, the
more imperfect is the credit market.
    Indeed, it is a somewhat accepted wisdom in the literature that Roscas, as informal financial
institutions, exist because of the lack of formal credit markets; moreover, it is expected that the
development of formal credit markets will lead to the eventual disappearance of Roscas. While it
is undoubtedly true that Roscas are more commonly observed in developing countries with under-
developed formal credit markets, theoretically it remains unclear whether the economic role of
Roscas will vanish when individuals can access the formal credit market. In reality, even in some
developing countries, Rosca participants are not completely isolated from the formal credit market
and they may have some, albeit limited, access to the formal credit market. For example, Zhang
(2001), based on surveys of active Rosca participants in Southeastern China, found that more than
35 percent of Rosca participants who experienced adverse incomes shocks and were thus unable to
pay their pledged contribution to the Roscas borrowed from formal credit markets to fulfil their
Rosca obligations; moreover, 40 percent of Rosca participants in those areas reported lending some
of their Rosca winnings to the formal credit market. In other words, for Rosca participants in those
areas there are active interactions between Roscas and formal credit markets.
    These observations raise some important questions. How can we rationalize active Rosca op-
erations in the presence of a formal credit market? What is the economic role of Roscas when
individuals can both lend and borrow in a formal credit market? Does the importance of Rosca
decrease monotonically with the “perfectness” of the formal credit market? Does social welfare
increase monotonically with the “perfectness” of the formal credit market, given the presence of
Rosca?
    In this paper, we provide a comprehensive investigation on the interactions between the Rosca
and the formal credit market. We identify two competing forces in such interactions. On the
one hand, in the absence of formal credit market, although Rosca – with a proper size – is ex
ante welfare improving, it introduces a new risk induced by the uncertainty in the allocation of the
money pot. Since the formal credit market enables Rosca participants to hedge the risks of winning
or losing the Rosca, it may improve welfare by reducing the cost of participating in Rosca. In this
sense, the access to the formal credit market complements Rosca participation.
    On the other hand, having access to the formal credit market increases the value of outside
option, making it more difficult to satisfy the incentive compatibility and the participation con-
straints for Rosca. Indeed, we show that in the extreme case when the credit market is perfect,
the role of Rosca disappears. However, if the formal credit market is imperfect, i.e. if there is a
borrowing-saving interest rate gap, we show that participating in Rosca leads to an improvement,
both in the ex ante and ex post sense, in participants’ welfare.
    Interestingly, we find that social welfare does not monotonically increase as the imperfectness
of the credit market is reduced. Specifically, we provide conditions under which social welfare is
higher in an environment with a positive borrowing-saving interest rate gap that sustains Rosca
participation than that in an environment with a perfect credit market. Our finding implies that the


                                                 2
presence of an imperfect credit market may facilitate, rather than substitute, Rosca participation
because the Rosca participants may use the credit market to smooth the risk associated with losing
or winning the money pot in the Rosca bidding.5
    The idea that Rosca may serve as a form of insurance for its participants is not new. Calomiris
and Rajaraman (1998) make a forceful intuitive argument for the insurance role of Rosca. Klonner
(2000, 2003) introduces a model of Rosca as an insurance mechanism where individuals privately
observe their future incomes, but his model does not consider the possibility of a formal credit
market. He shows that individuals will prefer bidding Roscas to random Roscas if the temporal
risk aversion is not greater than the static risk aversion.
    There are also several papers that analyze Rosca bidding games with private information. Kuo
(1993) analyzes the equilibrium of a bidding Rosca where myopic participants’ private information is
their discount factors; moreover, he assumes that their discount factors are independently redrawn
in every period. Thus in Kuo (1993), Rosca biddings are effectively reduced to a sequence of inde-
pendent auctions. Kovsted and Lyk-Jenson (1999) study the role of Roscas in financing indivisible
investment expenditures where individuals differ in their privately observed rate of returns. They
only allow individuals to access the formal credit markets when there is a gap between the money
pot won in the Rosca and the necessary lumpy investment. Besley and Levenson (1996a, 1996b)
and Handa and Kirton (1999) present empirical evidence for the role of the Rosca in saving for
durable good purchases and indivisible investment. Yu (2014) investigates how well different Rosca
designs serve to accelerate investment in a context where participants with different entrepreneurial
skills use Rosca to fund investment projects. He did not allow the entrepreneurs to access formal
credit market. Using both reduced-form and structural methods, Kaboski and Townsend (2012a,
2012b) studied the impact of the introduction of an exogenous, large-scale, microcredit interven-
tion program, the Thai Million Baht Village Fund program on the villagers’ short-term credit,
consumption, agricultural investment, income and asset growth.
    Finally, our theoretical model of Rosca bidding in the presence of credit markets also contributes
to the auction literature. Three important features of Rosca bidding differentiate our model from
the standard auction model. First, in Rosca bidding there is no pre-assigned “buyers” and “sell-
ers”; rather, the roles of “sellers” (i.e., “lenders”) and “buyers” (i.e., “borrowers”) are determined
endogenously. Second, in standard private value auctions a bidder cares about the bids of others
only to the extent that the opponents’ bids affect her probability of winning; in Rosca bidding,
however, the opponents’ bid will affect the money in the pot in subsequent rounds and thus directly
affect the bidder’s continuation value even if she loses the bidding in the current round. Third,
because Rosca participants can access the formal credit market every period, in this model bidders’
valuations are endogenously derived from the value function of an optimal consumption/saving
   5
    In a different setting, Krueger and Perri (2011) study the interaction between public income insurance (through
progressive income taxation) and incomplete private risk sharing. They show that the fundamental friction that limits
private risk sharing in the first place is crucial in determining whether the provision of public insurance improves or
reduces social welfare.



                                                          3
problem.6
    The remainder of the paper is structured as follows. In Section 2 we present the basic model
and discuss two benchmark cases, one without access to any credit market and another with access
to a perfect credit market. In Section 4 we investigate the performance of Rosca with an imperfect
formal credit market, i.e., where the borrowing interest rate is higher than the saving interest rate.
We show that in this environment, Rosca is welfare improving. In Section 5 we show that ex ante
welfare is non-monotonic with respect to the imperfectness of the formal credit market. In Section
6, we conclude and provide some additional discussions. All proofs are contained in the Appendix.


2        The Model
   In this section, we first describe a two-period model of bidding Rosca in the presence of a formal
credit market where individuals can borrow and lend at interest rates rb and rs respectively.

Environment.             Consider two risk averse agents, indexed by i = 1, 2, with time-additive utility
function
                                                    u(ci1 ) + δEu(C2i ),

where cit , t = 1, 2, is agent i0 s period-t consumption, δ ∈ (0, 1) is the discount factor.7 We assume
that u(·) is twice differentiable, strictly increasing, strictly concave, and satisfies Inada conditions.
The income process for individual i in period t, denoted by Yti , consists of a risk-free component
ȳ > 0, and with probability 1 − p, a negative income shock Xti drawn from CDF F (·) . Formally,

                                                      Yti = ȳ − Xti ,

where with probability p ∈ (0, 1) , Xti = 0; and with probability 1 − p, Xti ∼ F (·) on the support
(x, x̄] with x ≥ 0. We assume that F (·) is associated with a continuous density f (·), and that the
income shock realizations are independent across agents and periods.

Credit Market and Rosca. In the absence of Rosca, each individual has access to a credit
market where they can borrow at interest rate rb and lend at interest rate rs ≤ rb .
    The two agents may also form a Rosca. If they do, they need to decide its size m, which is
the amount of money each has to contribute to the pot each period. We assume that the Rosca
will allocate the priority of using the pot through a premium-bidding auction. More specifically, a
premium-bidding auction is organized as follows. Each agent, after the realization of her income
in period 1, submits a bid indicating how much premium she is willing to add to the mandatory
    6
    The first two features also appear in Klonner (2003), but the third feature is unique in this paper. Hubbard,
Paarsch and Wright (2013) also study the equilibrium of a discount bidding Rosca where participants have pri-
vate investment returns as a sequential first-price, sealed-bid auction within the risk-neutral symmetric independent
private-values paradigm. As in all existing literature, they assume agents do not have access to formal credit market.
    7
        E denotes expectation, and as a notational convention, all random variables are capitalized.


                                                             4
             Agents Decide                                        Optimal Saving
                                Income Shocks       Bidding                            - Next Period
            whether to Form        Realized                        or Borrowing
           Rosca with Size m
                                                                                         -




                               Figure 1: The Time Line of the Model


size m in period 2 if she wins the right to use the pot in period 1. The one who submits the higher
premium bid wins the right to use the pot. The winner has to honor her bid in the second period.
It is important to emphasize that the credit market is always accessible to the agents even after
the formation of a Rosca.

Timing. The timing of the game is depicted in Figure 1. In the beginning of period 1 and before
the realizations of period-1 income shocks, the two agents decide whether to form a Rosca, and
if so, the size m of the Rosca. Then each agent observes her period-1 income shock, which is her
private information. If no Rosca is formed, then the two agents will only use the credit market to
insure their income risks; if a Rosca is formed, then the agents can use both the Rosca and the
credit market to insure their income risks. In a Rosca, the agents submit their premium bid after
realizing their period-1 income shocks, and the winner is able to use the pot money in period 1.
Agents make consumption and saving decisions after the Rosca bidding. Then time moves to the
second period when the period-2 income shocks are realized. The winner of the period-1 Rosca
bidding contributes m plus her winning premium bid to the pot, which is received by the loser of
the period-1 bidding in period 2. Both agents then make period-2 consumption decisions.

Cases We Consider in this Paper. In the paper we will discuss three cases of the above model
to investigate the interactions between Rosca and formal credit markets based on variations of rs
and rb . The first case is the benchmark case of no formal credit markets, which is captured by
rs = −1 and rb → ∞; i.e., there is no borrowing and saving. Note that to justify the statement
that rs = −1 in the case of no formal credit markets, we assume that the “income” is in the form
of non-storable perishable goods prior to the introduction of the formal credit market. The second
case is another benchmark case where there is a perfect credit market, which is represented by
rb = rs = r > 0, i.e., agents can borrow and save at the same interest rates. These two benchmark
cases will be analyzed in Section 3. The third case is the general case of imperfect formal credit
markets, namely, rb > rs ≥ 0, which we will analyze in Section 4. Table 1 summarizes these cases.


                                                5
                             Case I:      No Formal Credit Market           rs = −1, rb → ∞
                             Case II:     Perfect Credit Market             rb = rs = r > 0
                             Case III:    Imperfect Credit Market           rb > rs ≥ 0

                             Table 1: Summary of the Cases Considered in the Paper.

3         Benchmark Cases
3.1         Case I: Rosca without a Formal Credit Market
    We first consider a benchmark case of Rosca without access to any formal credit market, where
the Rosca allocation is determined through premium bidding. That is, at any round the participant
who bids to contribute the highest premium payment beyond the agreed-upon size m in latter
rounds of the Rosca is allocated the right to access the money pot in this round.

3.1.1         The Bidding Equilibrium

   If an individual does not participate in Rosca, then without access to any formal credit market,
the consumption decision of a representative agent (say, individual 1), following the realization of
the first period’s income y1 , is simply, c∗1 = y1 = ȳ − x1 .8 Her utility without Rosca is:9

                                              VIn (y1 ) = u(y1 ) + δEu(Y2 ),                                         (1)

where the superscript “n” is mnemonic for “no Rosca.”
   If individual 1 participates in a Rosca with size m, and wins the period-1 pot by bidding b, her
expected utility is
                             VIw (b; y1 ) = u(y1 + m) + δEu(Y2 − m − b).                        (2)
If she participates in the Rosca and loses the bidding in the first period, her expected utility given
her opponent’s bid b̂, is:10

                                      VIf (b̂; y1 ) = u(y1 − m) + δEu(Y2 + m + b̂).                                  (3)

    We now characterize the equilibrium bidding strategy. Without loss of generality, let us consider
bidder 1. Suppose that her opponent follows a bidding strategy bI (·) that satisfies b0I (·) > 0.
Consider the revelation mechanism for bidder 1 with type x > x. The expected utility for bidder
1 of type-x from reporting x̃ is given by:

        UI (x, x̃) = Pr X j = 0 + 1 − Pr(X j = 0) Pr x < X j ≤ x̃ VIw (bI (x̃); ȳ − x)
                                                                     

                       1 − Pr(X j = 0) Pr X j > x̃ E[ VIf (bI X j ; ȳ − x) X j > x̃],
                                                              
                +                                                                                 (4)

    8
         For notational simplicity, we omit the superscript i for agent i whenever doing so would not cause confusion.
    9
    We use subscript “I” in value functions, bidding functions etc., to denote this is for case I. Similar subscripts are
used for cases II and III below.
    10
    The superscripts “w” and “f ” are mnemonic for “winning the Rosca bidding” and “failing to win the Rosca
bidding” respectivey.


                                                              6
where X j denotes the period-1 income shock of agent 10 s opponent (i.e., agent 2). To understand
this expression, note that the first term is the expected utility for a type-x bidder 1 from reporting x̃
and win the period 1 bidding. Such mis-reporting will lead the mechanism to submit a bid of bI (x̃)
for her and this bid will win against her opponent with type less than x̃, which occurs with the prob-
ability Pr X j = 0 + 1 − Pr(X j = 0) Pr x < X j ≤ x̃ , and winning with a premium bid of bI (x̃)
                                                          

will yield a continuation value of VIw (bI (x̃); ȳ − x) . The second term can be similarly understood:
with probability 1 − Pr(X j = 0) Pr X j > x̃ the opponent’s type will be drawn from (x̃, x] and
                                                  

bidder 1 will lose the auction when submitting the bid bI (x̃) . However, bidder 1’s continuation
value from losing the auction depends on the premium bid submitted by her opponent bI X j ,
                                                                                                      

thus bidder 1’s expected continuation value from losing is given by E[ VIf (bI X j ; ȳ − x) X j > x̃].
                                                                                     

Using the distribution of X j , we can rewrite (4) as:
                                                                                  Z    x̄
                                    (x̃)] VIw                                               VIf bI xj ; ȳ − x dF (xj ).
                                                                                                             
      UI (x, x̃) = [p + (1 − p) F               (bI (x̃); ȳ − x) + (1 − p)                                                (5)
                                                                                  x̃

The first-order condition for incentive compatibility (IC) requires that
                                                   ∂
                                                       UI (x, x̃)          = 0,
                                                  ∂ x̃              x̃=x

which yields                                                                                   
                                    (1 − p)f (x)        VIw bI (x); ȳ − x − VIf bI (x); ȳ − x
                      b0I (x) =                                                                            .               (6)
                                  p + (1 − p)F (x)                δEu0 (Y2 − m − bI (x))
    For type-0 bidder, if she reports her type truthfully, her interim payoff is given by:
              1             h                                i                       h                   i
                Pr X j = 0 VIw (bI (0); ȳ) + VIf (b (0) ; ȳ) + 1 − Pr(X j = 0) E VIf (bI X j ; ȳ) X j > x
                                                                                              
UI (0, 0) =
              2                                               Z x̄
              1 h w                   f
                                                   i
                                                                   VIf bI (xj ); ȳ dF (xj ),
                                                                                   
          =     p VI (bI (0); ȳ) + VI (bI (0); ȳ) + (1 − p)                                              (7)
              2                                                x

where the first term reflects the probability of tying when her opponent is also of type-0 (occurring
with probability Pr X j = 0 ) in which case she will obtain VIw (bI (0); ȳ) and VIf (bI (0); ȳ) with
                              

equal probability; the second term is the expected payoff in the case when her opponent’s type is
higher than x. If type-0 bidder deviates to some x̃ > x, the expression UI (0, x̃) is analogous to (5).
   The following proposition characterizes the equilibrium:

Proposition 1 Suppose that there exists b0 ≥ 0 such that

                                                 VIw (b0 ; ȳ) ≤ VIf (b0 ; ȳ)                                             (8)

and
                                         VIw (b0 ; ȳ − x) ≥ VIf (b0 ; ȳ − x) .                                           (9)
Then the solution to differential equation (6) with boundary condition bI (0) = limx→x bI (x) = b0
specifies a symmetric Bayesian Nash Equilibrium (BNE) in the Rosca bidding in period 1. Moreover,
the equilibrium bidding function bI (·) is non-negative and increasing.

                                                              7
    Condition (8) means that the agent without shocks prefers not to win with bid b0 ; while condition
(9) means that the agent with the smallest negative shock prefers to win with bid b0 . In particular,
when x = 0, the two conditions (8) and (9) collapse into one, namely, there is a b0 ≥ 0 such that:

                                               VIw (b0 ; ȳ) = VIf (b0 ; ȳ) .                                 (10)

3.1.2       Welfare Evaluations

    The ex ante welfare gain from participating in a Rosca with size m relative to no Rosca partic-
ipation, denoted by ∆WI (m) , is given by:

                        ∆WI (m) = p∆UI (0; m) + (1 − p)E [ ∆UI (X; m)| X > x] ,                                (11)

where
                                    ∆UI (x; m) = UI (x, x) − VIn (ȳ − x)

is the interim welfare gain of type-x bidder from participating in the Rosca relative to no partici-
pation.11

Proposition 2 If there is no access to a credit market and 0 < δ < u0 (ȳ)/ Eu0 (Y2 ), then

                                                 d∆WI (m)
                                                                       > 0.
                                                   dm            m=0

   An immediate corollary of Proposition 2 is that a Rosca with an optimally chosen size m∗ > 0
can improve the participants’ ex ante welfare. The intuition for the ex ante welfare gain from a
Rosca is as follows. The potential benefit from Rosca is to smooth the income risk by transferring
money m from the higher income state to the lower one. Taking p = 0 as an example, the potential
benefit from participating in Rosca of size m in the first period is:
    Z x̄                            Z x̄                                  Z x̄
         F (x)u(ȳ − x + m)dF (x) +      [1 − F (x)]u(ȳ − x − m)dF (x) −      u(ȳ − x)dF (x), (12)
        x                                  x                                         0

where, if we recall the explanation underlying (4), the first term is the expected first period’s utility
if she wins (with probability F (x), she gets utility u(ȳ − x + m)), the second term is the expected
first period’s utility if she loses (with probability 1 − F (x), she gets utility u(ȳ − x − m)), and the
third term is the expected utility without Rosca participation. The marginal potential benefits
from Rosca in the first period, at m sufficiently close to 0, can be obtained by taking derivative of
(12) with respect to m, and is given by:
                              Z x̄                    Z x̄
                                    0              2
                                   u (ȳ − x)dF (x) −      u0 (ȳ − x)dF (x) > 0,
                                x                                x

  11
     Recall that UI (x, x) as given by Eq. (5) is type-x agent’s expected welfare from participating in a Rosca with
size m, and VIn (ȳ − x) as given by Eq. (1) is type-x agent’s expected welfare with no Rosca participation.



                                                             8
which is the difference between the expectation of the first-order statistic of marginal utility and
the expected marginal utility.
   However, there are potential costs from Rosca in the second period. The second period’s ex
ante expected utility gain (or loss) from Rosca is given by
          Z   x̄                                           Z   x̄   Z   x̄                               
                                                                                                j       j
                                                                                                    
                   [F (x)δEu (Y2 − m − bI (x))] dF (x) +                      δEu Y2 + m + bI (x ) dF (x ) dF (x) − δEu(Y2 )
           x                                               x            x
          Z x̄
      =            F (x) [δEu (Y2 − m − bI (x)) + δEu (Y2 + m + bI (x))] dF (x) − δEu(Y2 ),                              (13)
           x

where the first term in the first line is the expected second period’s utility if she wins (with
probability F (x), she gets discounted expected utility δEu(Y2 − m − bI (x))), the second term is
the expected second period’s utility if she loses (with probability 1 − F (x), she gets discounted
                               R x̄
conditional expected utility x δEu Y2 + m + bI (xj ) dF (xj )/ [1 − F (x)]), and the third term is
                                                       

the expected utility without participating Rosca; and the equality follows from an integration by
parts. By the concavity of u(·), the second period’s expected utility gain is always negative for
any m > 0, which reflects the cost due to the extra second-period consumption volatility when
participating in the Rosca, since both the allocation and the amount of the money pot are random
depending on the opponent’s first period income shock realization. The bigger the size, the higher
the volatility. The expected marginal cost from Rosca in the second period, at m close to 0, is zero:
                 Z x̄                                                         
              d
                       F (x)[δEu(Y2 − m − bI (x) + δEu(Y2 + m + bI (x))]dF (x)       = 0.
             dm x                                                                m=0

Therefore, the ex ante welfare gain is positive for a Rosca with optimal size m∗ > 0 as Proposition
2 shows.

3.2       Case II: Rosca and a Perfect Formal Credit Market
    Now we consider the other extreme case where Rosca participants can borrow and lend at an
interest r > 0 in a perfect formal credit market, and examine whether Rosca may still improve
participants’ welfare. We show that having access to a perfect formal credit market will crowd out
the role of Rosca.

3.2.1      Indirect Utility

   First, we derive the indirect utility of a representative agent. With a perfect credit market
where the interest rates rb = rs = r, given the first period’s income y1 , a representative agent’s
problem is                                                           
                                                         y1 + ρY2 − c1
                         V (y1 ; r) ≡ max u(c1 ) + δEu                    ,                    (14)
                                      {c1 }                    ρ
where ρ ≡ 1/ (1 + r).




                                                                    9
    The value function V (·; r) can be shown to be increasing and concave.12 Without participating
in a Rosca, the agent’s utility is given by

                                                   n
                                                 VII (y1 ; r) = V (y1 ; r).                                 (15)

Note that under a perfect credit market, a Rosca with size m and winning bid bII (x), depending
on the winner’s realized shock x, is equivalent to a transfer (in net present value) of:

                                                 T (x) = ρ[mr − bII (x)]                                    (16)

from the loser to the winner. Therefore, the winner’s indirect utility is given by

                                      w
                                    VII (bII (x); ȳ − x, r) = V (ȳ − x + T (x); r) ,                      (17)

and the loser’s (random) indirect utility, depending on the winner’s income-shock X j , is given by

                                     f
                                   VII (bII (X j ); ȳ − x, r) = V (ȳ − x − T (X j ); r).                  (18)

In what follows, we use these indirect utilities to derive the bidding strategy and then evaluate the
social welfare.

3.2.2       An Impossibility Result

    Using strategies similar to those in the derivation of expression (5), and plugging in indirect
utilities VIIw and V f as given by (17) and (18), we can derive the expected utility for agent 1 of
                      II
type x > x from reporting x̃ > x as follows:
                                                                       Z x̄
  UII (x, x̃; r) = [p + (1 − p)F (x̃)]V (ȳ − x + T (x̃); r) + (1 − p)      V (ȳ − x − T (xj ); r)dF (xj ), (19)
                                                                               x̃

where the explanation of each term is similar to (5) and is thus omitted here. The first order
condition for optimal strategy must satisfy ∂∂x̃ UII (x, x̃; r) x̃=x = 0, thus we obtain

                                    (1 − p)f (x) V (ȳ − x + T (x); r) − V (ȳ − x − T (x); r)
                    T 0 (x) = −                             ∂
                                                                                               .            (20)
                                  p + (1 − p)F (x)          ∂y V (ȳ − x + T (x); r)

Since T (·) ≥ 0, it follows immediately T 0 (·) ≤ 0, i.e., the transfer is decreasing in income shock.
   For x = 0, UII (0, 0; r) is similar to (7) with VIw and VIf replaced by VII   w and V f respectively.
                                                                                         II
   We can prove the following result regarding the social welfare in the presence of a perfect formal
credit market:

Proposition 3 If there is a perfect credit market, then Rosca cannot improve the ex ante welfare.
  12
       This is a special case of Lemma 1 in Section 4 where the formal statement and proof are provided.




                                                             10
    Propositions 2 and 3 for the two benchmark cases help to identify the key properties of Rosca
that are important in understanding its interactions with formal credit markets. There are two
competing effects from having access to formal credit markets. On the positive side, having access
to formal financial markets can potentially improve individuals’ welfare over the immediate outcome
of the Rosca bidding. To see this, we note that, if access to a credit market is available, the loser of
the Rosca bidding could achieve a higher expected utility by utilizing the credit market, specifically,
she receives:
                                                     
                          y1 − m + ρ Y2 + m + b̂ − c1                                          
     max u(c1 ) + δEu                                   ≥ u(y1 − m) + δEu Y2 + m + b̂ ,
      {c1 }                             ρ

where the right hand side is the loser’s utility without access to the credit market. Similarly, the
winner could also be better off by utilizing the formal credit market in response to the Rosca
winning.
    However, the above potential benefit changes the incentive structure because the presence of
formal credit opportunities invites incentives for arbitrage, making it more difficult to satisfy the
incentive compatibility constraint in Rosca bidding. Recall from (16) that Rosca is equivalent to
a transfer of first-period income from the loser to the winner, with the expected net transfer π(·)
given by                              h                                  i
                         (
                            1           1
                                                         R x̄      j   j
                            2 pT (0) − 2 pT (0) + (1 − p) x T (x )dF (x ) if x = 0,
                 π(x) ≡                                       R x̄
                           [p + (1 − p)F (x)]T (x) − (1 − p) x T (xj )dF (xj ) if x > x,
where in each case the first term is the expected in-transfer (conditional on her winning the auction)
and the second term is the expected out-transfer (conditional on her losing the auction). By Jensen’s
inequality, we know that for all x,
                                   UII (x, x; r) ≤ V (ȳ − x + π(x); r),                           (21)
where for type x > x, UII (x, x; r) is the interim utility defined as in (19), with x̃ replaced by x and
for type x = 0, UII (0, 0; r) is similar to (7) with VIw and VIf replaced by VII w and V f respectively.
                                                                                          II
The interpretation is that the transfer mechanism underlying the Rosca is no better than just
giving an expected net transfer π(·) to the participant due to the concavity of V (·; r). Note that
the incentive compatibility also requires
                   UII (x, x; r) ≥ UII (x, x̄; r) = V (ȳ − x + T (x̄); r) ≥ V (ȳ − x; r),        (22)
since it is feasible for a bidder to submit the highest bid b(x̄) ≤ mr by which she can ensure herself
an interim utility no less than V (ȳ − x; r). Inequalities (21) and (22) imply that, for all x, we
must have V (ȳ − x + π(x); r) ≥ V (ȳ − x; r), which in turn implies that π(x) ≥ 0, for all x. The
conflicts then arise from the fact that the budget balance constraint Eπ(X) = 0 does not allow for
π(X) > 0 with a positive probability given π(·) is nonnegative. Therefore, the only possibility is
π(·) ≡ 0. Then EUII (X, X; r) ≤ EVII    n (ȳ − X; r), which implies that there is no Rosca that is both

incentive compatible and ex ante welfare improving, in contrast to Proposition 2 where Rosca is ex
ante beneficial.

                                                     11
4         Rosca with Imperfect Credit Market
    In this section, we consider an imperfect formal credit market where the individuals are allowed
to borrow and save, but the borrowing interest rate rb is greater than the saving interest rate rs .
As described in Table 1 we refer to this as Case III.

4.1        The Case without Rosca
         Without Rosca, the problem for a representative agent with income y1 is:

                                   n
                                 VIII (y1 ; rb , rs ) ≡    max [u(c1 ) + δEu(C2 )]                               (23)
                                                          {c1 ,C2 }
                                 s.t. c1 + ρs C2 ≤ y1 + ρs Y2 ,                                                  (24)
                                      c1 + ρb C2 ≤ y1 + ρb Y2 ,                                                  (25)

where ρs ≡ 1/ (1 + rs ) and ρb ≡ 1/ (1 + rb ) , and (24) and (25) are the budget constraints for a
saver and a borrower respectively.13
                                                                          n (y ; r , r ) and optimal
   We can obtain several useful properties regarding the value function VIII  1 b s
                    ∗
consumption policy c1 (y1 ; rb , rs ) for Problem (23):

                         n (·; r , r ) and c∗ (·; r , r )]
Lemma 1 [Properties of VIII     b s         1      b s

                         n (·; r , r ) is continuous, differentiable, increasing and concave in y ;
(i) The value function VIII     b s                                                              1

(ii) The optimal consumption policy c∗1 (·; rb , rs ) is increasing in y1 ;

(iii) y1 − c∗1 (y1 ; rb , rs ) is increasing in y1 .

    Lemma 1 generalizes the standard result on the intertemporal consumption with linear budget
constraint. In particular, Part (iii) says that if an agent with income y1 is a borrower, then for an
agent with income less than y1 , she must borrow more. Also if an income-y1 agent is a saver, then
for an agent with income more than y1 , she must save more. As we will see below, Lemma 1 is
useful in terms of assessing the social welfare and delineating a Rosca participant’s role (saver or
borrower) in the presence of an imperfect credit market.

4.2        Rosca, Indirect Value Functions and the Interaction with an Imperfect
           Credit Market
   Now suppose that there is a Rosca with size m in addition to the access to an imperfect credit
market. The value of bidder 1 with income y1 from winning the auction to access the pot at the end

    The two constraints (24) and (25) are equivalent to the constraint C2 ≤ Y2 + min{ y1ρ−c1 , y1ρ−c1 }. We write it
    13
                                                                                               s     b
as two explicit constraints, (24) for a saver and (25) for a borrower, to facilitate the application of the Lagrangian
approach.



                                                           12
                                                  w (b; y , r , r ) , is the solution to the following
of period 1 with a premium bid of b, denoted by VIII     1 b s
problem of consumption and saving:
                               w
                             VIII (b; y1 , rb , rs ) ≡    max [u(c1 ) + δEu(C2 )]                              (26)
                                                         {c1 ,C2 }
                                s.t. c1 + ρs C2 ≤ y1 + m + ρs (Y2 − m − b),                                    (27)
                                     c1 + ρb C2 ≤ y1 + m + ρb (Y2 − m − b),                                    (28)

where in constraints (27) and (28), the first period’s income y1 + m reflects her access to the
additional amount m from winning the auction, and the second period’s income Y2 − m − b reflects
her paying additional premium b in excess of the normal Rosca payment m in the second period.
    Similarly, the value of bidder 1 with income y1 from losing      the period
                                                                                1 auction while her
                                                              f
opponent wins with a premium bid of b̂, denoted by VIII b̂; y1 , rb , rs , is the solution to the
following problem of consumption and saving:
                                                
                           f
                         VIII   b̂; y1 , rb , rs   ≡ max [u(c1 ) + δEu(C2 )]                    (29)
                                                         {c1 ,C2 }

                                 s.t. c1 + ρs C2 ≤ y1 − m + ρs (Y2 + m + b̂),                                  (30)
                                      c1 + ρb C2 ≤ y1 − m + ρb (Y2 + m + b̂)                                   (31)

where in constraints (30) and (31), the first period’s income y1 − m reflects the fact that bidder
1 has to contribute m to the pot because she loses the bidding, and the second period’s income
Y2 + m + b̂ shows that she gets back m and the promised premium of b̂ from her opponent in period
2.
    We now discuss how losing or winning the money pot in the period-1 Rosca auction changes the
participant’s role of being a borrower or a saver in the credit market. Recall that c∗1 (y1 ; rb , rs ), intro-
duced in Lemma 1, is the optimal consumption in period one without Rosca. And let c∗w         1 (y1 , b; rb , rs )
be the Rosca winner’s optimal consumption in period 1, when her income is y1 and the winning
bid is b, i.e., the solution to Problem (26); and let c∗f
                                                        1 (y1 , b̂; rb , rs ) be the counterpart of the loser
when her opponent’s winning bid is b̂, i.e., the solution to Problem (29). We have the following
important observations:

Lemma 2 [Properties of Consumption/Saving Decisions for Rosca Winners and Losers]
                                             f
(i) If y1 − m ≥ c∗1 (y1 ; rb , rs ), then VIII                         n (y ; r , r ) ≥ V w (b̂; y , r , r ) and y −
                                               (b̂; y1 , rb , rs ) ≥ VIII  1 b s         III      1 b s           1
            ∗f
      m ≥ c1 (y1 , b̂; rb , rs ) for any b̂ ∈ [mrs , mrb ];

(ii) If c∗1 (y1 ; rb , rs ) ≥ m + y1 , then VIIIw (b; y , r , r ) ≥ V n (y ; r , r ) ≥ V f (b; y , r , r ) and
                                                       1 b s         III 1 b s          III     1 b s
      c∗w
       1  (y 1 , b; r  ,
                      b sr ) ≥ y1 + m for any b ∈  [mr s , mr b ].

   The intuition behind Lemma 2 can be stated as follows. Part (i) says that, for a saver in the
absence of the Rosca (which is implied by y1 − m ≥ c∗1 (y1 ; rb , rs )), if she saves money in the credit
market, she receives a saving interest rate rs ; but if she contributes money through Rosca given

                                                         13
her opponent’s bid b̂ ∈ [mrs , mrb ], the implicit interest rate is higher than rs and thus she is better
off with the Rosca. Similarly, Part (ii) says that, for a borrower in the absence of Rosca (which is
implied by c∗1 (y1 ; rb , rs ) ≥ m + y1 ), if she borrows money from the credit market, she would have to
pay a borrowing interest rate rb ; but if she can get the money through winning the Rosca bidding
with any bid b ∈ [mrs , mrb ], her implicit borrowing interest rate is lower and thus she is better off
with Rosca. Lemma 2 establishes a link between the agents’ roles in the credit market before and
after Rosca participation. We will use Lemma 2 to solve the Rosca bidding equilibrium when the
size of Rosca is properly chosen.

4.3       Bidding Equilibrium and Welfare Analysis
   Now we characterize the bidding equilibrium of Rosca with size m. Similar to formula (4), the
expected utility for bidder 1 of type-x (x > x) from reporting type x̃ (x̃ > x) is given by:
                                    Pr X j = 0 + 1 − Pr(X j = 0) Pr x < X j ≤ x̃ VIII    w
                                                                                
   UIII (x, x̃; rb , rs )     =                                                              (bIII (x̃); ȳ − x, rb , rs )
                                                                    f
                                   1 − Pr(X j = 0) Pr X j > x̃ E[ VIII (bIII X j ; ȳ − x, rb , rs ) X j > x̃],
                                                                             
                      +                                                                                                   (32)

         w (b                                   f          j ; ȳ − x, r , r ) are defined as in (26) and (29),
                                                            
where VIII    III (x̃); ȳ − x, rb , rs ) and VIII (bIII X              b s
respectively.
    The explanation of (32) is similar to (4). Using the distribution of X, we rewrite (32) as:
                                                                    w
                     UIII (x, x̃; rb , rs ) = [p + (1 − p)F (x̃)] VIII (bIII (x̃); ȳ − x, rb , rs )
                                                       Z x̄
                                                              f
                                                                   bIII (xj ); ȳ − x, rb , rs dF (xj ).
                                                                                              
                                              +(1 − p)      VIII                                                        (33)
                                                                 x̃

Note that Lemma 1 implies that VIII w (·; ȳ − x, r , r ) and V f (·; ȳ − x, r , r ) are differentiable.
                                                   b s         III             b s
Using the same technique used to derive (6), the equilibrium bidding function bIII (·) must satisfy:
                                             w (b                                f
                              (1 − p)f (x) VIII  III (x); ȳ − x, rb , rs ) − VIII (bIII (x); ȳ − x, rb , rs )
         b0III (x) = −                                            w
                                                              ∂VIII (bIII (x);ȳ−x,rb ,rs )
                                                                                                                .       (34)
                            p + (1 − p)F (x)
                                                                                   ∂b

    We should point out that equation (34) only specifies the necessary first-order condition. We
need some technical conditions to insure the global optimality of bIII (·) as characterized by (34).
First, we see from (34) that, to ensure that bIII (·) is monotonically increasing, any type-x agent
needs to be better off being a winner of in the period-1 Rosca bidding with a bid bIII (x) than
being a loser with the same bid from her opponent. To guarantee this, we need to impose some
restrictions on the size of the Rosca m, namely m can not be too large: if m is too large, it is
possible that the winner of the Rosca bidding ends being a saver, while the loser ends up being a
borrower, causing a violation of the monotonicity of bIII (·). It turns out that a sufficient condition
is that the Rosca size m > 0 is bounded above by m (rb , rs ) as given by:14

                       m ≤ m (rb , rs ) ≡ min{c∗1 (ȳ − x; rb , rs ) − (ȳ − x), ȳ − c∗1 (ȳ; rb , rs )}.              (35)
  14
       The existence of m̄ (rb , rs ) is in turn guaranteed by:

                                   u0 (ȳ) < δ(1 + rs )Eu0 (Y2 ) and u0 (ȳ − x) > δ(1 + rb )Eu0 (Y2 ).


                                                                      14
By Lemma 2, if m ≤ ȳ − c∗1 (ȳ; rb , rs ), then the type-0 bidder will not be a borrower regardless of her
wining or losing the auction; and if m ≤ c∗1 (ȳ − x; rb , rs ) − (ȳ − x), then the type-x bidder will not
be a saver regardless of her wining or losing the auction. Second, we also need a technical condition
that the utility function has weakly decreasing absolute risk aversion and u0000 (.) ≥ 0, where the
latter implies increasing absolute prudence.15

Lemma 3 Consider an imperfect credit market with borrowing and saving interest rate rb and rs
respectively, with 0 ≤ rs < rb . Suppose that u (·) has weakly decreasing absolute risk aversion and
that u0000 ≥ 0, and the size of Rosca m is bounded by m̄ (rb , rs ) as given by (35), then there exists a
bidding equilibrium in period-1 Rosca auction such that:

(i) bIII (0) = mrs ;

(ii) for type x > x, bIII (x) is characterized by the differential equation
                          (1 − p)f (x) V (ȳ − x + ρb (mrb − bIII (x); rb ) − V (ȳ − x − ρb (mrb − bIII (x)); rb )
          b0III (x) =                                                                                               , (36)
                        p + (1 − p)F (x)                ρb V 0 (ȳ − x + ρb (mrb − bIII (x)); rb )
         with an initial condition bIII (x) = mrs , where V (·; r) is defined as in (14) and V 0 (y1 ; r)
         denotes its derivative with respect to y1 .

       If the equilibrium is characterized by Lemma 3, the welfare property is given by:

Proposition 4 Assume rb > rs ≥ 0 and that the conditions for Lemma 3 hold. Then under the
equilibrium bidding strategy specified in Lemma 3, Rosca improves participants’ ex ante welfare.

    The key observation here is that the interest rate gap limits the agents’ arbitrage between Rosca
and the credit market. With the gap between the borrowing and saving interest rates, a saver will
be self-disciplined to submit a bid with an implied interest rate lower than the saving interest rate
in the credit market. In equilibrium, the borrower will realize that the saver will not bid higher
than the saving interest rate, and thus may submit a bid with an implied interest rate lower than
the borrowing interest rate. Since the bids are between the two credit market interest rates, both
saver and borrower are better off. In the Corollary 1 below, we explicitly characterize the bidding
equilibrium for the case of Constant Absolute Risk Aversion (CARA) utility functions:

Corollary 1 Under the CARA utility function u(c) = [1 − exp (−βc)] /β, the equilibrium bidding
function is given by:
              
               mrs ,                                                                  if x = 0
   bIII (x) =                    h                       i h              i2              (37)
                                                     b −rs )
               mrb + 2+r
                        2β
                           b
                              ln 1 − 1 − exp − 2βm(r
                                                  2+rb
                                                                       p
                                                                  p+(1−p)F (x)      , if x > x,

Under the above condition, the agent with no income shock will be a saver, i.e., ȳ > c∗1 (ȳ; rb , rs ), and the agent with
the income shok x will be a borrower, i.e., c∗1 (ȳ − x; rb , rs ) > (ȳ − x).
  15
     In a seminal paper, Kimball (1990) shows that the intensity of saving also depends on the absolute prudence
           000
γ(·) ≡ − uu00 (·)
               (·)
                   . He shows that the assumption u0000 (·) ≥ 0 implies that the absolute prudence γ(·) is increasing.


                                                             15
where Rosca size m is bounded by
                                                                                                                 
                           1         ln[(1 + rb )δE exp(−βY2 )]                1          ln[(1 + rs )δE exp(−βY2 )]
m (rb , rs ) = min                 −                            − (ȳ − x) ,         ȳ +                               .
                         2 + rb                   β                          2 + rs                    β
                                                                                                                   (38)


5        Welfare Comparisons
   In the previous sections, we have investigated the possibility for Rosca to improve the welfare,
under a variety of credit market conditions. Now we discuss the change of welfare when credit
market conditions improve. In the absence of Rosca, it is straightforward to show that, for any y1 ,
the following inequalities hold:

   VIn (y1 ) ≤ VIII
                 n                          n
                    (y1 ; rb , rs ) ≤ min{VII               n
                                              (y1 ; rs ), VII                     n
                                                              (y1 ; rb )} = min{VIII                    n
                                                                                     (y1 ; rs , rs ), VIII (y1 ; rb , rb )},
                                                                                                                          (39)
          n                                n                                           n
where VI (y1 ) is defined as in (1), VII (y1 ; r) is defined as in (15) and VIII (y1 ; rb , rs ) is defined as in
(23). We summarize the above inequalities by the following proposition:

Proposition 5 (Welfare and Credit Market Imperfectness in the Absence of Rosca) In
the absence of Rosca, a reduction in the credit market imperfectness, as measured by the borrow-
ing/savings interest rate gap, increases the social welfare.

   The next proposition addresses the following question: are agents better off in an environment
where they form a Rosca with size m, but do not have access to credit market, or in an environment
with a perfect formal credit market with interest rate r with no Rosca? The answer is affirmatively
the latter, if the interest rate r in the perfect credit market is not too high.

Proposition 6 (Perfect Credit Market without Rosca vs. Rosca without Credit Market)
                                              R x̄
Assume p = 0. If the Rosca size m is such that x bI (x)dF (x)2 /m ≥ r, we have

                                                               n
                                               EUI (X, X) ≤ EVII (ȳ − X; r).
                  R x̄
In particular,       x   bI (x)dF (x)2 /m ≥ r holds if ρ = 1/(1 + r) ≥ δ.

    The intuition for Proposition 6 is as follows. In a traditional society where there is no credit
market but a continuum of ex ante identical residents who are randomly paired to form Rosca with
                                                               R x̄
size m. The average winning bid in this economy is exactly x bI (x)dF (x)2 ,16 which results in an
                             R x̄                                                  R x̄
average implied interest rate x bI (x)dF (x)2 /m. Under the stated condition that x bI (x)dF (x)2 /m
higher than the interest rate r prevalent in the perfect credit market, agents in the modern society
with perfect credit market will experience less volatile consumption as that in the traditional society
    16
    The average winning bid has a c.d.f. F (x)2 instead of F (x) because it is the highest order statistic of two random
variables.


                                                              16
                       Parameter                                                Value
                       CARA Parameter: β                                        0.065
                       Borrowing Interest Rate: rb                              0.27
                       Discount Factor: δ                                       0.77
                       Top Income: ȳ                                           72.5
                       Fraction with No Negative Income Shocks: p               0.63
                       Income Shock Distribution F (x) : Uniform (x, x̄]        x = 91,x̄ = 95
                       Rosca size: m                                            5.96

                               Table 2: Parameters for the Numerical Example.

with Rosca only. Interestingly, if the interest rate r is determined by a Walrasian equilibrium where
R x̄          ∗
 x [ȳ − x − c1 (ȳ − x; r, r)]dF (x) = 0, then under Constant Absolute Risk Averse (CARA) utility
function, we indeed have ρ ≥ δ.
     Finally, we consider traditional societies with the presence of traditional Rosca and a formal
credit market, and ask the following question: in the presence of Rosca, is the social welfare
monotonically increasing as the credit market imperfectness, as measured by rb − rs , converges to
zero? Interestingly and somewhat surprisingly, the answer is no, at least for CARA utility, as the
following proposition states:

Proposition 7 (Non-Monotonicity of Welfare with respect to Credit Market Imper-
fectness in the Presence of Rosca) Assume that the utility is CARA. For any fixed rb , when
the size of Rosca m ≤ minrs ∈[0,rb ] m (rb , rs ) where m (rb , rs ) is given by (38) satisfies

                 ȳ − c∗1 (ȳ; rb , rb )
                                                               Z x̄                   
                                                                          β (1 + rb )
                                         < (1 − p)2 + p(1 − p)      exp               x dF (x), (40)
                          m                                     x           2 + rb

then for some rs < rb , we have

                                    EUIII (X, X; rb , rs ) > EUIII (X, X; rb , rb ).                           (41)

    To illustrate Proposition 7, we provide a numerical example where the parameters that define
the environment are described in Table 2. We consider the changes in welfare when the saving
interest rate rs varies from 0 to rb = 0.27. We first verify that the conditions for Proposition 7 are
satisfied in the example. It can be shown that the type-0 agent will be a saver in period 1 regardless
of rs and her optimal period-1 saving, ȳ − c∗1 (ȳ; rb , rs ) where c∗1 (ȳ; rb , rs ) is give by (A18), is given
by                                                                             Z x̄                
               ∗                       1
         ȳ − c1 (ȳ; rb , rs ) =               ln [(1 + rs )δ] + ln p + (1 − p)      exp (βx) dF (x) ,
                                  β (2 + rs )                                     x

which can be shown to be a decreasing function of rs and is no smaller than (approximately) 34.12,
achieved at rs = rb = 0.27.17 It can also be verified that agents with income shock x > x will be a
  17
       Details of the calculations can be found in an online appendix available at http://www.econ.upenn.edu/˜hfang.


                                                          17
          EU


                                                                                   E UIII HX , X ; rb , rb L = EVHy - X ; rb L


                E UIII HX , X ; rb , rs L
        1.0




        0.9



                                                              n Hy - X ; r , r L
                                                          E VIII          b s
        0.8




        0.7




                                                                                                                                 rb
        0.6
                                                                                                                                      rs
                                 0.05        0.10               0.15                          0.20                        0.25


Figure 2: Non-Monotonicity of Social Welfare in the Imperfectness of Formal Credit Market When
Rosca is Also Present.
Notes: EUIII (X, X; rb , rs ) denotes the ex ante expected welfare in an environment with Rosca and an impefect
                     n
credit market; EVIII   (ȳ − X; rb , rs ) is the ex ante expected welfare in an imperfect credit market but without Rosca;
EV (ȳ − X; rb ) is the ex ante expected welfare in an environment with perfect credit market of interest rate rs = rb .
                                                  n
Note at rs = rb , EUIII (X, X; rb , rb ) = EVIII    (ȳ − X; rb , rb ) = EV (ȳ − X; rb ).


borrower in period 1, with the optimal borrowing for type-x given by:
                                                                               Z x̄                
 ∗                                1
c1 (ȳ−x; rb , rs )−(ȳ−x) =               βx − ln [(1 + rb )δ] − ln p + (1 − p)      exp (βx) dF (x)   = 5.97.
                             β (2 + rb )                                          x

Therefore the Rosca size m = 5.96 indeed satisfies that m ≤ minrs ∈[0,rb ] {ȳ − c∗1 (ȳ; rb , rs ), c∗1 (ȳ −
x; rb , rs ) − (ȳ − x)} = 5.97. Finally, inequality (40) in Proposition 7 is satisfied because

       ȳ − c∗1 (ȳ; rb , rb )
                                                                   Z x̄                   
                                 34.12                 2                      β (1 + rb )
                               =       = 5.72 < (1 − p) + p(1 − p)      exp               x dF (x) = 7.00.
                m                5.96                               x           2 + rb

    Figure 2 demonstrates the numerical results. As we have shown in Proposition 4, Rosca results
in a social welfare gain under an imperfect market, i.e., the curve EUIII (X, X; rb , ·) is above the
          n (ȳ − X; r , ·), for all levels of r . There are two important observations. First, the
curve EVIII           b                         s
welfare gain of the Rosca vanishes as the market becomes perfect, i.e., rs → rb , which is shown by
the impossibility result with a general utility u(·) (see Proposition 3). Second, in this numerical
example, as rs approaches rb , EUIII (X, X; rb , ·) is not monotonically increasing. The reason is that
as rs → rb , it becomes more difficult to satisfy the incentive compatibility constraint in the Rosca
mechanism, which drives the bid up, and reduces welfare gain from Rosca. Moreover, the decrease

                                                           18
of welfare gain from Rosca will dominate the increase of welfare gain from the improvement of the
credit market. Finally, as rs = rb , we have shown that the perfect credit market will eliminate any
welfare gain from Rosca, EUIII (X, X; rb , rb ) = EV (ȳ − X, rb ). The non-monotonicity shows that
the perfectness of the credit market is not always desirable since it may inhibit the performance of
the self-insurance mechanism such as Rosca.
    Moreover, it can be seen that inequality
                                     h          i (40) is more likely to hold if the expected marginal
                              R x̄     β(1+rb )
disutility of income shocks x exp 2+rb x dF (x) is higher. Moreover, the fact that the right
hand side of (40) is inversely U -shaped in p indicates that for the non-monotonicity to occur, p
should not be too small or too large.


6    Conclusion
    In this paper, we develop an auction model of risk averse Rosca participants facing income
shocks to investigate the interaction between the credit market and Rosca, which fills a hole in the
existing literature. We uncover two competing forces regarding the interaction between a Rosca
and a formal credit market. On the one hand, the formal credit market may facilitate (rather
than substitute) the participation of Rosca through the smoothing of the risk introduced by the
uncertainty in the Rosca bidding; on the other hand, the incentive compatibility constraint for
Rosca participants becomes more difficult to satisfy due to the arbitrage incentives resulting from
the access to the formal credit market.
    Using the gap of the borrowing and saving interest rates as a measure of the imperfectness of the
credit market, we compare three cases: (i) Rosca without credit market; (ii) Rosca with a perfect
credit market; (iii) Rosca with an imperfect credit market. We show that a perfect credit market
completely crowds out the role of Rosca. However, when credit market is present but imperfect,
we show that Rosca and the formal credit market can complement each other in improving social
welfare. Interestingly, we find that the social welfare in an environment with both Rosca and formal
credit market does not necessarily increase monotonically as the imperfectness of the credit market
converges to zero.




                                                 19
References
 [1] Adams, D. W., and M. L. Canavesi de Sahonero (1989). “Rotating Saving and Credit Associ-
     ations in Bolivia.” Saving and Development, Vol. 13, 219-236.

 [2] Aleem, I. (1990). “Imperfect Information, Screening, and the Costs of Information Lending:
     A Study of a Rural Credit Market in Pakistan.” World Bank Economic Review, Vol. 4, No. 3,
     329-349.

 [3] Ardener, S. (1964). “The Comparative Study of Rotating Credit Associations.” Royal Anthro-
     pological Institute of Great Britain and Ireland, Vol. 94, 201-229.

 [4] Besley, Timothy J., Stephen Coate and Glenn C. Loury (1993). “The Economics of Rotating
     Savings and Credit Associations.” American Economic Review, Vol. 83, 792-810.

 [5] Besley, Timothy, Stephen Coate and Glenn C. Loury (1994). “Rotating Savings and Credit
     Associations, Credit Market and Efficiency.” Review of Economic Studies, Vol. 61, 701-719.

 [6] Besley, Timothy and Alec Levenson (1996a). “The Role of Informal Finance in Household
     Capital Accumulation: Evidence from Taiwan.” Economic Journal, Vol. 106, No. 1, 39-59.

 [7] Besley, Timothy and Alec Levenson (1996b). “The Anatomy of an Informal Financial Market:
     Rosca Participation in Taiwan.” Journal of Development Economics, Vol. 51, 45-68.

 [8] Bonnett, Aubrey W. (1981). Institutional Adaptation of West Indian Immigrants to America:
     An Analysis of Rotating Credit Associations. Washington, D.C.: University Press of America.

 [9] Calomiris, Charles and Indira Rajaraman (1998). “The Role of ROSCAs: Lumpy Durables or
     Event Insurance?” Journal of Development Economics, Vol. 56, 207-216.

[10] Geertz, Clifford (1962). “The Rotating Credit Association: A “Middle Rung” in Development.
     Economic Development and Culture Change, Vol. 10, 241-63.

[11] Handa, Sudhanshu and Claremont Kirton (1999). “The Economics of Rotating Saving and
     Credit Associations: Evidence from the Jamaican ‘Partner’.” Journal of Development Eco-
     nomics, Vol. 60, 173-194.

[12] Hubbard, Timothy P., Harry J. Paarsch and Will M. Wright (2013). “Hui: A Case Study of a
     Sequential Double Auction of Capital.” Working Paper.

[13] Kaboski, Joseph P. and Robert M. Townsend (2012a). “The Impact of Credit on Village
     Economies.” American Economic Journal: Applied Economics, 4(2): 98-133.

[14] Kaboski, Joseph P. and Robert M. Townsend (2012b). “A Structural Evaluation of a Large-
     Scale Quasi-Experimental Microfinance Initiative.” Econometrica, 79(5): 1357-1406.


                                              20
[15] Kimball, M. S. (1990). “Precautionary Saving in the Small and in the Large.” Econometrica,
     58, 53-73.

[16] Kimuyu, Peter-Kiko (1999). “Rotating Savings and Credit Associations in Rural East Africa.”
     World Development, Vol. 27, No. 7, 1299-1308.

[17] Klonner, Stefan (2000). “Rotating Savings and Credit Associations as Insurance.” mimeo,
     Cornell University.

[18] Klonner, Stefan (2003). “Rotating Savings and Credit Associations when Participants are Risk
     Averse.” International Economic Review, Vol. 44, No. 3, 979-1005.

[19] Kovsted, Jens and Peter Lyk-Jensen (1999). “Rotating Savings and Credit Associations:The
     Choice between Random and Bidding Allocation of Funds.” Journal of Development Eco-
     nomics, Vol. 60, 143-172.

[20] Krueger, Dirk and Fabrizio Perri (2011). “Public versus Private Risk Sharing.” Journal of
     Economic Theory, Vol. 146, 920–956.

[21] Kuo, Ping-Sing (1993). “Loans, Bidding Strategies and Equilibrium in the Discount-Bid Ro-
     tating Credit Association.” Academia Economic Papers, Vol. 21, No. 2, 261-303.

[22] Light, Ivan (1972). Ethnic Enterprises in America. Berkeley: University of California Press.

[23] Luenberger, D.G., (1969). Optimization by Vector Space Methods. New York, John Wiley &
     Sons.

[24] Milgrom, Paul and Ilya Segal (2002). “Envelope Theorems for Arbitrary Choice Sets.” Econo-
     metrica, Vol.70, 583–601.

[25] Yu, Ning Neil (2014). “On Designs of Rotating Savings and Credit Associations.” Working
     Paper, Emory University.

[26] Zhang, Weikung (2001). “A Survey on Participation of Roscas in Taizhou City.” mimeo, Nor-
     mal College of Taizhou.




                                                21
A      Appendix: Proofs

Proof of Proposition 1:
     Suppose that b0 ≥ 0 satisfies (8) and (9). We prove Proposition 1 in two steps.
     (Step 1.) We show that any solution to Eq. (6) with boundary condition bI (0) = bI (x) = b0 satisfies
 0
bI (·) > 0 and bI (·) ≥ 0.
     First, we show that there exists some x∗ > x such that b0I (x) > 0 for x ∈ (x, x∗ ). Suppose not. There
must exist some ε > 0 such that b0I (x) ≤ 0 for any x ∈ (x, x + ε). Then, for x ∈ (x, x + ε) we have:

VIw (bI (x); ȳ−x)−VIf (bI (x); ȳ−x) > VIw (bI (x); ȳ−x)−VIf (bI (x); ȳ−x) ≥ VIw (bI (x); ȳ−x)−VIf (bI (x); ȳ−x) ≥ 0,

where the first inequality follows from the strict concavity of u(·); and the second inequality follows from
the fact that VIw (·; ȳ − x) decreases in b and VIf (·; ȳ − x) increases in b; and the last inequality follows from
the assumption that bI (x) = b0 satisfying inequality (9). Therefore, by Eq. (6), the above inequality in turn
implies b0I (x) > 0, a contradiction.
    Next we show that b0I (·) > 0 for all x > x. Suppose not. Given that b0I (x) > 0 for x close to x as we have
shown, there must exist x∗ such that b0I (x∗ ) = 0, bI (x∗ + ε) < bI (x∗ ) and b0I (x∗ + ε) < 0 for some ε > 0. If
so, we have

                              VIw (bI (x∗ + ε); ȳ − (x∗ + ε)) − VIf (bI (x∗ + ε); ȳ − (x∗ + ε))
                          >   VIw (bI (x∗ ); ȳ − (x∗ + ε)) − VIf (bI (x∗ ); ȳ − (x∗ + ε))
                          >   VIw (bI (x∗ ); ȳ − x∗ ) − VIf (bI (x∗ ); ȳ − x∗ ) = 0,

where the first inequality follows from the fact that VIw (·; ȳ − x) − VIf (·; ȳ − x) decreases in b; the second
inequality follows from the strict concavity of u(·); and the last equality follows from the hypothesis that
b0I (x∗ ) = 0 (through Eq. (6)). Therefore, by Eq. (6) again, the above inequality implies that b0I (x∗ + ε) > 0,
a contradiction. Thus, for all x > x, b0I (·) > 0 and bI (·) ≥ 0.
      (Step 2.) We show that bI (·) that solves Eq. (6) with boundary condition bI (0) = bI (x) = b0 is a
symmetric BNE of the Rosca bidding game.
      First, we show that there is no incentive for type x > x to mimic any x̃ 6= x such that x̃ > x. Note that
expression (4) and the concavity of u (·) imply that:

                         ∂ 2 UI (x, x̃)
                                        = (1 − p)f (x̃)[u0 (ȳ − x − m) − u0 (ȳ − x + m)] ≥ 0.                       (A1)
                             ∂ x̃∂x
Together with the first order condition that ∂UI (x, τ )/∂τ |τ =x = 0, (A1) implies that, for any x, x̃ > x,
                                                          Z x
                                                              ∂UI (x, τ )
                                 UI (x, x) − UI (x, x̃) =                 dτ ≥ 0.                          (A2)
                                                           x̃    ∂τ

Therefore, there is no incentive for any type x > x to mimic any x̃ 6= x such that x̃ > x.
    We next show that there is no incentive for type x > x to mimic type 0. Since bI (0) = bI (x) = b0 , if a
type-x bidder were to mimic type-0 agent and bid b0 , her gain from the deviation is:
                                                                   1
           UI (x, 0) − UI (x, x) ≤ UI (x, 0) − UI (x, x) =           p[V f (bI (x); ȳ − x) − VIw (bI (x); ȳ − x)]
                                                                   2 I
                                       1
                                  ≤      p[V f (bI (x); ȳ − x) − VIw (bI (x); ȳ − x)] ≤ 0,
                                       2 I


                                                             22
where the first inequality is due to UI (x, x) ≥ UI (x, x), which follows from (A2); the equality simply uses the
definition of UI (x, 0) and UI (x, x); and the third step uses bI (x) ≤ bI (x) and that VIw (·; ȳ − x)−VIf (·; ȳ − x)
decreases in b.
     Lastly, we use condition (8) to show that there is no incentive for type-0 agent to deviate from bidding
bI (0) = b0 . Note that any type x > x will bid higher than bI (x) = b0 because b0I (·) > 0. Given the opponent’s
equilibrium bidding strategy bI (·), a type-0 bidder’s expected gain of deviation is:

    UI (x, 0) − UI (0, 0)
                                                                                                Z x                      
         w                1 w                   f                                  w                     f     j
                                                                                                                         j
  = p VI (bI (x); ȳ) − [VI (bI (0); ȳ) + VI (bI (0); ȳ)] + (1 − p) F (x)VI (bI (x); ȳ) −           VI (bI x ; ȳ)dF (x )
                          2                                                                         x
    1 h w                                 i              h                                   i
  ≤   p VI (bI (0); ȳ) − VIf (bI (0); ȳ) + (1 − p)F (x) VIw (bI (0); ȳ) − VIf (bI (0); ȳ) ≤ 0,
    2
where the first inequality follows from the fact that VIw (·; ȳ) decreases in b and VIf (·; ȳ) increases in b; and
the second inequality follows from the assumption that b0 satisfies inequality (8). Thus, type-0 bidder have
no incentive to mimic x ∈ (x, x̄].
Proof of Proposition 2:
     We first prove that, under the stated condition that δ ∈ (0, u0 (ȳ)/Eu0 (Y2 )), the bidding equilibrium
as characterized by Proposition 1 exists when m is sufficiently small. To see this, note that, if δ ∈
(0, u0 (ȳ)/Eu0 (Y2 )) , then
                               h                         i
                              ∂ VIw (0; ȳ) − VIf (0; ȳ)
                                                           = 2 [u0 (ȳ) − δEu0 (Y2 )] > 0.
                                         ∂m
                                                                  m=0

Thus, for sufficiently small m > 0, we have              (0; ȳ) > VIf (0; ȳ). Since VIw (·; ȳ) − VIf (·; ȳ) is continuous
                                                            VIw
and decreasing in b, there exists some b0 > 0 such that VIw (b0 ; ȳ) = VIf (b0 ; ȳ) , which satisfies condition
(8). Further, note that VIw (b0 ; ȳ − x) − VIf (b0 ; ȳ − x) is increasing in x, VIw (b0 ; ȳ) = VIf (b0 ; ȳ) implies
VIw (b0 ; ȳ − x) ≥ VIf (b0 ; ȳ − x) since x ≥ 0. Thus, b0 also satisfies condition (9). Therefore, Proposition 1
applies and a bidding equilibrium as characterized by Proposition 1 exists.
    Now, the ex ante expected utility from participating in Rosca with size m conditional on x ≥ x,
Rx
 x
   UI (x, x)dF (x), where UI (x, x) is defined in (5) with x̃ being replaced by x, can be written as:
Z x                          Z x                                                     Z x̄                                
                                                          w                                   f       j
                                                                                                                       j
    UI (x, x)dF (x) =               [p + (1 − p) F (x)] VI (bI (x); ȳ − x) + (1 − p)      VI (bI x ; ȳ − x)dF (x ) dF (x)
 x                              x                                                              x
                               Z x
                      =                [p + (1 − p)F (x)][u(ȳ − x + m) + δEu(Y2 − m − bI (x))]dF (x)
                                x
                                            "Z                                                                         #
                                                 x
                               +(1 − p)              [(1 − F (x))u(ȳ − x − m)dF (x) + δEu(Y2 + m + bI (x))F (x)] dF (x)   (A3)
                                               x

where the second equality uses the fact that we can use integrating by parts to obtain:
                   Z x Z x                              !
                                f     j               j
                             VI (bI (x ); ȳ − x)dF (x ) dF (x)
                          x            x
                       Z   x   Z    x
                                         u(ȳ − x − m) + δEu(Y2 + m + bI (xj )) dF (xj )dF (x)
                                                                              
                  =
                          x        x
                       Z   x                                            Z   x
                  =            (1 − F (x))u(ȳ − x − m)dF (x) +                 δEu(Y2 + m + bI (x))F (x)dF (x).
                          x                                             x


                                                                   23
Using the definition of ∆UI (x; m) as given by (11), and taking derivative of (A3) with respect to m, we have:
                                             Z x
            dE [ ∆UI (X; m)| X > x]
                                           =      [p + (1 − p)F (x) − (1 − p)(1 − F (x))] u0 (ȳ − x)dF (x)
                        dm            m=0     x
                         Z x                  
                              ∂bI (x)
           −pδEu0 (Y2 )               + 1]       dF (x).                                                    (A4)
                          x     ∂m         m=0

Similarly, we can rewrite the ex ante expected utility for type-0 agent from participating in Rosca
with size m, using expression (7), as
                       p
       UI (0, 0) =       [u(ȳ + m) + δEu(Y2 − m − bI (0)) + u(ȳ − m) + δEu(Y2 + m + bI (0))] (A5)
                       2         Z      x̄
                       +(1 − p)              [u(ȳ − m) + δEu(Y2 + m + bI (x))] dF (x).
                                    x

Taking derivative of (A5) with respect to m, we obtain:
                                           Z x            
       d∆UI (0; m)                   0          ∂bI (x)
                        = (1 − p)δEu (Y2 )              +1                                       dF (x) − (1 − p)u0 (ȳ).   (A6)
           dm       m=0                     x    ∂m                                        m=0

    Combining (A4) and (A6), we have:

 d∆WI (m)                d∆UI (0; m)                  dE [ ∆UI (X; m)| X > 0]
                     = p                    + (1 − p)
   dm        m=0             dm        m=0                      dm               m=0
                               Z x                                                                     
                     = (1 − p)      [p + (1 − p)F (x) − (1 − p)(1 − F (x))] u0 (ȳ − x)dF (x) − pu0 (ȳ)
                                        x
                                    Z    x̄
                     > (1 − p)2                   [2F (x) − 1] u0 (ȳ − x)dF (x)
                                        x
                                    Z        x̄
                     > (1 − p)2                   [2F (x) − 1] u0 (ȳ − x̂)dF (x)
                                        x
                                                   Z    x̄
                     = (1 − p)2 u0 (ȳ)                      [2F (x) − 1] dF (x)
                                                    x
                                       h               i                       x̄
                     = (1 − p)2 u0 (ȳ) F (x)2 − F (x)                              = 0,
                                                                               x

where the first inequality follows from the fact that u0 (ȳ − x) > u0 (ȳ), and in the second inequality
x̂ is defined by F (x̂) = 1/2, and it follows from the fact that u0 (ȳ − x) is increasing in x. Therefore,
 d∆WI (m)
     dm         > 0.
          m=0
Proof of Proposition 3:
   The proof is provided in the text.

Proof of Lemma 1:
   Using the Lagrangian method (see Luenberger, 1969) for concave functional Eu(·), we can
rewrite the representative agent’s problem (23) as:
                         n
                       VIII (y1 ; rb , rs ) =                min      max LnIII (c1 , C2 ; λb , λs ; y1 , Y2 )              (A7)
                                                       λb ≥0,λs ≥0 {c1 ,C2 }


                                                                      24
where

LnIII (c1 , C2 ; λb , λs ; y1 , Y2 ) = u(c1 )+δE {u(C2 ) + λb [y1 − c1 + ρb (Y2 − C2 )] + λs [y1 − c1 + ρs (Y2 − C2 )]}
                                                                                                               (A8)
is the Lagrangian functional and λb ≥ 0 and λs are respectively the Lagrangian multiplier for
constraints (25) and (24).18 Because u(·) is concave, and the constraint is linear in the control
variables, both the solution and the multiplier are unique. The first-order conditions are given by:

                                       u0 (c1 ) = λs + λb and δEu0 (C2 ) = ρs λs + ρb λb .                                   (A9)

   (i) Given that LnIII (c1 , C2 ; λb , λs ; y1 , Y2 ) is continuous and differentiable in each argument
and concave in (c1 , C2 ), by a generalized envelope theorem (e.g., Milgrom and Segal, 2002),
max{c1 ,C2 } LnIII (c1 , C2 ; λb , λs ; y1 , Y2 ) is continuous and differentiable in y1 . Then,
                                                                                          
                                           ∂
                                                  max LnIII (c1 , C2 ; λb , λs ; y1 , Y2 )
                                         ∂y1 {c1 ,C2 }

is continuous in (λb , λs , y1 ). Therefore, the value VIII     n (y ; r , r ) is also differentiable in y , given that
                                                                       1 b s                              1
              n                                                                                        ∂    n (y ; r , r ) =
max{c1 ,C2 } LIII (c1 , C2 ; λb , λs ; y1 , Y2 ) is convex in (λb , λs ). By the envelope theorem, ∂y1 VIII     1 b s
                     n
λb + λs > 0, so VIII (·; rb , rs ) is increasing.
     To show the concavity of VIII         n (·; r , r ), observe that the Lagrangian Ln (c , C ; λ , λ ; y , Y )
                                                   b s                                        III 1    2 b s 1 2
is linear in y1 . Thus for y1 6= y10 and α ∈ [0, 1], we have:

      n
    VIII (αy1 + (1 − α)y10 ; rb , rs )
              max αLnIII (c1 , C2 ; λb , λs ; y1 , Y2 ) + (1 − α)LnIII (c1 , C2 ; λb , λs ; y10 , Y2 )
                                                                                                     
  =    min
          λb ≥0,λs ≥0 {c1 ,C2 }
  ≥ α          min        max LnIII (c1 , C2 ; λb , λs ; y1 , Y2 ) + (1 − α)      min       max LnIII (c1 , C2 ; λb , λs ; y1 , Y2 )
           λb ≥0,λs ≥0 {c1 ,C2 }                                               λb ≥0,λs ≥0 {c1 ,C2 }

  =          n
          αVIII (y1 ; rb , rs ) +            n
                                    (1 − α)VIII (y10 ; rb , rs ),

        n (·; r , r ) is concave. In particular, V (·; r) as defined in (14) is precisely V n (·; r , r ) when
thus VIII      b s                                                                         III     b s
rb = rs = r; thus it is concave.
    (ii) By the envelope theorem and the first order condition (A9), we have
                                          n (y ; r , r )
                                       ∂VIII  1 b s
                                                         = λb + λs = u0 (c∗1 (y1 ; rb , rs )).
                                             ∂y1
Since we have shown in (i) that V (·; rb , rs ) is concave, it follows that u0 (c∗1 (y1 ; rb , rs )) is decreasing
in y. Thus, c∗1 (y1 ; rb , rs ) is increasing in y1 .
    (iii) First consider the case c∗1 (y1 ; rb , rs ) > y1 , i.e. when the agent is a borrower in the first
period. This implies that λs = 0. From the first order condition (A9), we have

                                                                   y1 − c∗1 (y1 ; rb , rs )
                                                                                           
                                                         δ
                          u0 (c∗1 (y1 ; rb , rs )) = λb = Eu0 Y2 +                            .
                                                         ρb                 ρb
  18
       The complementarity slackness condition applies, i.e., λk = 0, k = b, s, if the corresponding constraint is slack.


                                                                    25
Since u0 (c∗1 (y1 ; rb , rs )) is decreasing in y1 and the above first order condition holds for any y1 , then
y1 − c∗1 (y1 ; rb , rs ) is increasing in y1 .
    Similarly, for the case c∗1 (y1 ; rb , rs ) < y1 , which implies that λb = 0, we have the first order
condition
                                                                    y1 − c∗1 (y1 ; rb , rs )
                                                                                            
                               0 ∗                        δ  0
                             u (c1 (y1 ; rb , rs )) = λs = Eu Y2 +                             .
                                                          ρs                 ρs
Similar reasoning as above implies that y1 − c∗1 (y1 ; rb , rs ) is increasing in y1 .
Proof of Lemma 2:
                                                                                                           
                                                              w (b; y , r , r ) and V f
    Using the Lagrangian method we can rewrite the problems VIII                           b̂; y  , r  , r
                                                                     1 b s           III        1    b    s
as given by (26) and (29) respectively as:
                w
             VIII  (b; y1 , rb , rs ) =       min       max Lw
                                                             III (c1 , C2 ; λb , λs ; y1 + m, Y2 − m − b),           (A10)
                                           λb ≥0,λs ≥0 {c1 ,C2 }
                                    
              f
            VIII    b̂; y1 , rb , rs   =      min       max LfIII (c1 , C2 ; λb , λs ; y1 − m, Y2 + m + b̂),         (A11)
                                           λb ≥0,λs ≥0 {c1 ,C2 }

                                               f
where the Lagrangians Lw                                                                              w
                             III (·) and LIII (·) are defined analogous to (A8). Since both LIII (·) and
LfIII (·) are linear in (m, b), we can use the same argument as that in the proof of Part (i) of Lemma
1 to get:
                          n                     1h f                          w
                                                                                                   i
                        VIII (y1 ; rb , rs ) ≥    VIII (b; y1 , rb , rs ) + VIII (b; y1 , rb , rs ) .   (A12)
                                                2
    (i) We first show that y1 − m ≥ c∗1 (y1 ; rb , rs ) implies y1 − m ≥ c∗f
                                                                          1 (y1 , mrs ; rb , rs ). Suppose to
                          ∗f
the contrary, y1 − m < c1 (y1 , mrs ; rb , rs ), that is, an agent with income y1 who loses the Rosca
bidding in period 1 and expects to receive from the opponent a premium bid mrs in second period
will switch to become a borrower in period 1. This implies that:
                                                                                                                                  !
                                                         δ                              y1 − m − c∗f  1 (y1 , mrs ; rb , rs )
u0 (c∗1 (y1 ; rb , rs )) > u0 c∗f
                               1  (y1 , mrs ; rb , rs )  =    Eu0
                                                                  Y 2 + m  +  mr   s  +
                                                           ρb                                             ρb
                                                                        ∗
                                                                                       
                            δ             m            δ          y1 − c1 (y1 ; rb , rs )
                         >    Eu0 Y2 +            ≥ Eu0 Y2 +                                 = u0 (c∗1 (y1 ; rb , rs )) ,
                           ρs             ρs          ρs                  ρs

where the first inequality follows from the supposition c∗1 (y1 ; rb , rs ) ≤ y1 − m < c∗f   1 (y1 , mrs ; rb , rs );
the first equality follows from the first order condition for a borrower since y1 −m < c∗f     1 (y1 , mrs ; rb , rs );
                                                                  ∗f
the second inequality follows from ρs > ρb and y1 − m < c1 (y1 , mrs ; rb , rs ); the third inequality
follows from y1 − m ≥ c∗1 (y1 ; rb , rs ) immediately; and the last equality follows from the first order
condition for a saver with income y1 and the definition of c∗1 (y1 ; rb , rs ). This is a contraction. Thus,
c∗f
 1 (y1 , mrs ; rb , rs ) ≤ y1 − m.
    We next show that y1 − m ≥ c∗1 (y1 ; rb , rs ) implies that c∗f1 (y1 , b̂; rb , rs ) ≤ y1 − m for any b̂ ∈
(mrs , mrb ]. As we have shown above, when b̂ = mrs the loser of the period-one Rosca bidding will
remain a saver, hence the two problems, (23) and (29) with b̂ = mrs , are identical because both
the objective functions and constraints are identical; therefor,
                                         f                            n
                                       VIII (mrs ; y1 , rb , rs ) = VIII (y1 ; rb , rs ).

                                                               26
        f
Since VIII (b̂; y1 , rb , rs ) is increasing in b̂, then for any b̂ ∈ (mrs , mrb ], we have

                             f                          f                            n
                           VIII (b̂; y1 , rb , rs ) > VIII (mrs ; y1 , rb , rs ) = VIII (y1 ; rb , rs ).                    (A13)

We now argue that inequality (A13) implies c∗f      1 (y1 , b̂; rb , rs ) ≤ y1 − m. To see this, suppose to
                   ∗f
the contrary that c1 (y1 , b̂; rb , rs ) > y1 − m. This implies that λ∗s = 0 at the optimal solution for
problem (A11). Thus, we have:

       LfIII (c∗1 , C2∗ ; λ∗b , λ∗s ; y1 − m, Y2 + m + b̂) = LfIII (c∗1 , C2∗ ; λ∗b , λ∗s ; y1 , Y2 ) − λ∗b ρb (mrb − b̂)
                                                              ≤ LnIII (c1 , C2 ; λ∗b , λ∗s ; y1 , Y2 ),

                          f                         n (y ; r , r ), a contradiction.
which implies that VIII     (b̂; y1 , rb , rs ) ≤ VIII  1 b s
                                                         f                          f                            n (y ; r , r ) ≥
    Finally, using inequality (A12), we have VIII           (b̂; y1 , rb , rs ) ≥ VIII (mrs ; y1 , rb , rs ) = VIII     1 b s
  w
VIII (b̂; y1 , rb , rs ).
    (ii) We would like to show that c∗1 (y1 ; rb , rs ) ≥ y1 + m implies that c∗w              1 (y1 , b; rb , rs ) ≥ y1 + m.
                                       ∗w
Suppose to the contrary that c1 (y1 , b; rb , rs ) < y1 +m. Then we obtain the following contradiction:

                                                                                         y1 + m − c∗w
                                                                                                                             
    0 ∗                        0 ∗w                         δ       0                                    1 (y1 , b; rb , rs )
   u (c1 (y1 ; rb , rs )) < u (c1 (y1 , b; rb , rs )) = Eu Y2 − m − b +
                                                           ρs                                              ρs
                                                   
                              δ                  m
                          <      Eu0 Y2 −              ≤ u0 (c∗1 (y1 ; rb , rs ))
                             ρb                  ρb

where the first step follows from the supposition c∗w                                                  ∗
                                                                 1 (y1 , b; rb , rs ) < y1 + m ≤ c1 (y1 ; rb , rs ); the
second step follows from the first order condition for a “saver” since c∗w                1 (y1 , b; rb , rs ) < y1 + m;
                                                              ∗w
the third step follows from ρs > ρb , y1 + m > c1 (y1 , b; rb , rs ), and b ≤ mrb ; and the last step
uses the first order condition for the case y1 + m ≤ c∗1 (y1 ; rb , rs ). This is a contraction. Thus,
c∗1 (y1 ; rb , rs ) ≥ y1 + m implies that c∗w
                                           1 (y1 , b; rb , rs ) ≥ y1 + m for any b ∈ [mrs , mrb ].
                                  ∗
      We next show that if c1 (y1 ; rb , rs ) ≥ y1 + m, then VIII       w (b; y , r , r ) ≥ V n (y ; r , r ) for any
                                                                                  1 b s        III 1 b s
b ∈ [mrs , mrb ]. Since we have shown that a winner of the period-one Rosca bidding will remain a
borrower, for b = mrb , the two problems, (23) and (26) with b = mrb , are in fact identical because
both the objective function and the constraints are identical. Thus, we have VIII                 w (mr ; y , r , r ) =
                                                                                                           b 1 b s
   n (y ; r , r ). Since V w (b; y , r , r ) is decreasing in b, we have
VIII      1 b s               III   1 b s

                 w                         w                            n                      f
               VIII (b; y1 , rb , rs ) ≥ VIII (mrb ; y1 , rb , rs ) = VIII (y1 ; rb , rs ) ≥ VIII (b; y1 , rb , rs )

where the last inequality follows from (A12).

Proof of Lemma 3:
    (Step 1.) We show that, under the restriction on Rosca size m ≤ m (rb , rs ) , any agent with
type x > x will be a borrower, regardless of winning or losing the period-one Rosca bidding.
    Note that the size restriction on m implies that 0 < m ≤ c∗1 (ȳ − x; rb , rs ) − (ȳ − x), which in
turn, by Part (iii) of Lemma 1, implies m ≤ c∗1 (y1 ; rb , rs ) − y1 for any y1 < ȳ − x.



                                                               27
    That the winner of the period-one Rosca bidding will remain a borrower follows from Part (ii)
of Lemma 2, which states that m + y1 ≤ c∗1 (y1 ; rb , rs ) implies c∗w                 1 (y1 , b; rb , rs ) ≥ y1 + m for any
b ∈ [mrs , mrb ].
    We now show that the loser of the period-one Rosca bidding will also be a borrower. Suppose
to the contrary, then c∗f    1 (y1 , b; rb , rs ) < y1 − m. Then, we have:
                                                                                                                                  !
                                                                                                            ∗f
                                  
                                     ∗f
                                                             δ                              y 1 −   m   − c   (y1 , b; rb , rs )
  u0 (c∗1 (y1 ; rb , rs )) < u0 c1 (y1 , b; rb , rs ) ≤ Eu0 Y2 + m + b +                                    1
                                                             ρb                                              ρs
                                                        ∗
                                                                         
                               δ                  y1 − c1 (y1 ; rb , rs )
                           ≤      Eu0 Y2 +                                  = u0 (c∗1 (y1 ; rb , rs )) ,
                               ρb                         ρb

where the first step follows from the supposition c∗1 (y1 ; rb , rs ) ≥ y1 − m > c∗f           1 (y1 , b; rb , rs ); the
second step follows from the first order condition for being a saver; the third step is by m + b +
y1 −m−c∗f
       1 (y1 ,b;rb ,rs )        y −c∗ (y ;r ,r )
        ρs               ≥ 0 ≥ 1 1 ρ 1 b s ; and last step comes from the first order condition for a
                                        b
borrower when c∗1 (y1 ; rb , rs ) < y1 .
    Then the indirect utility functions VIII     w (·; y , r , r ) and V f (·; y , r , r ), as defined by (26) and
                                                        1 b s           III     1 b s
(29) respectively, can be simplified as
                                     w
                                   VIII (b; y1 , rb , rs ) = V (y1 + ρb (mrb − b); rb )                                    (A14)
                                     f
                                   VIII (b; y1 , rb , rs ) = V (y1 − ρb (mrb − b); rb ),                                   (A15)

where V (·; r) is defined as in (14). These simplifications allow us to rewrite the first order condition
(34) as (36).
    (Step 2.) We show that the incentive compatibility for any type x > x is satisfied by the
postulated bidding equilibrium.
    First, we show that any type x > x will not deviate to bid bIII (0) = bIII (x) = mrs . Since
 0                 w (b(x); y − x, r , r ) ≥ V f (b(x); y − x, r , r ) (see Part (ii) of Lemma 2), we have:
bIII (x) ≥ 0 by VIII                b s       III               b s

           UIII (x, x; rb , rs ) − UIII (x, 0; rb , rs )
                                                                                                          i
                w                             1h f                               w
         = p VIII (b(x); y − x, rb , rs ) −        V (b(0); y − x, rb , rs ) + VIII (b(0); y − x, rb , rs )
                                              2 III
                                                         Z x                                       
                                 w                              f         j                      j
           +(1 − p) F (x)VIII (b(x); y − x, rb , rs ) −       VIII (b(x ); y − x, rb , rs )dF (x )
                                                                      x
               w                              n
         ≥ p[VIII (b(x); y − x, rb , rs ) − VIII (y − x, rb , rs )]
                               w                              f
               +(1 − p)F (x)[VIII (b(x); y − x, rb , rs ) − VIII (b(x); y − x, rb , rs )]
         ≥ 0,

where the first step follows from the expression of UIII (x, x̃; rb , rs ) as in (33); the second step is
by inequality (A12) and b(xj ) ≤ b(x), for xj ≤ x; and the last step is by VIII       w (b(x); y − x, r , r ) ≥
                                                                                                       b s
  n                        f
VIII (y − x; rb , rs ) ≥ VIII (b(x); y − x, rb , rs ) that is implied by inequality (A12) again.
    We next show that there is no incentive for type x > x to mimic type x̃ 6= x. By the same
argument as in the proof of Proposition 1, it suffices to show ∂ 2 UIII (x, x̃; rb , rs ) /∂x∂ x̃ ≥ 0. For

                                                               28
notational convenience, denote TIII (x) = ρb [mrb − bIII (x)]. Substituting (A14) into (33), and
taking derivatives with respect to x and x̃, we have:
                                               "                                                                           #
    ∂ 2 UIII (x, x̃; rb , rs )                         V 0 (y1 − TIII (x̃); rb ) − V 0 (y1 + TIII (x̃); rb )
                               = (1 − p)f (x̃)                                            (x̃);rb )−V (ỹ1 −TIII (x̃);rb )   ,
            ∂ x̃∂x                               +V 00 (y1 + TIII (x̃); rb ) V (ỹ1 +TIII
                                                                                       V 0 (ỹ1 +TIII (x̃);rb )

where y1 = y−x, ỹ1 = ȳ−x̃; V 0 and V 00 respectively denote the first and second order derivative with
respect to y1 . In the supplemental appendix we show that the technical conditions that u exhibits
decreasing absolute risk aversion and u0000 ≥ 0 are sufficient to ensure that ∂ 2 UIII (x, x̃; rb , rs ) /∂x∂ x̃ ≥
0.19
    (Step 3.) We show that the incentive compatibility for type-0 agent is satisfied in the postulated
equilibrium.
    Lemma 2 shows that m ≤ ȳ − c∗1 (ȳ; rb , rs ) implies that c∗f              1 (ȳ, b̂; rb , rs ) ≤ ȳ − m for any b̂ ∈
                        f                         n                     w
[mrs , mrb ] and that VIII (b̂; ȳ, rb , rs ) ≥ VIII (ȳ; rb , rs ) ≥ VIII (b̂; ȳ, rb , rs ). Therefore, type-0 bidder is
a saver regardless of winning or losing the period-one Rosca bidding and it does not have strict
incentives to deviate to bid any b̃ > mrs = bIII (x).

Proof of Proposition 4:
     We showed in the Proof of Lemma 3 that the size restriction on m ≤ m ≡ min{c∗1 (ȳ − x) − (ȳ −
x), ȳ − c∗1 (ȳ; rb , rs )} implies that, regardless of winning or losing the period-one Rosca bidding, the
bidder will be a saver if x = 0 and a borrower if x > x. We have, for type-0 agent,
                                            ph f                                     w
                                                                                                                  i
                 UIII (0, 0; rb , rs ) =        VIII (bIII (0); ȳ, rb , rs ) + VIII     (bIII (0); ȳ, rb , rs ))
                              Z x̄          2
                                     f
                 +(1 − p)          VIII  (bIII (xj ); ȳ, rb , rs )dF (xj )
                               x
                  ph f                                   w
                                                                                       i
                                                                                                         f
          >            VIII (bIII (0); ȳ, rb , rs ) + VIII   (bIII (0); ȳ, rb , rs )) + (1 − p)VIII        (bIII (0); ȳ, rb , rs ) (A16)
                  2
                                                                             n
          = pV (ȳ; rs ) + (1 − p)V (ȳ; rs ) = V (ȳ; rs ) = VIII               (ȳ; rb , rs ),

where the first step is simply the definition of UIII (0, 0; rb , rs ) , and the second step follows from the
                              f
fact that b0III (·) > 0 and VIII  (·; ȳ, rb , rs ) is increasing; the third step uses the fact that bIII (0) =
                     f                               w (b
mrs implies that VIII (bIII (0); ȳ, rb , rs ) = VIII     III (0); ȳ, rb , rs )) = V (ȳ; rs ); and the last step follows
the fact that type-0 agent is a saver in the absence of Rosca.
    For agents with type-x > x, we have:

                                                   w
UIII (x, x; rb , rs ) ≥ UIII (x, x̄; rb , rs ) = VIII (bIII (x̄); ȳ − x, rb , rs ) = V (ȳ − x + ρb (mrb − bIII (x̄)); rb )
                                               n
                         ≥ V (ȳ − x; rb ) = VIII (ȳ − x; rb , rs ),                                                                 (A17)

where the first step follows from the incentive compatibility constraint that type-x bidder does not
have strict incentive to pretend as type-x̄; the second step follows from the fact that type−x̄ agent
will always win the period-one Rosca bidding because b0III > 0; the third step follows from the fact
  19
       The supplemental appendix is available at http://www.econ.upenn.edu/˜hfang.


                                                                   29
that type-x̄ agent will be a borrower despite winning the Rosa bidding; the fourth step uses the
fact that bIII (x̄) ≤ mrb ; and the last step follows from the fact that type-x̄ agent is a borrower in
the absence of Rosca.
    Inequalities (A16) and (A17) show that under the equilibrium bidding strategy specified in
Lemma 3, agents of all types are interim individually rational. The ex ante welfare gain EUIII (X, X; rb , rs )
      n (ȳ − X; r , r ) > 0 immediately follows.
− EVIII             b s

Proof of Corollary 1:
    For CARA utility, the first order condition for the optimal consumption c∗1 (·) in Problem (14)
is given by:                                                       
                            −βc1                             y1 − c1
                          e      = δ(1 + r)E exp −β Y2 +                ,
                                                                ρ
which, after some algebra, yields:

                                               1+r      ln [(1 + r) δK]
                                 c∗1 (y1 ) =       y1 −                 ,                         (A18)
                                               2+r          β(2 + r)

where K ≡ Eexp (−βY2 ) is a constant that equals to the expected marginal utility of period-2’s
income. Therefore, the value function V (y1 ; r) is:
                                                                   
                                      1+δ      1        β (1 + r)
                         V (y1 ; r) =      − η(r) exp −           y1 ,                   (A19)
                                       β       β          2+r

where for notational convenience we denote
                                               2+r               1
                                     η(r) ≡        [(1 + r) δK] 2+r .                             (A20)
                                               1+r
   Plugging (A19) into the differential equation (36) in Lemma 3, we obtain:
                                                 n    h                   i    o
                                                        2β[mrb −bIII (x)]
                        0
                      βbIII (x)    (1 − p) f (x)  exp        2+rb           − 1
                                =                                                .                (A21)
                       2 + rb                   p + (1 − p)F (x)

With the following change of variables:

                                                 2β [mrb − bIII (x)]
                                      h(x) ≡                         ,                            (A22)
                                                       2 + rb

we can re-write the differential equation (A21) as:

                                         2 (1 − p) f (x)
                             h0 (x) =                    {1 − exp [h (x)]} ,                      (A23)
                                        p + (1 − p)F (x)

The above differential equation has a general solution:
                                        (                          2 )
                                                          p
                           h (x) = − ln 1 − ω                            ,                        (A24)
                                                  p + (1 − p) F (x)



                                                      30
where ω is an integration constant that is determined from the boundary condition bIII (x) = mrs ,
which requires
                                               2βm(rb − rs )
                                      h (x) =                .                              (A25)
                                                  2 + rb
Thus the integration constant ω is given by:
                                                                                  
                                                                     2βm(rb − rs )
                                    ω = 1 − exp [−h (x)] = 1 − exp −                 .                                               (A26)
                                                                        2 + rb

We can then solve bIII (x) from (A24) to obtain (37). The necessary size restriction m̄ for this
example follows immediately from c∗1 (·) . We verify the sufficiency of the first order condition for
the bidding equilibrium in the supplemental appendix.20

Proof of Proposition 5:
   The inequalities directly follow from inspecting the admissible sets defined by inequalities in
Problem (23), and the fact that all the value functions considered are the solutions to the special
cases of the general Problem (23).

Proof of Proposition 6:
   Recall the expression for E[UI (X, X) |X > x ] as given by (A3). Under the assumption that
p = 0, (A3) can be simplified as:
                                      Z    x
E[UI (X, X) |X > x ] =                         F (x) [u(ȳ − x + m) + δEu(Y2 − m − bI (x))] dF (x)                                     (A27)
                                       x
                                          Z        x                                                Z    x
                                      +                [1 − F (x)]u(ȳ − x − m)dF (x) +                      F (x)δEu(Y2 + m + bI (x))dF (x).
                                               x                                                     x

By Jensen’s inequality, we have
         Z x                                                                          Z    x
                                                                                1
              F (x)δEu(Y2 + m + bI (x))dF (x) =                                   δ            Eu (Y2 + m + bI (x)) dF (x)2          (A28)
              x                                                                 2      x
                                                                                                 Z x               
                                                                                1                                 2
                                                                       ≤          δEu Y2 + m +        bI (x)dF (x) ,
                                                                                2                  x
             Z    x                                                                 Z x
                                                                                1
                      F (x)δEu(Y2 − m − bI (x))dF (x) =                           δ     Eu (Y2 − m − bI (x)) dF (x)2                 (A29)
              x                                                                 2 x
                                                                                                 Z x               
                                                                                1                                 2
                                                                       ≤          δEu Y2 − m −        bI (x)dF (x) .
                                                                                2                  x
                                                                           Rx
Concavity of u(·) and the assumption that mr ≤                              x       bI (x) dF (x)2 implies
                     Z     x                           Z                     x                       
                                               2                                                    2
Eu Y2 + m +                     bI (x)dF (x) +Eu Y2 − m −                           bI (x)dF (x)             ≤ Eu(Y2 +m+mr)+Eu(Y2 −m−mr).
                        x                                                   x
                                                                                                                                     (A30)
 20
      The supplemental appendix is available at http://www.econ.upenn.edu/˜hfang.



                                                                       31
Applying inequalities (A28)-(A30) to (A27), we obtain:
                                                     Z     x
                 E[UI (X, X) |X > x ] ≤                        F (x) [u(ȳ − x + m) + δEu(Y2 − m − mr)] dF (x)
                                                       x
                                                         Z         x
                                                     +                 [1 − F (x)] [u(ȳ − x − m) + δEu(Y2 + m + mr)] dF (x)
                                                               x
                                                     Z     xn                                                         o
                                                 =                 F (x)VIw (mr; ȳ − x) + [1 − F (x)]VIf (mr; ȳ − x) dF (x)
                                                       x
                                                     Z     x
                                                                                        n
                                                 ≤             V (ȳ − x; r)dF (x) = EVII (ȳ − X; r) ,
                                                       x
                                            n                                o
where the last inequality follows from max VIw (mr; ȳ − x), VIf (mr; ȳ − x) ≤ V (ȳ − x; r). Thus,
                                                                               Rx
     Now we show that ρ = 1/ (1 + r) ≥ δ is a sufficient condition for mr ≤ x bI (x) dF (x)2 . We
first show that the bidding equilibrium bI (·) satisfies:
                                                                       x
                                                                                                         1−δ
                                                               Z
                                                                           bI (x) dF (x) ≥                   m.                                  (A31)
                                                                   x                                      δ

Inequality (A31), together with the assumption that ρ = 1/ (1 + r) ≥ δ, implies that:
                                            x                                      x
                                                                                                                  1−δ
                                      Z                                       Z
                                                bI (x) dF (x)2 >                       bI (x) dF (x) ≥                m ≥ mr,
                                        x                                      x                                   δ

as desired.
                                                                   Rx
    We prove (A31) by contradiction. Suppose, to the contrary, that x bI (x) dF (x) < (1 − δ) m/δ.
Now multiply F (x)(1 − F (x))δEu0 (Y2 − m − bI (x)) on both sides of Eq. (6), and integrate both
sides over [x, x̄] , we obtain
Z    x                                                                                  Z    x
         F (x)[1−F (x)]δEu0 (Y2 −m−bI (x))b0I (x)dx =                                            [1−F (x)][VIw (bI (x); ȳ−x)−VIf (bI (x); ȳ−x)]dF (x).
 x                                                                                       x
                                                                                                                                                 (A32)
Using integration by parts, the left hand side of (A32) becomes:
     Z       x                                                                                       Z    x
                 F (x)[1 − F (x)]δEu0 (Y2 − m − bI (x))b0I (x)dx =                                            δEu(Y2 − m − bI (x))[1 − 2F (x)]dF (x).
         x                                                                                            x


Plugging in the expressions for VIw (bI (x); ȳ − x) and VIf (bI (x); ȳ − x) as give by (2) and (3), (A32)
can be simplified as:
     Z x
         δEu (Y2 − m − bI (x)) F (x)dF (x)                                                              (A33)
                  x
                 Z    x                                                                     Z    x
    =                     δEu(Y2 + m + bI (x))[1 − F (x)]dF (x) −                                    [1 − F (x)][u(ȳ − x + m) − u(ȳ − x − m)]dF (x).
                  x                                                                          x




                                                                                        32
Plugging (A33) into (A27), we have

    E[UI (X, X) |X > x ]
    Z x                                Z            x                                               Z     x
  =     δEu (Y2 + m + bI (x)) dF (x) +                  2[1 − F (x)]u(ȳ − x − m)dF (x) +                     [2F (x) − 1]u(ȳ − x + m)dF (x)
       x                                        x                                                     x
                        Z    x                                         Z    x
            m
  < δEu(Y2 + ) +                 2[1 − F (x)]u(ȳ − x − m)dF (x) +              [2F (x) − 1]u(ȳ − x + m)dF (x),                       (A34)
            δ            x                                              x
    |                                                    {z                                                   }
                                                           ϕ(m)

where the last inequality follows from Jensen’s inequality
                 Z x                                          Z                       x                   
                     Eu (Y2 + m + bI (x)) dF (x) ≤ Eu Y2 + m +                             bI (x) dF (x)
                   x                                                               x
                         Rx
and the supposition that x bI (x) dF (x) < (1 − δ) m/δ.
   Now consider the term ϕ(m) as defined in (A34). Note that ϕ(0) = EVIn (ȳ − X); and recall
from Proposition 2 that d∆W I (m)/dm m=0 > 0, which implies that ϕ(ε) > ϕ(0) for a small ε > 0.
However, we have the following two observations:
                                                 Z x
                            ϕ0 (0) = Eu0 (Y2 ) −     u0 (ȳ − x)dF (x) = 0
                                                            x

where the second equality follows from the fact that Y2 = ȳ − X by i.i.d. assumption; and
                                               Z x
                            00     1 00
                          ϕ (0) = Eu (Y2 ) +       u00 (ȳ − x)dF (x) < 0.
                                    δ            x

This is a contradiction to ϕ(ε) > ϕ(0). Thus we establish (A31) and the result follows.
Proof of Proposition 7:
    First, we derive an expression for UIII (x, x; rb , rs ) with x > x. Under the restrictions on Rosca
size, we know that any agent with type x > x agent is a borrower regardless of losing or winning
the first period Rosca bidding. Thus we have, for x > x,
                       (1)
     UIII (x, x; rb , rs ) = [p + (1 − p)F (x)]V (ȳ − x + ρb (mrb − bIII (x)); rb )
               Z x̄
                      V ȳ − x − ρb (mrb − bIII (xj )); rb dF (xj )
                                                             
     +(1 − p)
                 x
                                                        
     (2) 1 + δ     1                β (1 + rb )
     =         − η(rb ) exp −                   (ȳ − x) ×
           β       β                  2 + rb
                                                                     Z x̄
                                                                                 β(mrb − bIII (xj )
                                                                                                         
                                     β(mrb − bIII (x)                                                      j
       [p + (1 − p)F (x)] exp −                            + (1 − p)      exp −                       dF (x )
                                           2 + rb                     x                2 + rb
                                                        
     (3) 1 + δ     1                β (1 + rb )
     =         − η(rb ) exp −                   (ȳ − x) ×
           β       β                  2 + rb
     (                                                            "        #         )
                                                                     h xj
                                                       Z x̄
                                     h (x)                                         j
       [p + (1 − p)F (x)] exp −              + (1 − p)        exp −           dF (x )
                                       2                   x            2
                                                        p
     (4) 1 + δ     1                β (1 + rb )
     =         − η(rb ) exp −                   (ȳ − x)      1 − ωp2                                     (A35)
           β       β                  2 + rb

                                                            33
where the first equality follows from the definition of UIII (x, x; rb , rs ) and the fact that type-x
is always a borrower under the assumed restriction on Rosca size m; the second equality follows
from substituting the expression V (y; r) for CARA utility function as defined in formula (A19);
the third equality simply uses the definition of the change of variable function h (x) as defined in
(A22); finally, the fourth equality is a result of the following two calculations. The first calculation
is a direct result of (A24):
                                         s                              2
                                   h (x)                         p
                             exp −         = 1−ω                              ,                   (A36)
                                      2                  p + (1 − p) F (x)
where ω a constant given in (A26). The second calculation is:
                "       #                         s                            2
                   h xj
        Z x̄                                  Z x̄        
                                                                    p
(1 − p)      exp −         dF (xj ) = (1 − p)         1−ω                    j)
                                                                                   dF (xj )
         x           2                         x            p + (1 − p) F (x
                                      Z 1
                                                          dτ
                                    =                   p
                                       [p+(1−p)F (x)]2 2 τ − ωp2
                                      p            1               p             p
                                    =    τ − ωp2              2
                                                                =    1 − ωp2−       [p + (1 − p)F (x)]2 − ωp2 ,
                                                             [p+(1−p)F (x)]

where the second equality follows from a change-of-variable

                                            τ ≡ [p + (1 − p)F (xj )]2 .                                      (A37)

   We next derive an expression for UIII (0, 0; rb , rs ). Under the assumed restriction on Rosca size
m, a type-0 agent with income ȳ will be a saver regardless of winning or losing the period one Rosca
bidding, and as shown in Corollary 1, bIII (0) = mrs ; thus we have:
                                                       Z x
        UIII (0, 0; rb , rs ) = pV (ȳ; rs ) + (1 − p)     V (ȳ + ρs (bIII (x) − mrs ); rs )dF (x). (A38)
                                                        x

Evaluating the integral in the second term of the above expression, we get:
    Z x̄
         V (ȳ + ρs (bIII (x) − mrs ); rs )dF (x)
     x
                                                Z x̄                             
    (1)   1+δ   1                β (1 + rs )                    β(bIII (x) − mrs )
    =         − η(rs ) exp −                 ȳ        exp −                          dF (x)
           β    β                  2 + rs          x                  2 + rs
                                                                      Z x̄                                  
    (2)   1+δ   1                β (1 + rs )              βm(rs − rb )                2 + rb β(bIII (x) − mrb )
    =         − η(rs ) exp −                 ȳ exp                            exp −                               dF (x)
           β    β                  2 + rs                    2 + rs        x          2 + rs       2 + rb
                                                                                             2+rb
                                                                                      h (x) − 2+rs
                                                                      Z x̄    
    (3)   1+δ   1                β (1 + rs )              βm(rs − rb )
    =         − η(rs ) exp −                 ȳ exp                            exp −               dF (x)
           β    β                  2 + rs                    2 + rs        x             2
                                                                                                                   2+rb
                                                                      Z x̄ (                          2 )− 2(2+r s)
    (4)   1+δ   1                β (1 + rs )              βm(rs − rb )                           p
    =         − η(rs ) exp −                 ȳ exp                              1−ω                                      dF (x)
           β    β                  2 + rs                    2 + rs        x             p + (1 − p) F (x)
                                                                                                         2+rb
                                                                              Z 1"         2 #− 2(2+r  s)
    (5)   1+δ       1                    β (1 + rs )              βm(rs − rb )                  p
    =         −           η(rs ) exp −                  ȳ exp                          1−ω                     dξ,       (A39)
           β    β (1 − p)                   2 + rs                   2 + rs        p            ξ

                                                            34
where the first equality follows from substituting the expression V (y; r) for CARA utility function
as defined in formula (A19); the second equality follows from re-arranging terms; the third equality
simply uses the definition of the change of variable function h (x) as defined in (A22); the fourth
equality uses the expression (A36); and the last equality uses the change of variable

                                           ξ ≡ p + (1 − p)F (x).

Plugging (A39) into (A38), we obtain:
                                                                            
                                      1+δ        p            β (1 + rs )
             UIII (0, 0; rb , rs ) =        − η(rs ) exp −                ȳ                            (A40)
                                        β        β               2 + rs
                                                                                           2+rb
                                                                  Z 1"         2 #− 2(2+rs)
               1                   β (1 + rs )          βm(rs − rb )               p
             − η(rs ) exp −                    ȳ exp                         1−ω                 dξ.
               β                     2 + rs               2 + rs        p          ξ

Using (A35) and (A40), we can write the ex ante expected welfare of agents in the presence of the
Rosca and imperfect credit market, EUIII (X, X; rb , rs ), as follows:

            EUIII (X, X; rb , rs ) = pUIII (0, 0; rb , rs ) + (1 − p)E[ UIII (X, X; rb , rs )| X > x]
            1 + δ p2
                                                     
                                       β (1 + rs )
          =       − η(rs ) exp −                   ȳ
              β     β                    2 + rs
                       |              {z              }
                                       Term A
                                                                                       2+rb
                                                                Z 1"       2 #− 2(2+rs)
                p             β (1 + rs )          βm(rs − rb )                 p
              − η(rs ) exp −              ȳ exp                         1−ω                  dξ
                β               2 + rs                2 + rs         p          ξ
                  |          {z             }|                          {z                     }
                           Term A                                     Term B
                                     Z x̄                             
                1−p       p
                                   2
                                                   β (1 + rb )
              −     η(rb ) 1 − ωp          exp −               (ȳ − x) dF (x).                         (A41)
                  β       | {z } x                   2 + rb
                              Term C

We now evaluate
                                                 ∂
                                        lim         EUIII (X, X; rb , rs )                              (A42)
                                       rs →rb   ∂rs
and show that under the stated conditions in the proposition, it is negative. To evaluate (A42), we
first note that, in (A41), rs shows up in what we labeled as “Term A”, “Term B” and “Term C”
(via the term ω as shown in (A26)).
     For Term A, we can show by simple but tedious algebra that:
                                                                                         
         ∂                   1                 β (1 + rs )         β ȳ   ln [(1 + rs ) δK]
            (Term A) = −          η(rs ) exp −             ȳ           +                     . (A43)
        ∂rs                2 + rs                2 + rs          2 + rs         2 + rs
For Term C, we have:
                                                                  "                   #
                                 ∂                                     1   p2    ∂ω
                          lim       (Term C) =            lim         − p
                         rs →rb ∂rs                      rs →rb        2 1 − ωp ∂rs
                                                                               2

                                                         βmp2
                                                    =           .                                       (A44)
                                                         2 + rb

                                                        35
where the second equality follows from [recalling of the definition of ω as given in (A26)],
                           lim ω = 0;
                          rs →rb
                                                                           
                              ∂ω               ∂               2βm(rb − rs )
                        lim         = lim            1 − exp −                                      (A45)
                       rs →rb ∂rs     rs →rb ∂rs                  2 + rb
                                                                           
                                                   2βm         2βm(rb − rs )
                                    = lim −              exp −
                                      rs →rb      2 + rb          2 + rb
                                          2βm
                                    = −          .                                                  (A46)
                                         2 + rb
For Term B, we have                                      Z   1
                                     lim (Term B) =              dξ = 1 − p;                        (A47)
                                    rs →rb               p
moreover,
                                                                           2+rb      
                                                        Z 1"      2 #− 2(2+rs)
           ∂ (Term B) (1)         ∂        βm(rs − rb )            p                 
     lim              = lim           exp                      1−ω                 dξ
    rs →rb     ∂rs        rs →rb ∂rs         2 + rs       p        ξ                 
                                                                        2+rb
                                               Z 1"         2 #− 2(2+r  s)
    (2)         ∂        βm(rs − rb )                          p
    = lim          exp                   · lim        1−ω                      dξ
        rs →rb ∂rs         2 + rs         rs →rb p             ξ
                                                                        2+rb       
                                                Z 1"         2 #− 2(2+r   s)
                    βm(rs − rb )             ∂                  p                  
    + lim exp                      · lim               1−ω                       dξ
       rs →rb         2 + rs        rs →rb ∂rs  p               ξ                  
                                                      2+rb  (
                       Z 1         "         2 #− 2(2+r s) 
                                                                                                 "       2 #!)
    (3) βm(1 − p)                              p                           ∂          2 + rb             p
    =                +       lim 1 − ω                           · lim            −            ln 1 − ω          dξ
           2 + rb        p rs →rb             ξ                  rs →rb ∂rs       2(2 + rs )           ξ
    (4)βm(1 − p) βmp(1 − p)
    =             −
         2 + rb          2 + rb
                 2
   (5) βm(1 − p)
    =              .                                                                                        (A48)
         2 + rb
where the third equality uses the facts that
                                                         
                                    ∂        βm(rs − rb )      βm
                              lim      exp                  =        ,
                            rs →rb ∂rs         2 + rs         2 + rb
                                                  2+rb
                            Z 1"         2 #− 2(2+r s)
                                                              Z 1
                                          p
                       lim        1−ω                    dξ =     dξ = 1 − p;
                      rs →rb p            ξ                    p

and the fourth equality follows from
                           Z 1(                                  "      2 #!)
                                         ∂          2 + rb               p
                                  lim           −             ln 1 − ω          dξ
                            p   r s →rb ∂r s      2(2 +  rs )            ξ
                           Z 1 "  2                  #
                                1 p                 ∂ω
                      =                       lim            dξ
                            p   2 ξ          rs →rb ∂rs
                                     Z 1  2
                              βm            p              βmp(1 − p)
                      = −                        dξ = −                .
                             2 + rb p       ξ                  2 + rb

                                                    36
   Applying equalities (A43)-(A48), we obtain

                        ∂
               lim          EUIII (X, X; rb , rs )
              rs →rb ∂rs
                 p2
                                                                                                            
                                 ∂                        p              ∂
          =   −         lim            (Term A) −                lim          (Term A)         lim (Term B)
                  β rs →rb ∂rs                            β rs →rb ∂rs                        rs →rb
                                                                           
                 p                                        ∂
              −        lim (Term A)               lim          (Term B)
                 β rs →rb                       rs →rb ∂rs
                                                                Z x̄                                   
                 1−p                         ∂                                    β (1 + rb )
              −          η(rb ) lim              (Term C)              exp −                   (ȳ − x) dF (x)
                    β               rs →rb ∂rs                      x                2 + rb
                    p2
                                                                                                   
                                               β (1 + rb )             β ȳ       ln [(1 + rb ) δK]
          =                 η(rb ) exp −                     ȳ                +
              β(2 + rb )                         2 + rb              2 + rb              2 + rb
                                                                                                       
                  p(1 − p)                       β (1 + rb )              β ȳ       ln [(1 + rb ) δK]
              +                η(rb ) exp −                     ȳ               +
                 β(2 + rb )                          2 + rb            2 + rb              2 + rb
                                                                                
                 p                      β (1 + rb )           βm
              − η(rb ) exp −                         ȳ                (1 − p)2
                 β                        2 + rb           (2 + rb )
                                 p2 βm x̄
                                                                                   
                 1−p
                                           Z
                                                           β (1 + rb )
              −          η(rb )                 exp −                     (ȳ − x) dF (x)
                    β            2 + rb x                    2 + rb
                                                       
              η(rb )pm                  β (1 + rb )
          =                exp −                     ȳ ×
                2 + rb                    2 + rb
                                                                                                                   
               ȳ + ln[(1+rb )δK]                                             Z x̄      
                                                                                            β (1  + r   )
                                                                                                                  
                  2+rb          β(2+rb )                                                              b
                                             − (1 − p)2 + (1 − p)p                   exp                  x dF (x)
                            m                                                   x            2 +  rb               
                                                       
              η(rb )pm                  β (1 + rb )
          =                exp −                     ȳ ×
                2 + rb                    2 + rb
                 ȳ − c∗1 (ȳ, rb )
                                                                    Z x̄                                  
                                                    2                              β (1 + rb )
                                     − (1 − p) + (1 − p)p                   exp                 x dF (x) ,
                        m                                               x             2 + rb
                                                                                    ∂
where the last equality follows from (A18). Therefore, limrs →rb                   ∂rs EUIII (X, X; rb , rs )     < 0 if (40)
holds.




                                                            37
B      Supplemental Appendix
B.1     Verifying the Sufficiency of the First Order Condition in Lemma 3
   In this supplemental appendix, we show that the technical assumptions in Lemma 3 guarantees
the sufficiency of the first order condition. It suffices to show the following lemma:

Lemma B1 Assume that −u00 (·)/u0 (·) is weakly decreasing and u0000 ≥ 0, then ∂ 2 UIII (x, x̃; rb , rs )/∂ x̃∂x ≥
0 for any x > x and x̃ > x.

    Substituting (A14) into (33), and taking derivatives with respect to x and x̃, we have:
                                               "                                                                           #
    ∂ 2 UIII (x, x̃; rb , rs )                         V 0 (y1 − TIII (x̃); rb ) − V 0 (y1 + TIII (x̃); rb )
                               = (1 − p)f (x̃)                                            (x̃);rb )−V (ỹ1 −TIII (x̃);rb )   ,
            ∂ x̃∂x                               +V 00 (y1 + TIII (x̃); rb ) V (ỹ1 +TIII
                                                                                       V 0 (ỹ1 +TIII (x̃);rb )

where y1 = y − x, ỹ1 = ȳ − x̃; V 0 and V 00 respectively denote the first and second order derivative
with respect to y1 . For convenience, we also suppress argument rb in the value function V (y; rb ),
so V (·) is a shortcut for V (·; rb ). To show ∂ 2 UIII (x, x̃; rb , rs )/∂ x̃∂x ≥ 0, it suffices to show

                                                                            V (ỹ1 + TIII (x̃)) −V (ỹ1 − TIII (x̃))
V 0 (y1 − TIII (x̃)) − V 0 (y1 + TIII (x̃)) + V 00 (y1 + TIII (x̃))                                                  ≥ 0,
                                                                                      V 0 (ỹ1 + TIII (x̃))

which can be rewritten as
           V 0 (y1 − TIII (x̃)) − V 0 (y1 + TIII (x̃)) V (ỹ1 + TIII (x̃)) − V (ỹ1 − TIII (x̃))
                                                      +                                          ≤ 0,                       (B1)
                      V 00 (y1 + TIII (x̃))                      V 0 (ỹ1 + TIII (x̃))

since V 00 (y1 + TIII (x̃)) ≤ 0 by the concavity of V (·).
    We show inequality (B1) in two steps: first, we show a sufficient condition based on the prop-
erties of V (·); second, we show that under the stated conditions for the lemma, the sufficient
condition in the first step is satisfied.
                                               00 (·)
    Step 1. We show that (B1) holds if − VV 0 (·)     and −V 000 (·) are weakly decreasing.
                         00
    Note that if − VV 0 (·)
                        (·)
                            is weakly decreasing, then V 000 (·) ≥ 0; hence V 0 (·) is convex. We thus have
                                                                        Z   ỹ1 +TIII (x̃)
                     V (ỹ1 + TIII (x̃)) − V (ỹ1 − TIII (x̃)) =                             V 0 (τ )dτ
                                                                          ỹ1 −TIII (x̃)
                  1 0
                     V (ỹ1 + TIII (x̃)) + V 0 (ỹ1 − TIII (x̃)) [ỹ1 + TIII (x̃) − (ỹ1 − TIII (x̃))]
                                                                  
                ≤
                  2
                = TIII (x̃)[V 0 (ỹ1 + TIII (x̃)) + V 0 (ỹ1 − TIII (x̃))],

which implies that

                                                                          V 0 (ỹ1 − TIII (x̃))
                                                                                               
                 V (ỹ1 + TIII (x̃)) − V (ỹ1 − TIII (x̃))
                                                           ≤ TIII (x̃) 1 + 0                      .                         (B2)
                           V 0 (ỹ1 + TIII (x̃))                          V (ỹ1 + TIII (x̃))




                                                                1
Similarly, note that if −V 000 (·) is weakly decreasing, then V 00 (·) is convex. Together with the fact
that V 00 (·) < 0, we have
                                                                     Z   y1 +TIII (x̃)
                           0                   0
                         V (y1 + TIII (x̃)) − V (y1 − TIII (x̃)) =                       V 00 (τ )dτ
                                                                     y1 −TIII (x̃)
                     1  00
                        V (y1 + TIII (x̃)) + V 00 (y1 − TIII (x̃)) [y1 + TIII (x̃) − (y1 − TIII (x̃))]
                                                                     
                   ≤
                     2
                   = TIII (x̃)[V 00 (y1 + TIII (x̃)) + V 00 (y1 − TIII (x̃))],

which implies, by dividing both sides by −V 00 (y1 + TIII (x̃)) > 0,

            V 0 (y1 − TIII (x̃)) − V 0 (y1 + TIII (x̃))                 V 00 (y1 − TIII (x̃))
                                                                                             
                                                        ≤ −TIII (x̃) 1 + 00                     .               (B3)
                       V 00 (y1 + TIII (x̃))                            V (y1 + TIII (x̃))

     Combining inequalities (B2) and (B3), we have

                  V 0 (y1 − TIII (x̃)) − V 0 (y1 + TIII (x̃)) V (ỹ1 + TIII (x̃)) − V (ỹ1 − TIII (x̃))
                                                             +
                              V 00 (y1 + TIII (x̃))                          V 0 (ỹ1 + TIII (x̃))
                             0
                             V (ỹ1 − TIII (x̃)) V 00 (y1 − TIII (x̃))
                                                                         
                ≤ TIII (x̃)                        −                       .
                             V 0 (ỹ1 + TIII (x̃)) V 00 (y1 + TIII (x̃))

Since TIII (x̃) ≥ 0, to show (B1), it suffices to show

                                     V 0 (ỹ1 − TIII (x̃)) V 00 (y1 − TIII (x̃))
                                                          −                      ≤ 0.                           (B4)
                                     V 0 (ỹ1 + TIII (x̃)) V 00 (y1 + TIII (x̃))

   Consider the left hand side of inequality (B4). It can be show by simple algebra that the first
        0                                                                    V 00 (·)
              1 −TIII (x̃))
term VV 0 (ỹ
          (ỹ1 +TIII (x̃)) is decreasing in ỹ1 due to the assumption that − V 0 (·) is weakly decreasing; and
                                00
                        (y1 −TIII (x̃))                                  000
the second term − VV 00 (y1 +TIII (x̃))
                                        is decreasing in y1 if − VV 00 (·)
                                                                       (·)
                                                                           is increasing, which follows from the
                                000
stated assumption that −V is weakly decreasing (i.e. V ≥ 0).        0000
                                                                                                     0
                                                                                                          1 −TIII (x̃))
    We now prove inequality (B4). Consider two possible cases. (i). If ỹ1 ≥ y1 , we have VV 0 (ỹ     (ỹ1 +TIII (x̃)) ≤
V 0 (y1 −TIII (x̃))
V 0 (y1 +TIII (x̃)) ;   hence

           V 0 (ỹ1 − TIII (x̃)) V 00 (y1 − TIII (x̃))   V 0 (y1 − TIII (x̃)) V 00 (y1 − TIII (x̃))
                                −                      ≤                     −                      ≤ 0,
           V 0 (ỹ1 + TIII (x̃)) V 00 (y1 + TIII (x̃))   V 0 (y1 + TIII (x̃)) V 00 (y1 + TIII (x̃))
                                                    00                                                 00
                                                                                                        1 −TIII (x̃))
where the last inequality holds because − VV 0 (·)
                                               (·)
                                                   is decreasing. (ii). If ỹ1 < y1 , we have − VV 00 (y
                                                                                                      (y1 +TIII (x̃)) ≤
     00 (ỹ1 −TIII (x̃))
− VV 00 (ỹ1 +TIII (x̃))
                         ; hence

           V 0 (ỹ1 − TIII (x̃)) V 00 (y1 − TIII (x̃))   V 0 (ỹ1 − TIII (x̃)) V 00 (ỹ1 − TIII (x̃))
                                −                      ≤                      −                       ≤ 0,
           V 0 (ỹ1 + TIII (x̃)) V 00 (y1 + TIII (x̃))   V 0 (ỹ1 + TIII (x̃)) V 00 (ỹ1 + TIII (x̃))
                                                         00
where the last inequality holds because − VV 0 (·)
                                               (·)
                                                   is decreasing.
                             00 0                                    00 (·)
   Step 2. We show that − uu0       ≤ 0 and u0000 ≥ 0 implies that − VV 0 (·) and −V 000 (·) are both
weakly decreasing.


                                                              2
                                                                ∂c∗1
    For convenience, we use short notation c∗0
                                            1 =                 ∂y1 and suppress y1 in case of no confusion and
                                                               V 00 (·)
simply use r instead of rb . First we show that              − V 0 (·) is weakly decreasing, which is equivalent to
show that V 000 V 0 −V 002 ≥ 0. Note that the first order condition for optimal consumption in Problem
(14), u0 (c∗1 ) = δ(1 + r)Eu0 (C2∗ ) , yields

                                  (1 + r)2 δEu00 (C2∗ )                           u00 (c∗1 )
                   c∗0
                    1 =                                       = 1 −                                    .              (B5)
                           u00 (c∗1 ) + (1 + r)2 δEu00 (C2∗ )       u00 (c∗1 ) + (1 + r)2 δEu00 (C2∗ )

Thus we have
                                                        0 < c∗0
                                                             1 < 1.

Taking derivative of c∗0
                      1 with respect to y1 , we obtain after some algebra,

                                                u000 (c∗1 )c∗0  00 ∗      00 ∗    000 ∗ 1        ∗0
                                                            1 Eu (C2 ) − u (c1 )Eu (C2 ) ρ (1 − c1 )
                    c∗00
                     1     = −(1 + r) δ     2
                                                          [u00 (c∗1 ) + (1 + r)2 δEu00 (C2∗ )]2
                                   u000 (c∗1 )c∗0  00 ∗      00 ∗    000 ∗ 1        ∗0
                                               1 Eu (C2 ) − u (c1 )Eu (C2 ) ρ (1 − c1 )
                           = −                                                                 c∗02
                                                                                                1 .                   (B6)
                                                    (1 + r)2 δ[Eu00 (C2∗ )]2

Also we recall from the proof of Lemma 1,

                                                   V 00 = u00 (c∗1 )c∗0
                                                                     1 < 0.


Therefore, we have

             V 000 = u000 (c∗1 )(c∗0 2      00 ∗ ∗00
                                  1 ) + u (c1 )c1
                                               000 (c∗ )c∗0 Eu00 (C ∗ ) − u00 (c∗ )Eu000 (C ∗ ) 1 (1 − c∗0 )
                     "                                                                                       #
                                              u      1   1           2          1          2    ρ       1
                   = u000 (c∗1 ) − u00 (c∗1 )                                                                  c∗02
                                                                                                                1
                                                                 (1 + r)2 δ[Eu00 (C2∗ )]2
                                       u00 (c∗1 )2 Eu000 (C2∗ ) ρ1 (1 − c∗0
                     "                                                       #
                                                                          1)
                   = u000 (c∗1 )c∗01 +                 2      00     ∗  2
                                                                               c∗02
                                                                                1                                     (B7)
                                             (1 + r) δ[Eu (C2 )]
                    ≥ 0.

where the second step uses (B6), the third step uses (B5), and the last step is due to the fact that
u000 ≥ 0 and 0 < c∗0 1 < 1.
     Using the expression (B7), by some algebra, we have
                     (                                                       " 00 ∗ 2 000 ∗ 1                        #)
                                                                               u  (c1 ) Eu (C  2 ) ρ
  V 000 V 0 − V 002 = u0 (c∗1 )u000 (c∗1 ) − u00 (c∗1 )2 + u0 (c∗1 )(1 − c∗0
                                                                          1)                           − u000 (c∗1 )    c∗02
                                                                                                                         1 .
                                                                              (1 + r)2 δ[Eu00 (C2∗ )]2

Since c∗02
       1 > 0, to show V V − V
                                 000 0        002 ≥ 0, it is equivalent to show

                                                                  " 00 ∗ 2 000 ∗ 1                       #
                                                                    u  (c1 ) Eu (C  2 ) ρ
           u0 (c∗1 )u000 (c∗1 ) − u00 (c∗1 )2 + u0 (c∗1 )(1 − c∗0
                                                               1)                           − u000 (c∗1 ) ≥ 0.        (B8)
                                                                   (1 + r)2 δ[Eu00 (C2∗ )]2




                                                               3
To this end, the following reasoning is key:
                                                                                                           2                    !2
                                                                      u00 (C ∗ )2                                   u00 (C2∗ )
                                                                                          q
                      0
               Eu         (C2∗ )Eu000 (C2∗ )     ≥ Eu      0
                                                               (C2∗ )E 0 2∗          =E        u0 (C2∗ )        E
                                                                                                                     u0 (C2∗ )
                                                                                                                    p
                                                                       u (C2 )
                                                                                        !2
                                                                      u00 (C2∗ )
                                                           q                                              2
                                                          E u0 (C2∗ ) p                      = Eu00 (C2∗ ) .
                                                                                              
                                                 ≥
                                                                        u0 (C2∗ )

                                  002
                                                                                      00 0
where the first step uses u000 ≥ uu0 , which follows from the assumption that − uu0 ≤ 0, the second
step is straightforward, and the third step follows from Cauchy-Schwartz inequality.
    Applying the above result Eu0 (C2∗ )Eu000 (C2∗ ) ≥ [Eu00 (C2∗ )]2 to the left hand of inequality (B8)
and using the first order condition (1 + r)δEu0 (C2∗ ) = u0 (c∗1 ), we show that the left hand side of
inequality (B8) is

                                                                             u00 (c∗1 )2
                                                                                                    
                           0 ∗ 000 ∗        00 ∗ 2     0 ∗          ∗0                         000 ∗
      LHS of (B8) ≥ u (c1 )u (c1 ) − u (c1 ) + u (c1 )(1 − c1 )                             − u (c1 )
                                                                         (1 + r)δEu0 (C2∗ )
                                   = u0 (c∗1 )u000 (c∗1 ) − u00 (c∗1 )2 + (1 − c∗0   00 ∗ 2    000 ∗ 0 ∗
                                                                                1 )[u (c1 ) − u (c1 )u (c1 )]

                                   = [u0 (c∗1 )u000 (c∗1 ) − u00 (c∗1 )2 ]c∗0
                                                                           1 ≥ 0,

                                                               00
which shows V 000 V 0 − V 002 ≥ 0; i.e., − VV 0 (·)
                                                (·)
                                                    is weakly decreasing.
                                                                             1−c∗0           u00 (c∗ )
   Next, we want to show V 0000 ≥ 0. We use c∗01 = (1+r)2 δEu1 00 (C ∗ ) from (B5) to rewrite V 000 in
                                                 1                  2
(B7) as:
                                         1   000   ∗ 
                                                                    !
                                         ρ Eu (C2 )    u00 (c∗1 ) 3 ∗03
                                                                  
                        000      000 ∗
                      V = u (c1 ) +                                     c1 .
                                        [(1 + r)2 δ]2 Eu00 (C2∗ )
Thus, taking the derivative of V 000 with respect to y1 and divide by c∗02
                                                                       1 , we have

                                      1   000  ∗         !0                         1    000 ∗               !
 V 0000                                      u00 (c∗1 ) 3
                                      ρ Eu (C2 )                                     ρ Eu (C2 )    u00 (c∗1 ) 3 ∗00
                                                     
                    000
          =   u           (c∗1 )
                          +                                   ∗0          000 ∗
                                                             c1 + 3 u (c1 ) +                                     c1
 c∗02
  1                                         Eu00 (C2∗ )
                                     [(1 + r)2 δ]2                                  [(1 + r)2 δ]2 Eu00 (C2∗ )
                                    1        00 ∗ 3
                                    ρ          u (c1 )                    1
          = u0000 (c∗1 )c∗02
                         1   +                               Eu0000 (C2∗ ) (1 − c∗0
                                                                                 1 )c1
                                                                                       ∗0
                               [(1 + r)2 δ]2 Eu00 (C2∗ )                  ρ
            |                                     {z                                    }
                                                  Term A
                  1    000 (C ∗ )c∗0 
                    Eu                  u (c1 ) 3 u000 (c∗1 ) ∗0
                                         00  ∗                                         Eu000 (C2∗ ) 1
                                                                                                             
                  ρ          2 1
              +                     3                            c                   −                (1 − c1 ) + 3u000 (c∗1 )c∗00
                                                                                                            ∗0
                   [(1 + r)2 δ]2       Eu00 (C2∗ )     u00 (c∗1 ) 1                    Eu00 (C2∗ ) ρ              | {z 1}
                  |                                                    {z                                      }    Term C
                                                                    Term B
                  1   000  ∗                              3
                  ρ Eu (C2 )                 u00 (c∗1 )
                                          
              +3                                                c∗00
                                                                 1 .
                 [(1 + r)2 δ]2             Eu00 (C2∗ )
                |                         {z                      }
                                        Term D




                                                                              4
Term A is non-negative due to the assumption that u0000 ≥ 0. So we only consider the remaining
three items. We merge Terms B and D into
                                 1                              3
                                                   u00 (c∗1 )                                  u000 (c∗1 ) ∗02 Eu000 (C2∗ ) 1
                                                                                                                                               
                                 ρ                                           000
Term B+Term D =                           3                          Eu            (C2∗ )                 c −                       ∗0 ∗0    ∗00
                                                                                                                              (1 − c1 )c1 + c1 .
                          [(1 + r)2 δ]2           Eu00 (C2∗ )                                  u00 (c∗1 ) 1    Eu00 (C2∗ ) ρ
                                                                                             |                        {z                         }
                                                                                                                        Term E
                                                                                                                                                   (B9)
Using the expression of        c∗00
                                1     (see (B6)), Term E is simplified as

                   u000 (c∗ )          Eu000 (C2∗ ) 1                u000 (c∗1 )c∗0  00   ∗       00 ∗     000    ∗ 1   ∗0
                                                                                 1 Eu (C2 ) − u (c1 )Eu (C2 ) ρ (1 − c1 ) ∗02
    Term E = 00 ∗1 c∗02           −                   (1 − c∗0 ∗0
                                                              )c   −                                                       c1
                   u (c1 ) 1           Eu00 (C2∗ ) ρ        1 1
                                                                                       (1 + r)2 δ[Eu00 (C2∗ )]2
     000 ∗
                              u000 (c∗1 )c∗03                              000    ∗          u00 (c∗1 )
                                                                                                                    
      u (c1 ) ∗02                         1              1       ∗0 ∗0 Eu (C2 )                                ∗0
  =              c −                                  + (1 − c1 )c1                                          c −1
      u00 (c∗1 ) 1        (1 + r)2 δEu00 (C2∗ )          ρ             Eu00 (C2∗ ) (1 + r)2 δEu00 (C2∗ ) 1
    u000 (c∗1 ) ∗03 1                         000
                                ∗0 ∗02 Eu (C2 )
                                                    ∗
  =        ∗   c1  −     (1  − c1   )c 1            ∗  .
    u00 (c1 )          ρ                   Eu00 (C2 )
                                                  1−c∗0             u00 (c∗1 )
where the last step applies the fact               c∗0
                                                      1
                                                           =    (1+r)2 δEu00 (C2∗ )
                                                                                                  from (B5) to both baskets.
                                                    1
   Therefore, we have
                                      1                             3
                                                       u00 (c∗1 )                                     u000 (c∗1 ) ∗0 1              000  ∗
                                                                                                                                             
                                      ρ                                            000                                        ∗0 Eu (C2 )
Term B + Term D =                             3                          Eu              (C2∗ )                  c1 −   (1 − c1 )                  c∗02
                                                                                                                                                    1 .
                            [(1 + r)2 δ]2             Eu00 (C2∗ )                                            ∗
                                                                                                      u00 (c1 )       ρ                  ∗
                                                                                                                                  Eu00 (C2 )
                                                                                                                                               (B10)
By the expression of c∗00
                      1 as in (B6), we have

                                              u000 (c∗1 )c∗0  00 ∗      00 ∗    000 ∗ 1        ∗0
                                                          1 Eu (C2 ) − u (c1 )Eu (C2 ) ρ (1 − c1 )]
                 Term C = −3u000 (c∗1 )                                                                                       c∗02
                                                                                                                               1 .             (B11)
                                                                     (1 + r)2 δ[Eu00 (C2∗ )]2

Combining (B10) and (B11), we obtain:

    TermB + Term D + Term C                                                                                               
                                                                                            h 00 ∗ i2
                 000    ∗ 1         ∗0         u00 (c∗1 )               000  ∗          1       u (c1 )          000    ∗
           Eu (C2 ) ρ (1 − c1 ) (1+r)2 δ[Eu00 (C ∗ )]2 u (c1 ) − (1+r)δ Eu00 (C ∗ ) Eu (C2 ) 
          
                                                                                                                             
                                                                                                                              
                                                           2                                          2
  = 3c∗02
      1
                                                                                                     
                                                           u00 (c∗1 ) 2
                                                        h              i
                               1
                     + (1+r)2 δEu               1
                                                                            Eu000 (C2∗ ) − u000 (c∗1 ) u000 (c∗1 )c∗0
                                                                                                                             
                                 00 (C ∗ )                   00 (C ∗ )
                                                                                                                             
          
                                       2     (1+r)δ       Eu       2
                                                                                                                     1        
                                                                                     !
                                                    Eu000 (C2∗ ) u00 (c∗1 ) 2                                               00 ∗
                                                                                                                                           
      ∗02            1                 000 ∗                                                     000   ∗ 1            ∗0 u (c1 )   000 ∗ ∗0
  = 3c1                              u (c1 ) −                                              Eu (C2 ) (1 − c1 ) 00 ∗ − u (c1 )c1
          (1 + r)2 δEu00 (C2∗ )                     (1 + r)δ Eu00 (C2∗ )                                 ρ                Eu (C2 )
                     3
                                (                                                   )2
                c∗0                             Eu000 (C2∗ ) u00 (c∗1 ) 2
                                                                  
                  1                 000 ∗
  = −3                            u (c1 ) −
        (1 + r)2 δEu00 (C2∗ )                    (1 + r)δ Eu00 (C2∗ )
  ≥ 0.

Therefore, we have the desired result

                                  V 0000
                                         ≥ Term B + Term C + Term D ≥ 0.
                                  c∗02
                                   1



                                                                         5
B.2    Verification of Global Optimality for the CARA Case in Corollary 1
    To show the global optimality of the bidding function (37) for any x > x, it suffices to check that
condition (B1) is satisfied. Recall from (A19), V (·; r) is exponential for the CARA case. Hence,
for any y1 , ỹ1 , and TIII (x) = ρb (mrb − bIII (x)), we have

        V 0 (y1 − TIII (x̃); rb ) − V 0 (y1 + TIII (x̃); rb )
                      V 00 (y1 + TIII (x̃); rb )
                              h                              i                         h                              i
          (1+rb )                 β(1+rb )                        (1+rb )                   β(1+rb )
            2+rb  η(rb ) exp    −   2+rb   (y1  −  TIII (x̃))  −   2+rb   η(r b ) exp    −   2+rb    (y1 + TIII (x̃))
      = −                                                     h                                 i
                                  β(1+rb ) (1+rb )                β(1+rb )
                                    2+rb    2+rb   η(rb ) exp   −   2+rb   (y1   +  T III (x̃))
               h                               i         h                                i
          exp − β(1+r
                    2+rb
                          b)
                             (y1 −  TIII (x̃))   −  exp    − β(1+rb )
                                                              2+rb    (y1 +  T  III (x̃))
      = −                                h                              i
                           β(1+rb )          β(1+rb )
                             2+rb exp − 2+rb (y1 + TIII (x̃))

and
                 V (ỹ1 + TIII (x̃); rb ) − V (ỹ1 − TIII (x̃); rb )
                               V 0 (ỹ1 + TIII (x̃); rb )
                               h                                  i                  h                              i
                 1                  β(1+rb )                           1                 β(1+rb )
                 β η(r b ) exp  −     2+rb   (y 1 +   T III (x̃))   −  β η(r b ) exp   −  2+rb    (y  1 − TIII (x̃))
            =                                                 h                               i
                                         (1+rb )                   β(1+rb )
                                          2+rb η(rb ) exp − 2+rb (y1 + TIII (x̃))
                     h                                  i          h                               i
                 exp − β(1+r2+rb
                                 b)
                                    (y 1 − T III  (x̃))   −  exp    −  β(1+rb )
                                                                         2+rb    (y1 + T III (x̃))
            =                                    h                                 i                 .
                                  β(1+rb )            β(1+rb )
                                    2+rb   exp     −    2+rb   (y 1  + T III (x̃))

Therefore, condition (B1) is satisfied by

   V 0 (y1 − TIII (x̃); rb ) − V 0 (y1 + TIII (x̃); rb ) V (ỹ1 + TIII (x̃); rb ) − V (ỹ1 − TIII (x̃); rb )
                                                        +                                                    = 0.
               V 00 (y1 + TIII (x̃); rb )                           V 0 (ỹ1 + TIII (x̃); rb )

Finally, for type-0 bidder, bIII (0) = mrs , as we have shown in Lemma 3.




                                                              6
