NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

FISCAL STIMULUS IN ECONOMIC UNIONS:
WHAT ROLE FOR STATES?
Gerald Carlino
Robert P. Inman
Working Paper 21680
http://www.nber.org/papers/w21680
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
October 2015

The authors would like to thank Alan Auerbach, Jeff Brown, William Dupor, Pablo Guerron, James
Nason, Keith Still, and Tom Stark for helpful comments on earlier versions of this research, and Jake
Carr and Adam Scavatti for outstanding research assistance. The views expressed here are those of
the authors and do not necessarily represent the views of the Federal Reserve Bank of Philadelphia,
the Federal Reserve System, the University of Pennsylvania, or the National Bureau of Economic
Research.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peerreviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.
© 2015 by Gerald Carlino and Robert P. Inman. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed
two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice,
is given to the source.

Fiscal Stimulus in Economic Unions: What Role for States?
Gerald Carlino and Robert P. Inman
NBER Working Paper No. 21680
October 2015
JEL No. E62,H77
ABSTRACT
The Great Recession and the subsequent passage of the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act
returned fiscal policy, and particularly the importance of state and local governments, to the center
stage of macroeconomic policy-making. This paper addresses three questions for the design of
intergovernmental macroeconomic fiscal policies. First, are such policies necessary? Analysis of
US state fiscal policies show state deficits (in particular from tax cuts) can stimulate state economies
in the short-run, but that there are significant job spillovers to neighboring states. Second, to internalize
these spillovers, what central government fiscal policies are most effective for stimulating income
and job growth? Both federal tax cuts and transfers to households and firms and intergovernmental
transfers to states for lower income assistance are effective, with one and two year multipliers greater
than 2.0. Third, how are states, as politically independent agents, motivated to provide increased transfers
to lower income households? The answer is matching (price subsidy) assistance for such spending.
The intergovernmental aid is spent immediately by the states and supports assistance to those most
likely to spend new transfers.
Gerald Carlino
Federal Reserve Bank of Philadelphia
Research Department
Ten Independence Mall
Philadelphia, Pa 19106
jerry.carlino@phil.frb.org
Robert P. Inman
Department of Finance
The Wharton School
University of Pennsylvania
Philadelphia, PA 19104-6367
and NBER
inman@wharton.upenn.edu

FISCAL STIMULUS IN ECONOMIC UNIONS: WHAT ROLE FOR STATES?
by
Gerald Carlino and Robert P. Inman1
I. Introduction
The Great Recession and the subsequent passage of the American Recovery and
Reinvestment Act (ARRA) has returned fiscal policy, and in particular the role of state and local
governments in such policies, to center stage in our efforts to return the US economy to full
employment. Passed within the first two months of President Obama’s administration, ARRA has
now spent over $796 billion to stimulate the stimulate the private economy: $381 billion as federal
tax relief and expanded unemployment compensation, $98 billion as direct federal government
spending, and $318 billion as intergovernmental transfers to state and local governments for
education spending ($93 billion), infrastructure spending ($70 billion), financing of lower-income
housing ($6 billion), lower-income Medicaid funding ($101 billion), and low-income assistance ($48
billion).2 The striking features of this legislation have been its scale, clearly the largest fiscal
stimulus since the Great Depression, and its reliance upon intergovernmental transfers to state and
local governments for implementing central government fiscal policy.
Lying behind ARRA are the implicit assumptions that fiscal policies can stimulate job
growth during recessions, that state fiscal policies alone are not up to the task and thus federal
policies are needed, and that intergovernmental transfers to state and local governments can

1

Gerald Carlino, Senior Economic Advisor and Economist, Federal Reserve Bank of Philadelphia.
Robert P. Inman, Richard K. Mellon Professor of Finance, Economics, and Public Policy, Wharton School,
University of Pennsylvania, and Research Associate, NBER.
2

See Recovery.gov/transparency/fundinggoverview/pages/funding.breakdown.aspx.

1

therefore be an important component of any central government’s stimulus package. This has been
the received wisdom in the scholarly and policy literature on the design of fiscal policy in economic
unions, at least since the foundational writings of Richard Musgrave (1959) and Wallace Oates
(1972).3 There have been few empirical tests of these propositions, however, with the exception of
important early work by Edward Gramlich (1978, 1979). And Gramlich was skeptical, finding the
federal efforts to escape the 1976 recession with grants to states were too little and too late. ARRA
funding has provided scholars with another opportunity to evaluate the stimulus impact of
intergovernmental aid, and the results are more encouraging; see Wilson (2012), Feyrer and
Sacerdote (2011), and Chodorow-Reich et al. (2012). These studies relate changes in state or county
employment one year after the passage of ARRA to the level of ARRA transfers received by the
coincident state or local government, or their contractors, in the previous fiscal year. Each study
finds a significant positive impact on local private and public employment, with the strongest effects
coming from ARRA support for state Medicaid payments.
These new results are valuable, but they leave three important questions unanswered. First,
while there are measured gains for the local economy receiving assistance, might they come at the
expense of, or alternatively might they enhance, the job or income gains of neighboring economies?
Specifically, how do these gains aggregate? Second, the local economy studies have (so far) only
been used to reveal economic changes for, at most, one year after ARRA spending. We still need

3

Musgrave, in his classic treatise on public finance, devotes one paragraph to the question of states
and macroeconomic stabilization (1959, pp. 181-182). He begins, and concludes, his discussion as follows:
While some degree of coordination may be attained between the levels (of government), the
compensatory function must be coordinated for the nation as a whole, and this requires
central action. . . . The objectives of the Distribution and Stabilization Branches . . . require
primary responsibility at the central level.

2

to know: How long will the stimulus effects last? Third, the local impact studies estimate the effects
of ARRA spending as it is spent, but federal aid is fungible; see Craig and Inman (1982) generally
and Conley and Dupor (2013) for ARRA. Might state and local governments have saved ARRA
funds for spending after the recession had subsided or might ARRA aid been used to replace states’
own planned spending or tax relief? This paper seeks to provide answers to these three questions.
Our results suggest ARRA policies might have been re-designed to provide a significantly larger
impact on national economic growth following the Great Recession.
In Section II we address the original Musgrave-Oates conjecture that state government
stimulus policies, say through increased current debt to finance state spending or tax relief, cannot
significantly influence their small, and economically open, economies. Any fiscal stimulus by a
single state will lead to higher demands for imports from other states and thus the main beneficiaries
will be firms and workers in these other states. Even if new job opportunities are created within the
state, federal economies permit unemployed workers from other states to relocate and compete with
original state residents for the state’s new employment opportunities. Either way, the economic
benefits of the fiscal stimulus will be shared with residents outside the state. Since the bulk of the
cost of the fiscal stimulus will be born largely by current state residents through higher future taxes
to repay the current deficit, states may be reluctant to adopt their own stimulus policies. As a result
of these fiscal spillovers, Musgrave and Oates conclude that only the national government can
efficiently manage stimulative fiscal policies during times of recessions. We summarize work
originally presented in Carlino and Inman (2013) that presents an empirical test of the MusgraveOates conjecture for the US economy. We find significant fiscal spillovers, suggesting possible
advantages using central government fiscal policies.

3

In Section III we examine the potential effectiveness of nationally administered fiscal
policies for stimulating aggregate income growth and new job opportunities. The analysis stresses
the importance in federal economies of state governments for implementing stimulative fiscal
policies. By design, national fiscal policies in normal times focus on providing national defense and
national social insurance. State and local governments are the primary providers of infrastructure,
education, and police and fire protection. In the US federal system, the states are also the primary
providers of low income protection and health insurance. Thus in times of recessions, it will be state
governments who make the final decisions on spending for public goods and services and (in the
US) for transfers and health coverage to lower income households. If the national government wants
to finance a coordinated fiscal strategy for stimulating the national economy, it must consider
explicitly how its policies impact the spending and tax decisions of its state and local governments.
The national fiscal policy that most directly impacts the fiscal decisions of the state and local sector
are intergovernmental transfers, exactly the policy that assumed such a central role in the
implementation of ARRA. Section III provides this analysis.
In Section IV we provide a micro-econometric foundation for the aggregate results reported
in Section III. Here we specify and estimate a budgetary model of state government spending,
taxation, and borrowing for the 48 mainland state for the sample period, 1979 to 2010 to highlight
the full budgetary effects, both in the current and future fiscal years, of exogenous changes in federal
to state aid. The resulting micro-econometric estimates of how states allocate federal aid are shown
to be consistent with the observed macro-econometric estimates in Section III for how federal aid
impacts the aggregate economy.
In Section V we use our macro-econometric estimates of the impact of federal spending,

4

federal tax relief, and federal intergovernmental aid to simulate the effects of each fiscal policy on
the private economy to provide a comparative analysis of policy effectiveness. We estimate that
the combination of policies included in ARRA was not as effective as it might have been. A
different mix of fiscal policies, one emphasizing direct tax relief and intergovernmental transfers to
states for lower income assistance, is shown to have a significantly larger stimulus impact than the
policy mix chosen by ARRA.
Section VI concludes our analysis.

II. Can State Deficits Influence State Economies?
A. State Deficits: In Carlino and Inman (2013) we test for the impact of state government
deficits on job growth in the state’s, and in surrounding states’, economies to evaluate the relevance
of the Musgrave-Oates conjecture. We do so by regressing the annual rate of growth in each state’s
jobs and state population on an all-inclusive measure of each state’s own deficit lagged one year.
For this analysis, the state’s own deficit is defined as its aggregate “cash flow” deficit across all
state funds, equal to aggregate state own expenditures minus aggregate state own revenues.
Included in aggregate own expenditures are spending for current goods and services plus aid to local
governments, capital spending for infrastructures, state pension benefit spending, and state spending
for unemployment insurance and workmen’s compensation. Included in aggregate state own
revenues are state tax and fees, state and local employee contributions into the state pension plan,
and employee and employer contributions into the unemployment and workmen’s compensation
trust funds. This aggregate cash flow deficit is financed by short-term and long-term borrowing and

5

by drawing down cash holdings in state savings, trust fund, and pension accounts. 4 Importantly,
states with effective balanced budget rules for the state’s general fund deficit can still run significant
aggregate state deficits for purposes of stimulating the state’s aggregate economy. Excluded from
the state’s own deficit are revenues from federal aid.
Figure 1(a and b) shows the historical pattern of all states’ own deficits (dashed line) and all
states’ total deficits (solid line) equal to own deficits plus federal exogenous aid; both deficits are
measured in 2004 dollars. Own deficits are always positive – that is, a deficit – while total deficits
are generally negative – that is, a surplus – as federal aid fills the gap between total state spending
and state own revenues.
B. The Impact of State Deficits on the State Economy: Our analysis focuses on the impact
of the state’s own deficit on state job growth ( N ) and population growth ( H ) specified as.
( N , H ) = f(OwnD(-1), ZAid(-1), Spillovers; Controls) + υst,

(1)

where OwnD(-1) is the state’s own cash flow deficit lagged one fiscal year, ZAid(-1) is
unconstrained (“revenue-sharing”) federal aid to the state lagged one fiscal year, Spillovers is our
measure of inter-state fiscal spillovers defined below, and Controls is a vector of additional variables
added to the estimation equation to control for a variety of non-fiscal determinants of state job and
population growth.5 The regressions’ error terms are specified as υst = vt + vs + vst, with year (vt)
4

Since future taxes will be needed to repay each of the fund borrowing, there is a reduction in state
taxpayers’ future wealth. Residents may therefore try to replace the decline in public wealth with an increase
in their private wealth by saving more, perhaps from the tax cuts or spending increases from the deficit
financed stimulus, an outcome known as Ricardian Equivalence; see Barro (1974). If so, the stimulus effect
of the initial deficits will be reduced. The results we present here are the combined (“reduced form”) effects
of the initial income and future wealth effects of deficit financing.
5

Unfortunately, the definition and measurement of state incomes changes over our sample period.
Thus we focused on job and population growth as our dependent variables. Included in the vector of Controls
are lagged values of the spillover variables as a control for shocks to “neighboring” economies, changes in

6

fixed effects to control for common changes in aggregate demand and interest rates and state fixed
effects (vs) to control for stable state amenities, state political and legal environments, and the land
area of each state. Our estimation strategy corrects for serial correlation and heteroscedasticity in
vst.
Our preferred measure for interstate economic spillovers, Spillovers, is based upon Crone’s
(2004) definition of economic clusters. Crone groups the 48 mainland states into eight economic
clusters that share common business cycle patterns; see Table 1. The advantage of Crone’s grouping
of economic neighbors is that it allows both for supply linkages between the states for intermediate
goods and for final demand linkages between states as households shop across borders.6

The

variable Spillovers is specified separately for each state’s growth in jobs and population as the job
and population growth, respectively, in each state’s economic neighbors, with the growth rates
weighted by the historic share of each state in the cluster’s total excluding the “home” state.
The sample includes the 48 mainland states and the period is from 1973-2009 with all fiscal
variables measured in real (2004) dollars per capita. State job and population growth rates are both
stationary as confirmed by the Im-Persaran-Shin (2003) test for stationarity in panel data allowing
for unit roots to differ across states. Stationarity of the dependent variables is required for the

world energy prices interacted with whether the state is an energy-producing state, and changes in state
productivity as measured from the state production function for manufacturing. Other within-state year
controls generally found to be statistically insignificant and therefore excluded from our final results include
decade-to-decade changes in the level of advanced education in the state (percent with college degrees or
more) and in state urbanization (percent of population living in urban areas); losses from major natural
disasters thought to impact the state economy; oil price changes interacted with whether the state could be
considered a major consumer of energy; and population weighted changes in OwnD(-1) of the other states
in each state’s economic region as a control for potential fiscal competition among economic neighbors.
Finally, controlling for region-wide fixed effects had no statistically significant effect on our results.
6

For evidence that the Crone economic clusters capture most of the important economic spillovers
across state economies, see Bronars and Jansen (1987).

7

estimated coefficients to reveal a structural relationship between own deficits and growth rates.
To correct for the possible endogeneity of state own deficits in the growth equations we use
the value of this variable lagged from four to six years as an instrument to predict OwnD(-1). The
identifying assumptions are first, that deficit changes from fiscal choices made in preceding
legislative regimes have an institutional persistence helping to predict current own deficits, and that,
those lagged deficit changes are not correlated with the current growth performance of the state
except through their impact on current own deficits. An F test for the predictive power of the
instruments exceeds 10, suggesting strong instruments. Exclusion tests that the instruments are not
correlated with current state job or population growth cannot reject the null hypothesis that exclusion
is appropriate.
Final estimation uses the first differences of the growth rates as our dependent variable as
recommended by Caselli, et. al. (1996). But because we also include lagged growth rates in our
estimated equation, the error term of the differenced equation is likely to be correlated with the
differences of the lagged growth rates. This will lead to biased coefficient estimates for the dynamic
effects of fiscal policy on job and population growth. Thus we will need instruments for the lagged
dependent variables. We adopt the estimation approach of Holtz-Eakin, et. al. (1988) using four or
more year lags of the dependent variables as instruments; Arellano-Bond (1991) tests confirmed the
appropriateness of our choice for lags.
C. Results: What did we find? The full details of the estimated job and population growth
equations are provided in Carlino and Inman (2013); we summarize the main conclusions here.
Figure 2 summarizes our estimated impact of state own deficits on state job growth. The solid line
shows the estimated percentage change in job growth over time for a state with respect to a one-

8

time, one percentage increase in the state’s own deficit. The estimated effect after the first year of
a one percent increase in the deficit is an increase in the rate of job growth by one percent; the
estimated effect is statistically different from zero at the 95 percent confidence level.7 The positive
job impact of a current period deficit disappears by the second year, however, suggesting that the
deficits were financing current consumption and a temporary expansion of state aggregate demand
rather than new infrastructure and a supply side improvement in future state productivity. In the
longer run, eleven years after the initial increase in state deficits, the rate of state job growth
declines. Why? That is when state debts must be repaid by running a positive state surplus on the
current accounts. Just as state deficits can stimulate initial job growth, when those deficit must be
repaid by later surpluses, job growth declines.
When we decomposed the source of the state deficit into tax cuts or spending increases, the
strongest and statistically most important determinant of positive job growth are aggregate state tax
cuts. Spending increases do improve job growth but the estimated effects are never statistically
significant. Unconstrained federal aid to the states, ZAid(-1), is never a significant determinant of
state job growth. The strong positive effect of tax cuts and the weak effect of unconstrained federal
aid is confirmed in our analysis of the macro-economic economy as well.
The effect of state own deficits on the rate of growth of state population from net migration

7

These percentages changes translate directly into new jobs. Suppose a state doubles its own state
deficits from the current state mean of $390/person to $780/person, an increase of $390/person. This 100
percent increase in deficits means a 100 percent increase in the state’s rate of job growth. The average rate
of job growth in the most recent sample years is .012 per annum. Thus the job growth rate increases to .024,
or an improvement in growth of .012. Again for recent years, the typical state has 2.8 million jobs. Thus the
increase of .012 in job growth means an additional 34,000 jobs (= 2.8 million x .012). We can compute the
deficit cost per job as total deficits divided by new jobs. The average state’s population is 6.25 million
residents, so the total cost of the deficit stimulus will be $2.44 billion (• $390/person x 6.25 million
residents). The deficit cost per job will therefore be $71,800 per job (• $2.44 billion/34,000 jobs).

9

is positive, but small in magnitude and only marginally significant statistically. This makes sense
if the state job gains are temporary as shown in Figure 2. Further we find no significant impact of
state own deficits on the state’s rate of unemployment. But jobs have increased. The constant rate
of unemployment must mean that new workers are entering the labor force at the same rate that new
jobs are created. The small effect of deficits on the rate of in-migration must mean that most of the
new workers are current state residents leaving “home production” and re-entering the labor force.
In Carlino and Inman (2013), we estimate that for a typical state, a 1 standard deviation increase in
the state’s own deficit – $390/resident – will add 34,000 new jobs within a year (a 1.2% increase),
and that 27,000 of those jobs will be filled by state residents and 7,000 filled by in-migrants from
other states. For our typical state with 6.25 million residents, this means an aggregate deficit cost
of $2.44 billion. This $2.44 billion has created 34,000 new jobs. The implied present value cost per
job to an average state’s residents is therefore $71,800 per job.8
Importantly, there are significant spillover effects from an increase in one state’s own deficits
onto job growth in the other states included in its economic cluster as defined by Crone. To control
for common shocks to the set of states within a cluster we also include in all our regressions year
fixed effects and oil price shocks. We estimate that job growth in the other states of an economic
cluster will increase a state’s own job growth one year later. The implied cross-state job elasticity
is .6 – that is, a 1 percent increase in the combined rate of job growth in all of a state’s cluster will
increase the rate of job growth within the state by 6/10's of 1 percent. The estimated spillover effect
is strongly statistically significant at a 99 percent level of confidence.
Based on these estimates, Table 2 provides summary estimates for the impact of a state’s

8

See fn. 7 above.

10

own deficit on jobs within the state, and in its economic neighbors in its cluster, one year after the
deficit increase. The increase in the state’s deficit is set equal to $390/resident, a one standard
deviation increase in state own deficits for the national sample. We focus on the largest state in each
of the eight Crone economic clusters; the economic neighbors are the other states within the cluster.
This $390/person deficit ranges from 6 percent to as much as 15 percent of each of the largest state’s
own fund revenues in FY 2008 and implies a sizeable increase in state spending and transfers or a
significant reduction in state taxes and fees. Projected job impacts are estimated to occur over
calendar year 2009.9 There is no evidence of significant job creation after the first year following
the temporary increase in state own deficits; see Figure 2.
Three alternative simulations are presented in Table 2. The upper panel illustrates the impact
on state jobs of a deficit increase in the region’s largest state alone, with no new deficits by its
economic neighbors. The middle panel shows the impact of deficits by all other states in the cluster,
except the largest state. These two panels illustrate the potential spillovers across states, first from
the largest state to its neighbors and then from the neighbors to the largest state. The lower panel
shows the increase in cluster jobs if all states in the cluster agree to cooperate in a common policy
where each state increases its own deficit by $390/person.
The $390/person deficit is estimated to add 1.1 percent to the deficit state’s rate of job
growth, which leads in turn to the change in total jobs computed as the 1.1 percent times the actual
level of employment in each state in 2009. The job growth in the deficit state then spills over into
9

Table 2 shows the ability of state deficits to create state jobs and in process reveals the temptation
that governors may face to deficit finance state budgets. Particularly so, since any adverse effects of deficit
financing on job creation only occur when the deficits are repaid; see Figure 2. Herein lies a reason for state
balanced budget rules and state rainy day funds. An accumulated rainy day fund ranging from 6 percent
(Massachusetts) to perhaps 15 percent (Florida) of own state revenues would be sufficient to finance a
$390/resident deficit in a current year’s budget and to thus provide the job increases seen in Table 2.

11

neighboring states through changes in the growth of the cluster’s jobs. This change, which varies
by each state within the cluster, allows a prediction of new job growth and thus new jobs in each
neighboring state. Those new jobs in all states within the cluster are then summed to provide an
estimate of the overall level of job spillovers. Finally, the large state’s own jobs and the spillover
jobs are summed to give the total jobs created in the cluster from the increase in the own deficit of
the largest state. Also reported (within parentheses) is the deficit cost per job created defined as the
increase in the total own deficit in the largest state divided by jobs created.
The second panel shows jobs created and the deficit cost/job from increasing deficits in each
cluster’s smaller states, without increasing deficits in the largest state. Estimation of job creation
in this case is state by state, allowing for each state to have a spillover effect on all its neighbors.
Here the large state is the recipient of jobs created by its smaller economic neighbors. Finally, the
third panel aggregates the results of the upper two panels to show the impact on total jobs within
each cluster, and the average tax cost/job if all states agreed to jointly increase their deficits by
$390/person.10
Four conclusions are evident from Table 2. First, own state deficits can create new jobs
within the deficit state. The deficit cost/job created in the state running the deficit ranges from
$72,000 per job in Massachusetts to $91,000 per job in California. These job cost estimates are
comparable to those obtained by the recent evaluative literature of the one year impact of the
American Reinvestment and Recovery Act’s fiscal assistance to SL governments on local job

10

The job estimates here are only for the impacts after the first year, and do not allow for any effects
of spillover jobs back onto the economy of the original deficit state. First, the effects of own state deficits
on own state jobs is never statistically significant after the first year. Second, Carlino and Inman (2013)
found no effect of a second period lagged spillover on own state jobs. We are confident that the results in
Table 2 capture most of the important job effects of state own deficits.

12

growth; see Feyrer and Sacerdote (2011) and Wilson (2012).
Second, there are quantitatively significant aggregate job spillovers onto neighboring states
within each cluster for relatively large (10 percent or so) increases in the large state’s deficits.11 The
fiscal costs to the neighboring states of these new jobs is $0/job. These spillover benefits create a
strong incentive for the other states within a cluster to free-ride on the large state’s deficit policies.
For comparable deficit levels, very large states can often create more jobs for their neighbors than
the neighbors can create for themselves. For example, in the Far West cluster, the job spillovers
from California deficits (108,561) exceeds its neighbors’ own job creation (90,301) for equal new
deficits; the Far West column in Table 2.
Third, the potential incentive to free-ride runs in both directions. If the largest state’s
neighbors were to collectively increase their deficits, but the large state did not, then the large state
would receive the spillover jobs. For example, if Arizona, Nevada, Oregon, and Washington were
to each increase their deficits by $390/person, California is estimated to receive 43,800 free,
spillover jobs; again, see the Far West column of Table 2. With significant spillovers, all states
may choose to “sit on their hands,” hoping that the other states in their cluster will run deficits in
times of recessions. Or if each state does choose to run a deficit to create jobs within their own state
– as would occur if the state benefits of a new job exceed the state’s own deficit cost/job – there will
likely be a downward bias in each state’s deficit behavior as they would ignore the social benefits
of the spillover jobs created by their own deficits. The resulting equilibrium of such state deficit
behaviors may be no expansionary deficits at all, or positive but still too little deficit financing.

11

Recent research, by Beetsma and Giuliodori (2011), Auerbach and Gorodnichenko (2013), and
Hebous and Zimmermann (2013) studying aggregate interdependencies among EU economies also find
significant job and income spillovers across economic neighbors from country deficit fiscal policies.

13

Finally, the lower panel of Table 2 shows the gains in job creation of a cooperative deficit
policy when all states in the economic cluster run a common $390/person deficit. Total jobs created
will be the sum of total jobs created in the first and second panels when the two sets of governments
operated independently. The deficit cost per job for all residents in the economic cluster will be the
weighted average cost/job after allowing for spillovers. Under a cooperative policy the deficit
cost/job is significantly lower than if each state, or set of states, operated independently.

For

example, in the Far West cluster the “private” deficit cost/job to California is $90,956 per job and
that for the four smaller states is $84,234 per job. But cooperating, so that all five states provide a
$390/person “job-creating deficit,” and allowing for job spillovers, reduces the deficit cost per job
to $52,532. A deficit policy that may not have been attractive for any one state may become
attractive when all states agree to cooperate and collectively share the deficit costs of job creation.12
If so, then there is an argument for centralizing stabilization fiscal policy at the level of a national
government.

By this analysis, the Musgrave-Oates conjecture is correct. The question then

becomes: How should we manage a central government deficit policy to best stimulate aggregate
job creation in a federal economic union?

12

Though that decision must ultimately rest on a comparison of the social benefits of job creation
to the social costs of the increase in state own deficits. Whether the benefits of a created job exceed estimated
costs remains an open question. For example, as part of an effort to understand fluctuations in employment
rates, Hall and Milgrom (2008, Table 2) estimate the annual (flow) benefits of job search and/or home
production to a risk-neutral worker of remaining unemployed is 70 percent of the overall gain in added
output. The net social surplus of moving from unemployed to employed would therefore be 30 percent of
the worker’s added output. It is this net output benefit from job gains today offset by any discounted future
job losses that should be compared to the present value of all taxes (including their excess burdens) needed
to finance today’s increase in state own deficits.

14

III. Macroeconomic Policy in Economic Unions: The Role of Federal Aid
A. Role of Federal Aid in the US Economy: Economic unions bring together member
countries and territories for the efficient provision of public goods and services. The union’s central
government is to take advantage of economies of scale in production and in risk pooling for large
and common economic shocks by providing national defense, by regulating markets and a common
currency, and by insuring all citizens against common economic, health, and disaster risks. The
union’s state and local governments (hereafter, the SL sector) are to provide those goods and
services were such economies are not decisive, for example, education, police and fire protection,
health care, environmental quality, transportation, and (perhaps above a national minimum) income
support for disadvantaged citizens. This division of responsibility, rational as it is for the financing
and provision of public services, creates a potential problem for the central government’s
management of macroeconomic fiscal policy. If the central government wishes to stimulate the
aggregate union-wide economy, but much of what government does is being financed and allocated
by lower-tier governments, then there may be inadequate policy tools at the level of the central
government for coordinated macroeconomic fiscal policy. One tool that is available is the central
government’s tax and transfer policy, and an important component of that policy are transfers to the
SL sector.13
That such federal assistance to SL governments has become an important part of US national
fiscal policy is evident from Figures 3 and 4. Figure 3 shows the time pattern of total federal aid per

13

There is a rich theory for why such transfers to lower-tier governments may be needed for the
efficient financing and provision of SL local public services; see Boadway and Shah (2009; Part II). The
importance of such transfers for macroeconomic policy was initially argued for by Heller (1966, Chapter 3)
and became the basis for the federal policy known as General Revenue Sharing, passed in 1972 (Reischauer,
1975).

15

capita (denoted as A) and what we will call federal project aid per capita (denoted as AP), and
federal welfare aid per capita (denoted as AW) over the postwar period 1947:1 to 2010:3, each
measured in 2005 dollars: A = AP + AW. This division of total intergovernmental aid into its two
components will prove important to our understanding as to how such fiscal transfers impact the
aggregate economy. By design, project aid can be spent at the full discretion of the state or local
government, known as aid “fungibility,” and is typically allocated to providing public services.
Welfare aid is targeted to income support or services for lower income households and is only paid
during the fiscal year after such expenditures have been incurred.14
Real federal aid per capita has risen from $47/person in 1947 to $1,787/person in 2009:1,
the last date before the implementation of President Obama’s ARRA fiscal stimulus; see Figure 3.
For comparison, Figure 4 shows the time path of federal purchases of goods and services (denoted
as G) and of federal net revenues defined as taxes paid by household and firms less direct transfers
to household and firms (denoted as R).

Federal project aid as a share of federal government

spending for goods and services has grown from 2 percent in 1947 to over 11 percent by 2008 before
ARRA to 14 percent including ARRA assistance. Including federal welfare aid in total federal
purchases and intergovernmental transfers raises total aid’s share of such spending to 23 percent

14

General revenue sharing/project aid (AP) includes general revenue sharing, elementary and
secondary education aid, model cities and urban renewal aid, transportation aid, all federal aid programs
meant to assist SL government finances after recessions (including ARRA’s “stability aid”), and tobacco
settlement payments. The tobacco settlement payments are viewed as de facto “federal aid” financed by a
“tax” on tobacco companies; see Singhal (2008). The two federal aid programs included in welfare aid (AW)
are Aid to Families with Dependent Children (AFDC) and Medicaid. When measuring AP and AW we
specifically allow for the change in funding structure under the Personal Responsibility and Work
Opportunity Reconciliation Act of 1996 (PRWORA). PRWORA transformed funding for public welfare
from a matching aid program – Aid to Families with Dependent Children (AFDC) – to an unconstrained,
lump-sum transfer – Temporary Assistance for Needy Families (TANF). When specifying AW and AP we
remove AFDC spending from AW in 1998 and add TANF spending to AP in 1998.

16

before ARRA and to 27 percent including ARRA. Federal aid to SL governments has become an
important aggregate fiscal policy, and thus an eligible policy instrument for stimulating the
aggregate economy. But is it effective?
B. Estimating Aid’s Impact on the Private Economy: We provide an evaluation of the
effectiveness of aggregate fiscal policy, including federal aid, using structural vector autoregression
analysis (SVAR) as pioneered by Blanchard and Perotti (2002), estimated for the US economy for
the time period 1960:1 to 2010:3. The analysis begins with the estimation of a reduced form VAR
specified as:
Zt = C(L)CZt-1 + ut, where ZtN = [rt, gt, at, yt] and utN = [urt, ugt, uat, uyt],

(2)

where the vector Zt includes rr as the log of federal net revenues defined as federal taxes net of
transfers to households and firms (R), gt as the log of federal government purchases (G), at as the
log of total federal aid to the SL sector (A), and yt as the log of GDP (Y), each measured at quarterly
intervals and in 2005 dollars per capita. Also included in the initial VAR are the trend variables
time and time squared, and an indicator variable for “deep recessions” (= 1, if the national rate of
unemployment exceeds 8 percent).
As in Blanchard and Perotti, the lag structure C(L) is a 4 x 4 matrix of three-quarter
distributed lag polynomials, and the vector utN = [urt, ugt, uat, uyt] is a 4 x 1 vector of reduced form
residuals. The reduced form residuals for policy in each quarter are the result of truly exogenous,
or structural, shocks to policy plus contemporaneous (within quarter) changes in policy because of
reduced form shocks to aggregate GDP. Contemporaneous changes in policy because of unspecified
shocks to income are known as automatic stabilizers, where urt is (estimated to be) positively related
to uyt because federal net revenues are progressive, ugt is (assumed to be) unrelated to changes in uyt

17

within the current quarter because of administrative rules for government purchases of goods and
services, and uat is (estimated to be) negatively related to changes in uyt because such assistance
serves as fiscal insurance for the SL sector. By knowing values for the automatic stabilizers we can
then estimate the truly exogenous shocks to policy from the reduced form residuals. Finally, given
exogenous policy shocks, we can compute the impact of each fiscal policy on income and each
policy’s associated income multipliers. A Technical Appendix provides the full details of the
estimation procedure.
Our analysis above follows that of Blanchard and Perotti (2002) with one important
difference. In contrast to their analysis which specifies federal net revenues as federal taxes less
transfers to households and firms and transfers to SL governments (R - A), we separate net revenues
into the two fiscal policies: Taxes less transfers to household and firms (R) and transfers to the SL
sector (A). In so doing, we drop the assumption implicit in the specification of Blanchard and
Perotti that SL public officials allocate transfers to government just as would household and firms
– that is, that elected officials are perfect agents for the households and firms they represent. The
vast literature finding a “flypaper effect” to such assistance strongly rejects this assumption; see
Inman (2009). Federal aid to the SL sector must be included as a separate fiscal policy. A failure
to do so leaves a potentially important gap in our understanding of macroeconomic fiscal policy in
a federal economy, one that was particularly evident at the time of the passage of ARRA.15 Tables
3 and 4 present our results. Table 5 examines the sensitivity of our conclusions to alternative
15

At the time of congressional deliberations over ARRA, there were no accepted estimates as to how
the SL sector would react to increases in intergovernmental aid nor how such aid would impact the private
economy. As a result The Council of Economic Advisors (Romer and Bernstein, 2009) and the
Congressional Budget Office (CBO Report, 2010) were forced to rely upon estimates of household behavior
for how the SL sector would spend their stimulus money and upon estimates of federal spending and tax cut
multipliers for how SL government spending and tax cuts would impact the private economy.

18

identification assumptions.16
C. Results: Table 3 presents our estimates of fiscal multipliers for the original three variable
SVAR of Blanchard and Perotti and for our four variable extension with separate estimates for a
federal aid multiplier. The estimated impact on GDP of each fiscal policy are reported by quarters
for up to 5 years (20 quarters). The multipliers give the increase in GDP for a one-time, $1 increase
in each policy; one standard deviation (68 percent) confidence intervals are reported within
parentheses, and an asterisk indicates when the estimated effect is significantly different from zero
at a 95 percent level of confidence. All multipliers are evaluated at sample means for the fiscal
variable and GDP. Cols. (1)-(4) provide estimates for Blanchard-Perotti’s original analysis, first for
the full sample of observations from 1947:1 to 2010:3, and then for the sample of years beginning
in 1960. Blanchard and Perotti were concerned that the 1950's represented a unique period for the
US economy as it rebounded from WWII and therefore focused their primary analysis on the period
beginning 1960:1. We follow their lead but extend their analysis from their last observation of
1997:4 to 2010:3.
Table 3 shows unanticipated shocks in federal government spending and federal net revenues
also net of transfers to SL governments (R - A) can have quantitatively and statistically significant
positive impacts on the growth of GDP. A one time increase in G of $1 can increase GDP by $.94
on impact and provide a $.77 gain after the first year of the initial stimulus. A one-time $1 cut in

16

Our decision to adopt the SVAR approach to policy identification has been dictated by the
limitations in available data on intergovernmental transfers to the SL sector. The alternative approach to
policy identification, known as “narrative” analysis, is not available because of the limited number of
narrative events for welfare aid; see see Carlino and Inman (2014). Table 5, however, presents a variety of
robustness checks using the Blanchard-Perotti approach, and all of these results are very similar to the
estimated fiscal multipliers obtained using the narrative approach; see Ramey (2011), Romer and Romer
(2010), and Mertens and Ravn (2014).

19

(R - A) may have an even larger impact, increasing GDP by nearly $2 by the end of first year and
continuing to impact the economy by as much as $1.20 into a second year; Table 3, cols. (1) and (2).
These results remain for the analysis for the period after 1960:1; Table 3, cols. (3) and (4). Our
estimates here are broadly similar in magnitude and in timing to those of the original BlanchardPerotti analysis (2002, Tables III and IV). The one significant difference is the larger fiscal
multiplier for net revenues (also net of SL transfers); our estimates are close to -2.0 while their
estimates range from -.70 to - 1.32.
Table 3 cols. (5) - (7) report our new results where federal net revenues are now defined as
only net of transfers to household and firms (R), while transfers to SL governments (A) are separated
out to test for their own impact on the private economy. The resulting four variable SVAR provides
separate estimates for the multiplier effects of R, G, and A on GDP. Now the multiplier impact of
a $1 cut in household and firms net revenues is $2.80 on impact, $3.30 after one year, $2.20 after
two years, and even as much as $1.50 three years later; Table 3, col. (5). These large net revenue
multipliers are confirmed throughout our analysis and are consistent with recent work of Romer and
Romer (2010) and Mertens and Ravn (2014) who, as here, focus on the impacts of taxes and
transfers to households and firms only. The impact of a one-time $1 increase in G on GDP is now
no more than $.56 on impact and never statistically significant thereafter; Table 3, col. (6). This
weak impact of direct federal government purchases on the private economy is consistent across all
our four variable SVAR estimates and with other recent estimates for the federal purchase
multiplier; see Barro and Redlick (2011) and the overview provided by Ramey (2011).
Importantly, federal transfers to the SL sector are seen to have their own impact on private
incomes, distinct from that of transfers to households and firms. The multiplier for a one-time $1

20

increase in A is $.53 on impact, $.71 after one year, $.50 after two years, and still adding to GDP
growth by $.36 three years later; Table 3, col. (7). All impacts are statistically significant at the 95
level of confidence.17
The important lesson here is that increased federal aid to the SL sector cannot be viewed as
having an identical impact on the private economy as either direct transfers to households and firms
or as direct federal government purchases of goods and services. Federal aid must be treated as its
own policy, not a surprising conclusion once we recognize that the intergovernmental transfers go
to elected officials not to households and firms and are spent on teachers, police officers, and roads,
not on tanks, planes, and research.
Table 4 extends our analysis of federal intergovernmental transfers by disaggregating total
aid into its two major components, general revenue sharing and project (“shovel ready”) aid (AP)
and targeted welfare aid to fund SL transfers and services to lower income households (AW).
Project aid includes general revenue sharing, elementary and secondary education aid, model cities
and urban renewal aid, transportation and highway aid, and tobacco settlement payments.18 Also
included as part of AP beginning in 2009:1are the ARRA stimulus grants for education (called
“stability” aid), aid for transportation and highways, and miscellaneous assistance for many smaller
state programs. The two federal aid programs included in welfare aid (AW) are Aid to Families with

17

It is instructive to note that the estimated multipliers from the Blanchard-Perotti specification for
net revenues inclusive of federal transfers to the SL sector, R - A, is essentially a weighted average of the
separate multipliers for net revenues from households and firms and that for federal intergovernmental aid.
From Figures 3 and 4 federal net revenues to household and firms averages about $2000 per person over our
sample period and transfers to SL governments about $1000 per person. Weighting the multipliers for R in
Table 3, col. (5) by 2/3's and those for A in Table (3), col. (7) by 1/3 approximates the multipliers for the
combined net revenue variable, R - A, reported in Table 3, col. (3).
18

The tobacco settlement payments can be viewed as de facto “federal aid” financed by a “tax” on
tobacco companies; see Singhal (2008).

21

Dependent Children (AFDC) and Medicaid. When measuring AP and AW we allow for the change
in the funding structure of this assistance under the Personal Responsibility and Work Opportunity
Reconciliation Act of 1996 (PRWORA). PRWORA transformed AFDC funding from a targeted
matching grant to an unconstrained, lump-sum transfer known as Temporary Assistance for Needy
Families (TANF). We remove AFDC from AW beginning in 1998 and add the new TANF funding
to AP. The increase in Medicaid assistance under ARRA is included in AW, again beginning in
2009:1. The SVAR estimation now involves five variables, R, G, AP, AW, and Y; see the Technical
Appendix for details. Table 4 presents our results for disaggregated intergovernmental aid.
The estimated multipliers for a one-time $1 increase in federal net revenues from households
and firms (R) and federal purchases (G) are comparable to those reported in Table 3. The impact
of the two forms of federal aid on GDP, however, are significantly different. The multipliers
associated with an innovation in project aid (AP) are initially small, negative, and statistically
significant, then positive thereafter though never statistically significant; see Table 4, col. (3). The
negative effect of AP in the first quarter following the innovation is similar to that found by
Gramlich (1978) in his analysis of the Public Works Employment Act of 1976. There the states
postponed planned construction of state infrastructure in anticipation of receiving federal funding,
but only after federal approval of their planned state projects. When approved, usually with a 3 to
6 month delay, the projects were built. Importantly, though “shovel-ready” the approved projects
were not new projects and did not represent new state spending. Federal AP funds appear to have
substituted for already allocated state revenues. The released state revenues were then allocated
elsewhere in the state budget, perhaps to programs with smaller economic impacts, or used to pay
down debt or even saved; see Section IV.

22

Federal aid which does stimulate the private economy is assistance that encourages the
expansion of state transfers to, and provision of services for, lower income households. The
multiplier for one more dollar of AW is large, above 2 at its peak impact, and sustained, lasting up
to three years; see Table 4, col. (4). The estimated impacts of AW on the private economy are all
statistically significant. As we will discover in Section IV, the reasons for AW’s relatively large
impact on the private economy are twofold. First, because AW assistance is paid as a targeted
matching grant, increases in AW directly stimulate new state spending. Second, the new state
spending goes to poor households, either directly as cash transfers or as relief for spending on
medical services. Either way, there is more money in the pockets of lower income households.
Evidence from studies of household behavior is that these lower income households are “creditconstrained” and the families most likely to spend new cash immediately; see Agarwal, Liu, and
Souleles (2007). Thus there is an immediate and sustained impact on the private economy. We
conclude that if the central government wishes to stimulate the private economy during recessions
using intergovernmental transfers, the most effective policy is matching aid for assistance to lower
income households.
In Table 5 we present robustness checks of our core SVAR results in Table 4 to alternative
identification strategies, to the inclusion of monetary policy in the vector of policies, and to the
exclusion of the Tobacco Settlement from the list of federal aid programs. Only the results for
federal aid, AP and AW, are reported in the Table 5. (Estimates for multipliers of government
purchases (G) and federal taxes and transfers to households and firms (R) are similar in magnitude
and timing to those reported in Tables 3 and 4.) Table 5, cols. (1) and (2) replace the BlanchardPerotti identifying specification for revenue’s automatic stabilizer elasticity with respect to income

23

of 2.08 with an alternative estimate of 3.0 provided by Mertens and Ravn (2014). With this
adjustment our estimates for the AP and AW multipliers are somewhat smaller than those reported
in Table 4, but the negative impact multiplier for AP assistance in Q1 remains, as do the relatively
larger effects of AW over AP.19 Table 5, cols. (3) and (4) report estimates for an alternative
identifying assumption as to the timing for the impact of federal policies, both upon each other, and
upon GDP. Rather than the initial assumption that federal net revenues pre-determine spending,
here we assume federal spending on purchases and projects (G and AP) pre-determine net revenues
and welfare transfers (R and AW). Again results parallel those in Table 4. Table 5, Cols. (5) and
(6) extend the original five equation SVAR for fiscal policy to now allow for possible confounding
effects of monetary policy; see Rossi and Zubairy (2011). We do so by adding the federal funds rate
and the inflation rate to the analysis as measures of monetary policy. As in Rossi and Zubairy
(2011; Figures 9 and 11), we too find fiscal policy is estimated as less stimulative when monetary
policy is included in the analysis. Monetary policy is less than fully accommodating. But, again
AW is significantly more stimulative than AP assistance. Finally, Table 5, cols. (7) and (8) report
estimates for the restricted sample, 1960:Q1 to 1998:Q3, excluding transfers from the Tobacco
Settlement. Our core results remain in place for this restricted sample as well.
D. Summary: We conclude, first, that unanticipated increases in federal purchases or tax
relief can stimulate the private economy, and second, that among the available fiscal policies, giving
money to households and firms either directly as tax cuts or indirectly as intergovernmental transfers

19

We have also reestimated the core SVAR model setting revenue’s automatic stabilizer with a lower
estimate of 1.6 from Follette and Lutz (2010). With this lower specification, the peak multipliers for AW
is now 2.89, occurring in Q2, and that for AP is .967, also occurring in Q2. Here too we see a statistically
significant, negative impact multiplier (= . -.139) for AP aid. AW aid has a statistically significant effect
on GDP into Q12 (= 1.2) while AP aid has a significant effect until Q8 (= .89).

24

for lower income transfer and services are the most effective policies. Tax multipliers are - 3 or
larger and the impacts last for up to three years. The multipliers for intergovernmental welfare aid
are always above 1.0, perhaps as large as 2.0, and also continue to impact the private economy for
up to three years after the initial infusion of aid.

IV. States as Agents: Understanding How Federal Aid Impacts the Private Economy
While informative as to the likely impacts of federal aid on the macroeconomy, the analysis
in Section III leaves unanswered exactly how these transfers might stimulate the private economy,
and in particular, why federal aid for welfare services is so much more effective than federal aid for
state government purchases or tax relief. To shed light on this question, we provide microeconometric estimates of state government fiscal behavior in response to intergovernmental
transfers. In short, much of federal project aid (AP) is saved by government and spent only slowly.
Most of welfare aid (AW) is spent within the fiscal year received and is returned to the private
economy as transfers to poor families and or as middle class tax relief.
A. Specification: To understand how states allocate federal transfers, paid either as project
(AP) or welfare (AW) aid, we specify and estimate a model of state government budgetary behavior
for the 48 mainland states for the years 1979 to 2010. The framework accounts for all state spending
and all state revenues.20 The overall state budget identity is specified by cash flow accounting of
state monies and defined as:
AP +
(rs - b)
- (gs + k) / SURPLUS = Δc - Δd + Δf
($504) + ($3063 - $276) - ($3003 + $312) / (-$24) = ($81) - ($55) + (-$50),

20

(3)

All budgetary data for the analysis are from the Census of Governments, State Government
Finances, various years.

25

where:
AP = State project aid per resident;21
rs =

State revenues per resident defined as all state taxes plus charges and
fees plus miscellaneous revenues plus profits from state-run utilities
plus profits from state liquor stores plus net proceeds from lottery
sales;

b=

State own expenditures per resident for lower income transfers and
medical assistance defined as total state welfare expenditures (B)
minus federal aid for welfare and Medicaid: b = B - AW, where AW
equals the federal matching rate for welfare and Medicaid spending
times B (AW = mCB), or b = (1 - m)CB;

gs =

State expenditures per resident for current state operations plus
intergovernmental assistance paid to local governments plus interest
and principal paid on state debt plus state own contributions to state
public employee retirement, workers’ compensation, and
unemployment trust funds;

k=

Total capital outlays per resident;

Δc =

Changes in “rainy day” fund cash and security holdings per resident,
other than in insurance trust funds, as contributions (Δc > 0) or
withdrawals (Δc < 0);

Δd =

Changes in the cash value of short- and long-term debt outstanding
per resident, as new borrowing (Δd > 0) or debt retirement (Δd < 0);
and,

Δf /

Changes in cash contributions per resident to insurance trust funds
measured as Δf / SURPLUS - Δc + Δd, and reflecting contributions
to (Δf > 0) or withdrawals from (Δf < 0) insurance trust funds not
including state own contributions to these funds.

Project aid (AP) enters the budget identify directly, while welfare aid (AW) is a per dollar subsidy
paid at the federal matching rate (m) times the chosen level of state spending for lower income

21

All federal programs included in AP for the aggregate analysis of aid are included here for our
state analysis as well; see fn. 14.

26

families (B). The net cost of welfare spending – b = (1 - m)CB = B - AW – is what must be paid
from the state’s own revenues.
The LHS of Eq. (3) reports all revenues received by the state less all spending by the state.
The difference defines the cash flow surplus ( SURPLUS > 0) or deficit (SURPLUS < 0) in each
fiscal year. Over our sample period, the average SURPLUS indicates a small average deficit of (-)
$24 per resident, but the standard deviation of SURPLUS is $263 reflecting the cyclical sensitivity
of state fiscal fortunes over our sample period.22 The RHS of Eq. (3) shows where the dollars go
when there is a positive cash flow, or where the dollars come from when there is a negative cash
flow. When there is a positive surplus, extra funds can be saved (Δc > 0), used to repay outstanding
short- and long-term debt (Δd < 0) or be put into insurance trust funds (Δf > 0). When there is a
deficit then savings must be reduced (Δc < 0 or Δf < 0) or short- or long-term government debt must
be increased (Δd > 0).
To understand how states allocate an extra dollar of project aid or welfare aid across rs, b,
gs, k, Δc, Δd, and Δf, we specify and estimate a behavioral budget model of state finances, specified
generally as:
(rs, b, gs, k, Δc, Δd, Δf) = f(AP,1 - m; I, é; c-1; X) + (vt + vs + vst),

(4)

where each of the state fiscal choices is determined by a common set of federal aid policies (AP, (1m)), the state’s economic environment (mean household income, I, and unanticipated shocks to the
state’s unemployment rate, é),23 the state’s lagged rainy day fund (c-1), and a set (X) of political,
22

SURPLUS reported here is the negative of what is reported as the Total Deficit in Figure 1, and
is the annual average over the path of the dark line beyond 1979. The cyclicality of aggregate state deficits
and surpluses is evident in Figure 1.
23

Measured as the residual of a regression of the state’s current level of unemployment on lags of
three years of the state unemployment rate. A separate regression is run for each state.

27

institutional, economic, and natural disaster controls. The specification treats all fiscal outcomes
as jointly determined in response to exogenous changes in the national policy and the state’s
economic and political environments. Eq. (4) is estimated as a linear expenditure system for all
fiscal variables and imposes an adding-up constraint on the impact of each exogenous variable on
fiscal outcomes.
Included in X are: (i) political controls: the state’s vote for the Republican candidate in the
last presidential election, the Berry et al. (2010) measure of conservative-liberal preferences of state
residents, and whether the budget is set in the year preceding the election of a governor; (ii) an
institutional control: a requirement for contributions to a state rainy day fund; (iii) a control for
natural disasters: the total economic damages from disasters lagged one year, and (iv) additional
economic controls: a state-specific consumer price index, national oil price shocks interacted with
whether the state is an energy- producing or energy-consuming state, and unexpected shocks to
federal defense spending within the state.
The estimated budget equations also control for unmeasured shocks as year fixed effects (vt)
for common shocks to all states a given year (e.g., interest rate changes, federal tax reforms), state
fixed effects (vs) for stable differences across states that may affect state choices (e.g., budget rules),
and unmeasured within year and state (vst) effects where vst is assumed to follow an AR(1) process
unique to each state. No spatial autocorrelation is assumed. Estimation is by generalized least
squares.
Key to identifying the effects of federal intergovernmental transfers on state fiscal choices
is the assumption that those transfers as measured here are uncorrelated with the unmeasured (vst)
determinants of state revenues, spending, and savings decisions. We seek to establish the

28

appropriateness of this assumption by two specification strategies.24 First, aid may be correlated
with economic or political events which also impact fiscal outcomes. We control for this possibility
of omitted variable bias by including year and state fixed effects as well as our control variables (X)
that vary over state and years. Second, care is taken to ensure that federal aid is specified to include
only transfers that are exogenous to each state’s current period budget. Project aid (AP) is specified
as only those programs whose funding is, by design or administration, independent of current-period
state spending.25 Welfare aid (AW) is not included directly in the budget equations as that assistance
is determined in part by the state’s own spending on transfers to lower-income households – that is,
AW = mCB. Shocks to B will be correlated with AW, biasing the estimate of AW’s impact on state
fiscal outcomes. To remove this source of endogeneity, we estimate the effect not of AW but of (1 m) on fiscal outcomes, where (1 - m) is exogenous to current state budget choices and can be

24

Efforts to address the possible endogeneity of federal aid through instrumental variable estimation
proved unsuccessful. We followed the approach of Knight (2002), using changes in congressional committee
membership for the state’s representatives, tenure of the state’s congressional delegation, and state party
representation relative to party majority in each chamber. In addition, we added changes in the governor’s
party relative to the state’s majority congressional party and whether the state was a potential “swing state”
based upon the closeness of the last presidential election. The resulting first stage F statistics never exceeded
4.0 for our sample period. Weak instruments may worsen the bias of the estimates. We therefore prefer the
specification strategy outlined here.
Shoag (2010) has developed an alternative approach to measuring the impact of “outside” funds on
state budgets using “unexpected pension” returns from favorable or unfavorable swings in national interest
rates. Those returns are viewed as exogenous and are shown to have budgetary impacts on state spending
comparable in magnitude to what we estimate in Table 6. In our work and Shoag’s, outside money – whether
exogenous federal aid or pension fund windfalls – leads to an approximate $.30 increase in state spending.
25

See fn. 13 for the full list of the programs that are included in AP. Program details supporting the
exogeneity assumption for project aid can be found in Craig and Inman (1982) for education, Knight (2002)
and U.S. Department of Transportation (2007, p. 19) for transportation, Gramlich (1978) for jobs and training
programs, Reischauer (1975) for general revenue-sharing, Chernick (1998) for welfare’s TANF support, and
Singhal (2008) for Tobacco Settlement payments.

29

interpreted as the “net price” of each dollar of state spending on welfare services.26
B. Results: Table 6 summarizes our results for the impact of the fiscal policy and economic
variables on each of the seven budgetary aggregates. Estimates for Δf are obtained from the budget
identity’s adding-up constraint.

Estimates for the effects of a $1 increase in the state’s mean

household income (I) show state government activities to be normal goods, even own welfare
spending (b). From the first row of Table 6, state revenues (rs) rise by $.024/person, government
current spending (gs) by $.012/person, welfare spending (b) by $.002/person, and capital spending
(k) by $.001/person. This leaves a positive cash flow from the marginal increase in state revenues
of $.009/person ( = $.024 - $.012 - $.002 - $.001), which is then allocated as $.006/person to rainy
day savings (Δc) and $.004/person to insurance trust fund savings (Δf). There is also a $.001/person
increase in state debt (Δd), presumably to finance the $.001/person increase in capital spending.
Increases in state project aid (AP) have no significant effect on state revenues (rs) or welfare
spending (b), but AP does increase spending on current state operations and transfers to local
governments (gs) and capital outlays (k); see the second row of Table 6. Total state spending rises
by $.51 for each dollar increase in AP, with $.38 allocated to current account spending and $.13 to
capital outlays.27 The $.51 increase in total spending following the government’s receipt of one

26

The rate m is known officially as the Federal Medical Assistance Percentage and is set each year
based upon the state’s three-year average income relative to the national average income beginning five years
before the rate applies – e.g., the matching rate that applies in 2012 is based on incomes for the years 2007
to 2009. Poorer states have higher rates than richer states. There have been two important “policy moments”
that led to significant changes in the rate – FY 2004 following the Jobs and Growth Tax Relief Reconciliation
Act of 2003 and FY2009 and FY2010 following ARRA. Finally, as controls for possibly omitted influence
of swings in the state economy on the value of m, we also include in all regressions state income per capital
(I) and the unexpected changes in the state unemployment rate (é).
27

We tested for possible reallocations of AP in recession years and found no significant differences,
except for a $.02 reallocation of spending from current operations (gs) into capital outlays (k). Overall
spending from an additional dollar of AP remained constant at $.51 with the remaining $.49 saved in rainy

30

more dollar of AP should be contrasted with the $.02 increase in total spending after households
receive one more dollar of private income. The spending effect confirms once again the presence
of a flypaper effect – “money sticks where it hits” – and stresses the need to evaluate the impact of
intergovernmental transfers separately from transfers to households.28
The remaining $.49 of AP goes to net savings and equals an increase of $.33 in the state’s
rainy day fund (Δc) and $.19 in the state’s insurance trust fund accounts (Δf), offset by a $.03
increase in state debt (Δd), again used to finance, in part, state capital outlays. Efforts by the federal
government to check the savings motive with “maintenance of effort” provisions are very hard to
enforce for all but new programs for new state services.29 We can only speculate here for reasons
of this strong savings effect of AP funding, but a precautionary motive may be decisive. All of the
AP programs, except for Tobacco Settlement funding, are discretionary, requiring congressional
renewal and often bureaucratic acceptance of a state application. Governors may be reluctant to
create new programs or expand agencies on the unsecured promise of continued federal funding.
Project aid that is saved is then spent in subsequent years as it is withdrawn from the state’s

day and trust fund accounts.
28

Leduc and Wilson (2013) in their recent work on the allocation of ARRA’s transportation aid seek
to unravel the “black box” of the flypaper effect. They find that a dollar of ARRA transportation assistance
led to a $.72 increase in state highway spending and that state politics was the key to understanding this
strong spending effect. Spending for highway projects was highly correlated with contributions by the
construction industry to the controlling political party of the state.
29

Maintenance of effort requirements for existing programs are very easy to subvert, since any dollar
being spent can be called a “new dollar” against the unverifiable alternative of a “planned” spending cut. This
was a particular problem for ARRA. The bulk of ARRA assistance for states was for additional funds for
existing state programs: welfare and Medicaid, transportation infrastructure, and schools. Only truly new
programs clearly reveal new dollars. While new programs for state governments were included in the ARRA
stimulus package, the aggregate spending on these programs was very small compared to the total of ARRA
assistance. Given the need for quick passage of policies, there was simply not enough time to design large
new programs; see Grunwald (2012, Chapter 3).

31

rainy day fund (c), but the rate of withdrawal is very slow and the added spending effects in the near
term are slight. A $1 increase in the lagged value of the rainy day fund (c-1) encourages the state
to withdraw only $.107 from that account each year; Table 6, col. (5). That $.107 is then allocated
as $.006 to own welfare spending (b), $.059 to current accounts spending (gs), and $.01 to capital
outlays (k). Total spending therefore rises by $.075. The remaining $.036 is used to pay down debt
outstanding. From these estimates, the final spending effects of a $1 increase in AP will be $.506
in the year aid is received and $.02 in each year thereafter.30
Increases in welfare aid (AW) are made by increasing the federal matching rate (m) for
income transfers and services for lower income families. The increase in m lowers the net price (1 m) for redistributive services leading the state to increase B, total assistance to poor households.
The net cost to the state’s taxpayers will be own spending, defined as b = (1 - m)CB. The elasticities
of b and B with respect to (1 - m) can be specified as: gb, (1-m) = 1 + gB,(1 - m). Based upon the estimates
in Table 6, elasticities evaluated at the sample means are gb, (1-m) = .57 and gB, (1-m) = -. 43.
Increasing the federal matching rate lowers the net price for welfare spending (1 - m),
leading to an increase in transfers paid to poor households (B), but to a fall in the state’s own welfare
spending (b). This was the policy adopted in ARRA’s decision to increase m by .10. From Table
6, a .10 increase in m lowers the average net price (1 - m) from .4 to .3, which in turn leads to a fall
in own welfare spending (b) of -$40.59/person ( = -.10 x 405.9; Table 6, col. (2)). Because of the

30

The year after the receipt of aid, there is a $.326 increase in cash savings. This $.326 increase is
withdrawn at the rate of -.107 per dollar or by -$.035 (=-.107C.326) in the next fiscal year. This $.035
withdrawal is then allocated as $.025 to increased spending and $.01 to paying down of debt. This leaves
$.291 ( = .326 - .035) in the cash account, which allows for another withdrawal of -$.031 (= -.107C.291)
allocated as $.022 to spending in the third year after the receipt of aid. The sequence is repeated again in year
four and thereafter. The final equilibrium increase in aggregate state spending will be about $.75 per dollar
of AP assistance, with $.506 occurring in the year the aid is received.

32

lower net price for welfare services, there is an increase in total transfers to poor households of
$95/person ( = ΔB), however. Finally, the .10 ULVH in the matching rate implies an increase for
federal government spending on welfare aid of $135.50/person ( = ΔAW).31
The expansion of welfare matching aid has important implications for the other portions of
the state budget too. First, government spending on current services (gs) fall by $45.70/person (
= -.10 x 457; Table 6, col. (3)) and capital outlays (k) are reduced by $7.57 ( = -.10 x 75.66; Table
6, col. (4)). Total spending, gs + k, therefore declines by $53.30/person. When joined with the
$40.59 fall in own welfare spending the state now has $$93.86 in additional dollars. What does it
do with the money? The state returns $52.58 immediately as a tax cut (= - .10 x 525.8; Table 6, col.
(1)), and then saves the remaining $41.28 as a small $.70 increase in the rainy day fund (= - .10 x 7.01; Table 6, col. (5)), a $15.29 paying down of state debts (= -.10 x 152.9; Table 6, col. (6)), and
a $25.30 increase in insurance trust fund savings (= -.10 x - 253).32
In the end, aggregate state spending for poor families rises by $95/person or approximately
$790 per eligible recipient, assuming the national poverty rate is 12 percent.

This increase in

poverty spending costs the federal government $135/person in additional federal welfare aid. After
paying transfers to poor families, the remaining $40 of federal welfare aid plus the $53 in savings
31

Own welfare spending is defined as b = (1-m)CB, where B is transfers to poor households. The
welfare budget before the increase in the state matching rate has b = $276 implying B = $690/person from
B = b/(1 - m) with b (= $276) and m (= .6) evaluated at sample means. After m is increased to .7, b = $276 $40.59 = $235.41. Now B = (b/(1 - m) = $785 evaluated at m = .7 and b = $235. The implied increase in
total lower-income transfers per person is therefore ΔB = $785 - $690 = $95/person. The implied increase
in total federal aid is $135.50/person = (m = .7)C(B = $785) - (m = .6)C(B = $690) = ΔAW.
32

These reduced form results for the impact of (1 - m) on state budgets, including all income effects
from the reduction in the cost of welfare spending, imply that welfare spending and the provision of
government spending are “political substitutes” while welfare spending and general tax relief for current and
future taxpayers are “political complements.” While the linear expenditure system requires all goods to be
economic substitutes (absent income effects), a strong income effect for taxpayer incomes arising from the
lower price of welfare services accounts for the strong positive impact of the fall in (1 - m) on tax relief.

33

from reduced government spending are allocated as $53 of tax relief to the middle class and as $40
for increased savings and debt repayment.
C. Simulated Macro Multipliers: The estimates above of state budgetary behavior provide
important insight into how AP and AW impact the private economy, and in particular, why welfare
aid seems so much more effective than project aid as a stimulus for the private economy. Each form
of assistance has four impacts on state budgetary behaviors: on state revenues (Δrs), on transfers to
lower income households (ΔB), on government purchases (ΔG = Δgs + Δk), and on changes in
publicly held wealth (ΔW = Δc - Δd + Δf). Each budgetary impact in turn has a potential multiplier
effect on the private economy. Tables 7 and 8 combine our estimates of the one year budgetary
impacts of AP and AW assistance with separate, one year (four quarter) multiplier estimates for the
macroeconomic impacts of each budgetary variable on private economic activity. When combined,
we can specify the implied one year AP and AW multipliers for comparison to the econometrically
estimated four quarter multipliers reported in Table 4; see Tables 7 and 8.
For our estimate of the one year multiplier for changes in state revenues, we use dGDP/drs
= -3.19, the four quarter federal tax multiplier from Table 4. This seems reasonable as many state
tax codes mimic that of the federal code. For our estimate of the one year multiplier for changes in
state spending on goods and services, we use dGDP/dG = .88, the federal spending multiplier after
four quarters; see Table 4. This estimate is comparable in magnitude to the state multiplier estimates
in Clemens and Miran (2012).
We approximate the one year multiplier for increases in state transfer spending as dGDP/dB
= 1.59. dGDP/dB cannot be specified directly from an estimated tax multiplier. State spending for
lower income households includes not just transfer income but also transfers-in-kind, most

34

importantly, subsidized health care through Medicaid. One estimate for the impact of Medicaid
spending on household consumption follows from the analysis of the Oregon Medicaid program.
In this program, the average new enrollee received $788/person in additional health care spending
and, as a result, saved $390/person in own health care spending; see Finkelstein et al. (2012, Tables
V and VII). This result suggests that about half of every dollar of Medicaid spending becomes new
income for Medicaid recipients. If so, then the multiplier for dGDP/dB can be approximated as half
the multiplier for dGDP/drs or, after a sign change for receipt of transfer income, as 1.59.
Finally we approximate the macroeconomic multiplier for increases in household public
savings wealth, dGDP/dW, as the real interest rate (.03) times the (absolute) value of the revenue
multiplier, or as dGDP/dW = .03C3.189 = .10.
Table 7 combines our estimates of the budgetary impacts of AP assistance with the estimates
of the one year multipliers for each impact to approximate a reduced form multiplier for federal
project aid. A $1 increase in AP has zero impact on state revenues (= Δrs), increases transfers to
poor households by $.02 ( = ΔB), increases state spending by $.50 (= ΔG), and increases public
savings by $.48 (= ΔW). Multiplying each budgetary impact by its one year multiplier, implies an
aggregate multiplier for AP aid of .52; see Table 7.
Table 8 combines our estimates for the budgetary impacts of AW assistance with their
separate one year multipliers to approximate an implied multiplier for welfare aid, where the source
of the additional welfare aid is an increase in the federal government’s matching rate for state
welfare spending. Table 8 assumes the matching rate is increased by .10. As estimated in section
B above, this increase in the matching rate will lead to a $53/person fall in state revenues (= Δrs),
a $95/person increase in transfers to poor households (= ΔB), a $53/person fall in state purchases

35

(= ΔG), and a $41/person increase in government savings (= ΔW). All of these changes imply a
$135/person increase in total federal welfare aid (ΔAW). The implied impact of $1 more of AW
would then be a $.39 fall in state revenues, a $.70 increase in state welfare spending, a $.39 fall in
government purchases, and a $.30 increase in public savings; see Table 8. Multiplying each
budgetary impact by its one year multiplier, implies an aggregate multiplier for AW aid of 2.04.
D. Summary: The simulated multipliers for AP and AW implied by our micro-econometric
estimates of state budgetary policies are comparable in magnitude to those estimated from our
SVAR macro-econometric estimates of federal aid policies, and strikingly close to those for AW
assistance. Like the direct macro-econometric estimates, the simulated multipliers show AW to be
significantly more stimulative than AP aid.
Our micro-econometric analysis of state budgets helps us to understand why. States allocate
one dollar of unconstrained AP aid as $.51 to government spending, which has a relatively modest
stimulus impact, and $.49 to government savings. The savings motive is likely to be strongest for
temporary AP aid. Maintenance of effort provisions to check savings behaviors are very difficult
to enforce. The saved resources are only slowly “leaked” back into the spending budget at a rate
of $.03 per year. Resources that are saved are assumed to have a wealth effect, but that multiplier
is very modest. AP aid provides no taxpayer relief and no additional resources for transfer spending.
As a rough guide, AP aid to the SL sector can be expected to have approximately half the impact
on the aggregate economy as federal government direct purchases.
In contrast, AW aid when paid as a matching grant for increased state welfare spending has
a strong impact on reallocating state resources away from government purchases and towards tax
relief for households and firms and increased transfers to, and health care services for, lower income

36

families. A dollar of AW aid induces $.39 in tax relief for middle class households and businesses
and $.70 additional spending for lower income households. Both those fiscal changes have strong
stimulative impacts on the private economy. The “extra” $.09 comes from the cut in state spending
of $.39 allocated in part to a $.30 increase in state savings. In the end, we lose the stimulative
impact of state spending but it is more than offset by the advantages of returning dollars directly to
households, particularly credit-constrained lower income families. For these reasons, matching AW
assistance is the most effective SL policy for stimulating the private economy.

V. Federal Aid as a Fiscal Stimulus: What Works?
Table 9 presents the results of a macro-econometric simulation based upon our five variable
SVAR to illustrate the relative effectiveness of the four alternative fiscal policies considered here:
central government tax cuts (ΔR) and direct government purchases (ΔG), increases in SL project aid
(ΔAP), and increases in SL welfare aid (ΔAW). To illustrate the relative impact of the four policies,
we use the actual allocations implemented by ARRA in the year following the passage of the act.
For purposes of our simulations, we have re-estimated the five variable SVAR of Eq. (3) for the preARRA sample period 1960:1 to 2009:1.

Based on these estimates, we then simulate the

performance of the economy without, and then with, ARRA policy innovations.33 The analysis here

33

That ARRA qualifies as a policy shock is clear from its legislative history; see Boone, Dube, and
Kaplan (2014). The legislation introduced structural policy shocks to federal net revenues, federal purchases,
SL project aid, and SL welfare aid. Simulations for the path of GDP following the fiscal innovations are
calculated in three steps. First, each policy innovation is transformed into a corresponding structural shock
for the five variable specification of Eq. (3) denoted as (vrt, vgt, vapt, vawt), where shocks are the percentage
change from the quarter preceding the innovation. Second, the estimated SVAR as specified in the Technical
Appendix is used to provide vectors of the seasonally adjusted reduced form fiscal shocks (uCt) for each year
(t). Third, the reduced form fiscal shocks and the originally estimated VAR specified by Eq. (2) with the
control variable “deep recession” set equal to 1 are used to provide a projected path for GDP following each
fiscal innovation.

37

is offered only to illustrate the relative effectiveness of the alternative policies and should not be
taken as an evaluation of ARRA per se.34
For policy innovations in federal net revenues we use the total tax savings and direct
transfers to households and firms that occurred in the first quarter after the passage of ARRA: ΔR
= $45.2 billion in 2009:2. For government purchases, we assign the innovation to the quarter when
actual purchases are first observed, with the level of the innovation equal to purchases in that
quarter: ΔG = $11.83 billion in 2010:1. Innovations in AP include additional funding for three
existing federal aid programs: aid to K-12 education (called “stability” aid), aid for infrastructure
spending for roads and bridges, and aid for construction of public housing. Education assistance was
paid immediately in 2009:2 and this policy innovation was assigned the actual allocation in that
period: ΔAP = $8.686 billion.

Because of a required application review, funding for the

infrastructure projects and public housing was not observed until 2010:1 but then equaled ΔAP =
$18.753 billion. Finally, the innovation for welfare aid included added support for SL spending for
family services, child support, low-income housing allowances, and most importantly Medicaid.
This aid was first paid in 2009:2 at a level of ΔAW = $37.032 billion.35
The predicted path of GDP without policy innovations is provided as a benchmark; Table
9, col. (1). Predictions for the incremental effects of individual policies on GDP are computed as

34

As is clear from estimates for our no-policy benchmark, our simulated economy is predicted to
recover much more quickly than has the actual economy. Most of the adverse shocks in our estimated
economy are from real side economic declines – for example, rising oil prices – and not like our recent
economic decline due to an adverse shock to the financial sector. Economies recover much more slowly from
financial shocks; see Reinhardt and Rogoff (2009).
35

The timing and size of the ARRA policy innovations is for the date funds are first allocated; see
Romer and Romer (2010). Estimates for ARRA’s revenue innovation (ΔR) are from:
www.recovery.gov/News/featured/pages/TaxReliefDec2010.aspx.

38

the difference between the predicted path of GDP with and without the innovation; Table 9, cols.
(2)-(5). The predicted path of GDP following the introduction of all four stimulus policies together
is shown in Table 9, col. (6). The most effective of the individual policies is direct tax relief (ΔR).
New welfare aid (ΔAW) is also an effective stimulus to income growth. The least effective of the
four policies as an economic stimulus are increases in federal government direct purchases (ΔG) and
increases in federal project aid (ΔAP).36 The reason for these differential impacts is not the level
of spending on the individual policies but rather the significantly higher estimated multipliers for
tax reductions and welfare spending increases. The combined impact of all four policy innovations
working in concert is reported in Table 9, col. (6). As a policy package the estimated maximal
impact is $823/person occurring in 2009:Q4. The implied increase in the economy’s growth is 1.8
percent over the economy’s no-policy benchmark.
The performance of the original policy package can be improved by reallocating all of
stimulus funding to its two most effective policies, tax cuts and increased matching welfare aid. For
example, all of the increase in federal purchases (ΔG) can be reallocated to tax cuts, increasing the
innovation in ΔR to $57.03 billion in 2009:2. All of new project aid spending (ΔAP) can be
reallocated to the innovation in welfare aid raising ΔAW to $64.473 billion, also in 2009:2. For
these targeted policies, peak GDP growth again occurs in 2009:4, but now equals $1094/person and
continues to have a significant impact on GDP growth well into 2012. With this more targeted
stimulus package, the simulated increase in the economy’s growth rate is 2.6 percent over the nopolicy benchmark. This is an approximate 30 percent improvement in GDP growth over the original
36

A point anticipated by Alice Rivlin’s critique of the ARRA in a speech given at the Brookings
Institution when ARRA was first proposed: “A long-term investment program should not be put together
hastily and lumped in with the anti-recession program. . . . (It) will not create many jobs right away.” Quoted
in Suskind (2011, p. 162).

39

mix of policies.
Finally, from the simulated growth in GDP and Okun’s Law, we can estimate the likely
increase in national employment arising from the original policy package. Okun’s Law describes
the relationship between changes in the growth rate of GDP and changes in the rate of employment.
Ball, Leigh, and Loungani (2013) have estimated this relationship for the US economy and find that
a 1% increase GDP growth implies a ½ percent increase in the rate of employment. The
employment level of the US economy at the time of the introduction of proposed policies (January,
2009) was 142 million workers. The original policy would imply a 1.8 percent increase in GDP
after one year or, by Okun’s Law, a 9/10's of 1 percent increase in employment. That would be 1.3
million new jobs. The more targeted stimulus policy using only tax cuts and welfare aid implies a
2.6 percent rate of income growth after one year, and by Okun’s Law, a 1.3 percent increase in
employment. This would be an increase of 1.85 million jobs. And the cost per job? The total cost
of the original stimulus over the year 2009:1 to 2010:1 for all four policies was $112.82 billion.
Thus the cost per job for the original ARRA policies is $86,700 per job. For the more “efficient”
targeted policy package, the cost falls to $61,000 per job.

VI. Conclusion: What Role for States?
The received wisdom, at least since Musgrave (1959) and Oates (1972), is that state
governments have little role to play in the design and implementation of macroeconomic fiscal
policy. The argument comes from either of two assumptions. First, as small open economies, state
governments cannot impact their own economies through the use of expansionary fiscal policies.
The summary in Section II of our work in Carlino and Inman (2013) rejects this assumption.

40

Increases in a state’s own deficits can stimulate state job growth. Or second, if there are job gains
for any one state, there may also be significant job spillovers for their neighboring states. Our work
in Carlino and Inman (2013), and the work of others studying policy interdependencies among
central European economies, finds strong support for the presence of spillovers. If so, states may
underprovide the socially efficient level of deficit policies, hoping their neighbors will incur the
costs of job creation. In this case, central government fiscal policies will be needed to internalize
the relevant externalities.
That said, states may still be needed. In mature economic unions, states are the main
providers of most government goods and services (defense is the exception) and often play a central
role in the financing and provision of transfers and services to lower income households. If so, then
for the central government to increase aggregate government purchases or to transfer income to
lower income households it must “use” the states. There remains a role for states, but now as the
economic “agents” of the central government. The central government may “command” state fiscal
policies, but more often than not (or because US law does not allow unfunded mandates) the central
government must “control” state behavior through the use of intergovernmental transfers. In
sections III and IV we study the ability of such transfers to impact state fiscal policies and to
ultimately stimulate income and job creation in the national economy. We find the most effective
transfer policies are incentive based and use matching aid to encourage general state tax relief and
income and service assistance for lower income households.
Why then did ARRA use relatively inefficient project aid? Boone, Dube, and Kaplan (2014)
suggest that project aid was the “political” price required for the timely passage of ARRA by a
Congress whose members’ political futures are closely tied to the fiscal needs of their state political

41

allies. As a result, the poor urban states got additional welfare aid, the richer and more rural states
got additional infrastructure aid, and everyone got more unconstrained assistance for public
education; see Inman (2010).

Here then, may be the most important role for states in

macroeconomic policy-making in economic unions: Not just as agents for implementing approved
policies, but also as principals who collectively design these policies.

42

REFERENCES
Agarwal, S., C. Liu, and N. Souleles (2007), “The Reaction of Consumer Spending and Debt to Tax
Rebates – Evidence from Consumer Credit Data,” Journal of Political Economy, Vol. 115
(December), 986-1019.
Arellano, M. and S. Bond (1991), “Some Tests of Specification for Panel Data: Monte Carlo
Evidence and an Application to Employment Equations,” The Review of Economic Studies, Vol. 58
(April), 277-297.
Auerbach, A. (2003), “Fiscal Policy, Past and Present,” Brookings Papers on Economic Activity,
No. 1 , 75-122.
Auerbach, A. and Y. Gorodnichenko (2013), “Output Spillovers from Fiscal Policy,” American
Economic Review, Vol. 103 (May), 141-146.
Ball, L., D. Leigh, and P. Loungani (2013), “Okun’s Law at Fifty?” NBER Working Paper No.
18668.
Barro, R. (1974), “Are Government Bonds New Wealth?” Journal of Political Economy, Vol. 82
(December), 1095-1117.
Barro, R. and C. Redlick (2011), “Macroeconomic Effects of Government Purchases and Taxes,”
Quarterly Journal of Economics, Vol. 126 (February), 51-102.
Beetsma, R. and M. Giuliodori (2011), “The Effects of Government Purchase Shocks: Review and
Estimates for the EU,” Economic Journal, Vol. 121 (February), F4-F32.
Berry, W., R. Fording, E. Ringquist, R. Hanson, and C. Klarner (2010), “Measuring Citizen and
Government Ideology in the US States: A Re-appraisal,” State Politics and Policy Quarterly, Vol.
10 (Summer), 117-135.
Blanchard, O. and R. Perotti (2002), “An Empirical Characterization of the Dynamic Effects of
Changes in Government Spending and Taxes on Output,” Quarterly Journal of Economics, Vol.
117 (November), 1329-1368.
Boadway, R. and A. Shah (2009), Fiscal Federalism: Principles and Practice in Multiorder
Governance, Cambridge University Press: New York.
Boone, C., A. Dube, and E. Kaplan (2014), “The Political Economy of Discretionary Spending:
Evidence from the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act,” Brookings Papers on Economic
Activity, Spring, 375-428.

R-1

Bronars, Stephen and Dennis Jansen (1987), “The Geographic Distribution of Unemployment Rates
in the United States: A Spatial-Time Series Analysis,” Journal of Econometrics, Vol. 36
(November), 252-279.
Carlino, G. and R. P. Inman (2013), “Local Deficits and Local Jobs: Can US States Stabilize Their
Own Economies?” Journal of Monetary Economics, Vol. 60 (July), 517-530.
Carlino, G. and R. P. Inman (2014), “A Narrative Analysis of Post World War II Changes in
Federal Aid,” Federal Reserve Bank of Philadelphia, Research Paper No. 12-23/R.
Caselli, Francesco, Gerardo Esquivel, and Fernando Lefort (1996), “Reopening the Convergence
Debate: A New Look at Cross-Country Growth Empirics,” Journal of Economic Growth, Vol. 1
(September), 363-389.
Clemens, J. and S. Miran (2012), “Fiscal Policy Multipliers on Subnational Government Spending,”
American Economic Journal: Economic Policy, Vol. 4 (May), 46-68.
Chernick, H. (1998), “Fiscal Effects of Block Grants for the Needy: An Interpretation of the
Evidence,” International Tax and Public Finance, Vol. 5 (May), 205-233.
Chodorow-Reich, G., L. Feiveson, A. Liscow, and W. Woolston (2012), “Does State Fiscal Relief
During Recessions Increase Employment? Evidence from the American Recovery and
Reinvestment Act,” American Economic Journal: Economic Policy, Vol. 4 (August), 118-145.
Congressional Budget Office (CBO) (2010), “Estimated Impact of the American Recovery and
Reinvestment Act on Employment and Economic Output from January 2010 Through March 2010,”
May, 2010, Washington, DC.
Conley, T. and B. Dupor (2013), “The American Recovery and Reinvestment Act: Solely a
Government Jobs Program? Journal of Monetary Economics, Vol. 60 (July), 535-549.
Craig, S. and R. P. Inman (1982). “Federal Aid and Public Education: An Empirical Look and the
New Fiscal Federalism,” Review of Economics and Statistics, Vol. 64 (November), 541-552.
Crone, Theodore (2004), “An Alternative Definition of Economic Regions in the United States
Based on Similarities in State Business Cycles,” Review of Economics and Statistics, Vol. 87
(August), 617-626.
Feyrer, J. and B. Sacerdote (2011), “Did the Stimulus Stimulate? Real Time Estimates of the
Effects of the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act,” NBER Working Paper No. 16759.
Finkelstein, Amy, et al. (2012), “The Oregon Health Insurance Experiment: Evidence from the First
Year,” Quarterly Journal of Economics, Vol. 127 (August), 1057-1106.

R-2

Follette, G. and B. Lutz (2010), “Fiscal Policy in the United States: Automatic Stabilizers,
Discretionary Fiscal Policy Actions, and the Economy,” Finance and Economics Discussion Series,
Federal Reserve Board, 2010-43.
Gramlich, E. (1978), “State and Local Budgets the Day After It Rained: Why Is the Surplus So
High?” Brookings Papers on Economic Activity, No. 1, 191-216.
Gramlich, E. (1979), “Stimulating the Macro Economy Through State and Local Governments,”
American Economic Review, Vol. 69 (May), 180-185.
Grunwald, M. (2012), The New, New Deal, Simon and Schuster: New York, NY.
Hall, Robert and Paul Milgrom (2008), “The Limited Influence of Unemployment on the Wage
Bargain,” American Economic Review, Vol. 98 (September), 1653-1674.
Hebous, S. and T. Zimmermann (2013), “Estimating the Effects of Coordinated Fiscal Actions in
Euro Zone,” European Economic Review, Vol. 58 (February), 110-121.
Heller, W. W. (1966), New Dimensions in Political Economy, Harvard University Press: Cambridge,
MA.
Holtz-Eakin, Douglas, Whitney Newey, and Harvey Rosen (1988), “Estimating Vector
Autoregressions with Panel Data,” Econometrica, Vol. 56 (November), 1371-1395.
Im, K. S., M. H. Pesaran, and Y. Shin (2003), “Testing for Unit Roots in Heterogeneous Panels,”
Journal of Econometrics, Vol 115 (July), 53-74.
Inman, R. (2008), “The Flypaper Effect,” NBER Working Paper 14579.
Inman, R. (2010), “States in Fiscal Distress,” Regional Economic Development, Federal Reserve
Bank of St. Louis, Vol. 6 (1), 65-80. and as NBER Working Paper No. 16086.
Keith, R. and A. Schick (2004), “Introduction to the Federal Budget Process,” Congressional
Research Service, 98-721 GOV (updated, December 28, 2004).
Knight, B. (2002), “Endogenous Federal Grants and Crowd-Out of State Government Spending:
Theory and Evidence from the Federal Highway Aid Program,” American Economic Review, Vol.
92 (March), 71-92.
Ladd, H. (1993), “State Responses to the TRA86 Revenue Windfalls: A New Test of the Flypaper
Effect,” Journal of Policy Analysis and Management, Vol. 12 (Winter), 82-103.

R-3

Leduc, S. and D. Wilson (2013), “Are State Governments Roadblocks to Federal Stimulus?
Evidence from Highway Grants in the 2009 Recovery Act,” Federal Reserve Bank of San Francisco,
WP 2013-16.
Mertens, K. and M. O. Ravn (2014),”A Reconciliation of SVAR and Narrative Estimates of Tax
Multipliers,” Journal of Monetary Economics, Vol. 68 (December), S1-S19.
Musgrave, Richard (1959), The Theory of Public Finance, McGraw-Hill Book Company: New
York.
Oates, Wallace (1972), Fiscal Federalism, Harcourt, Brace, Jovanovich: New York.
Ramey, V. (2011), “Can Government Purchases Stimulate the Economy?” Journal of Economic
Literature, Vol. 49 (September), 673-685.
Reinhardt, C. and K. Rogoff (2009), “The Aftermath of Financial Crises,” NBER Working Paper
No. 14656.
Reischauer, R. (1975), “General Revenue Sharing: The Program’s Incentives,” in W. Oates (ed.),
Financing the New Federalism: Revenue Sharing, Conditional Grants, and Taxation, Baltimore:
Johns Hopkins University Press.
Romer, C. And J. Bernstein (2009), “The Job Impact of the American Recovery and Reinvestment
Plan,” Council of Economic Advisors, January 9, 2009.
Romer, C. and D. Romer (2010), “The Macroeconomic Effects of Tax Changes: Estimates Based
on a New Measure of Fiscal Shocks,” American Economic Review, Vol. 100 (June), 763-801.
Rossi, B. and S. Zubairy (2011), “What Is the Importance of Monetary and Fiscal Shocks in
Explaining US Macroeconomic Fluctuations?” Duke University, Department of Economics.
Singhal, M. (2008), “Special Interest Groups and the Allocation of Public Funds,” Journal of Public
Economics, Vol. 92 (April), 548-564.
Shoag, D. (2013), “Using State Pension Shocks to Estimate Fiscal Multipliers since the Great
Depression,” American Economic Review: Papers and Proceedings, Vol. 103 (May), 121-124.
Suskind, R. (2011), Confidence Men: Wall Street, Washington, and the Education of a President:
Harper, New York.
United States Department of Transportation (2007), Financing Federal-Aid Highways, Publication
No. FHWA-PL-07-017, March.

R-4

Wilson, D. (2012), “Fiscal Spending Jobs Multipliers: Evidence from the 2009 American Recovery
and Reinvestment Act,” American Economic Journal: Economic Policy, Vol. 4 (August), 251-282.

R-5

Figure 1: States’ Deficits Over Time*

a) Deficits Per Capita
Dollars
3500
Total Deficit
Own Deficit

3000
2500
2000
1500
1000
500
0
-500
-1000
-1500
1970

1974

1978

1982

1986

1990

1994

1998

2002

2006

2010

2006

2010

b) Deficits’ Share of GDP
Percent
10
Total Deficit/GDP
Own Deficit/GDP

8
6
4
2
0
-2
-4
1970

1974

1978

1982

1986

1990

1994

1998

2002

* Figure 1a plots the paths of total deficits per capita (including federal aid as revenues) and state own deficits per capita (excluding
federal aid as revenues) for the 48 mainland U.S. states. Figure 1b plots the paths of total and state own deficits as a share of GDP. Total
state deficits are represented by solid lines; state own deficits are represented by dashed lines. Positive dollar amounts indicate a
deficit; negative dollar amounts indicate a surplus. Both are measured in 2004 dollars. NBER recession periods are indicated by
shaded bands.

Figure 2: Responses of State Job Growth to an Increase in State Own Deficits*

% Change in Job Growth
3
2
1
0
-1
-2
-3
-4
-5
-6
0

1

2

3

4

5

6

7

8

9

10

11

Years

Source: Carlino and Inman (2013)
* The solid line represents the time path for changes in the rate of state job growth in response to a 1 percent change in the state's own
deficit introduced at the start of year 0. The dashed lines represent the 95 percent confidence band for each year's projected change in
job growth.

Federal Aid, Federal Purchases, and Federal Net Revenue: 1947 - 2010*
(Per Capita, 2005 Dollars)
Figure 3
Total Aid, Welfare Aid, and Project Aid
$/person
2,500

Total Aid (A)
2,000

Welfare Aid (AW)
Project Aid (AP)

1,500

1,000

500

0
1950

1960

1970

1980

1990

2000

2010

* Recession years shown as shaded bands

Figure 4
Federal Purchases and Federal Net Revenue
$/person
6,000

Federal Purchases (G)
5,000

Fed Net Revenues (R)

4,000
3,000
2,000
1,000
0
1950

1960

1970

1980

1990

* Recession years shown as shaded bands

2000

2010

TABLE 1: Economic Regions[

[

ECONOMIC REGIONS

MEMBER STATES

New England

Maine, New Hampshire, Vermont,
Massachusetts, Rhode Island, Connecticut

Mideast

New York, New Jersey, Pennsylvania,
Delaware, Maryland

Southeast

Virginia, North Carolina, South Carolina,
Georgia, Florida, Kentucky, Tennessee,
Alabama, Mississippi, Arkansas

Great Lakes

West Virginia, Michigan, Ohio, Indiana,
Illinois, Wisconsin, Minnesota

Plains

Missouri, Kansas, Nebraska, Iowa

Mountain/Northern Plains

South Dakota, North Dakota, Montana, Idaho

Energy Belt

Louisiana, Wyoming, Utah, Colorado, Texas,
Oklahoma, New Mexico

Far West

Arizona, California, Nevada, Oregon,
Washington

Economic regions are defined as in Crone (2004). Crone’s economic regions differ from
the BEA definitions by moving West Virginia into the Great Lakes region and Louisiana into the
“Energy Belt” region, both from the BEA’s Southeast region. Minnesota is added to the Great
Lakes region from the BEA’s Plains region. South Dakota and North Dakota are moved to a new
Mountain/Northern Plains region from the BEA’s Plains region. Wyoming. Utah, and Colorado are
moved to the “Energy Belt” region from BEA’s Rocky Mountain States region. Finally, Arizona
is moved to the Far West region from the BEA’s Southwest region. The BEA’s Southwest region
is now omitted.

TABLE 2: State Own Deficits, State Jobs, and The Benefits of Cooperation: One Year Impact Effects

REGION

NEW
ENGLAND

MIDEAST

SOUTHEAST

GREAT
LAKES

PLAINS

MOUNTAIN
NORTH PLAINS

ENERGY
BELT

FAR
WEST

LARGEST JOBS
STATE
(ΔDeficit/Own Rev)

Massachusetts

New York

Florida

Illinois

Missouri

Idaho

Texas

California

(.06)

(.07)

(.15)

(.11)

(.14)

(.12)

(.11)

(.10)

LARGE STATE’S
OWN JOBS
(Deficit Cost/Job)

35,253
($72,103)

95,237
($79,063)

81,337
($89.467)

63,294
($78,851)

29,831
($77,934)

6,850
($88,502)

113,563
($85,175)

158,483
($90,956)

JOB SPILLOVERS
TO OTHER STATES
(Deficit Cost/Job)

24,149
($0)

65,237
($0)

55,716
($0)

43,356
($0)

20,434
($0)

4,692
($0)

77,791
($0)

108,561
($0)

REGION’S TOTAL
JOBS
(Deficit Cost/Job)

59,402
($42,791)

160,475
($46,922)

137,053
($53,078)

106,650
($46,796)

50,265
($46,251)

11,542
($52,523)

191,354
($50,549)

267,043
($53,980)

OTHER STATES’
OWN JOBS
(Deficit Cost/Job)

40,086
($76,724)

137,926
($79,299)

242,881
($84,819)

199,416
($79,574)

41,730
($71,759)

13,201
($72,556)

88,759
($81,294)

90.301
($84,234)

JOB SPILLOVERS
TO LARGE STATE
(Deficit Cost/Job)

15,286
($0)

48,756
($0)

46,429
($0)

38,907
($0)

14,936
($0)

3,965
($0)

37,577
($0)

43,836
($0)

REGION’S TOTAL
JOBS
(Deficit Cost/Job)

67,544
($45,534)

232,406
($47,061)

409.254
($47,061)

336,015
($47,225)

70,315
($42,587)

22,245
($43,057)

149,559
($48,245)

152,158
($49,990)

REGIONAL POLICY
JOBS
(Deficit Cost/Job)

126,946
($44,250)

392,881
($47,004)

546,307
($51,025)

442,665
($47,121)

120,580
($44,114)

33,787
($46,293)

340,913
($49,538)

419,201
($52,532)

Source: Carlino and Inman (2013)

TABLE 3: SVAR Estimates: GDP Responses to Fiscal Shocks for Blanchard-Perotti and Aid Specifications†

Specification
Sample Period

BlanchardPerotti
1947:1 to 2010:3
(1)

BlanchardPerotti
1947:1 to 2010:3
(2)

BlanchardPerotti
1960:1 to 2010:3
(3)

BlanchardPerotti
1960:1 to 2010:3
(4)

Aid
Specification
1960:1 to 2010:3
(5)

Aid
Specification
1960:1 to 2010:3
(6)

Aid
Specification
1960:1 to 2010:3
(7)

Fiscal Policy

(R - A)

G

(R - A)

G

R

G

A

IMPACT

-1.603*
(-1.72, -1.47)

.944*
(.94, .947)

-1.683*
(-1.98, -1.55)

.959*
(.95, .96)

-2.804*
(-2.84, -2.77)

.564*
(.56, .57)

.528*
(.52, .53)

4 Qtrs

-1.943*
( -2.24, -1.65)

.772*
(.46, 1.08)

-2.089*
( -2.45, -1.72)

1.000*
(.59, 1.40)

-3.287*
( -3.90, -2.67)

.447
(-.24, 1.13)

.713*
(.56, .86)

8 Qtrs

-1.222*
(-1.57, -.87)

.294
(-.07, .66)

-1.223*
(-1.70, -.75)

.619
(.20, 1.03)

-2.186*
(-2.96, -1.41)

.404
(-.30, 1.11)

.499*
(.33, .67)

12 Qtrs

-.698
(-1.06, -.34)

.023
(-.36, .41)

-.578
(-1.05, -.11)

.340
(-.11, .75)

-1.503*
(-2.26, -.74)

.309
(-.44, 1.06)

.360*
(.18, .54)

20 Qtrs

-.235
(-.47, .06)

-.071
(-.38, .24)

-.0962
(-.34, .16)

.058
(-.38, .50)

-.920
(-1.61, -.23)

.165
(-.64, .98)

.234
(.04, .43)

Peak

-2.105* (Q2)
(-2.35, -1.86)

.963* (Q2)
(.77, 1.17)

-2.267* (Q2)
(-2.55, -1.99)

1.078* (Q2)
(.67, 1.41)

-3.755* (Q2)
(-4.22, -3.29)

.564* (Q1)
(.56, .57)

.802* (Q2)
(.68, .93)

†

For Cols. (1)-(4), federal net revenues less total federal aid to the SL sector (R - A) is ordered first, then federal
government purchases (G), then GDP. For Cols. (5)-(7), the identifying ordering is federal net revenues for household and
firms (R), then federal purchases (G), then total federal aid to the SL sector (A), and finally GDP; see the Technical
Appendix. Each cell gives the point estimates of the fiscal multiplier impacting GDP evaluated at the sample means for
the fiscal variables and GDP, and then the lower and upper bounds (within parentheses) for the one standard deviation (68
percent) error band. Multipliers that are significantly different from 0 at the 95 percent level of confidence are indicated
by an *.

TABLE 4: SVAR Estimates: GDP Response to Fiscal Shocks With Disaggregated Aid Specification †

Sample Period

1960:1 to 2010:3
(1)

1960:1 to 2010:3
(2)

1960:1 to 2010:3
(3)

1960:1 to 2010:3
(4)

Identification Strategy

SVAR

SVAR

SVAR

SVAR

Fiscal Policy

R

G

AP

AW

IMPACT

-2.955*
(-3.06, -2.91)

.807*
(.80, .82)

-.108*
(-.11, -.11)

1.637*
(1.61, 1.66)

4 Qtrs

-3.189*
(-3.71, -2.67)

.884
(.27, 1.51)

.919
(.02, 1.78)

2.108*
(1.80, 2.42)

8 Qtrs

-2.067*
(-2.73, -1.40)

.677
(.07, 1.28)

.908
(.05, 1.77)

1.453*
(1.07, 1.83)

12 Qtrs

-1.312*
(-1.97, -.067)

.498
(-.15, 1.15)

.886
(-.03, 1.80)

.988*
(.58, 1.40)

20 Qtrs

-.647
(-1.15, -.14)

.301
(-.40, 1.01)

.843
(-.16, 1.84)

.548
(.15, .95)

Peak

-3.604* (Q2)
(-3.98, -3.23)

.884 (Q4)
(.27, 1.50)

1.005 (Q2)
(.19, 1.82)

2.315* (Q2)
(2.08, 2.55)

†

The initial SVAR identification used here orders federal net revenues (R) first, then federal government purchases (G),
then welfare aid (AW), then general revenue/project aid (AP), and finally GDP; see the Technical Appendix. Each cell
gives the point estimates of the fiscal multiplier impacting GDP evaluated at the sample means for each fiscal variable and
GDP, and then the lower and upper bounds (within parentheses) for the one standard deviation (68 percent) error band.
Multipliers that are significantly different from 0 at the 95 percent level of confidence are indicated by an *.

TABLE 5: SVAR Estimates: Robustness†
αr,y = 3.0

Ordering

Ordering

With Monetary

With Monetary

1960:12010:3

1960:12010:3

1960:12010:3

1960:12010:3

1960:12010:3

1960:12010:3
(6)

No Settlement
1960:11998:3
(7)

No Settlement
1960:11998:3
(8)

(1)

(2)

(3)

(4)

(5)

Identification
Strategy

SVAR

SVAR

SVAR

SVAR

SVAR

SVAR

SVAR

SVAR

Fiscal Policy

AP

AW

AP

AW

AP

AW

AP

AW

IMPACT

-.076*
(-.08, -.07)

1.146*
(1.13, 1.17)

-.109*
(-.10, -12)

1.594*
(1.57, 1.62)

-.096*
(-.09, -.10)

1.642*
(1.63, 1.65)

-.002*
(-.003, -.001)

1.584*
(1.56, 1.61)

4 Qtrs

.954
(.10, 1.81)

1.577*
(1.33, 1.82)

.930
(.06, 1.80)

1.882*
(1.62, 2.15)

.244
(.09, .40)

1.511*
(1.29, 1.78)

.624
(.06, 1.78)

2.040*
(1.74, 2.34)

8 Qtrs

.930
(.07, 1.79)

1.109*
(.82, 1.39)

.918
(.05, 1.79)

1.253*
(.91, 1.59)

.293
(.132, .455)

.427
(.11, .75)

.908
(.05, 1.76)

1.407*
(.89, 1.77)

12 Qtrs

.899
(-.02, 1.81)

.769*
(.45, 1.08)

.896
(-.03, 1.82)

.809*
(.44, 1.18)

.172
(-.00, .35)

–.137
(-.46, .18)

.885
(-.03,1.80)

.956*
(.56 1.35)

20 Qtrs

.850
(-.15, 1.85)

.441
(.12, .76)

.853
(-.16, 1.87)

.392
(-.07, .718)

-.110
(-.29, .07)

-.213
(-.46, .04)

.850
(-.15, 1.84)

.531
(-.15, .92)

Peak

.969 (Q3)
(.12, 1.82)

1.715* (Q2)
(1.52, 1.91)

1.017 (Q2)
(.20, 1.84)

2.068* (Q2 )
(1.88, 2.26)

.305 (Q7)
(.15, .46)

2.000* (Q2)
(1.79, 2.21)

1.005 (Q2)
(.19, 1.82)

2.242* (Q2)
(2.01, 2.47)

Specification
Sample Period

αr,y = 3.0

†

All results are for sample period, 1960:1 to 2010:3. Cols. (1) and (2) use a more elastic coefficient specifying the
automatic (same quarter) impact of GDP on federal net revenues. Cols. (3) and (4) allow for monetary policy variables
(federal funds rate and rate of inflation) within the SVAR specification with fiscal policy ordered before monetary policy.
Cols. (5) and (6) report results for the alternative ordering of government fiscal policy with government spending (G and AP) ordered
first, then revenue policies (R, AW), followed by GDP. Cols. (7) and (8) report results for the restricted sample period, 1960:1 to
1998:3 excluding the Tobacco Settlement and subsequent quarters. Each cell gives the point estimates of the fiscal multiplier

impacting GDP evaluated at the sample means for fiscal policies and GDP, and then the lower and upper bounds (within
parentheses) for the one standard deviation (68 percent) error band. Multipliers that are significantly different from 0 at
the 95 percent level of confidence are indicated by an *.

TABLE 6: State Budgetary Responses to Federal Aid: 1979-20108

rs
[$3063]
(1)

b
[$276]
(2)

gs
[$3003]
(3)

k
[$312]
(4)

Δc
[$81]
(5)

Δd
[$55]
(6)

Δf
[-$50]
(7)

.024*
(.002)

.002*
(.0005)

.012*
(.002)

.001*
(.0005)

.006*
(.001)

.001
(.001)

/ .004

AP
[$504]

-.000
(.052)

.006
(.010)

.379*
(.041)

.127*
(.016)

.326*
(.064)

.033
(.048)

/ .195

c-1
[$2485]

.021*
(.010)

.006*
(.002)

.059*
(.009)

.010*
(.003)

-.107*
(.011)

-.036*
(.008)

/ .017

( 1- m)
[.39]

525.8*
(224.0)

405.9*
(75.1)

457.0*
(215.0)

75.66
(66.67)

-7.01
(218.7)

152.9
(160.7)

/ -253

N

1536

1536

1536

1536

1536

1536

1536

R2

.93

.81

.94

.76

.20

.12

NA

I
[$60,566]

†

Budget equations reported in columns (1) to (7) are estimated by generalized least squares allowing for state-specific AR(1)
processes. Heteroskedastic-corrected standard errors are reported within parentheses; coefficients twice their standard errors are
indicated by an *. Column (7) reports the implied impact of each independent variable required for budgetary “adding up” for the
residual category “net contributions to trust fund accounts” denoted as Δf (/ AP + rs - (b + gs + k) - Δc + Δd). In addition to I, AP,
(1-m), and c-1, each regression also includes as independent variables: year and state fixed effects plus state-year controls for the cost
of living in the state, citizen preferences measured on a liberal-conservative spectrum, the state’s republican vote in the previous
presidential election, a (1,0) indicator variable for whether the budget is decided in an election year for governor, a (1,0) indicator
variable for the presence of a state rainy-day fund requirement, national oil price shocks interacted with regional indicator variables
for consuming states in New England, Great Lakes, and the Mid-East or producing states in the Southwest and Rocky Mountain
regions, shocks to state military contracts and payroll, and the lagged level of real per capita property damages within the state caused
by “billion dollar” natural disasters, and shocks to the state unemployment rate. . Sample means are listed below each variable.

TABLE 7: Simulated Four Quarter Fiscal Multiplier for Federal Project Aid

For a $1 Increase in Federal Project Aid: ΔAP = 1
Δrs = .000

ΔB = Δb/(1 - m)

ΔG = Δgs + Δk

Δrs = .000

.015 = .006/(1 - .6)

.506 = .379 + .127

ΔW =

Δc - Δd + Δf

.488 = .326 - .033 + .195

For a $1 Increase in Federal Project Aid: ΔAP = 1*

Δrs/ΔAP • .00

ΔB/ΔAP • .02

ΔG/ΔAP • .50

ΔW/ΔAP • .48

Simulated Four Quarter Project Aid (AP) Multiplier
dGDP/dAP = (dGDP/drs)C[Δrs/ΔAP] + (dGDP/dB)C[ΔB/ΔAP] + (dGDP/dG)C[ΔG/ΔAP] + (dGDP/dW)C[ΔW/ΔAP],
.52

= (-3.19)C[.000]

+

(1.59)C[.02]

+

(.88)C[.50]

+

(.10)C[.48]

* Marginal effects of changes in AP involve rounding and satisfy “adding-up” to allocate the $1 of new AP assistance.

TABLE 8: Simulated Four Quarter Fiscal Multiplier for Federal Welfare Aid

For .10 Increase in the Federal Welfare Matching Rate from m0 = .60 to m1 - .70
Changes in the Overall State Budget
Δrs = -$52.58

Δb = -$40.59

ΔG = Δgs + Δk = - $45.70 + -.$7.60 = - $53.30 ΔW = Δc - Δd + Δf = $.70 - (-$15.29) + $25.30 = $41.31
Changes in Poverty Support and Federal Welfare Aid

B0 = b0/(1 - m0) = 276/(1 - .6) = $690

B1 = [b0 + Δb]/(1 - m1) = [276 + (-40.59)]/(1 - .7) = $785

ΔB = B1 - B0 = $785 - $690 = $95
ΔAW = Δ(Welfare Aid) = (m1)C(B1) - (m0)C(B0) = (.7)C($785) - (.6)C($690) = $549.50 - $414 = $135.50
For a $1 Increase in Federal Welfare Aid: ΔAW = 1*
Δrs/ΔAW = (-52.58)/(135.50) = -.39 ΔB/ΔAW = (95)/(135.50) = .70 ΔG/ΔAW = (-53.30)/(135.50) = -.39

ΔW/ΔAW = (41.30)/(135.50) = .30

Simulated Four Quarter Welfare Aid (AW) Multiplier
dGDP/dAW = (dGDP/drs)C[Δrs/ΔAW] + (dGDP/dB)C[ΔB/ΔAW] + (dGDP/dG)C[ΔG/ΔAW] + [dGDP/dW)C[ΔW/ΔAW],
2.04

=

(-3.19)C[-.39]

+

(1.59)C[.70]

+

(.88)C[-.39]

+

(.10)C[.30]

* Marginal effects of changes in AW involve rounding and satisfy “adding-up” to allocate the $1 of new AW assistance.

TABLE 9: Fiscal Stimulus and Simulated GDP Growth Following ARRA
Predicted Gains in Real GDP Per Capita for Alternative “Fiscal Innovations” (2005 Dollars)
PERIOD

BASELINE
PREDICTED
GDP
(1)

TAX
RELIEF
(ΔR)
(2)

FEDERAL
PURCHASES
(ΔG)
(3)

PROJECT
AID
(ΔAP)
(4)

WELFARE
AID
(ΔAW)
(5)

FULL
STIMULUS
(ALL POLICIES)
(6)

“TARGETED”
STIMULUS
(ΔR; ΔAW)
(7)

2009:Q1

41,279

-

-

-

-

-

-

2009:Q2

41,675

604

0.00

-0.00

116

722

970

2009:Q3

41,887

649

0.00

12

136

800

1062

2009:Q4

42,197

659

0.00

15

147

823

1094

2010:Q1

42,640

640

23

11

141

819

1060

2010:Q2

43,140

603

11

32

132

781

997

2010:Q3

43,649

558

12

38

122

734

921

2010:Q4

44,141

500

9

31

110

653

827

2011:Q1

44,690

442

6

26

98

573

730

2011:Q2

45,052

384

3

25

86

499

635

2011:Q3

45,465

330

.1

24

74

429

547

2011:Q4

45,850

280

-2

22

64

364

465

2012:Q1

46,209

235

-4

19

54

306

393

2012:Q2

46,544

196

-5

16

46

254

329

2012:Q3

46,860

163

-7

14

39

209

273

2012:Q4

47,160

134

-8

11

33

170

226

TECHNICAL APPENDIX
SVAR Specification and Identification of Fiscal Multipliers
The four variable SVAR estimates the impact of federal net revenues paid by households and
firms (R), federal government purchases (G), and aggregate federal aid (A) on national GDP (Y).
The analysis begins with the estimation of a reduced form VAR specified as:
Zt = C(L)CZt-1 + ut, where

(A1)

ZtN = [rt, gt, at, yt] and utN = [urt, ugt, uat, uyt],
and where rr is the log of federal net household and firm revenues (R), gt is the log of federal
government purchases (G), at is the log of aggregate federal aid (A), and yt is the log of GDP (Y),
each measured at quarterly intervals and measured as real (2005) dollars per capita. Also included
in the initial VAR are the trend variables time and time squared, and an indicator variable for “deep
recessions” (= 1, if the national rate of unemployment exceeds 8 percent).
The lag structure C(L) is a 4 x 4 matrix of three-quarter distributed lag polynomials, and ut
is a 4 x 1 vector of reduced form innovations, specified as utN = [urt, ugt, uat, uyt]. The three quarter
lag allows for seasonal patterns in the responses of fiscal variables to GDP. The AIC test statistic
indicates that three quarter lags of the endogenous variables are optimal; three lags are also
sufficient to remove serial correlation from the residuals.
To recover the exogenous structural shocks to net federal revenues, federal government
purchases, and federal aid, denoted as vrt, vgt, and vat, respectively, we follow the methodology of
Blanchard and Perotti (2002). First, we take advantage of quarterly variation in our data and impose
the restriction that discretionary changes in fiscal policy take at least one quarter to respond to
changes in GDP. Thus the contemporaneous discretionary response of net revenues, purchases, or

A-1

aid to GDP is zero.
Second, we impose constraints on the ordering of discretionary policy changes, requiring
discretionary revenues to be set prior to discretionary spending for either purchases or aid, and then
within spending, that purchases (largely defense spending) are set prior to federal aid to the SL
sector. The Congressional Budget and Impoundment Control Act of 1974 and subsequent
legislation have established aggregate revenues as the first decision for congress when setting the
federal budget; see Keith and Schick (2004) and Auerbach (2003). Formally, federal net revenues
are seen to Granger-cause federal purchases.1 We assume discretionary government purchases
predetermine spending for federal aid as, politically, defense spending “trumps” discretionary
domestic spending. We cannot rule out the possibility that domestic spending may hold priority
over defense spending by a Granger-causality test.2 As a pre-caution, therefore, we redo our analysis
with federal purchases pre-dating revenues in the policy process and report those results as a
robustness check in Table 5.3
Third, we identify the built-in responses of federal tax and transfer policies and federal
purchases to contemporaneous (same quarter) changes in GDP following the specifications proposed
originally by Blanchard and Perotti (2002). The built-in contemporaneous elasticity of federal net
household and firm revenues to changes in GDP is set equal to 2.08; sensitivity test for alternative

1

For the full sample period (1947:1 to 2010:3) we reject the null hypothesis that revenues do not
Granger-cause spending (χ2 = 14.01), but we cannot reject the null that spending does not Granger-cause
revenues (χ2 = 3.84).
2

For the full sample period (1947:1 to 2010:3) we cannot reject either the null hypothesis that federal
aid Granger-causes federal purchases (χ2 = 14.26) or the null hypothesis that federal purchases Granger-cause
federal aid.
3

We have tested for the sensitivity of our core results to the alternative ordering within spending that
places domestic spending politically “prior” to defense spending, and the results remain essentially the same.

A-2

specifications are reported in Table 5. An estimate of the contemporaneous (same quarter) built-in
effects of GDP on federal aid to the SL sector is obtained from a panel regression for the period
1970-2010 relating the log of total federal-to-state aid to the log of gross state product (GSP)
conditional on year and state fixed effects; our preferred elasticity estimate is -.35 (s.e. = .10).
The vector of reduced form residuals is then specified as a linear combination of structural
shocks. After subtracting all contemporaneous responses among the reduced form residuals, net
residuals (uC,C) can be specified as:
uC,rt / (urt - αr,yCuyt) = βr,gCvgt + βr,aCvat + vrt,
uC,gt / (ugt - αg,yCuyt) = βg,rCvrt + βg,aCvat + vgt,
uC,at / (uat - αa,yCuyt) = βa,gCvgt + βa,rCvrt + vat,

(A2)

uC,yt / (uyt - αy,rCurt - αy,gCugt - αy,aCuat) = vyt,
where each coefficient αp,y specifies the built-in (programmatic) elasticity of fiscal policy (p = r, g,
a) to GDP and each coefficient αy,p the response of GDP to contemporaneous (including exogenous)
changes in each fiscal policy ( p = r, g, a).
Our core estimates set αr,y = 2.08, αg,,y = 0, and αa,y = -.35. From the identification strategy for
the timing of fiscal policy decision-making, βr,g = βr,a = 0 from the priority of federal revenues over
spending and βg,a = 0 from the priority of government purchases over SL aid. With these restrictions,
we identify the remaining six free parameters (βg,r, βa,g, βa,r, αy,r, αy,g, αy,a) and compute a distribution
for the exogenous structural errors, vtN = [vrt, vgt, vat, vyt]. We can then compute impulse response
functions for GDP following exogenous shocks in fiscal policy drawn from the estimated
distributions of the structural errors, and then from the impulse response functions we can estimate
multipliers evaluated at the sample means for GDP and each policy; see Table 3.

A-3

A similar specification and identification strategy is used when the analysis is extended to a
five variable SVAR to evaluate the separate effects for project aid (AP) and welfare aid (AW). Here
the vector of policies and GDP is specified as ZN = [rt, gt, awt, apt, yt], where awt is the log of federal
matching aid for state-funded transfers to lower-income households including Medicaid (AW) and
apt is the log of federal project aid for general state and local government spending or tax relief (AP).
The corresponding vector of exogenous residuals to be estimated is now vtN = [vrt, vgt, vawt, vapt, vyt].
The five variable SVAR is specified as:
uC,rt / (urt - αr,yCuyt) = βr,gCvgt + βr,awCvawt + βr,apCvapt + vrt,
uC,gt / (ugt - αg,yCuyt) = βg,rCvrt + βg,awCvawt + βg,apCvapt + vgt,
uC,awt / (uawt - αaw,yCuyt) = βaw,rCvrt + βaw,gCvgt + βaw,apCvapt + vawt,

(A3)

uC,apt / (uapt - αap,yCuyt) = βap,rCvrt + βap,gCvgt + βap,awCvawt + vapt,
uC,yt / (uyt - αy,rCurt - αy,gCugt - αy,awCuawt - αy,apCuapt) = vyt,
where we again specify αr,y = 2.08 and αg,,y = 0; βr,g = βr,aw = βr,ap = 0 by the budgetary priority of
revenue over spending; and βg,aw = βg,ap = 0 from the budgetary priority of government purchases
(largely defense) over grants to the SL sector. Initially we specify formula welfare aid as prior in
budgeting to discretionary federal program aid and set βaw,ap = 0. For the five variable SVAR, we use
estimates of the contemporaneous built-in effects of GDP on the two components of federal aid, again
obtained from state panel regressions now relating the log of welfare and program aid to the log of
gross state product (GSP), conditional on year and state fixed effects. Here the preferred estimates
are αap,y = -.40 (s.e. = .15) and αaw,y = -.19 (s.e., =.07).4 Both sets of aid policies are progressive,
4

Explicitly including the contemporaneous effect of changes in GDP on AW and AP removes
possible bias in our multiplier estimates that could arise if congress responds to a recessionary shock with
immediate additional assistance for the SL sector. Historically, Congress has introduced intergovernmental
aid programs two and three years after recessions to help states cover their recession-induced shortfalls in

A-4

increasing as income declines. Our assumed ordering of fiscal policy again has Congress first
determine revenues, then government purchases, then welfare aid, and finally project aid. With these
restrictions we can identify the 10 free parameters (βg,r, βaw,r, βaw,g, βap,r, βap,g, βap,aw, αy,r, αy,g, αy,aw, αy,ap)
and the resulting vector of exogenous residuals vtN = [vrt, vgt, vawt, vapt, vyt]. We can then compute the
impulse response functions for GDP following exogenous shocks in fiscal policy, and from these
impulse response functions we can estimate fiscal multipliers evaluated at the sample means for GDP
and each policy, now including those for welfare aid (AW) and program aid (AP); see Tables 4 and
5.

revenue. But the fact that the lagged influence of income on policy is never statistically significant beyond
3 to 4 quarters leads us to view these programs as exogenous shocks to fiscal policy.

A-5

