                              NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                                    UNEQUAL BEQUESTS

                                       Marco Francesconi
                                        Robert A. Pollak
                                       Domenico Tabasso

                                      Working Paper 21692
                              http://www.nber.org/papers/w21692


                     NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                              1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                Cambridge, MA 02138
                                    October 2015




We are grateful to Sonia Bhalotra, Sergei Severinov, Mark Wilhelm, and seminar participants at the
University of Geneva, UCLA, UTCC Bangkok, Washington University School of Law, and several
conferences and workshops for comments and suggestions. The views expressed herein are those of
the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.

© 2015 by Marco Francesconi, Robert A. Pollak, and Domenico Tabasso. All rights reserved. Short
sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided
that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
Unequal Bequests
Marco Francesconi, Robert A. Pollak, and Domenico Tabasso
NBER Working Paper No. 21692
October 2015
JEL No. D13,J12,K36

                                            ABSTRACT

Using data from the Health and Retirement Study (HRS), we make two contributions to the literature
on end-of-life transfers. First, we show that unequal bequests are much more common than generally
recognized, with one-third of parents with wills planning to divide their estates unequally among their
children. These plans for unequal division are particularly concentrated in complex families, which
are of two types: families with stepchildren and families with genetic children with whom the parent
has had no contact, e.g., children from previous marriages. We find that in complex families past and
current contact between parents and children reduces or eliminates unequal bequests. Second, although
the literature focuses on the bequest intentions of parents who have made wills, we find that many
older Americans have not made wills. Although the probability of having a will increases with age,
30 percent of HRS respondents aged 70 and over have no wills. Of HRS respondents who died between
1995 and 2010, 38 percent died without wills. Thus, focusing exclusively on the bequest intentions
of parents who have made wills may provide an incomplete and misleading picture of end-of-life
transfers.


Marco Francesconi                                  Domenico Tabasso
University of Essex                                University of Geneva
Colchester CO4 3SQ                                 and NCCR LIVES and IZA
United Kingdom                                     domenico.tabasso@unige.ch
and IZA
mfranc@essex.ac.uk

Robert A. Pollak
Washington University in St. Louis
Arts and Sciences
and the Olin Business School
Campus Box 1133
1 Brookings Drive
St. Louis, MO 63130-4899
and IZA
and also NBER
pollak@wustl.edu




A Supplementary online material is available at:
https://sites.google.com/site/domtabasso/appendix-material-for- unequal-bequests
1. Introduction
In this paper we shed new light on bequest behavior using a large and nationally rep-
resentative US sample drawn from the Health and Retirement Study (HRS) over the
period 1995–2010. A distinguishing feature of our work is its focus on complex families,
in particular on parents with stepchildren and parents with genetic children with whom
they have limited or no contact (e.g., children from previous marriages). We complement
our analysis of the bequest intentions of parents with wills by examining actual bequests
using reports about the disposition of the estates of HRS respondents who died between
one HRS wave and the next. We find that unequal bequests (both intended and actual)
are much more prevalent than previously documented, with one-third of parents with
wills planning to distribute their estates unequally. Unequal intended bequests are most
common in complex families, but contact between parents and children reduces or elimi-
nates unequal bequests. Finally, we find that a substantial fraction of older parents report
having no wills and a substantial fraction of HRS respondents who died had no wills.
       Empirical research has long established that a substantial majority of parents divide,
or intend to divide, their estates equally among their children (Menchik 1980; Wilhelm
1996; McGarry 1999; Cox 2003; Light and McGarry 2004; Behrman and Rosenzweig
2004). Despite the fact that earlier economic models predicted unequal bequests (e.g.,
Becker 1974; Bernheim, Shleifer, and Summers 1985; Cox 1987), more recent studies have
developed theories that attempt to rationalize the prevalence of equal bequests, sometimes
also attempting to explain why parents treat their children unequally with respect to inter
vivos transfers but equally with respect to bequests (e.g., Andreoni 1989; Bernheim and
Severinov 2003).
       The proportion of American parents aged 50 and over who reported having wills,1 in
which their children were treated unequally more than doubled between 1995 and 2010,
rising from 16 percent to almost 35 percent (Figure 1).2 This upward trend, which holds
for both mothers and fathers, is not simply driven by the ageing of the HRS respondents.3
A similar increase can be observed across several cohorts of Americans born since 1890
(Figure 2). Younger cohorts (i.e., those born in 1960 or after) are substantially more likely
to intend unequal bequests, with the sharpest increases occurring among individuals who
are no longer married: widows, widowers, and divorced individuals (Figure 3).4 Bequests,
   1
     We focus on the bequest intentions of parents with wills because most of the information on bequest
intentions collected by HRS is from parents who report that they have wills. See the data description in
subsection 3.B.
   2
     Throughout the paper, stepchildren are counted as “children”. Moreover, although the legal definition
of stepchildren is narrow (i.e., a stepchild is the child of a spouse), we use this term broadly, to include
the children of a cohabiting partner as well as the children of a legally married spouse.
   3
     Between 1998 and 2010 the average age of the HRS sample increased only by four years. This is due
to a number of factors, including attrition, death of older respondents and, since 2004, the introduction
of new cohorts of individuals aged 51 to 56.
   4
     HRS data do not allow us to distinguish between cohabitors and married individuals.


                                                     2
therefore, bear a strong relationship to demographics: as demographics are changing so
are bequests.
       Since the middle of the 1990s the fraction of parents reporting unequal bequest inten-
tions has consistently been 30–35 percentage points higher among parents with stepchil-
dren than among those with genetic children only (Figure 4). Comparing parents who
have had no contact with at least one of their genetic children with parents who have had
at least some contact with all of their genetic children, we find the no-contact parents
about 35–45 percentage points less likely to intend equal bequests.5 The trends in unequal
bequest intentions among parents without contact with their children is the same as the
trend observed among parents with stepchildren. As the proportion of complex families
has risen in the last twenty years, so has the proportion of parents who plan unequal
bequests.
       When individuals die without a valid will, the intestacy laws of their state provide
the default allocation, dividing the decedent’s estate between the surviving spouse and
the children.6 After providing an often very substantial share for the surviving spouse,
intestacy laws divide the remainder equally among the decedent’s genetic and legally
adopted children. Unlike surviving spouses, under intestacy laws surviving cohabiting
partners inherit nothing. And, unlike genetic and legally adopted children, under intestacy
laws stepchildren inherit nothing (Fried 1992; Brashier 2004; Friedman 2009; Reid, de
Waal, and Zimmermann 2011).
       Since 1998 the average fraction of HRS respondents without a will has been around 42
percent (Figure 5).7 Among respondents with stepchildren the average fraction without
wills is somewhat greater (49 percent), and it is even greater among parents who have
no contact with their genetic children (58 percent). Parents aged less than 70 are much
less likely to have wills, perhaps because writing a will is not yet salient for them, but a
staggering 30 percent of parents aged 70 and over report not having wills. The data also
reveal a slight education gradient (not shown): HRS respondents with university degrees
or higher qualifications are more likely to have a will as opposed to their less educated
counterparts.
       Standard economic models ignore complex families. The (usually implicit) assumption
is that all children are born to a married couple who remain married to each other. When
one spouse dies, the surviving spouse is (usually implicitly) assumed not to remarry.
   5
      In 1995 the HRS did not ask the question on parent-child contact, while in 2010 the question was
asked only to a small fraction of respondents. For these reasons we do not show those two years in Figure
4.
    6
      As Rosenbury (2005) shows, there are important differences in intestacy laws across states, but we
focus on features that are common across states.
    7
      This figure starts in 1998 because the 1995 HRS wave oversampled older people (with an average age
of 78 years), while the 1996 wave oversampled younger individuals, whose average age is 59 years. From
1998 onwards, the study comprised both subsamples, and in that year individuals were on average aged
67.



                                                   3
Little is said about divorce, remarriage or repartnering and even less about multiple
partner fertility.8 By ignoring divorce, repartnering, or remarriage, canonical economic
models fail to recognize the increased complexity of the family (Bumpass and Lu 2000;
Stevenson and Wolfers 2007; Lundberg and Pollak 2014, 2015).
    In addition to presenting a representative picture of contemporary end-of-life transfers,
we make two contributions to the literature. First, we show that unequal bequests are
much more common than generally recognized. Unequal bequests are concentrated in
complex families, that is, families in which parents have stepchildren and families with
genetic children with whom the parent has had no contact (e.g., children from previous
marriages). Parents with stepchildren are much less likely to include all children in their
wills than parents without stepchildren, and parents with stepchildren who have wills
are substantially less likely to plan equal bequests. Similarly, parents who have had no
contact with one or more of their genetic children are less likely to include all of their
children in their wills. When all children are included in the parent’s will, we find that
parents with no-contact children are less likely to plan equal bequests. The likelihood of
unequal bequests, however, is reduced and often entirely eliminated by longer coresidence
of stepparents and stepchildren. We interpret this finding as reflecting the accumulation
of family-specific capital (e.g., trust and affection) that triggers norms of equal treatment.
    Our second contribution to the literature on end-of-life transfers shifts the focus from
individuals with wills to those who die intestate (i.e., without wills). We find that many
older Americans do not have wills. More specifically, 40 percent of HRS respondents
report not having wills and 30 percent of HRS respondents aged 70 and over report not
having wills. Of HRS respondents who died, 38 percent died intestate. Hence, the usual
focus on bequest intentions provides an incomplete and misleading picture of end-of-life
transfers.
    The paper is organized as follows. Section 2 reviews previous work on bequests and
describes the legal environment in which individuals make end-of-life transfers. The data
are described in Section 3, where we also present the statistical methods we use in our
analysis. Section 4 presents the benchmark results of our empirical analysis of bequest
intentions, while Section 5 shows further empirical results, which include instrumental
variables estimates, and the analysis of changes in bequest intentions and of the actual
division of estates. Section 6 provides a simple conceptual framework for interpreting
end-of-life transfers. Section 7 concludes.
   8
     In a traditional nuclear family all the children in the household are joint children, but one or both
parents may have children from previous partnerships living elsewhere.




                                                    4
2. Background and Related Literature
Almost all economic models predict unequal bequests.9 For example, the altruist model
assumes that parents equalize marginal utilities across children (Barro 1974; Becker 1974;
Becker and Tomes 1979; Tomes 1981). This assumption, together with some strong
assumptions about preferences and inter vivos transfers, implies that parents will bequeath
more to their less well-off children. Exchange models assume that bequests are made
to children in return for their services such as attention and care (Bernheim, Shleifer,
and Summers 1985; Cox 1987; Cox and Rank 1992). Because children face different
opportunity costs of providing these services, exchange models predict that children will
provide different amounts of services and will receive unequal bequests.10
    Although both the altruist model and exchange models have some empirical support
(Tomes 1988, Cox and Rank 1992; Laitner and Ohlsson 2001), most empirical studies
challenge both classes of models finding that an overwhelming majority of parents divide
their estates equally among their children (Menchik 1980, 1988; Wilhelm 1996; McGarry
1999; Light and McGarry 2004; Behrman and Rosenzweig 2004; Erixson and Ohlsson
2015).11 Significant effort has then been devoted to rationalizing equal bequests. For
instance, Bernheim and Severinov (2003) propose a model of intergenerational transfers
based on the assumption that each child’s perception of parental affection influences
his or her subjective well-being. Children cannot directly observe parental preferences,
but parents signal affection through their actions, including bequests. Altruistic parents
then must consider the possibility that unequal bequests may lead their children to infer
that they are loved either more or less than their siblings. The assumption that the
division of inter vivos gifts is not observed by all the children, whereas the division of
bequests (or the division implied by bequest intentions) is observed, remains untested.
Nor is it clear whether and how parents’ stated bequest intentions affect children’s actions
(e.g., caregiving) regarding the parents. Equal division is also consistent with parents’
indifference over how their estates are divided among their children. But indifference is
both implausible and theoretically unsatisfying because it is compatible with all possible
division patterns.12
    Evolutionary psychology suggests a suite of hypotheses about end-of-life transfers that
   9
     Comprehensive reviews of the extensive economics literature on bequests are given by Behrman
(1997), Laitner (1997), Laferrère and Wolff (2006), and McGarry (2008, 2013). For an introduction
to the legal literature, see Friedman (2009) and Grossman and Friedman (2011). For a comprehensive
treatment of the legal issues, see Dukeminier and Sitkoff (2013).
  10
     Bargaining power and bargaining ability will also play a role in the absence of special assumptions
(e.g., that parents can make take-it-or-leave-it offers to their children.)
  11
     Wilhelm (1996), which use federal estate tax data, does allow for adopted children but not for
stepchildren and assumes that parents have equal (symmetric) concern for all their children. To the best
of our knowledge, all bequest models driven by altruism or exchange motives ignore stepchildren.
  12
     Pollak (1988) argues that the credibility of the parents’ threat to disinherit a child in the strategic
bequest model of Bernheim, Shleifer, and Summers (1985) crucially depends on the assumption that
parents are indifferent over how their estates are divided among their children.


                                                     5
are still largely untested (Cox 2003, 2007). The underlying premise is that parents behave
so as to maximize the probability of survival of their genes and that children with greater
wealth are more likely to pass on their genes. One implication is what we call the “genetic-
child hypothesis” — that is, parents will make end-of-life transfers to their genetic children
rather than to their social children (i.e., genetically unrelated children such as stepchildren
who live in the same household).13 We consider the implications of this hypothesis in two
cases: stepchildren and genetic children with whom the decedent has had no contact (e.g.,
children from a previous marriage who were very young when the parents divorced). The
genetic child hypothesis makes clear predictions in both of these cases. Decedents will
favor their genetic children.14
    The only empirical work that attempts to assess the relative importance of the al-
truism, exchange, and the genetic-child hypotheses is Light and McGarry (2004). Using
intended bequest data for a sample of 45- to 80-year-old mothers drawn from the Na-
tional Longitudinal Surveys of Young Women and Mature Women, they find that the
vast majority of mothers (more than 92 percent) intend to leave equal bequests. The
mothers who said they intended to leave unequal bequests were asked to explain why.
Some responded with explanations that were consistent with altruism, others with ex-
change and, among mothers with stepchildren, some with explanations consistent with
the genetic-child hypothesis. Light and McGarry find that greater within-family variation
in children’s incomes (a proxy for altruism), poor maternal health (a proxy for exchange),
and the presence of stepchildren (a proxy for the genetic-child motive) are associated with
higher probabilities of unequal intended bequests. More specifically, for mothers with at
least one genetic child and at least one stepchild, they find that the probability of unequal
intended bequests increases from 7.9 to 11.3 percent, a 43 percent increase.
    Other studies examine the extent to which the division of end-of-life transfers com-
pensates for caregiving. For example, using data from the first wave of the Assets and
Health Dynamics among the Oldest Old, Brown (2006) finds that children who are cur-
rently caregivers are 32 percentage points more likely than their noncaregiving siblings
to be included in their parents’ life insurance policies, while expected caregivers are three
percentage points more likely to be included in their parents’ wills and 15 percentage
   13
      Unlike models based on altruism or exchange, which hinge on actions taken individually by parents
and children (such as the child’s need for support or the frequency of visits to and other contacts with older
parents), the genetic-child hypothesis relies on one specific trait – the genetic link between decedents and
potential beneficiaries. In this respect, the genetic-child hypothesis is similar to models of intrahousehold
allocation that emphasize a single (exogenous) attribute, such as birth order (Behrman and Taubman
1986; Chu 1991) or the child’s sex (Behrman, Pollak and Taubman 1986). Although these other single-
attribute models may be useful for understanding differential inter vivos transfers or bequests related to
birth order or sex, they cannot explain unequal bequests or bequest intentions toward genetic and social
children.
   14
      Evolutionary reasoning also speaks to the distribution of bequests among genetic children and, when
it does, it seldom predicts equal bequests. For example, a childless post-menopausal daughter would not
be predicted to receive bequests. These accounts however are outside the scope of our paper.



                                                      6
points more likely to be included in their parents’ life-insurance policies.
       Unequal transfers from parents to children and from children to parents have also been
documented in divorced families. Analyzing the effects of parental marital disruption on
late-life inter vivos transfers, Pezzin and Schone (1999) find that parents (especially older
men) engage in substantially lower levels of transfers with stepchildren than with their
genetic children. Marital disruption is also central in Pezzin, Pollak, and Schone (2008).
That study, however, concentrates on “upstream transfers” (i.e., adult children’s time
and cash transfers to their parents) rather than on “downstream transfers” (i.e., transfers
of time and cash from parents to their children). They find unequal flows of services to
unpartnered disabled parents in families that experience divorce, with stepchildren pro-
viding significantly lower transfers than genetic children. Other than Light and McGarry
(2004), however, no previous study has examined bequests to stepchildren.
       End-of-life transfers and bequests have also been analyzed by legal scholars and com-
mentators. Unequal division of estates among genetic children typically generates unease
among trust and estates lawyers because they view unequal bequests as invitations to
litigation (Collins 2000; Blattmachr 2008; American Bar Association 2013). Stepchildren,
however, belong to a different category since the law treats stepchildren as unrelated
strangers rather than as family members (Schanzenbach and Sitkoff 2009).
       Legal scholars also write on intestacy, a subject thus far entirely neglected by economists.
Intestacy statutes divide the estates of married decedents with children between the sur-
viving spouse and the decedent’s genetic and legally adopted children.15 If a stepparent
dies without a valid will, stepchildren inherit nothing.16 As a number of scholars have
pointed out, stepchildren have never fared well under intestacy statutes (Mahoney 1989;
Gary 2000; Noble 2002; Brashier 2004; Cremer 2011). Stepchildren however may inherit
from their absent biological parent, and so it is unclear whether they are disadvantaged by
intestacy law.17 This issue cannot be explored with the HRS data and requires additional
research.
       Some stepparents may intentionally forego writing a will precisely because they know
that intestacy laws will mandate an equal division among their genetic and adopted
children and give nothing to their stepchildren. On the other hand, parents with genetic
children with whom they have had no contact might write wills to avoid giving these
children an equal share of their estates. Some parents are no doubt aware of the default
  15
      The Uniform Probate Code treats adopted children as if they were genetic children of the decedent
(Noble 2002; Cahn 2005).
   16
      California provides a narrow exception to this generalization: a stepchild may inherit if it can be
shown that the stepparent would have adopted the stepchild but was prevented from doing so by a legal
barrier. This exception is available only to a stepchild who satisfies the legal definition of a stepchild
(i.e., a child of the decedent’s spouse, not of the decedent’s cohabiting partner). See Hanson (1995) and
Noble (2002) for more details.
   17
      At common law, in fact, the relationship of stepparent and stepchild generally confers no rights and
imposes no duties (Wypyski 1984).



                                                    7
division imposed by intestacy law while others are not. Unfortunately, HRS provides
no information about respondents’ knowledge of or beliefs about intestacy law. We can,
for the first time, examine whether parents are less likely to write a will if they have
stepchildren or if they have genetic children with whom they have had no contact.


3. Data
A. Samples: Core and Exit Files

Our analysis uses data collected between 1995 and 2010 by the Health and Retirement
Study (HRS), which contains detailed information about bequest intentions and the actual
distribution of estates.18 The HRS is a longitudinal survey of a nationally representative
sample of more than 26,000 Americans over the age of 50 who are interviewed every two
years.19 If a respondent has a spouse or partner, the spouse or partner is invited to become
an HRS respondent. In each survey year, the “core files” provide data from standard
questionnaires administered to all respondents. The “exit files” provide information about
the actual distribution of the estates of HRS respondents who died since the previous wave;
this information is collected from a proxy respondent, such as the surviving spouse, an
adult child, or another close family member.
       From the core files we select respondents with at least one child and with nonmiss-
ing information on intended bequests and other basic variables. This leaves us with an
unbalanced panel of 23,984 individuals, for a total of 117,189 person-wave observations.
When first observed in the study, 11,221 individuals (47 percent of the sample) report
having no will, while 12,763 report having a will. As the survey progresses, the percent-
age of individuals without a will decreases to 42 percent. Of the 21,140 parents in our
sample with more than one child, 11,170 (53 percent) report their plans to distribute their
estates among their children. More than one fifth of the whole sample (5,082 parents)
report having both genetic children and stepchildren.20 Of these individuals, 2,342 report
having a will (about 18 percent of the sample of parents with wills or over 46 percent of
the parents with stepchildren).
       The HRS also collects information on the frequency of contacts between parents and
children. We use this information for the 12,739 individuals who have genetic children
only and report the frequency of contacts with their children and their bequest intentions.
Almost 14 percent of them (1,764 parents) report having had no contact with at least one
of their genetic children for at least one year during the survey period. On average 6.6
  18
     As noted in the Introduction, HRS asks respondents about their bequest intentions only if they report
having wills or trusts. We do not distinguish between wills and trusts, because trusts are not common in
the HRS sample: only 1.1 percent of the respondents report having a trust but not a will and 1.4 percent
report having both a will and a trust.
  19
     See <http://hrsonline.isr.umich.edu/> for more information about the data.
  20
     The HRS does not distinguish between genetic children and adopted children.



                                                    8
percent of parents report having no contact in the previous year with at least one of their
children.21 Among no-contact parents, the proportion without a will exceeds 57 percent.
This is substantially greater than that observed among parents who have more frequent
contact with all their genetic children (43 percent).
       The exit files provide information on the actual disposition of estates and other basic
variables for 7,416 individuals (almost 85 percent) of the 8,800 HRS respondents who
died over the sample period. There are 2,781 parents (38 percent) who died intestate, a
slightly smaller proportion than the 42 percent of HRS respondents in the core files who
report having no wills. Of the remaining 4,635 who died with a will, 3,897 had more than
one child and 630 (18 percent of the sample of decedents with wills and with more than
one child) had both stepchildren and genetic children, representing more than 90 percent
of decedents with stepchildren.22

B. Outcomes

Table 1 shows the means of our main dependent variables broken down by the presence
of stepchildren in both the core and the exit files and by parents’ marital status. About
42 percent of the sample in the core files does not have a will (column (a)). The raw
difference of 6.9 percentage points between those with stepchildren (column (b)) and
those with genetic children only (column (c)) is statistically significant. Almost two-
thirds of divorced parents do not have a will. Again, parents with stepchildren are less
likely to have a will than parents with genetic children only. The same picture emerges
from the exit files, even though the fraction of all parents without a will is almost 38
percent, somewhat less than in the core files. We shall return to this issue in the next
section.
       Conditional on having a will, about three-quarters of the parents from the core files
report they include all children in their wills, while only 59 percent of the estates whose
distributions are reported in the exit files were divided in a way that included all chil-
dren.23 Intended inclusion of all children is substantially less likely among parents with
stepchildren regardless of their marital status, but this does not emerge in the exit files,
  21
     Among parents with both stepchildren and genetic children, the proportion of parents with no contact
with at least one of their children is higher, around 28%.
  22
     The exit files necessarily yield a sample that is smaller than that obtained from the core files. More-
over, at present, the exit files disproportionally represent individuals with lower socioeconomic status and
higher mortality risks (Cutler et al. 2011).
  23
     As already mentioned, most of the information available in the HRS is on bequest intentions of
parents who report that they have a will. The exception is in relation to the probability that respondents
bequeath a specific amount of money (expressed in given categories), which is asked to each household
independently of whether respondents have a will or not. At the end of subsection 4.B we discuss the
results found using that information. We should stress that this information is not about the exact
monetary value of resources that parents intend to transfer to their children. Rather, it is about the
probability that a parent leaves a bequest worth a given amount of money. We therefore cannot determine
how much each child will inherit in case his/her parents write a will.



                                                     9
where none of the differences are statistically significant at conventional levels (column
(d), panel B).
   In the core files, almost one-third of all parents with a will report that they plan to
distribute their estate unequally among their children (column (a), panel C). Intended
unequal divisions are much more likely among parents with stepchildren (61 percent for all
parents and a staggering 75 percent for divorced parents, column (b)) than among parents
with genetic children only (27 and 29 percent respectively, column (c)). In the exit files,
however, the proportion of estates that are divided unequally is substantially greater
(53 percent). The difference between parents with stepchildren and parents with genetic
children only is smaller than that observed in the core files, but is always statistically
significant. This may reflect a change in parents’ behavior between the time they reported
their intentions in the core files and the actual distribution of their estates reported in the
exit files. It may also be driven by selection (parents in the exit files are older) or reflect
the difference in mortality rates by socioeconomic status (parents in the exit files are less
educated and less healthy, and these might be the type of parents who are more likely to
distribute unequally their end-of-life resources).
   Appendix Table A1 mirrors Table 1 focusing on no-contact parents. As in the case of
parents with stepchildren, parents who have had no contact with their genetic children
in the past year are much more likely not to have a will. About 59 percent of no-contact
parents have no will, as opposed to 44 percent of parents who have regular contact with
all their genetic children (panel A). Among divorced no-contact parents the proportion
of those without a will is 70 percent. Looking only at parents with a will, almost 84
percent of those with regular contacts with all their genetic children report the intention
to include all of them in the will. This proportion is 27 percentage points greater than
that observed among no-contact parents, and the difference is highly significant (panel
B). Finally, parents in regular contact with their children also report they are more likely
than no-contact parents to divide their estates equally (77 and 47 percent, respectively).
The difference between these two groups of parents is even greater when we consider those
who divorced or widowed (panel C). These patterns are consistent with the predictions
implied by exchange models.

C. Explanatory Variables and Statistical Methods

Table 2 reports summary statistics for the explanatory variables we use to model the prob-
abilities of reporting having a will and reporting the intention to leave unequal bequests.
We show figures for the sample of parents who report having wills (column (b)) and for
the broader sample of 23,984 individuals that also includes parents who report not having
wills (column (a)). The table also presents summary statistics for the subsample of all
parents who have both genetic children and stepchildren (column (c)) and the subsample


                                              10
of 2,342 parents with stepchildren who report having wills (column (d)).24
       Our covariates include standard demographic controls for parents’ age, sex, race, mar-
ital status, and number of marriages. These variables capture basic heterogeneity within
and across households. We also include measures of annual family income and total wealth
(both expressed in 1995 prices), parents’ education and employment status. We use these
variables as controls for heterogeneity in parental resources. HRS respondents are also
asked whether they gave money to at least one child or to all children equally; inter vivos
transfers are known to depend more directly than bequests on children’s current incomes
and thus tend to be divided less evenly (McGarry 1999).
       One of our key explanatory variables is an indicator variable for the presence of at
least one genetic child and at least one stepchild. The genetic-child hypothesis predicts
that parents will treat genetic children and stepchildren differently in allocating resources.
Because parents’ ability or willingness to make transfers may depend on the total number
of children and stepchildren, we include these characteristics as well.
       Another key variable is parents’ lack of contact with their genetic children. Parents
who report having had no contact with at least one of their genetic children over the
previous year are defined to be no-contact parents. In subsection 5.D we will also consider
parents with infrequent contact. This latter group comprises parents who report having
had at least one contact with their children over the last year, but not at least one contact
a month, while parents with frequent contacts are those who have contact at least once a
month. Exchange models predict that children with more regular contacts will be more
likely to receive bequests if these children are also more likely to provide care and support
to their needy older parents (Bernheim, Shleifer, and Summers 1985; Cox 1987).
       We use parental health status (“poor or fair” as opposed to “good or excellent”) as
a proxy for a parent’s need for children’s services and hence, willingness to pay for them
(i.e., the exchange motive). Using the parents’ reports of the children’s income and wealth
would substantially reduce the number of observations, so instead of doing so we predict
each child’s income using observed characteristics. Following Light and McGarry (2004),
we predict incomes using estimated parameters from income models that we fit to the
data from the Current Population Survey (CPS) between 1994 and 2006. Our sample
consists of all CPS respondents in the same age group as the parents/children in our HRS
sample. We estimate separate models for men and women using as regressors a constant,
a quartic in age, five dummy variables indicating the highest educational attainment, and
indicator variables for race, marital status, number of children, and home ownership. We
then use this predicted income variable to construct a measure of income differences, the
coefficient of variation (obtained by dividing the standard deviation of estimated income
by its mean) among the children of each individual.
  24
    For the sake of brevity, summary statistics of the independent variables for the sample of contact/no-
contact parents are not reported. They are available on the online appendix.


                                                   11
      For each of our covariates, we observe differences between parents with a will, parents
with stepchildren, and parents with stepchildren and a will (columns (b)–(d)). Perhaps
unsurprisingly, the most striking differences are between parents in the core files (column
(a)) and those in the exit files (column (e)). Compared with the parents in the core files,
parents in the exit files are less educated and more likely to report being in poor or fair
health in the last wave in which they participated. Parents in the exit files are older (and
thus more likely to be retired), and more likely to have been widowed (and hence to have
lower household income).

Methods — Let Yit denote one of the outcome variables described in subsection 3.B above,
i.e., whether individual i does not have a will at time t (=1, 0 otherwise), whether i,
conditional on having a will, mentions all children in the will at time t (=1, 0 otherwise),
and whether i includes all children equally in the will (=1, 0 otherwise). Let Xit be
a matrix containing all the explanatory variables described above, and Cit an indicator
variable that is equal to 1 if individual i lives in a complex family (i.e., stepfamily or no-
contact family) at time t, and zero otherwise. In the next section we report and discuss
random effects (RE) probit estimates obtained from a specification of the following sort
(Arellano 2003; Wooldridge 2010):

        Yit = α + βCit + Xit0 γ + εit ,                                                   (1)

where εit = νi + ξit is the residual, in which νi is the unobserved individual-specific
component and ξit is an idiosyncratic error term.
      Since the RE model assumes that νi and Cit (as well as νi and Xit ) are uncorrelated,
in subsection 5.A we shall present results based on fixed effects (FE) models, which do
not impose this no-correlation assumption. In the same subsection, we also deal with
the potential endogeneity of family complexity by using an instrumental variables (IV)
method based on a new instrument for Cit . We defer the description of this approach to
that part of the paper.


4. Benchmark Estimates
We present our benchmark estimates, emphasizing the roles of stepparents and parents
without contact with at least one of their genetic children. We first describe who has
a will and who does not (subsection A). Then we analyze whether parents include all
children in the will and, if they do, whether they intend to leave equal bequests to all
children (subsection B).25 We next investigate how health, wealth, and previous inter
vivos transfers affect the probability that HRS respondents intend to treat their children
unequally (subsection C).
 25
      It is worth keeping in mind that stepchildren are counted as children.

                                                    12
A. Who Has a Will and Who Does Not

As we saw in Table 1, the fraction of HRS respondents who have children but do not
have wills is substantial: 42 percent of those in the core files report not having a will.
A complication with bequest intention data is right censoring: some parents who will
eventually write wills have not done so at the time they respond to the survey. Older and
less healthy parents, however, might be more likely than other respondents to write wills.
So might unpartnered widows or widowers, who are the last ones to have the responsibility
of passing on the family estate to future generations. To account for these possibilities, we
control for parental age and health status, and estimate separately the response of widows,
widowers and divorced parents. To assess the extent of the right censoring problem more
directly, we use data from the exit files.26
       Table 3 presents marginal effects from random effects probit estimates of β in equation
(1), that is, the impact of the presence of stepchildren on the probability that parents re-
port not having a will. The table, based on data from the core files, shows the results from
five specifications. In specification (a) we include our basic set of controls (demographics,
education, and employment status) as well as health status indicators. Specification (b)
adds measures of money transfers to children, while specification (c) drops these mea-
sures of money transfers but includes controls for parents’ expected income and wealth.
Specification (d) includes all previous measures, while specification (e) also includes as
an additional regressor the coefficient of variation between children’s income. Besides the
results for all parents, the table also shows results separately for fathers and for mothers,
and reports the pooled and separate effects for the subsamples of widowed and divorced
parents.
       Although the descriptive statistics show that individuals with both genetic children
and stepchildren are less likely to report having wills than those with genetic children only,
the estimates in Table 3 imply that our basic control variables largely account for this
difference (column (a)), except for widows and for divorced fathers. Widows are indeed 7
percentage points more likely to have a will. This is confirmed when we control for inter
vivos transfers and parental income and wealth (columns (b)–(d)), but the relationship
becomes weaker and loses statistical significance when we further control for the coefficient
of variation between children’s predicted income (column (e)).
       For divorced fathers with stepchildren we find that the probability of not having a
will is nearly 8 percentage points greater than the corresponding probability for divorced
fathers with genetic children only (column (a)). Controlling for inter vivos transfers and
parental income and wealth leads to even greater estimates, ranging from 8 to 12 percent-
  26
     As mentioned in Section 3, 38 percent of parents in the exit files died intestate. This slightly lower
proportion than that recorded in the core files may reflect an actual change in parents’ behavior or
selection driven by differential attrition based on age, health, and socioeconomic status. We leave this
interesting issue for future research.


                                                    13
age points (columns (b) to (d)). When we control for within-family income differences,
the probability of not having a will goes up to almost 20 percentage points. In the next
subsection we examine whether the differential propensities to have a will reflect parental
preferences to favor own genetic children or preferences to equalize the distribution of
estates across all children, including stepchildren.
   Table 4 broadly confirms the results found for stepparents in the case of no-contact
parents. There are however two differences. One is among fathers who are 10–12 per-
centage points more likely not to have a will if they have no contact with their genetic
children, although this relationship disappears when we control for expected wealth and
within-family income differences. The other difference is among widowers who, regard-
less of the specification, are between 14 and 20 percentage points more likely to have no
will if they have no contact with their genetic children. Lack of contact therefore may
induce fathers in general, and widowers in particular, to eschew the allocations implied
by intestacy statutes.
   We do not know, however, why so many individuals do not write wills. Legal scholars
suggest that procrastination is one of the most plausible explanations for intestacy (Weis-
bord 2012). But procrastination does not manifest an intent to die intestate. Likewise,
the high rate of intestacy is not the result of agreement with, or reliance on, the default
rules of heirship. Although agreement with the default rules could reduce the need for a
will (Hirsch 2004), there is some (dated) anecdotal evidence that suggests that individu-
als lacking a will do not intentionally rely on the default rules (Fellows, Simon, and Rau
1978; Contemporary Studies Project 1978). Economists have also been moving away from
the notion that individuals who do not “opt out” could be assumed to prefer the default
(Thaler and Sunstein 2008). For example, in the context of retirement savings, Beshears
et al. (2009) provide strong empirical evidence that defaults do matter. In the context
of intestacy, we have no empirical research to draw on. Nonetheless, the earlier evidence
used by legal experts and the empirical evidence found in other contexts argue against
assuming that individuals without wills prefer, and would have chosen, the distribution
mandated by intestacy law.

B. Unequal Intended Bequests

Conditional on parents having a will and having more than one child, we now investigate
two questions: whether parents include all children in their wills and whether they treat
all children equally in their wills.
   Table 5 presents random effects probit estimates of the stepchild variable on the proba-
bility that individuals include all children in their wills. The five specifications in columns
(a)–(e) and the rest of the organization of the table are the same as in Table 3. Table
5 reveals that for parents with stepchildren the likelihood of including all children in the


                                              14
will is 28–39 percentage points lower than for parents without stepchildren. This impact
is stronger in absolute value for mothers than for fathers, although controlling for income
dispersion between siblings reverses this result (column (e)). In specification (d), moth-
ers with stepchildren are almost 38 percentage points less likely to report including all
children in their wills while fathers with stepchildren are about 27 percentage points less
likely to do so. These negative effects are strongest for divorced parents with stepchil-
dren, with estimated impacts ranging between 59 and 63 percentage points lower than
for divorced parents without stepchildren. We also find strong negative effects among
widows and widowers. This might happen because widows and widowers write new wills
after the death of the spouse. We shall return to this possibility in subsection 5.B, where
we analyze changes in bequest intentions.
   We repeated the same analysis focusing on the behavior of parents who have only
genetic children but who have no contact with at least one of them. The results are
presented in Appendix Table A2. These are qualitatively very similar to those reported
in Table 5. Parents who have no contact with at least one of their genetic children are
20–24 percentage points less likely to include all children in the will. In this case, it
is fathers (and not mothers) who generally have a higher propensity not to mention all
children in their wills. Divorced parents (especially divorced fathers) show an even greater
likelihood of not including all of their children in the will, although this likelihood is the
same as that found for all parents once we control for within-family differences (column
(e)). No-contact parents therefore have a substantially greater propensity to treat their
genetic children unequally.
   Conditional on having a will, we repeated the same analysis for the likelihood of having
a will in which all children are treated equally. Table 6 reports the RE probit estimates for
parents with stepchildren, while Appendix Table A3 reports the estimates for no-contact
parents. Table 6 indicates that the presence of stepchildren is always associated with a
considerably lower probability of equal intended bequests and these differences are always
statistically significant at the 1 percent level. For example, having both genetic children
and stepchildren as opposed to having genetic children only reduces the probability of a
will in which all children are treated equally by 31 percentage points (first row, column
(d)). This negative effect is greater for mothers than for fathers (36 versus 25 percentage
points, respectively), and the difference is statistically significant at conventional levels.
But, as in Table 5, this gender difference is not robust to the inclusion of the coefficient
of variation of children’s predicted income (column (e)).
   Unpartnered parents (either divorced or widowed) are generally less likely to plan equal
bequests if they have genetic children and stepchildren. For example, divorced fathers
are 52 percentage points less likely to treat all children equally than divorced fathers with
genetic children only (column (d)). Similar responses are found for divorced mothers
as well as for widows and widowers, and the gender differences are never statistically

                                             15
significant.
    Without exceptions, the estimates in Appendix Table A3 reveal that parents who have
no contact with their genetic children are also less likely to plan an equal division of their
estates. Parental absence is on average associated with a reduction in the probability
of equal bequest intentions of 28–32 percentage points. Slightly larger reductions are
observed among all fathers and among those who are divorced or widowed.27
    In sum, the estimates in Tables 5 and 6 and those in Appendix Tables A2 and A3
tell a consistent story. Parents in complex families are less likely to mention all their
children in the will. Among such parents, those who do mention all children are more
likely to plan an unequal division of end-of-life transfers. This evidence suggests that
stepchildren and genetic children with no contact with their parents appear to face similar
chances of inheriting from their stepparents and parents. This result sits at odds with
the genetic-child hypothesis, according to which parents favor their own genetic offspring
over stepchildren, and seems instead to be driven mainly by other motives. In the next
subsection we explore this possibility further.28

C. Health, Wealth, and Inter Vivos Transfers

In our analysis we included variables that are meant to proxy altruism and exchange as
bequest motives. We also controlled for gifts to children, since parents might adjust their
bequest intentions if they made substantial inter vivos transfers. The adjustment could
go in either direction. Parents might give less to children who already received inter vivos
transfers to equalize lifetime transfers, or they might give more because previous transfers
indicate greater need or closer ties. We now briefly discuss these results that can be found
in the online appendix.
    In families with stepparents and in families with no-contact parents, wealth and income
   27
      The results in Tables 6 and A3 were found for parents with two or more children and a will. An
alternative sample selection is to include only parents with two or more children and a will that mentions
all of the children. This selection clearly leads to smaller samples. But even when this more restrictive
definition is used, we find effect estimates that are in line with (albeit of smaller magnitude than) those
shown in Tables 6 and A3. They are reported in Appendix Table A4.
   28
      It should be emphasized that we performed several robustness checks. The estimates from these
exercises by and large confirm the picture of bequest intentions that has emerged so far. In one of the
exercises, we disaggregated the overall effect of the stepchild indicator variable by the number of genetic
children and stepchildren and distinguished among parents with one child in each category, those with two
genetic children and one stepchild, those with one genetic child and two stepchildren, and those with two
or more children in each category. Virtually all our earlier results are robust to this change. In another
check, we took advantage of the fact that, regardless of whether individuals have a will, the HRS asks one
respondent per household to report the probability of leaving a bequest worth at least $10,000, $100,000,
and $500,000, excluding any inheritance to be left to the surviving partner if he/she is still alive. We
banded all answers into six groups, i.e., we distinguished individuals who report a zero probability from
those with a positive probability, and these in turn were banded into five quintiles. Using random-effects
ordered probit regressions, we then re-analyzed the models of having a will, inclusion of all children in
the will, and equal intended bequests. Again, the results from this analysis are qualitatively very similar
to those discussed above. These and the previous estimates are reported in the online appendix.



                                                    16
have opposite effects on the probability of having a will. Wealthier parents are less likely
to report not having a will. But higher income parents are more likely to do so, perhaps
because such parents are likely to be younger and still in the labor force. In both types
of families, having made inter vivos transfers is associated with a 5–9 percentage point
reduction in the probability of not having a will. Being in fair or poor health is associated
with a 5–10 percentage point increase for stepparents, while the estimated increase is
9–13 percentage points for no-contact parents. Less healthy parents, who might be more
in need of care from their children, may have an incentive to have a will. Finally, larger
differences in children’s incomes are associated with a higher probability of not having a
will, although this relationship is never statistically significant.
   Wealthier stepparents and wealthier no-contact parents are more likely to report in-
cluding all children in their wills as well as dividing their estates equally. Moreover, for
parents with stepchildren, greater parental income, which might be more common among
younger (still working) parents, is associated with a reduction in both probabilities. For
such parents, we also estimate that parents who have already made inter vivos transfers
have a 7 percentage point higher probability of including all children in their wills and 11
percentage point higher probability of intending equal bequests. For no-contact parents,
the relationship with income is weaker and the effect of inter vivos transfers is smaller.
For instance, having already made inter vivos transfers increases the probability of includ-
ing all children in the will by 4–5 percentage points and the probability of equal bequest
intentions by 5–7 percentage points.
   For both types of families, greater income dispersion between siblings is associated with
a lower probability that wills include all children and a greater probability that parents
intend to divide their estates unequally. Although these correlations are not statistically
significant, if we assume that parents intend to give more to low-income children, then
they are consistent with altruistic behavior.
   Parents in poor health are 2 to 4 percentage points less likely to include all children
in the will and, conditional on mentioning all children, around 4 percentage points less
likely to include all of them equally. If poor health reflects parents’ long-term need for
child assistance, these results suggest that parents may use their intended future transfers,
which they could make known to their children, to elicit a long-term flow of services. This
is consistent with the exchange motive documented by Light and McGarry (2004).


5. Further Empirical Results
In this section we discuss further results in four subsections. Specifically, in subsection
A we compare our benchmark RE estimates with the estimates found with FE models
and those found with an instrumental variables approach. In subsection B we exploit
the longitudinal aspect of the HRS examining changes in bequest intentions, while in


                                              17
subsection C we turn from bequest intentions to the actual division of estates using the
exit files. Finally, in subsection D we examine how contacts and interactions between
parents and children in complex families are related to end-of-life transfers.

A. Evidence from Fixed Effects and Instrumental Variables Models

FE Estimates — As mentioned in Section 3, the RE estimates presented so far rely on the
assumption that the unobserved individual-specific component of the error term and our
measure of family complexity (i.e., νi and Cit , respectively, in equation (1)) are uncorre-
lated. A concern with the RE estimates is that the effect of family complexity on bequest
behavior might be spurious. But this may be due precisely to the mutual association
that family complexity and bequest behavior share with some unmeasured causal factor.
For instance, the association between having stepchildren (or having no contact with ge-
netic children) and not mentioning all children equally in the will may not be driven by
family complexity per se. Rather, it may reflect some hard-to-measure characteristics of
the complex families in which older individuals live, such as the personality of their new
partners or frail health.
      Although the primary goal of this paper is not to provide estimates that have a causal
interpretation, we also performed our analysis estimating equation (1) with FE linear
probability models. Indeed we do not see these estimates as offering a casual effect of
family complexity, but rather as providing us with a robustness check of the estimates
we reported earlier. The FE estimates are shown in panel A of Table 7 where, for ease
of comparison, we also report the RE estimates from our basic specification discussed
above.29
      Consider first the estimates for stepparents. In the cases of inclusion of all children
in the will and of equal division (columns (b) and (c) respectively), the FE estimates are
just slightly smaller (in absolute value) than the corresponding benchmark RE estimates,
but they have the same sign and the same level of statistical significance. The economic
interpretation of them is therefore the same as that of our previous RE estimates.
      If instead we look at the probability of having no will (column (a)), the FE estimates
reveal that stepparents are 2 percentage points less likely to have no will than their coun-
terparts without stepchildren, while the RE estimates revealed no difference between the
two groups of parents. Albeit quantitatively small, this difference reveals that steppar-
ents may be less willing to rely on the default rules of heirship, than what we would have
inferred from the RE results.
      Turning to no-contact families, the FE estimates show no significant relationship be-
tween this type of families and their likelihood of having no will (column (d)). The
difference between the FE results and the RE estimates disappears, however, when we
 29
      The FE estimates from the other specifications are available in the online appendix.



                                                    18
move to richer specifications: indeed Table 4 (specifications (c)–(e)) reveals no correlation
among all groups of no-contact families, except for widowers.
   Finally, in the cases of inclusion of all children and of equal division, the FE estimates
confirm the negative link found with the RE models, but the FE estimates are about 70 to
76 percent lower in absolute value. This may suggest that the strength of the association
between lack of contact and bequest behavior is lower than that suggested by the RE
estimates. But it may also reveal the presence of substantial measurement errors in the
Cit variable which would bias our estimates toward zero. Because of this possibility, we
now turn to the instrumental variables approach.

IV Estimates — To account for the potential endogeneity of family complexity in (1) and
limit the possible problem of measurement error in Cit , which could be exacerbated by
the FE model, we resort to an instrumental variables approach. The variable we use to
instrument for family complexity is a novel measure of optimism, which we construct using
individual expectations information contained in the HRS questionnaires. In particular,
we use a measure that combines the individuals’ responses to two questions, one on
inflation expectations over the next 10 years and the other on the expectation of a major
depression over the next 10 years. We use optimism as a predictor of life choices which,
in turn, are linked to family complexity. A complete description of this variable and its
subcomponents is available in the online appendix, where we also discuss its relationship
with individuals’ demographic and socioeconomic characteristics.
   The only other economic study that correlates optimism to life choices (and remarriage,
among others) is Puri and Robinson (2007). Their measure of optimism, however, is based
on individuals’ life expectancy miscalibration (that is, the gap between individuals’ self-
reported life expectancy and that implied by actuarial tables), while ours does not refer
to events that are affected by respondents’ life decisions. This difference is important
because life expectancy and life expectancy miscalibration are likely to be endogenous
to family structure and other life decisions, e.g., health choices, which in turn might be
associated with individual bequest behavior.
   Social and medical scientists have provided a wealth of evidence indicating that dispo-
sitional optimism — whereby one has a positive general outlook about future events and
life in general — does matter for physical and psychological well-being (Scheier, Carver,
and Bridges 1994; Solberg Nes and Segerstrom 2006). For example, there is a large body
of evidence that documents that optimistic cancer patients face lower mortality risk and
experience faster recovery after surgery than pessimists (e.g., Schulz et al. 1996; Scheier
et al. 1989; Rasmussen, Scheier, and Greenhouse 2009). Puri and Robinson (2007) find
that more optimistic people work harder, expect to retire later, invest more in individual
stocks, and save more. They also find that optimists who report they have been divorced
before are more likely to remarry.


                                             19
       Our IV results are reported in panel B of Table 7. These are obtained from bivariate
probit regressions in which the first and second stages are estimated jointly. The first stage
predicts family complexity, Cit , using the residuals of our measure of optimism from a
regression of optimism on age and sex. To account for the fact that we include a predicted
variable, the bivariate probit standard errors are estimated using a bootstrap method that,
due to the panel nature of the data, also allows for within-individual correlation.
       Irrespective of the type of complex family (whether stepfamily or no-contact family)
and across all three bequest outcomes, the χ2 tests and corresponding p-values in the
first stage suggest that our instrument is always statistically relevant. We find that, on
average, an increase in optimism of 1 percent leads to a reduction in the likelihood that
the HRS respondents live in a complex family of 0.1–0.2 percentage points.30
       The second stage estimates indicate that stepparents are 26 percentage points less
likely to include all children in their wills and 31 percentage points less likely to intend
equal division of their estate than parents with only genetic children (columns (b) and (c),
respectively). These are very close to the benchmark RE estimates we found in Section 4.
The corresponding IV estimates for the sample of parents without contact with at least
one of their genetic children are instead significantly larger in absolute value than those
obtained from the RE models (columns (e) and (f)). This last result suggests the possible
presence of unobserved common factors shared by the processes that generate bequest
intentions and the likelihood of living in a complex family.
       Finally, the IV estimates in columns (a) and (d) show that parents in complex fam-
ilies are, respectively, 21 and 6 percentage points more likely to have no will than their
simple family counterparts. The latter estimate is statistically insignificant and is indis-
tinguishable from the corresponding RE estimate shown in Table 4. The significant and
positive sign of the former coefficient, instead, may indicate that parents in stepfamilies
are substantially more reluctant to make wills than implied by the RE models in Table
3. Family complexity may encourage this procrastination.

       In sum, the results presented in Section 4 provide us with a useful benchmark, with
the RE estimates being almost always between the FE estimates and the IV estimates.
Although the FE model does not impose a zero-correlation assumption between the unob-
served individual component of the residuals and Cit , its estimates might exacerbate the
problems due to measurement error in the family complexity variables. The gaps between
  30
     This result is not in line with the finding by Puri and Robinson (2007) that more optimistic people
are more likely to remarry. A number of reasons may explain this difference. For example, we employ a
different measure of optimism. Moreover, the individuals in their sample are almost twenty years younger
than the HRS respondents in our study. Finally, we consider the whole population while they focus on
individuals who have been divorced. For comparison, we also repeated our analysis on the subsample of
divorced individuals. We found results similar to those shown in Table 7. These estimates are available in
the online appendix. More generally, our findings are consistent with the evidence from the psychological
literature that documents that optimists are a positive resource for close relationships (Srivastava et al.
2006; Carver et al. 2010).

                                                    20
the IV and the RE estimates shown in Table 7 might instead reflect the downward bias
in the RE estimates attributable to measurement errors, with only a small bias in the RE
estimates induced by omitted variables.31 They might also reflect unobserved differences
between the characteristics of the treatment and comparison groups (optimists versus
pessimists in our case) implicit in the IV approach. Our results therefore suggest that the
RE estimates are likely to be not far off the mark. For this reason the results we report
in the following subsections rely on RE specifications.

B. Transitions in Bequest Intentions

Exploiting the longitudinal aspect of the HRS, we analyze changes in bequest intentions.
For each of our three bequest outcomes, these can be readily estimated using equation
(1) conditional on Yi,t−1 = 0 or Yi,t−1 = 1. Individuals have a high degree of persistence
in their intentions. Of those who do not have a will in one wave 88 percent remain
without a will in the subsequent wave, and 86 percent (or 79 percent) of those intending
to bequeath to all children (or to all children equally) at one point in time continue to do
so the subsequent time they are interviewed.
       We focus on the transitions from not having a will to having a will, from having
a will that does not include all children to having a will that includes all children, and
from unequal intended bequests to equal intended bequests.32 In our analysis we explicitly
consider the interaction of the presence of stepchildren or parental absence with changes in
parents’ marital status (e.g., divorce and death of a spouse). Several other changes might
interact with bequest plans and the joint presence of genetic children and stepchildren or
the lack of contact with genetic children, such as changes in parental health and changes
in children’s economic situations. These however are not modeled, due to the small size
of our samples.
       Table 8 shows the results from a specification that includes changes in our basic set
of controls, health status, money transfers to children, and parental income and wealth
(comparable to specification (d) in Tables 3–6). The estimates of interest are robust to
their exclusion. In panel A we look at stepparents, while in panel B we focus on no-contact
parents. For each transition, we report two sets of coefficients. In the first column, we
present the impact of having stepchildren or genetic children with whom the parent has no
contact on the transition under study. In the second we also show the interaction terms of
the stepparent or no-contact parent variable with two changes in parental marital status:
  31
      This is confirmed by positive regression coefficients found when we regress each measure of family
complexity, Cit , on the random effects νi for each bequest outcome, Yit . See Card (2001) for a similar
interpretation in the context of the estimation of the return to schooling.
   32
      The picture emerging from the three transitions in the opposite directions is consistent with that
obtained from the three transitions just mentioned. They are therefore not presented, but are available
in the web appendix. In the same appendix, for completeness, we also report the estimates obtained from
all other transitions, such as from not having a will to having a will that includes all children equally, or
from having a will that includes all children to not having a will.

                                                     21
from marriage to divorce and from marriage to widowhood. This is important because,
following divorce or the death of a spouse, an individual might write a new will.
       In panels C and D we analyze this possibility more directly by considering only the
subsample of widows and widowers. In this case, we first analyze whether parents write
a new will or change an old will after the death of their partner (first column). In the
second column we present the estimates of how the presence of stepchildren or no-contact
children changes bequest intentions further.33
       Panel A of Table 8 reveals that the transition from not having a will to having a will
is not affected by the joint presence of stepchildren and genetic children. This is also
the case when the presence of stepchildren is interacted with the two changes in marital
status. The joint presence of genetic children and stepchildren, instead, significantly
reduces the probability of a transition to a will in which all children are included as
well as the transition from unequal to equal bequests. Having stepchildren reduces the
former transition by almost 9 percentage points (column (c)) and the latter by around 8
percentage points (column (e)). Controlling for changes in parents’ marital status does
not significantly alter these results (see columns (d) and (f)).
       The presence of stepchildren therefore is negatively correlated not only with the prob-
ability of equal intended bequests but also with the probability of changing the will from
unequal to equal treatment of children. Having lost a partner through divorce or death
generally makes this transition even less likely.
       Panel B confirms virtually all the previous results for the case of parents with no-
contact children. Generally the estimated effects are larger in absolute value among these
parents than among stepparents. The only exceptions are in columns (d) and (f) where
the reductions in the probability that no-contact children are included in the will and are
mentioned equally are not statistically significant if the no-contact parent’s partner dies.
This could be driven by the low statistical power of our small samples. We assess this
issue more directly in the next two panels in which we focus on the subsample of widows
and widowers.
       For this subsample we draw attention to four interesting results. First, the estimates
for widowed stepparents are qualitatively similar to those for no-contact parents. Second,
widowhood in all complex families increases the likelihood of changing bequest intentions:
it increases the transition to writing a will, having a will in which all children are men-
tioned, and having a will in which all children are equally included (columns (a), (c),
and (e)). Third, stepchildren or no-contact children neither increase nor decrease par-
ents’ greater propensity of writing a will (column (b)), but offset their parents’ greater
propensities of including all children in the wills and including them all equally (columns
(d) and (f)). Fourth, the presence of stepchildren combined with the loss of a spouse
  33
    Other interesting changes in marital status (e.g., remarriage and repartnering) cannot be analyzed
separately due to sample size limitations.


                                                 22
further reduces the likelihood of moving to a will with full inclusion by 13 percentage
points and the likelihood of moving to a will with equal division by 9 percentage points
(panel C). Such further reductions are not observed among no-contact parents (panel D).
This evidence is consistent with what we found in the top two panels.

C. Actual End-of-Life Transfers: Evidence from the Exit Files

The HRS exit files provide direct information about end-of-life transfers. The exit files
contain reports by the surviving spouse or partner or by other close family members of
the deceased HRS respondent and they allow us to analyze the actual division of estates
rather than bequest intentions. Unlike the core files, the exit files do not suffer from right
censoring but they are much smaller than the core files and the HRS respondents who die
early are not a random subsample of HRS respondents.
       Table 9 gives a summary of our results. For each outcome we show probit estimates
from two specifications. The first includes controls for standard demographics (column
(a)), while the second further controls for year-of-death fixed effects, an indicator for
whether the death was expected, earlier transfers to children, and parental wealth (column
(b)).34
       When looking at the probability of intestate succession (in the first two columns of
Table 9), the estimated coefficient of the stepchild variable is always statistically indis-
tinguishable from 0. This result, which holds true across all family types and for both
fathers and mothers, confirms the general findings reported in Table 3. From the exit
files, however, we detect neither the negative effect for widows nor the positive effect for
divorced fathers which were found using the core files. This might reflect an actual change
in parents’ behavior with respect to their bequest intentions. That is, it is possible that
widows and divorced fathers with stepchildren are not more (nor less) likely to rely on
intestacy law than their counterparts without stepchildren. But it could also be due to
the low statistical power implied by the small sample size of the exit files.
       In the next two columns, we consider the probability of including all children in the
will. This is estimated on the subsample of HRS respondents who wrote a will, while
those who died intestate are not included. We generally find that having stepchildren
does not affect the likelihood that all children are included (column (a)). This result
emerges for the full sample as well as for all the subsamples of mothers and fathers by
marital status. It contradicts what we found in Table 5 using the core files. Indeed, in
two out of the nine cases under specification (b), we even find a positive and significant
effect of the stepparent indicator. This result might indicate a strategy according to which
stepparents end up including all their children (including stepchildren) in their final will.
  34
    The table reports the estimates on the stepchild indicator found among families with stepparents.
The exit files do not allow us to perform the same analysis on parents who did not have contacts with
their genetic children.


                                                 23
      Would all children be included equally? The last two columns, where we present the
estimates for the probability of equal bequests, suggest that they are not.35 In fact,
in line with the bequest intention estimates of Table 6, the results in Table 9 indicate
that the presence of stepchildren reduces the probability that actual bequests are equal
by 9 percentage points (first line, specification (a)). This impact is roughly a fourth
of the magnitude of the corresponding impact on intended bequests. As in the case of
the core files, the estimated effect of stepchildren on equal actual bequests is greater
for fathers than for mothers, although the relatively large standard errors make this
differential response by gender statistically indistinguishable from 0. We also cannot
detect differential impacts for the subpopulations of parents who experienced divorce or
the death of a spouse or partner. But the probability of equal bequests is particularly
low for divorced mothers and widowers, with estimated effects similar to those we found
for the intended bequests. Some of these effects lose their statistical significance when we
estimate specification (b), but by and large the main pattern of results is confirmed.
      In sum, the presence of stepchildren does not affect the probability of writing a will.
Stepparents might explicitly decide to rely on intestacy statutes which would leave nothing
to stepchildren. For parents who die with a will, the actual bequests observed in the exit
files are largely consistent with the bequest intentions reported in the core files. Unequal
bequests are a distinguishing feature of stepparents whose genetic children are favored
over stepchildren in the actual division of estates.

D. Interactions between Parents and Children

We now focus on how interactions between parents and children are related to the proba-
bility that the children are mentioned in the will. We first look at the stepparent–stepchild
interaction and investigate whether stepchildren are less likely to be included in the will
of a stepparent when the stepparent also has genetic children.
      Table 10 presents random effects probit estimates of the probability that a stepchild is
mentioned in the stepparent’s will for the whole sample of stepchildren. The table shows
the results from five specifications. In specification (a) we include a basic set of controls
(i.e., parent and child’s age and gender), the age at which the child became a stepchild, and
the number of years spent with the stepparent. Specification (b) also controls for whether
the stepparent reported providing care for the stepchild’s child(ren), while specification
(c) includes an indicator of whether the stepchild was the main recipient of inter vivos
transfers from the stepparent. Specification (d) adds a measure of the stepchild’s predicted
income, which was constructed using the procedure described in Section 3, and controls
for the within-family difference between the stepchild’s predicted income and the genetic
child’s income (or the income mean when there are two or more genetic children). We
 35
      As before, this analysis is based only on the subsample of parents who died with a will.


                                                    24
distinguish three subgroups, one in which the stepchild’s income is equal or greater than
the genetic child’s, another in which it is 1–49 percent lower, and the last one in which
it is 50+ percent lower.36 Finally, specification (e) includes an indicator of whether the
stepparent expects to receive help from his/her stepchild in the future.
       Table 10 reveals that for a child whose stepparent also has a genetic child the prob-
ability of being included in the will is 3–4 percentage points lower, an average impact of
about 15 percent (columns (a)–(e)). This is consistent with the genetic-child hypothesis
according to which parents tend to favor children who share their genes. This negative
relationship is entirely eliminated, however, if the stepchild’s predicted income is lower
than the genetic child’s (specification (d)). Nearly two-fifths of stepchildren in the sample
have relatively lower incomes. This finding is consistent with altruism if parents not only
are more likely to mention low-income stepchildren in their wills (as we find here), but
also give them more. We cannot test this last point because, as mentioned in Section
3.B, the HRS does not contain any information about the monetary amount that the
respondents intend to bequeath to each child.
       Across all specifications, the older the stepparent the higher the likelihood that the
stepchild is included in the will: the stepchild penalty is offset if the stepparent is 10 years
older than the average stepparent. This may indicate a greater need for the stepchild’s
assistance. These findings mirror the relationship between parents and their genetic chil-
dren. In particular, they suggest that stepparents may use bequests to elicit a long-term
flow of reciprocal services rather than episodic short-term care. It is possible, in fact, that
episodic short-term care could be “paid for” by inter vivos transfers. This behavior is con-
sistent with the strategic use of bequests postulated by Bernheim, Shleifer and Summers
(1985). Children whose stepparents are in poor/fair health (another possible indicator of
need) have however a 5–6 percentage point decrease in the probability of being included
in the will.
       Table 10 also shows that, regardless of the age at which a child acquired the stepparent,
the more years he/she spent with the stepparent the higher the likelihood of being in-
cluded in the will: 7–10 years of stepchildhood completely eliminate the stepchild penalty.
Moreover, a stepchild’s probability of inclusion in the will goes up by about 6–8 percent-
age points if the stepparent reports having provided care for the stepchild’s child(ren)
(specifications (b)–(e)) and by another 13–14 percentage points if the stepchild is also
the main recipient of inter vivos transfers (specifications (c)–(e)). This may reflect trust
and bonding, which are strengthened by repeated interactions over longer time periods.
Finally, if stepparents expect help from their stepchildren in the future, the likelihood the
stepchild is mentioned in the will goes up by 14 percentage points (a 54 percent increase
  36
     We checked the sensitivity of this cutoff using different partitions (e.g., at one-third and two-thirds
of the genetic child’s income), and found results that are essentially identical to those shown in Table 10.
These alternative estimates are thus not reported.



                                                    25
over the baseline probability). This result suggests again the presence of exchange motives
with parents using bequests strategically toward stepchildren.
       Stratifying the sample by gender (see Appendix Tables A5 and A6), we find that
the negative association between the probability of being mentioned in the will and the
presence of a step-sibling (i.e., the variable ‘stepparent has own genetic children’) is con-
centrated among male stepchildren, who experience a reduction in this probability of
about 5–9 percentage points. Female stepchildren experience a reduction of at most 3
percentage points but this reduction is never statistically significant. For female stepchil-
dren the probability of being mentioned in the will is also unaffected by differences in
children’s predicted incomes. The relationship between stepparental expectation about
future help and inclusion in the will is stronger for female stepchildren (17 percentage
points for female as opposed to 11 percentage points for male stepchildren). The same
pattern of results, with the same gender differences, persists when we focus on the sub-
samples of stepchildren of divorced and widowed parents. These results are reported in
the online appendix.
       We now turn our attention to no-contact parent–genetic child interactions and inves-
tigate how contacts in complex families affect bequest intentions. In Table 11 we report
how the probability that a genetic child is mentioned in his/her parent’s will varies with
the frequency of contact and with the fact that the parent’s spouse is not genetically
related to the child.37 The first two columns of the table show that parents who have
no contact with their genetic children are 21–24 percentage points less likely to mention
them in their wills. The lack of parent–child contact therefore more than halves the child’s
odds of inclusion in the parent’s will. Having infrequent rather than frequent contacts also
reduces the likelihood of inclusion by 14–15 percentage points, but, as indicated by the
p-values at the bottom of the table, the difference between having infrequent contacts and
having no contact is always statistically significant. These results do not change when we
add controls for child’s income and other parent-child interaction terms (e.g., grandchild’s
care and inter vivos transfers).
       We find that the “no-contact genetic child penalty” is fully offset if the child is the main
recipient of inter vivos transfers. This might reflect earlier (more frequent) interactions.
Similarly, if the no-contact child is a female, her penalty is reduced by 60–90 percent,
perhaps reflecting the flow of other services expected by the parent but not observed in
the HRS.
       In columns (c) and (d) we explore how the child’s odds of being mentioned in the
will change not only when the child has infrequent or no contact with the parent but
also if he/she is not the genetic child of the parent’s partner and if the parent expects
  37
     Due to small sample size we could not estimate a specification which included the within-family
coefficient of variation in children’s income. We thus cannot use the estimates in Table 11 to assess the
role played by altruism.



                                                   26
to receive help from him/her in the future. We find that, if the no-contact child is also
genetically unrelated to the parent’s partner, his/her probability of being included in
the will is further reduced by 8 percentage points (column (c)). This means that for
no-contact stepchildren the odds of inclusion are essentially reduced to zero. As before,
being the main recipient of inter vivos transfers and being a female will reduce the penalty
substantially but will not eliminate it entirely. Expecting help from the absent child in
the future does not significantly affect the likelihood of mentioning him/her in the will
(column (d)). This suggests that parents do not anticipate receiving any help from genetic
children with whom they have no regular contact.
   Finally, we explore how the lack of contact interacts with the absence of a relationship
with the parent’s partner as well as with the parent’s expectation of receiving help in the
future (column (e)). If parents expect to receive help from their absent genetic children
in the future, the probability that such children are included in the will increases by 39
percentage points. This more than offsets the penalty of having no contact. However, if
the parent formed a new family and the absent child is not related to the parent’s new
partner/spouse, the chances that the absent child is mentioned in the will are reduced
by 28 percentage points, leading to an absent-child penalty of about 17 points, almost 40
percent of the baseline probability.
   We also conducted this analysis separately for male and female children, the results
of which are shown in web appendix. These estimates broadly confirm the results in
Table 11, with effects that are generally similar for sons and daughters. However, women
(but not men) who are not the genetic children of the parent’s partner face an additional
penalty only if they have no contacts with their parents.
   In sum, parents are more likely to transfer resources to children who share their genes
than to stepchildren who are genetically unrelated to them. But a simple evolutionary
story, such as the genetic-child hypothesis, does not explain what we observe in the data
as, for example, in the case of no-contact parents. Furthermore, bequests to stepchildren
are affected by altruistic and exchange motives. Parents are likely to leave bequests to
their low-income stepchildren suggesting altruistic motives. And stepchildren are more
likely to be mentioned in their stepparents’ wills if the stepparents are older suggesting
exchange motives. Trust and bonding seem to be highly relevant within all complex
families: there is no stepchild penalty if stepparents help with child care or have already
made other transfers. Similar patterns occur between parents and their no-contact genetic
children. The relationship between stepchildren and parents in complex families requires
deeper, more subtle explanations than those provided by the genetic-child hypothesis.




                                            27
6. Theory
Here we provide a simple framework to interpret the results of the previous two sections.
We borrow our key insights from the work by Behrman, Pollak and Taubman (1982, 1986,
1995).
       Consider a family comprised of one older parent (e.g., the surviving spouse) and two
children, child g who is her genetic child and child s who is her stepchild.38 Suppose
the parent has a separable welfare function defined over expected bequests for each child,
W (Bg , Bs ). The parent maximizes W subject to three constraints. The first constraint is
the budget constraint that applies to resources devoted to bequests. Such resources are
denoted by R, while investments are denoted by H. Assume the parent faces a fixed price
for investments and the price is identical for both children. Normalizing the investment
price to 1, we can write the constraint as Hg + Hs ≤ R.
       The other two constrains are the bequest production functions, one for each child.
One of the arguments of these functions is bequest-related investments, H, which include
the full history of each child’s health and human capital investments as well as material
help and money transfers that the parents have made over their children’s lives and
that, in turn, might depend on child attributes, such as age and sex. Child-specific
income and family circumstances are also determinants of such investments. Another
argument, labeled P , comprises bequest-relevant parental characteristics, such as age,
sex, marital status, health, income, and wealth. A final category, labeled T , includes
variables that determine the trust relationship between each child and the parent. This
takes account of physical proximity, contact, and bonding between parent and child, and is
signaled by and shaped by repeated interactions and relative bargaining powers. Putting
together these arguments leads us to a child-specific bequest production function of the
form Bk = B(Hk , Pk , Tk ), k = g, s.
       Provided the constrained maximization faced by the parent has an interior solution,
the first-order condition for parental bequest related investment for child k is

         ∂W ∂Bk
                 − λ = 0,
         ∂Bk ∂Hk

where λ is the Lagrange multiplier for the budget constraint that applies to resources
devoted to bequest-related investments for the two children. Expressing the first-order
conditions in ratio form yields

         ∂W/∂Bs   ∂Bg /∂Hg
                =          .
         ∂W/∂Bg   ∂Bs /∂Hs

This expression, which does not include the unobservable λ, corresponds to the standard
  38
       Alternatively, child s could be seen as the genetic child with whom the older parent has no contact.



                                                     28
tangency condition for a constrained maximum, i.e., the slope of the parental welfare
function equals the slope of the bequest possibility frontier for child s versus child g.
This is illustrated by point A in Figure 6. In this figure, we assume equal concern for
both children, so the indifference curves are symmetrical around the 45 degree line from
the origin. If we also assume a symmetric bequest possibility frontier, these assumptions
imply equal bequests in equilibrium, Bg∗ = Bs∗ .
   Because in the previous two sections we found strong evidence of unequal bequest
intentions that favor genetic children over stepchildren, we consider changes in the as-
sumptions underlying Figure 6. A straightforward change is to allow for unequal concern.
For instance, stepparents may expect stepchildren to care less efficiently for them, or may
anticipate that stepchildren can also rely on their nonresidental biological parents for help
and support. This case is illustrated in Figure 7, with parental preferences favoring the
child genetically linked to the parent, that is child g. If the production possibility frontier
remains symmetric, a parent with unequal concern favoring the genetic child will divide
the estates unequally, in such a way that Bg∗ > Bs∗ .
   Another departure from the benchmark of Figure 6 is through a change in the produc-
tion possibility frontier, while keeping the assumption of equal concern. Parents might
have skewed bequest related investments in favor of their genetic children, or genetic chil-
dren might have greater bargaining power (emotional capital) toward their parents than
stepchildren do. Point E ∗ in Figure 8 illustrates this case. Clearly, if parents also have
unequal concern favoring their genetic children, then the bequest division between the
stepchild and the genetic child could be even more unequal, as illustrated by point E 0 in
the figure.
   The results in subsection 5.D suggest that the situation is less unfavorable to stepchil-
dren if there is greater bonding and trust between them and their stepparents and if
stepparents have greater access to the stepchildren’s family-specific capital. This bonding
and trust is signaled and fostered by the stepparent providing care for the stepchild’s
children or making direct transfers to the stepchild. When this happens, the bequest pos-
sibility frontier can shift and the household will reach the new equilibrium E 00 in Figure
8 (under the assumption of equal concern).


7. Conclusion
In the last thirty years, American families have experienced massive changes: a retreat
from marriage, increased divorce and remarriage, and growth in cohabitation and non-
marital childbearing. Stepparents and no-contact parents in complex families may be less
motivated than parents in traditional families to provide resources to children with whom
they do not share their genes or have not shared their homes. And children in complex
families may be less willing than children in traditional families to assist disabled older


                                              29
parents, especially those with whom they have no genetic connection or only briefly shared
a home.
   For younger cohorts, nonmarital fertility of cohabiting couples who break up and
repartner will substantially increase the prevalence of complex families. Those in the
HRS cohort are older, and their complex families are generally a by-product of divorce
and remarriage. The implications for intergenerational transfers of these changes in family
structure are difficult to predict because complex families created by cohabitation and
nonmarital fertility in younger cohorts may behave differently from those created by
divorce and remarriage in older cohorts.
   We have shown that bequests are much more unequal now than in the recent past
and much more unequal than generally recognized. In simple families (i.e., families with
neither stepchildren nor no-contact children), equal bequests are the dominant pattern. In
complex families, however, we find substantial inequality in both bequest intentions and
actual bequests. We cannot assess the relative importance of genetic ties and contact by
studying simple families because in such families all of the children have the same genetic
ties with their parents. But the bequest patterns we find in complex families imply that
contact trumps genetic ties.
   The economics literature on end-of-life transfers assumes that individuals, or at least
older individuals, make wills. We find instead that parents often fail to write wills and,
either by design or default, rely on intestacy law to determine the distribution of their
estates. For parents with stepchildren, the effect of relying on intestacy law is to leave
everything to genetic and legally-adopted children and nothing to stepchildren. For no-
contact parents, the effect of relying on intestacy law is to treat contact and no-contact
genetic children equally. If parents understand the most basic provisions of intestacy law,
this finding is puzzling. It implies that parents who have had no contact with some of
their genetic children are more likely to treat all of their genetic children equally than
are parents who have maintained contact with all of their genetic children. We suspect
that the absence of wills reflects the disutility of making wills (and contemplating death)
rather than preferences for the distribution mandated by intestacy law. Unfortunately,
HRS provides no evidence that speaks to this issue. Regardless of parents’ motivations
for not making wills, we have shown that focusing exclusively on bequest intentions (i.e.,
on parents who make wills) provides an incomplete and misleading picture of end-of-life
transfers.




                                            30
  Figure 1: Unequal Bequest Intentions, by Parent’s Gender




Figure 2: Unequal Bequest Intentions, by Parent’s Birth Cohort



                             31
Figure 3: Unequal Bequest Intentions, by Parent’s Marital Status




   Figure 4: Unequal Bequest Intentions, by the Family Type



                              32
Figure 5: Trends in Intestacy Rates, by Parent’s Age and Family Type




 Bi



                          Parental utility function



                          A
Bi∗




                                         Bequest possibility frontier


                        Bj∗                   Bj

Figure 6: Equal Concern and Symmetric Bequest Possibility Frontier



                                33
                   Bi




                                                    A0
                  Bi∗




                                                  Bj∗             Bj

Figure 7: Unequal Concern Favoring Child j and Symmetric Bequest Possibility Frontier




                   Bi

                                               Equal concerns



                                        E 00



                                                        E∗


                                                             E0




                                                                  Bj

Figure 8: Asymmetric Bequest Possibility Frontiers With and Without Equal Concern




                                         34
                Table 1: Descriptive Statistics – Dependent Variables

                (a)         (b)             (c)            (d)
                       Parents with    Parents with
                        step- and         genetic      Difference
                All       genetic        children       (b)-(c)
                         children          only        (t-value)       N             n
A. No will
 Core files
   All         0.418       0.475           0.406        0.069***    117,189       23,984
                                                        (18.152)
   Divorced    0.623       0.663           0.617        0.046***     13,703        3,754
                                                        ( 3.784)
   Widowed     0.376       0.395           0.373        0.022**      27,308        7,679
                                                        ( 2.580)
 Exit files
  All          0.375       0.401           0.371         0.030*       7,416        7,416
                                                        ( 1.957)
   Divorced    0.570       0.587           0.567          0.020        702          702
                                                        (0.356)
   Widowed     0.348       0.370           0.346         0.024        3,220        3,220
                                                        (0.928)
B. Will includes all children
 Core files
   All         0.746        0.462          0.805        -0.343***    60,994       14,275
                                                         (76.840)
   Divorced    0.734       0.293           0.808        -0.515***     4,363        1,456
                                                         (29.636)
   Widowed     0.761       0.358           0.834        -0.476***    14,597        4,583
                                                         (52.965)
 Exit files
  All          0.587       0.618           0.581         0.037*       4,567        4,567
                                                         (1.816)
   Divorced    0.801       0.774           0.806          -0.033       337          337
                                                         (0.547)
   Widowed     0.856       0.876           0.853           0.022      1,956        1,956
                                                         (0.878)
C. Equal intended and actual bequest
 Core files
   All        0.676      0.390             0.735        -0.345***    60,994       14,275
                                                         (71.539)
   Divorced    0.641       0.245           0.708        -0.462***     4,363        1,456
                                                         (23.747)
   Widowed     0.679       0.291           0.749        -0.459***    14,597        4,583
                                                         (45.638)
 Exit files
  All          0.473       0.421           0.484        -0.063***     3,878        3,878
                                                          (2.998)
   Divorced    0.604       0.453           0.639         -0.186**      280          280
                                                          (2.511)
   Widowed     0.712       0.608           0.729        -0.120***     1,610        1,610
                                                          (3.656)
Note: N =number of observations; n=number of individuals. *p < 0.10, **p < 0.05, ***p < 0.01.
                                             35
                 Table 2: Descriptive Statistics – Explanatory Variables

                                                               Parents
                                                                 with      Parents      Parents
                                            All     Parents   step- and   with step-   included
                                                     with       genetic    children      in the
                                                     a will    children   and a will   exit filesa
                                            (a)       (b)         (c)        (d)           (e)

1 if has step- and genetic children       0.223      0.196     1.000        1.000        0.136

Demographics
 Female                                    0.564     0.557      0.559       0.573        0.529
 Age                                       68.59     70.76      65.64       68.65        78.17
                                          (10.59)   (10.32)    (10.81)     (10.66)      (10.39)
 1 if white                                0.829     0.927      0.797       0.910        0.833
 1 if married or partnered                 0.644     0.672      0.692       0.699        0.476
 1 if separated, divorced
   or never married                        0.123     0.078      0.123       0.082        0.096
 1 if widowed                              0.233     0.250      0.185       0.218        0.429
 Number of marriages                       1.355     1.312      1.920       1.951        1.347
                                          (0.668)   (0.612)    (0.815)     (0.767)      (0.664)
Health
 1 if in poor/fair health                 0.297      0.246     0.286        0.242        0.622
Education
 1 if below high school                   0.368      0.317     0.350        0.314        0.423
 1 if high school                         0.341      0.350     0.338        0.349        0.306
 1 if college or more                     0.292      0.333     0.312        0.337        0.271
Employment
 1 if in the labor force                  0.412      0.366     0.459        0.392        0.068
 1 if disabled                            0.082      0.046     0.099        0.056        0.154
 1 if retired                             0.506      0.588     0.443        0.551        0.778
Child variables
 Number of children                        3.522     3.274      5.004       4.852        3.464
                                          (2.092)   (1.860)    (2.436)     (2.272)      (2.219)
 Number of bio children                    3.092     2.889      3.075       2.887        3.129
                                          (1.791)   (1.551)    (1.878)     (1.691)      (1.993)
 Number of stepchildren                    0.430     0.384      1.929       1.965        0.335
                                          (1.149)   (1.077)    (1.741)     (1.682)      (1.102)
 Coefficient of within-family variation    0.411     0.398      0.449       0.433        0.414
  for children’s predicted incomeb        (0.356)   (0.265)    (0.382)     (0.217)      (0.230)

(cont.)




                                              36
(cont.)
                                (a)            (b)             (c)            (d)             (e)

Financial variables
 Real annual                   26,940         28,271        29,788          32,492           7,630
   household incomec         (205,093)      (157,141)      (44,663)       (56,093)         (18,500)
 Real wealthd                 267,702        387,954        231,881        351,730          238,948
                            (1,268,856)    (1,543,720)    (1,084,812)    (1,370,953)      (1,521,039)
 1 if gave money to
   at least a childe           0.362          0.411          0.379          0.424            0.255
 1 if gave money to
   all children equallye       0.079          0.101          0.032          0.415            0.081

N                             117,189         68,248         26,111         13,348           7,071
n                             23,984          12,763         5,082          2,342            7,071
Note: Figures are means and standard deviations (for continuous variables only) are in parentheses.
N =number of observations; n=number of individuals.
a
  Values are from the last year of observation in the core files. For some of the variables, N and n are
different from the values given at the bottom of the table. They are available from the authors.
b
  Based on 60,055 observations from 8,776 individuals.
c
  In 1995 values, and based on 74,099 observations from 13,323 respondents.
d
  In 1995 values, and based on 52,078 observations from 10,830 respondents; includes values of
financial and real estate properties.
e
  Based on 78,773 observations from 15,493 respondents.




                                                  37
   Table 3: Effect of Having Stepchildren on the Probability of Not Having a Will

                                                                 Specification
                                         (a)         (b)          (c)         (d)             (e)
All parents               Estimate      0.006       0.003       -0.017      -0.014          -0.028
                          (s.e.)       (0.020)     (0.024)     (0.020)     (0.023)         (0.030)
                          N            117,189     78,773      67,615      51,761          32,199
                          n            23,984      21,178      16,198      15,041            9,285

Mothers                   Estimate       -0.009     -0.017     -0.051*      -0.045          -0.037
                          (s.e.)        (0.029)    (0.033)     (0.030)     (0.032)         (0.036)
                          N             66,098     52,419      36,763      33,001          25,084
                          n             13,498     12,662       9,055        8,824           6,854

Fathers                   Estimate       0.024      0.032       0.011       0.019           0.011
                          (s.e.)        (0.026)    (0.033)     (0.025)     (0.033)         (0.056)
                          N             51,091     26,354      30,852      18,760           7,115
                          n             10,509      8,530       7,152       6,225           2,435

Widows and widowers       Estimate       -0.049     -0.052      -0.026      -0.028          -0.007
                          (s.e.)        (0.032)    (0.032)     (0.020)     (0.021)         (0.024)
                          N             27,308     26,986      21,135      20,972          16,104
                          n               7,679     7,638       6,662        6,637           5,248

Widows                    Estimate     -0.074**    -0.069**    -0.043**   -0.041**          -0.019
                          (s.e.)        (0.033)     (0.034)     (0.019)    (0.020)         (0.024)
                          N             22,416      22,196      17,179     17,073          13,152
                          n              5,960       5,935       5,158      5,142            4,085

Widowers                  Estimate       0.019      -0.007      0.046       0.022           0.044
                          (s.e.)        (0.072)    (0.071)     (0.066)     (0.063)         (0.076)
                          N              4,892      4,790       3,956       3,899           2,952
                          n              1,725      1,709       1,509       1,500           1,166

Divorced parents          Estimate       0.033      0.048      0.106**     0.105**         0.116**
                          (s.e.)        (0.031)    (0.034)     (0.048)     (0.051)         (0.056)
                          N             13,703     13,140      10,087       9,853           7,006
                          n              3,754      3,653       3,034       2,999           2,118

Divorced mothers          Estimate       -0.019     0.020       0.107       0.097           -0.050
                          (s.e.)        (0.054)    (0.051)     (0.073)     (0.078)         (0.138)
                          N               8,916     8,690       6,496       6,425            4,715
                          n               2,346     2,311       1,878       1,872            1,372

Divorced fathers          Estimate      0.076*     0.082*      0.118*      0.121*          0.195***
                          (s.e.)        (0.044)    (0.048)     (0.062)     (0.065)          (0.060)
                          N              4,787      4,450       3,591       3,428            2,291
                          n              1,411      1,344       1,156       1,127             746
Note: The figures are marginal effects of the parent with stepchildren indicator from random effects pro-
bit models. The comparison group is given by parents with genetic children only. See the text
for an explanation of specifications (a)–(e).
N =number of observations; n=number of individuals. ∗ p < 0.10, ∗∗ p < 0.05, ∗∗∗ p < 0.01.

                                                  38
          Table 4: Effect of No Contacts on the Probability of Not Having a Will

                                                             Specification
                                          (a)            (b)       (c)         (d)       (e)
All parents               Estimate     0.055**         0.050*    0.024        0.021     0.029
                          (s.e.)       (0.024)         (0.026) (0.028)       (0.029)   (0.031)
                          N             41,075         34,127    24,437      22,450     18118
                          n             12,739         11,868     8,767       8,529     6,927

Mothers                   Estimate       0.041          0.025     0.004       -0.004    0.001
                          (s.e.)        (0.028)        (0.031)   (0.032)     (0.033)   (0.035)
                          N             33,844         27,895    19,196      17,628     14381
                          n              9,847          9,259     6,557        6,401    5,246

Fathers                   Estimate     0.103**         0.120**    0.068       0.075     0.088
                          (s.e.)       (0.047)         (0.048)   (0.052)     (0.054)   (0.060)
                          N             7,231           6,232     5,241       4,822     3,737
                          n             2,900           2,615     2,211       2,129     1,682

Widows and widowers       Estimate     0.091***    0.092***      0.057*      0.055*    0.056*
                          (s.e.)        (0.035)     (0.036)      (0.029)     (0.030)   (0.031)
                          N             14,384      14,291       11,224      11,164     9,198
                          n              5,352       5,331        4,653       4,634     3,804

Widows                    Estimate       0.060          0.060     0.034       0.031     0.030
                          (s.e.)        (0.038)        (0.039)   (0.030)     (0.030)   (0.030)
                          N             11,887         11,815     9,167       9,121     7,514
                          n              4,237          4,220     3,667       3,652     2,992

Widowers                  Estimate     0.202**         0.200**   0.140*      0.139*    0.159*
                          (s.e.)       (0.081)         (0.080)   (0.077)     (0.077)   (0.085)
                          N             2,497           2,476     2,057       2,043     1,684
                          n             1,118           1,114      987         983       813

Divorced parents          Estimate       0.027          0.027     -0.001      0.002     0.023
                          (s.e.)        (0.023)        (0.024)   (0.046)     (0.046)   (0.049)
                          N              7,897          7,817      5,893      5,847     4,391
                          n              2,792          2,776      2,280      2,264     1,699

Divorced mothers          Estimate       0.026          0.022     -0.010      -0.002    0.030
                          (s.e.)        (0.028)        (0.029)   (0.064)     (0.063)   (0.064)
                          N              5,483          5,441      4,026      4,005     3,073
                          n              1,851          1,848      1,504      1,499     1,150

Divorced fathers          Estimate       0.040          0.044     0.016       0.015     0.021
                          (s.e.)        (0.040)        (0.040)   (0.065)     (0.065)   (0.073)
                          N              2,414          2,376     1,867       1,842     1,318
                          n               943            930       776         765       549
Note: The figures are marginal effects of the no-contact parent indicator from random effects
probit models. See the note to Table 3 for further explanations.
N =number of observations; n=number of individuals. ∗ p < 0.10, ∗∗ p < 0.05, ∗∗∗ p < 0.01.


                                                  39
Table 5: Effect of Having Stepchildren on the Probability that the Will Includes All
Children

                                                                Specification
                                              (a)          (b)       (c)        (d)            (e)
 All parents                 Estimate     -0.279***    -0.311*** -0.305*** -0.328***       -0.385***
                             (s.e.)        (0.017)      (0.020)   (0.021)     (0.024)       (0.029)
                             N              60,994       39,761    37,446     28,031         19,435
                             n              14,275       12,328    9,762       8,956         6,168

 Mothers                     Estimate     -0.360***    -0.359***   -0.391***   -0.377***   -0.365***
                             (s.e.)        (0.022)      (0.026)     (0.030)     (0.032)     (0.034)
                             N              33,529       25,862      19,639      17,535      15,302
                             n               7,827        7,243       5,267       5,112       4,589

 Fathers                     Estimate     -0.190***    -0.251***   -0.215***   -0.266***   -0.435***
                             (s.e.)        (0.025)      (0.032)     (0.031)     (0.038)     (0.057)
                             N              27,465       13,899      17,807      10,496      4,133
                             n               6,460        5,091       4,500       3,848      1,581

 Widows and widowers         Estimate     -0.421***    -0.398***   -0.393***   -0.374***   -0.377***
                             (s.e.)        (0.040)      (0.041)     (0.042)     (0.043)     (0.045)
                             N              14,597       14,402      12,620      12,514      11,075
                             n               4,583        4,554       4,207       4,187       3,817

 Widows                      Estimate     -0.444***    -0.433***   -0.419***   -0.408***   -0.410***
                             (s.e.)        (0.044)      (0.045)     (0.046)     (0.047)     (0.048)
                             N              11,911       11,776      10,247      10,178      9,064
                             n               3,548        3,529       3,247       3,235      2,975

 Widowers                    Estimate     -0.343***    -0.258***   -0.288***   -0.225**    -0.219**
                             (s.e.)        (0.101)      (0.010)     (0.104)     (0.101)     (0.107)
                             N              2,686        2,626       2,373       2,336       2,011
                             n              1,039        1,029        963         955         843

 Divorced parents            Estimate     -0.604***    -0.629***   -0.605***   -0.630***   -0.589***
                             (s.e.)        (0.068)      (0.073)     (0.078)     (0.080)     (0.097)
                             N              4,363        4,172       3,664       3,573       2,960
                             n              1,456        1,413       1,257       1,237        994

 Divorced mothers            Estimate     -0.495***    -0.477***   -0.467***   -0.469***   -0.462***
                             (s.e.)        (0.117)      (0.132)     (0.147)     (0.154)     (0.166)
                             N              2,818        2,741       2,385       2,356       2,042
                             n               877          863         763         759         645

 Divorced fathers            Estimate     -0.633***    -0.678***   -0.623***   -0.660***   -0.581***
                             (s.e.)        (0.086)      (0.088)     (0.095)     (0.097)     (0.137)
                             N              1,545        1,431       1,279       1,217        918
                             n               580          550         494         478         349
 Note: See the note to Table 3.
 ∗
   p < 0.10, ∗∗ p < 0.05, ∗∗∗ p < 0.01.


                                                  40
Table 6: Effect of Having Stepchildren on the Probability that Stepparents Intend to
Divide their Estate Equally Among All Children

                                                                Specification
                                              (a)          (b)       (c)        (d)            (e)
 All parents                 Estimate     -0.285***    -0.310*** -0.288*** -0.311***       -0.375***
                             (s.e.)        (0.016)      (0.020)   (0.021)     (0.024)       (0.028)
                             N              60,994       39,761    37,446     28,031         19,435
                             n              14,275       12,328    9,762       8,956         6,168

 Mothers                     Estimate     -0.371***    -0.365***   -0.376***   -0.358***   -0.347***
                             (s.e.)        (0.021)      (0.025)     (0.028)     (0.031)     (0.033)
                             N              33,529       25,862      19,639      17,535      15,302
                             n               7,827        7,243       5,267       5,112       4,589

 Fathers                     Estimate     -0.185***    -0.233***   -0.195***   -0.246***   -0.427***
                             (s.e.)        (0.025)      (0.032)     (0.031)     (0.038)     (0.051)
                             N              27,465       13,899      17,807      10,496      4,133
                             n               6,460        5,091       4,500       3,848      1,581

 Widows and widowers         Estimate     -0.404***    -0.386***   -0.382***   -0.362***   -0.357***
                             (s.e.)        (0.038)      (0.039)     (0.041)     (0.041)     (0.043)
                             N              14,597       14,402      12,620      12,514      11,075
                             n               4,583        4,554       4,207       4,187       3,817

 Widows                      Estimate     -0.422***    -0.413***   -0.404***   -0.392***   -0.386***
                             (s.e.)        (0.041)      (0.042)     (0.044)     (0.045)     (0.047)
                             N              11,911       11,776      10,247      10,178      9,064
                             n               3,548        3,529       3,247       3,235      2,975

 Widowers                    Estimate     -0.325***    -0.265***   -0.275***   -0.225**     -0.206*
                             (s.e.)        (0.096)      (0.100)     (0.102)     (0.103)     (0.111)
                             N              2,686        2,626       2,373       2,336       2,011
                             n              1,039        1,029        963         955         843

 Divorced parents            Estimate     -0.468***    -0.502***   -0.478***   -0.497***   -0.469***
                             (s.e.)        (0.060)      (0.064)     (0.069)     (0.071)     (0.085)
                             N              4,363        4,172       3,664       3,573       2,960
                             n              1,456        1,413       1,257       1,237        994

 Divorced mothers            Estimate     -0.368***    -0.370***   -0.324**    -0.303**     -0.284*
                             (s.e.)        (0.108)      (0.121)     (0.132)     (0.140)     (0.152)
                             N              2,818        2,741       2,385       2,356       2,042
                             n               877          863         763         759         645

 Divorced fathers            Estimate     -0.468***    -0.510***   -0.493***   -0.523***   -0.524***
                             (s.e.)        (0.077)      (0.079)     (0.084)     (0.085)     (0.114)
                             N              1,545        1,431       1,279       1,217        918
                             n               580          550         494         478         349
 Note: See the note to Table 3.
 ∗
   p < 0.10, ∗∗ p < 0.05, ∗∗∗ p < 0.01.


                                                  41
       Table 7: Robustness: Fixed Effects and Instrumental Variable Estimates

                                            Stepparents                         No-Contact Parents
                                            Inclusion of                           Inclusion of
                                            all children      Equal                all children   Equal
                                No will      in the will     division     No will   in the will division
                                 (a)             (b)           (c)         (d)          (e)        (f)

Benchmark: Random Effects
              Estimate     0.006             -0.279***      -0.285***    0.055**      -0.201***     -0.278***
              (s.e.)      (0.019)             (0.017)        (0.016)     (0.024)       (0.020)       (0.021)

A. Fixed Effects
                   Estimate    -0.023***     -0.195***      -0.163***      0.005      -0.047***     -0.083***
                   (s.e.)       (0.008)       (0.017)        (0.019)      (0.008)      (0.016)       (0.019)
                   N            117,189        60,994         60,994      41,075        19,811        19,811
                   n             23,984        14,275         14,275      12,739        6,920         6,920


B. Instrumental Variables
 First stage    Estimate       -0.002***     -0.002***      -0.002***    -0.001**      -0.002**      -0.002**
                (s.e.)          (0.000)       (0.000)        (0.000)      (0.000)       (0.001)       (0.001)
                χ2               45.523        16.064         15.467      10.527        12.360        12.043
                p-value          0.0000        0.0001         0.0001      0.0012        0.0004        0.0005

 Second Stage      Estimate     0.207***     -0.255***      -0.307***      0.062      -0.397***     -0.707***
                   (s.e.)        (0.046)      (0.026)        (0.039)      (0.118)      (0.074)       (0.077)
                   N             69,461        36,959         36,959      27,302        13,499        13,499
                   n             20,304        11,704         11,704      11,024        5,884         5,884
Note: Random effects figures are marginal effects from a random effect probit model. Fixed effects figures in
panel A are estimated from a fixed effect linear model. Regression specifications as in column (a) of Tables 3
and 4. All figures are computed on the core files.
∗
  p < 0.10, ∗∗ p < 0.05, ∗∗∗ p < 0.01.




                                                 42
                      Table 8: Changes in Parents’ Bequest Intentions

                                                                  Transition
                                                           ‘Not all children in    ‘Not all children in the
                                                             the will’ ⇒ ‘All       will’ ⇒ ‘All children
                              ‘No will’ ⇒ ‘Will’           children in the will’     equally in the will’
                                (a)         (b)              (c)          (d)         (e)           (f)
Panel A: Parents with Stepchildren
 Parent has stepchildren       0.001       0.016          -0.085***    -0.083***   -0.078***     -0.058**
                              (0.009)    (0.017)           (0.016)      (0.027)     (0.015)       (0.025)
 Parent has stepchildren ×                 0.012                       -0.238***                -0.169***
 from married to divorced                (0.039)                        (0.032)                   (0.048)
 Parent has stepchildren ×                -0.012                       -0.150***                -0.113***
 from married to widowed                 (0.022)                        (0.029)                   (0.029)

 N                                22,455       8,146        8,759        4,243      11,470        5,279
 n                                7,945        4,076        4,212        2,522      5,290         3,089

Panel B : No-contact Parents
 No-contact parent                 0.005       0.016      -0.165***    -0.257***   -0.181***    -0.229***
                                  (0.011)     (0.041)      (0.022)       (0.066)    (0.018)      (0.056)
 No-contact parent ×                          0.322*                    -0.271**                  -0.142
 from married to divorced                     (0.172)                    (0.127)                 (0.181)
 No-contact parent ×                           0.066                      -0.023                  -0.086
 from married to widowed                      (0.083)                    (0.166)                 (0.137)

 N                                10,392       2,402        2,553         867        3,717        1,136
 n                                4,529        1,455        1,604         647        2,211         840

Panel C : Widowed Parents and Parents with Stepchildren
 Widowed parent             0.099*** 0.114*** 0.083***                 0.147***    0.050**      0.085***
                             (0.016)   (0.020)    (0.024)               (0.032)    (0.020)       (0.025)
 Parent has stepchildren               0.039*                          -0.114***                -0.091***
                                       (0.022)                          (0.035)                  (0.031)
 Widowed parent ×                       -0.032                         -0.127***                -0.092***
 Parent has stepchildren               (0.021)                          (0.035)                  (0.033)

 N                                 4,191       4,191        2,336        2,336       2,917        2,917
 n                                 2,167       2,167        1,448        1,448       1,776        1,776

Panel D: Widowed Parents and No-contact Parents
 Widowed parent            0.112*** 0.111*** 0.168***                  0.190***    0.092***     0.120***
                            (0.020)   (0.024)   (0.035)                 (0.046)     (0.029)      (0.039)
 No-contact parent                     0.043                           -0.263***                -0.229***
                                      (0.046)                           (0.065)                  (0.058)
 Widowed parent ×                      0.035                             -0.031                   -0.095
 No-contact parent                    (0.075)                           (0.164)                  (0.136)

 N                                 2,848       1,979        1,246         786        1,704        1,043
 n                                 1,507       1,183         826          589        1,111         774
Note: See the notes to Tables 3. All figures are computed on the core files.
∗
  p < 0.10, ∗∗ p < 0.05, ∗∗∗ p < 0.01.

                                                 43
Table 9: Effect of Having Stepchildren on Actual Bequest Decisions from the Exit Files

Probability of:                                             Inclusion of
                                                            all children            Equal
                                         No will             in the will           division
                                      (a)      (b)         (a)        (b)        (a)         (b)
All parents           Estimate      -0.003    0.007      -0.009 0.075**      -0.093***     -0.043
                      (s.e.)       (0.023) (0.024)      (0.031) (0.033)       (0.031)     (0.035)
                      N              7,674    7,221       3,952      3,753     3,952        3,753

Mothers               Estimate      -0.015    -0.020     0.003      0.033      -0.045      -0.029
                      (s.e.)       (0.038)   (0.040)    (0.050)    (0.049)    (0.053)     (0.056)
                      N             4,052      3,833     1,951      1,861       1,951      1,861

Fathers               Estimate      -0.013    0.022      0.031     0.102**   -0.077**      -0.043
                      (s.e.)       (0.029)   (0.030)    (0.039)    (0.044)    (0.036)     (0.041)
                      N             3,622     3,385      2,001      1,890      2,001        1,890

Widowed parents       Estimate      0.022     0.019      0.048      0.032      -0.078     -0.094*
                      (s.e.)       (0.039)   (0.041)    (0.032)    (0.036)    (0.053)     (0.057)
                      N             3,233     3,134      1,597      1,548       1,597      1,548

Widows                Estimate      0.033     0.018      0.060      0.054      0.004       0.001
                      (s.e.)       (0.050)   (0.052)    (0.046)    (0.046)    (0.067)     (0.068)
                      N             2,428     2,350      1,169      1,132      1,169       1,132

Widowers              Estimate      -0.035    -0.002     -0.031     -0.068   -0.265***   -0.352***
                      (s.e.)       (0.067)   (0.070)    (0.056)    (0.070)    (0.091)     (0.101)
                      N              805       783        428        415        428         415

Divorced parents      Estimate      0.022     0.071      -0.071     -0.039     -0.228      -0.216
                      (s.e.)       (0.086)   (0.097)    (0.123)    (0.121)    (0.139)     (0.145)
                      N              715       684        281        273        281         273

Divorced mothers      Estimate      0.195     0.249      -0.138     -0.137    -0.418*    -0.473**
                      (s.e.)       (0.164)   (0.176)    (0.231)    (0.222)    (0.222)     (0.211)
                      N              387       376        144        142        144         142

Divorced fathers      Estimate      -0.032    0.018      -0.024     0.049      -0.168      -0.102
                      (s.e.)       (0.101)   (0.115)    (0.155)    (0.153)    (0.178)     (0.191)
                      N              328       307        137        131        137         131
Note: See the text for an explanation of specifications (a)–(b).
∗
  p < 0.10, ∗∗ p < 0.05, ∗∗∗ p < 0.01.




                                                  44
Table 10: Probability that a Stepchild is Explicitly Mentioned in His/Her Stepparent’s
Will

                                       (a)          (b)           (c)           (d)          (e)
 Mean of dependent variable           0.254        0.254         0.239         0.261        0.268

 Stepparent has own                 -0.042***    -0.042***      -0.031**     -0.035***     -0.040**
  genetic children                    (0.014)      (0.014)       (0.014)       (0.017)      (0.019)
 Years spent with stepparent         0.005***     0.005***      0.004***     0.005***      0.004***
                                      (0.001)      (0.001)       (0.001)      (0.001 )      (0.001)
 Age at marriage: 0-6a                 -0.006       -0.006       0.040*       0.073**       0.056*
                                      (0.016)      (0.016)       (0.023)       (0.031)      (0.033)
 Age at marriage: 7-12a                -0.015       -0.015        -0.001        0.018        0.009
                                      (0.013)      (0.013)       (0.017)       (0.022)      (0.024)
 Age at marriage: 13-18a               -0.004       -0.004         0.010        0.008         0.012
                                      (0.010)      (0.010)       (0.013)       (0.016)      (0.018)
 Stepchild is female                    0.008        0.008         0.012      0.063***     0.052***
                                      (0.006)      (0.006)       (0.007)       (0.012)      (0.013)
 Age of stepchild                      -0.001       -0.001         0.000        -0.000       -0.000
                                      (0.001)      (0.001)       (0.001)       (0.001)      (0.001)
 Stepparent is female                   0.001        0.003         0.016        -0.003        0.014
                                      (0.010)      (0.010)       (0.011)       (0.014)      (0.016)
 Stepparent age                      0.004***     0.004***      0.003***     0.002***      0.002***
                                      (0.001)      (0.001)       (0.001)       (0.001)      (0.001)
 Stepparent is in                   -0.045***    -0.045***     -0.057***     -0.056***    -0.062***
  poor/fair health                    (0.007)      (0.007)       (0.008)       (0.010)      (0.011)
 Stepparent takes care                            0.064***      0.082***       0.079**      0.071**
  of stepchild’s child(ren)                        (0.019)       (0.029)       (0.032)      (0.034)
 Stepchild is main recipient                                    0.143***      0.127***     0.125***
  of inter vivos transfers                                       (0.021)       (0.024)      (0.026)
 Log of stepchild’s income                                                   0.128***     0.116***
                                                                               (0.013)      (0.014)
 Stepparent expects help from                                                              0.144***
  stepchild in the future                                                                   (0.023)
 Stepchild’s predicted income is below genetic children’s income by:
  1–49 percent                                                               0.061***     0.052***
                                                                              (0.018)      (0.019)
  50+ percent                                                                0.037***      0.033**
                                                                              (0.014)      (0.015)

 N                                   26,983       26,983        13,904         11,106       9,551
 n                                   13,288       13,288         8,762          7,268       6,393
 Note: Figures are marginal effects from probit regressions. Standard errors are in parentheses.
 N =number of observations; n=number of stepchildren.
 a
   The age reported here refers to the age of the stepchild at the time in which his/her parent
 formed a partnership with his/her stepparent (who writes the will). The reference category is
 18 years or more.
 ∗
   p < 0.10, ∗∗ p < 0.05, ∗∗∗ p < 0.01.




                                                 45
Table 11: Probability that a Genetic Child is Explicitly Mentioned in His/Her No-contact
or Infrequent-contact Parent’s Will

                                             (a)             (b)         (c)         (d)              (e)
 Mean of dependent variable                 0.428           0.410       0.431       0.443            0.443

 Frequency of contacts (base=frequent)
 Infrequent                            -0.154***          -0.140***   -0.169***   -0.263***    -0.246***
                                         (0.007)            (0.009)     (0.045)     (0.039)      (0.045)
 No contact                            -0.236***          -0.213***   -0.312***   -0.329***    -0.284***
                                         (0.006)            (0.009)     (0.018)     (0.025)      (0.047)
 Parent is female                       0.033***             0.016*     0.034*      0.038**      0.035*
                                         (0.008)            (0.010)     (0.017)     (0.019)      (0.019)
 Parent age                             0.020***           0.018***    0.020***    0.021***     0.021***
                                         (0.000)            (0.001)     (0.001)     (0.001)      (0.001)
 Child is female                          0.004            0.127***    0.100***    0.103***     0.103***
                                         (0.005)            (0.007)     (0.011)     (0.012)      (0.012)
 Child age                                0.000             -0.001*      -0.001      -0.001       -0.001
                                         (0.000)            (0.001)     (0.001)     (0.001)      (0.001)
 Parent is married                      0.021***             -0.002   -0.132***   -0.136***    -0.134***
                                         (0.006)            (0.007)     (0.019)     (0.021)      (0.021)
 Parent married more than once         -0.091***          -0.065***   -0.065***   -0.085***    -0.087***
                                         (0.007)            (0.008)     (0.013)     (0.014)      (0.014)
 Parent takes care of child’s children                        0.002      -0.007      -0.003       -0.002
                                                            (0.009)     (0.013)     (0.014)      (0.014)
 Child is main recipient of inter vivos transfers          0.221***   0.189***     0.176***     0.176***
                                                            (0.010)     (0.014)     (0.014)      (0.014)
 Log of child’s income                                     0.205***   0.186***    0.188***     0.187***
                                                            (0.007)     (0.010)     (0.011)      (0.012)
 Child is not spouse’s genetic child                                  -0.084***   -0.071***    -0.053***
                                                                        (0.015)     (0.017)      (0.018)
 Parent expects help from                                                             0.006        0.002
  child in the future                                                               (0.011)      (0.011)
 Child is not spouse’s genetic child × infrequent contacts                                      -0.107**
                                                                                                 (0.054)
 Child is not spouse’s genetic child × no contacts                                             -0.281***
                                                                                                 (0.037)
 Parent expects help in future × infrequent contacts                                               0.094
                                                                                                 (0.085)
 Parent expects help in future × no contacts                                                    0.394***
                                                                                                 (0.108)

 N                                         157,173         94,003      39,300       34,145       34,140
 n                                          73,522         54,423      26,902       23,928       23,982

 p-valuea                                  0.0000          0.0000      0.0018       0.1225       0.5355
 Note: Figures are marginal effects and standard errors are in parentheses.
 a
   Refers to the p-value of the test of equality between the coefficients of “Infrequent contacts”
 and “No contacts”.
 N =number of observations; n=number of children.
 ∗
   p < 0.10, ∗∗ p < 0.05, ∗∗∗ p < 0.01.


                                                     46
References

American Bar Association. 2013. Guide to Wills and Estates, 4th edition. New York:
Random House.
Andreoni, James. 1989. “Giving with Impure Altruism: Applications to Charity and
Ricardian Equivalence.” Journal of Political Economy, 97(6): 1447–1458.
Arellano, Manuel. 2003. Panel Data Econometrics. Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Barro, Robert J. 1974. “Are Government Bonds Net Wealth?” Journal of Political
Economy, 82(6): 1095–1117.
Becker, Gary S. 1974. “A Theory of Social Interactions.” Journal of Political Economy,
82(6): 1063–1093.
Becker, Gary S. and Nigel Tomes. 1979. ”An Equilibrium Theory of the Distribution of
Incomes and Intergenerational Mobility.” Journal of Political Economy, 87(6): 1053-1189.
Behrman, Jere R. 1997. “Intrahousehold Distribution and the Family.” In Handbook of
Population and Family Economics, edited by Mark R. Rosenzweig and Oded Stark, vol.
1A. Amsterdam: North-Holland, pp. 125–187.
Behrman, Jere R., Robert A. Pollak, and Paul Taubman. 1982. “Parental Preferences
and Provision for Progeny.” Journal of Political Economy, 90(2): 52–73.
Behrman, Jere R., Robert A. Pollak, and Paul Taubman. 1986. “Do Parents Favor
Boys?” International Economic Review, 27(1): 31–52.
Behrman, Jere R., Robert A. Pollak, and Paul Taubman. 1995. From Parent to Child:
Intrahousehold Allocations and Intergenerational Relations in the United States. Chicago:
University of Chicago Press.
Behrman, Jere R., and Mark R. Rosenzweig, 2004. “Parental Allocations to Children:
New Evidence on Bequest Differences among Siblings.” Review of Economics and Statis-
tics, 86(2): 637–640.
Behrman Jere R., and Paul Taubman. 1986. “Birth Order, Schooling and Earnings.”
Journal of Labor Economics, 4(3, pt. 2): S121–S145.
Bernheim, B. Douglas, and Sergei Severinov. 2003. “Bequests as Signals: An Explana-
tion for the Equal Division Puzzle.” Journal of Political Economy, 111(4): 733–764.
Bernheim, B. Douglas, Andrei Shleifer, and Lawrence H. Summers. 1985. “The Strategic
Bequest Motive.” Journal of Political Economy, 93(6): 1045–1076.
Beshears, John, James J. Choi, David Laibson, and Brigitte C. Madrian. 2009. “The Im-
portance of Default Options for Retirement Saving Outcomes: Evidence from the United
States.” In Social Security Policy in a Changing Environment, edited by Jeffrey R. Brown,
Jeffrey B. Liebman, and David A. Wise. Chicago: University of Chicago Press, pp. 167–
195.
Blattmachr, Jonathan G. 2008. “Reducing Trust and Estate Litigation through Disclo-
sure, In Terrorem Clauses, Mediation and Arbitration.” Cardozo Journal of Conflict
Resolution, 9(2): 237–266.
Brashier, Ralph C. 2004. Inheritance Law and the Evolving Family. Philadelphia, PA:
Temple University Press.


                                           47
Brown, Meta. 2006. “Informal Care and the Division of End-of-Life Transfers.” Journal
of Human Resources, 41(1): 191–219.
Bumpass, Larry, and Hsien-Hen Lu. 2000. “Trends in Cohabitation and Implications for
Children’s Family Contexts in the United States.” Population Studies, 54(1): 29–41.
Cahn, Naomi R. 2005. “Adoptees, Families, Stepfamilies and Inheritance.” Adoption
Quarterly, 8(2): 57–66.
Card, David. 2001. “Estimating the Return to Schooling: Progress on Some Persistent
Econometric Problems.” Econometrica, 69(5): 1127–1160.
Carver, Charles S., Michael F. Scheier, Suzanne C. Segerstrom. “Optimism.” Clinical
Psychology Review 30(7): 879–889.
Chu, C.Y. Cyrus 1991. “Primogeniture.” Journal of Political Economy, 99 (1): 78–99.
Collins, Dennis W. 2000. “Avoiding a Will Contest: The Impossible Dream?” Creighton
Law Review, 34(1): 7–45.
Contemporary Studies Project. 1978. “A Comparison of Iowans Dispositive Preferences
with Selected Provisions of the Iowa and Uniform Probate Codes.” Iowa Law Review,
63(5): 1041–1152.
Cox, Donald. 1987. “Motives for Private Income Transfer.” Journal of Political Economy,
95(3): 508–546.
Cox, Donald. 2003. “Private Transfers within the Family: Mothers, Fathers, Sons, and
Daughters.” In Death and Dollars: The Role of Gifts and Bequests in America, edited by
Alicia H. Munnell and Annika Sunden. Washington, D.C.: Brookings Institution Press,
pp.168-197.
Cox, Donald. 2007. “Biological Basics and the Economics of the Family.” Journal of
Economic Perspectives, 21(2): 91–108.
Cox, Donald, and Mark R. Rank. 1992. “Inter-Vivos Transfers and Intergenerational
Exchange.” Review of Economics and Statistics, 74(2): 305–314.
Cremer, Terin Barbas. 2011. “Reforming Intestate Inheritance for Stepchildren and
Stepparents.” Cardozo Journal of Law and Gender, 18(1): 89–108.
Cutler, David M., Fabian Lange, Ellen Meara, Seth Richards-Shubik, and Christopher J.
Ruhm. 2011. “Rising Educational Gradients in Mortality: The Role of Behavioral Risk
Factors.” Journal of Health Economics, 30(6): 1174–1187.
Dukeminier, Jesse and Robert H. Sitkoff. 2013. Wills, Trusts, and Estates, 9th edition.
New York: Wolters Kluwer.
Erixson, Oscar, and Henry Ohlsson. 2015. “Estate Division: Equal Sharing, Exchange
Motives, and Cinderella Effects.” Uppsala University, mimeo.
Fellows, Mary L., Rita J. Simon, and William Rau. 1978. “Public Attitudes About
Property Distribution at Death and Intestate Succession Laws in the United States.”
American Bar Foundation Research Journal, 3(2): 319–391.
Fried, Martin L. 1992. “The Uniform Probate Code: Intestate Succession and Related
Matters.” Albany Law Review, 55(4): 927–40.
Friedman, Lawrence M. 2009. Dead Hands: A Social History of Wills, Trusts, and Inher-
itance Law. Stanford, CA: Stanford Law Books.

                                          48
Gary, Susan N. 2000. “Adapting Intestacy Laws to Changing Families.” Law and In-
equality, 18(1): 1–82.
Grossman, Joanna L., and Lawrence M. Friedman. 2011. Inside the Castle: Law and
Family in 20th Century America. Princeton: Princeton University Press.
Hanson, Thomas M. 1995. “Intestate Succession for Stepchildren: California Leads the
Way, but Has It Gone Far Enough?” Hastings Law Journal, 47(1): 257–286.
Hirsch, Adam J. 2004. “Default Rules in Inheritance Law: A Problem in Search of Its
Context.” Fordham Law Review, 73(3): 1031–1101.
Laferrère, Anne, and François-Charles Wolff. 2006. “Microeconomic Models of Family
Transfers.” In Handbook of the Economics of Giving, Altruism and Reciprocity, edited
by Serge-Christophe Kolm and Jean Mercier Ythier. Amsterdam: North-Holland, pp.
889–969.
Laitner, John. 1997. “Intergenerational and Interhousehold Economic Links.” In Hand-
book of Population and Family Economics, edited by Mark R. Rosenzweig and Oded Stark,
vol. 1A. Amsterdam: North-Holland, pp. 189–238.
Laitner John, and Henry Ohlsson. 2001. “Bequest Motives: A Comparison of Sweden
and the United States.” Journal of Public Economics 79(1): 205–236.
Light, Audrey, and Kathleen McGarry. 2004. “Why Parents Play Favorites: Explanations
for Unequal Bequests.” American Economic Review, 94(5): 1669–1681.
Lundberg, Shelly, and Robert A. Pollak. 2014. “Cohabitation and the Uneven Retreat
from Marriage in the U.S., 1950–2010.”In Human Capital in History: The American
Record, edited by Leah P. Boustan, Carola Frydman, and Robert A. Margo. Chicago:
University of Chicago Press, pp. 241–272.
Lundberg, Shelly and Robert A. Pollak. 2015. “The Evolving Role of Marriage: 1950–
2010.” Future of Children, 25(2): 29–50.
Mahoney, Margaret M. 1989. “Stepfamilies in the Law of Intestate Succession and Wills.”
U.C. Davis Law Review, 22(3): 917–950.
Menchik, Paul. 1980. “Primogeniture, Equal Sharing, and the U.S. Distribution of
Wealth.” Quarterly Journal of Economics, 94(1): 299–316.
Menchik, Paul. 1988. “Unequal Estate Division: Is it Altruism, Reverse Bequests, or
Simply Noise?” In Modeling the Accumulation and the Distribution of Wealth, edited by
Denis Kessler and Andre Masson. New York: Oxford University Press, pp. 105–116.
McGarry, Kathleen. 1999. “Inter Vivos Transfers and Intended Bequests.” Journal of
Public Economics, 73(3): 321–351.
McGarry, Kathleen. 2008. “Inheritance and Bequests.” In The New Palgrave Dictionary
of Economics, Second Edition, edited by Steven N. Durlauf and Lawrence E. Blume.
London: Palgrave Macmillan.
McGarry, Kathleen. 2013. ”An Analysis of Family Transfers: Theory and Evidence.”
February, mimeo.
Noble, Andrew L. 2002. “Intestate Succession for Stepchildren in Pennsylvania: A Pro-
posal for Reform.” University of Pittsburgh Law Review, 64(4): 835–853.
Pezzin, Liliana E., and Barbara Steinberg Schone. 1998. “Parental Marital Disruption


                                          49
and Intergenerational Transfers: An Analysis of Lone Elderly Parents and Their Chil-
dren.” Demography, 36(3): 287–297.
Pezzin, Liliana E., Robert A. Pollak and Barbara Steinberg Schone. 2008. “Parental
Marital Disruption, Family Type, and Transfers to Disabled Elderly Parents.” Journal of
Gerontology, Series B: Social Sciences, 63(6): S349–S358.
Pollak, Robert A.. 1988. “Tied Transfers and Paternalistic Preferences,” American Eco-
nomic Review Papers and Proceedings, 78(2): 240–244.
Puri, Manju, and David T. Robinson. 2007. “Optimism and Economic Choice.” Journal
of Financial Economics, 86(1): 71–99.
Rasmussen, Heather N., Michael F. Scheier, and Joel B. Greenhouse. 2009. “Optimism
and Physical Health: A Meta-Analytic Review.” Annals of Behavioral Medicine, 37(3):
239-256.
Reid, Kenneth G.C., Marius J. de Waal, and Reinhard Zimmermann. 2011. Testamentary
Formalities. Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Rosenbury, Laura. 2005.“Two Ways to End a Marriage: Divorce or Death.” Utah Law
Review, 2005(4): 1227–1290.
Schanzenbach, Max M., and Robert H. Sitkoff. 2009. “The Equal Bequest Puzzle: A
Legal Perspective.” Harvard Law School, mimeo.
Scheier, Michael F., Charles S. Carver, and Michael W. Bridges. 1994. “Distinguish-
ing Optimism from Neuroticism (and Trait Anxiety, Self-Mastery, and Self-Esteem): A
Reevaluation of the Life Orientation Test.” Journal of Personality and Social Psychology,
67(6): 1063–1078.
Scheier, Michael F., Karen A. Matthews, Jane F. Owens, George J. Magovern, R. Craig
Lefebvre, R. Anne Abbott, Charles S. Carver. 1989. “Dispositional Optimism and Re-
covery from Coronary Artery Bypass Surgery: The Beneficial Effects on Physical and
Psychological Well-Being.” Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 57(6): 1024–
1040.
Schulz, Richard, Jamila Bookwala, Judith E. Knapp, Michael Scheier, Gail M. Williamson.
1996. “Pessimism, Age, and Cancer Mortality.” Psychology and Aging, 11(2): 304–309.
Solberg Nes, Lise, and Suzanne C. Segerstrom. 2006. “Dispositional Optimism and
Coping: A Meta-Analytic Review.” Personality and Social Psychology Review, 10(3):
235–251.
Srivastava, Sanjay, Kelly M. McGonigal, Jane M. Richards, Emily A. Butler, and James
J. Gross. 2006. “Optimism in Close Relationships: How Seeing Things in a Positive Light
Makes Them So.” Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 91(1): 143–153.
Stevenson, Betsey, and Justin Wolfers. 2007. ”Marriage and Divorce: Changes and their
Driving Forces,” Journal of Economic Perspectives, 21(2): 27-52.
Thaler, Richard H. and Cass R. Sunstein. 2008. Nudge: Improving Decisions About
Health, Wealth, and Happiness. New Haven, CT: Yale University Press.
Tomes, Nigel. 1981. “The Family, Inheritance and the Intergenerational Transmission of
Inequality.” Journal of Political Economy, 89(5): 928–958.
Tomes, Nigel. 1988. “Inheritance and Inequality Within the Family: Equal Division
Among Unequals, or Do the Poor Get More?” In Modelling the Accumulation and the

                                           50
Distribution of Wealth, edited by Denis Kessler and Andre Masson. New York: Oxford
University Press, pp. 79–104.
Weisbord, Reid K. 2012. “Wills for Everyone: Helping Individuals Opt Out of Intestacy.”
Boston College Law Review, 53(3): 877–952.
Wilhelm, Mark O. 1996. “Bequest Behavior and the Effect of Heirs’ Earnings: Testing
the Altruistic Model of Bequests.” American Economic Review, 86(4): 874–892.
Wooldridge, J. M. 2010. Econometric Analysis of Cross Section and Panel Data. Cam-
bridge, MA: MIT Press, second edition.
Wypyski, Eugene M. 1984. The Law of Inheritance in All Fifty States. New York: Oceana.




                                          51
Appendix

                Table A1: Descriptive Statistics – Dependent Variables

                 (a)          (b)               (c)             (d)
                            Parents           Parents
                        have no contact    have contacts    Difference
                 All     with at least        with all       (b)-(c)
                           one child         children       (t-value)       N          n
 A. No will
    All         0.446         0.592             0.436        0.156***    41,075      12,739
                                                             (15.768)
    Divorced    0.627         0.703             0.617        0.085***     7,897      2,468
                                                              (4.991)
    Widowed     0.391         0.562             0.379        0.183***    14,384      4,073
                                                             (11.207)
 B. Will includes all children
    All         0.822         0.567             0.836        -0.269***   19,811      5,734
                                                              (22.302)
    Divorced    0.820         0.470             0.860        -0.390***    2,473       657
                                                              (15.957)
    Widowed     0.832         0.513             0.849        -0.336***    7,461      2,045
                                                              (17.600)
 C. Equal intended bequest
    All        0.756       0.465                0.772        -0.307***   19,811      5,734
                                                              (22.716)
    Divorced    0.742         0.373             0.783        -0.409***    2,473       657
                                                              (14.576)
    Widowed     0.751         0.402             0.770        -0.368***    7,461      2,045
                                                              (16.630)
 Note: N =number of observations; n=number of individuals. *p < 0.10, **p < 0.05, ***p < 0.01.
 All figures are calculated on the core files.




                                              52
Table A2: Effect of No Contacts on the Probability that the Will Includes All Children

                                                                  Specification
                                             (a)          (b)          (c)        (d)          (e)
All parents               Estimate       -0.201***    -0.216***    -0.239*** -0.240***     -0.221***
                          (s.e.)          (0.020)      (0.023)      (0.027)     (0.028)     (0.028)
                          N                19,811       15,949       12,460     11,354       10,724
                          n                 6,920        6,365        4,842      4,680        4,470

Mothers                   Estimate       -0.173***    -0.195***    -0.220***   -0.226***   -0.209***
                          (s.e.)          (0.022)      (0.026)      (0.031)     (0.033)     (0.032)
                          N                16,449       13,116       9,838       8,986       8,572
                          n                 5,418        5,013       3,632       3,529       3,404

Fathers                   Estimate       -0.279***    -0.269***    -0.278***   -0.262***   -0.250***
                          (s.e.)          (0.044)      (0.048)      (0.052)     (0.054)     (0.057)
                          N                3,362        2,833        2,622       2,368       2,152
                          n                1,503        1,353        1,210       1,151       1,066

Widows and widowers       Estimate       -0.231***    -0.233***    -0.205***   -0.201***   -0.196***
                          (s.e.)          (0.035)      (0.036)      (0.038)     (0.038)     (0.037)
                          N                7,461        7,401        6,515       6,472       6,221
                          n                3,075        3,058        2,839       2,825       2,745

Widows                    Estimate       -0.232***    -0.236***    -0.203***   -0.201***   -0.192***
                          (s.e.)          (0.040)      (0.040)      (0.042)     (0.042)     (0.041)
                          N                6,106        6,058        5,303       5,270       5,081
                          n                2,415        2,400        2,226       2,215       2,157

Widowers                  Estimate       -0.212***    -0.206***     -0.185**   -0.175**    -0.188**
                          (s.e.)          (0.078)      (0.078)       (0.087)    (0.086)     (0.090)
                          N                1,355        1,343         1,212      1,202       1,140
                          n                 661          659           613        610         588

Divorced parents          Estimate       -0.270***    -0.274***    -0.269***   -0.274***   -0.234***
                          (s.e.)          (0.053)      (0.053)      (0.059)     (0.060)     (0.061)
                          N                2,473        2,441        2,115       2,093       1,856
                          n                1,012        1,004         899         891         783

Divorced mothers          Estimate       -0.239***    -0.253***    -0.263***   -0.291***   -0.250***
                          (s.e.)          (0.071)      (0.073)      (0.083)     (0.087)     (0.085)
                          N                1,678        1,661        1,447       1,437       1,313
                          n                 658          655          591         588         533

Divorced fathers          Estimate       -0.344***    -0.338***    -0.319***   -0.297***   -0.224**
                          (s.e.)          (0.079)      (0.080)      (0.086)     (0.085)     (0.096)
                          N                 795          780          668         656         543
                          n                 354          349          308         303         250
Note: See the notes to Tables 3 and 4.
∗
  p < 0.10, ∗∗ p < 0.05, ∗∗∗ p < 0.01.



                                                 53
Table A3: Effect of No Contacts on the Probability that Parents Intend to Divide their
Estate Equally Among All Children

                                                                Specification
                                              (a)          (b)       (c)        (d)            (e)
 All parents               Estimate       -0.278***    -0.302*** -0.327*** -0.332***       -0.316***
                           (s.e.)          (0.021)      (0.024)   (0.028)     (0.029)       (0.030)
                           N                19,811       15,949    12,460     11,354         10,724
                           n                 6,920        6,365     4,842      4,680          4,470

 Mothers                   Estimate       -0.246***    -0.276***   -0.313***   -0.324***   -0.309***
                           (s.e.)          (0.025)      (0.028)     (0.034)     (0.035)     (0.036)
                           N                16,449       13,116      9,838       8,986       8,572
                           n                 5,418        5,013      3,632       3,529       3,404

 Fathers                   Estimate       -0.366***    -0.371***   -0.354***   -0.343***   -0.337***
                           (s.e.)          (0.042)      (0.047)     (0.050)     (0.052)     (0.057)
                           N                3,362        2,833       2,622       2,368       2,152
                           n                1,503        1,353       1,210       1,151       1,066

 Widows and widowers       Estimate       -0.352***    -0.357***   -0.332***   -0.330***   -0.328***
                           (s.e.)          (0.037)      (0.037)     (0.042)     (0.042)     (0.043)
                           N                 7461        7,401       6,515       6,472       6,221
                           n                3,075        3,058       2,839       2,825       2,745

 Widows                    Estimate       -0.356***    -0.361***   -0.330***   -0.329***   -0.323***
                           (s.e.)          (0.042)      (0.043)     (0.048)     (0.048)     (0.049)
                           N                6,106        6,058       5,303       5,270       5,081
                           n                2,415        2,400       2,226       2,215       2,157

 Widowers                  Estimate       -0.343***    -0.351***   -0.350***   -0.348***   -0.352***
                           (s.e.)          (0.079)      (0.081)     (0.088)     (0.089)     (0.090)
                           N                1,355        1,343       1,212       1,202       1,140
                           n                 661          659         613         610         588

 Divorced parents          Estimate       -0.377***    -0.388***   -0.382***   -0.392***   -0.371***
                           (s.e.)          (0.050)      (0.051)     (0.057)     (0.058)     (0.063)
                           N                2,473        2,441       2,115       2,093       1,856
                           n                1,012        1,004        899         891         783

 Divorced mothers          Estimate       -0.338***    -0.371***   -0.377***   -0.416***   -0.399***
                           (s.e.)          (0.071)      (0.073)     (0.082)     (0.084)     (0.087)
                           N                1,678        1,661       1,447       1,437       1,313
                           n                 658          655         591         588         533

 Divorced fathers          Estimate       -0.428***    -0.421***   -0.394***   -0.379***   -0.357***
                           (s.e.)          (0.069)      (0.070)     (0.078)     (0.079)     (0.095)
                           N                 795          780         668         656         543
                           n                 354          349         308         303         250
 Note: See the notes to Tables 3 and 4.
 ∗
   p < 0.10, ∗∗ p < 0.05, ∗∗∗ p < 0.01.


                                                  54
Table A4: Effect of Having Stepchildren and No Contacts on the Probability that Parents
Intend to Divide their Estate Equally Among All Children — Alternative Sample Selection

                                                          Specification
                                    (a)           (b)         (c)            (d)         (e)
    A. Parents with Stepchildren
     All parents Estimate -0.298***           -0.327***    -0.290***      -0.322***   -0.396***
                  (s.e.)       (0.018)         (0.022)      (0.023)        (0.026)     (0.031)
                  N            53,105           35,288       33,066         25,207      17,868
                  n            13,504           11,528       9,255          8,418       5,870

    B. No-contact Parents
     All parents Estimate        -0.229***    -0.248***    -0.255***      -0.257***   -0.253***
                  (s.e.)          (0.023)      (0.026)      (0.030)        (0.032)     (0.032)
                  N                17,795       14,482       11,483         10,518      9,956
                  n                6,574        6,003        4,624          4,467       4,281
    Note: The estimating sample includes only parents with two or more children and a will
    that mentions all of the children. For other explanations, see the notes to Tables 3 and 4.
    ∗
      p < 0.10, ∗∗ p < 0.05, ∗∗∗ p < 0.01.




                                                 55
Table A5: Probability that a Male Stepchild is Explicitly Mentioned in His/Her Steppar-
ent’s Will

                                        (a)          (b)          (c)          (d)          (e)
  Mean of dependent variable           0.261        0.261        0.233        0.258        0.266

  Stepparent has own                 -0.060***    -0.060***    -0.048***    -0.072***    -0.090***
   genetic children                    (0.018)      (0.018)      (0.018)      (0.024)      (0.027)
  Years spent with stepparent         0.004***     0.004***     0.003***    0.004***     0.004***
                                       (0.001)      (0.001)      (0.001)      (0.001)      (0.001)
  Age at marriage: 0-6a                 -0.017       -0.016       0.023        0.047        0.046
                                       (0.021)      (0.021)      (0.029)      (0.040)      (0.044)
  Age at marriage: 7-12a                -0.000       -0.001       0.040      0.073**      0.078**
                                       (0.019)      (0.019)      (0.026)      (0.035)      (0.040)
  Age at marriage: 13-18a               -0.016       -0.015       -0.000       0.001        0.005
                                       (0.013)      (0.013)      (0.016)      (0.021)      (0.024)
  Age of stepchild                      0.000        0.000       0.002*        0.001        0.002
                                       (0.001)      (0.001)      (0.001)      (0.001)      (0.001)
  Stepparent is female                   0.003        0.005      0.034**       0.007        0.023
                                       (0.013)      (0.013)      (0.014)      (0.019)      (0.022)
  Stepparent age                      0.003***     0.003***     0.002**        0.000        0.000
                                       (0.001)      (0.001)      (0.001)      (0.001)      (0.001)
  Stepparent is in                   -0.060***    -0.059***    -0.080***    -0.095***    -0.109***
   poor/fair health                    (0.008)      (0.008)      (0.010)      (0.012)      (0.014)
  Stepparent takes care                            0.090***      0.099**       0.074        0.085
   of stepchild’s child(ren)                        (0.030)      (0.045)      (0.048)      (0.052)
  Stepchild is main recipient                                   0.164***     0.160***     0.164***
   of inter vivos transfers                                      (0.031)      (0.036)      (0.039)
  Log of stepchild’s income                                                 0.131***     0.110***
                                                                              (0.018)      (0.020)
  Stepparent expects help from                                                            0.108***
   stepchild in the future                                                                 (0.032)
  Stepchild’s predicted income is below genetic children’s income by:
   1–49 percent                                                       0.103***            0.085**
                                                                       (0.036)            (0.037)
   50+ percent                                                         0.046**             0.029
                                                                       (0.019)            (0.020)

  N                                   13,598       13,598        6,989        5,562        4,782
  n                                   8,198        8,198         5,001        4,080        3,569
  Note: Figures are marginal effects from probit regressions. Standard errors are in parentheses.
  N =number of observations; n=number of stepchildren.
  a
    The age reported here refers to the age of the stepchild at the time in which his parent for-
  med a partnership with his stepparent (who writes the will). The reference category is 18
  years or more.
  ∗
    p < 0.10, ∗∗ p < 0.05, ∗∗∗ p < 0.01.




                                                 56
Table A6: Probability that a Female Stepchild is Explicitly Mentioned in His/Her Step-
parent’s Will

                                         (a)            (b)        (c)          (d)         (e)
   Mean of dependent variable           0.272          0.272      0.245        0.265       0.269

   Stepparent has own                    -0.028       -0.028       -0.010      -0.003       0.009
    genetic children                    (0.018)      (0.018)      (0.018)     (0.022)     (0.022)
   Years spent with stepparent         0.006***     0.006***     0.004***    0.005***    0.006***
                                        (0.001)      (0.001)      (0.001)     (0.001)     (0.001)
   Age at marriage: 0-6a                 -0.004       -0.003        0.048     0.085*        0.055
                                        (0.024)      (0.024)      (0.034)     (0.046)     (0.047)
   Age at marriage: 7-12a                -0.025       -0.024       -0.029      -0.021      -0.041
                                        (0.018)      (0.018)      (0.021)     (0.028)     (0.027)
   Age at marriage: 13-18a                0.001       0.001        0.016        0.007       0.006
                                        (0.015)      (0.015)      (0.019)     (0.023)     (0.025)
   Age of stepchild                    -0.002**      -0.002*       -0.001      -0.001     -0.002*
                                        (0.001)      (0.001)      (0.001)     (0.001)     (0.001)
   Stepparent is female                   0.005        0.007        0.002      -0.008       0.012
                                        (0.014)      (0.014)      (0.015)     (0.019)     (0.022)
   Stepparent age                      0.005***     0.005***    0.005***     0.004***    0.004***
                                        (0.001)      (0.001)      (0.001)     (0.001)     (0.001)
   Stepparent is in                   -0.038***    -0.038***    -0.034***      -0.021      -0.019
    poor/fair health                    (0.010)      (0.010)      (0.011)     (0.015)     (0.017)
   Stepparent takes care                             0.060**      0.062*      0.081*        0.059
    of stepchild’s child(ren)                        (0.026)      (0.037)     (0.045)     (0.045)
   Stepchild is main recipient                                   0.156***    0.122***    0.117***
    of inter vivos transfers                                      (0.030)     (0.033)     (0.036)
   Log of stepchild’s income                                                 0.142***    0.135***
                                                                              (0.019)     (0.021)
   Stepparent expects help from                                                          0.165***
    stepchild in the future                                                               (0.032)
   Stepchild’s predicted income is below genetic children’s income by:
    1–49 percent                                                               0.031       0.032
                                                                              (0.022)     (0.024)
    50+ percent                                                                0.019       0.025
                                                                              (0.021)     (0.023)

   N                                   13,385          13,385     6,915        5,544       4,769
   n                                    8,198           8,198     5,082        4,159       3,635
   Note: Figures are marginal effects from probit regressions. Standard errors are in parentheses.
   N =number of observations; n=number of stepchildren.
   a
     The age reported here refers to the age of the stepchild at the time in which her parent for-
   med a partnership with her stepparent (who writes the will). The reference category is 18
   years or more.
   ∗
     p < 0.10, ∗∗ p < 0.05, ∗∗∗ p < 0.01.




                                                  57
