NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

CALORIC REQUIREMENTS AND FOOD CONSUMPTION PATTERNS OF THE
POOR
Shari Eli
Nicholas Li
Working Paper 21697
http://www.nber.org/papers/w21697

NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
November 2015

We would like to thank Pierre-Olivier Gourinchas, Chang-Tai Hsieh, Ronald Lee, and Ted Miguel
for their comments and suggestions. We also thank Gustavo Bobonis, Stephan Litschig, Daniel Lafave,
Pranab Bardhan, Tom Vogl, Anne Case, Jeff Hammer, as well as participants of the Berkeley Development
Seminar, Princeton’s Center for Health and Well-being seminar, University of Toronto’s SWEAT
seminar, North East Universities Development Consortium (NEUDC) 2012 conference and Population
Association of America (PAA) 2013 conference. Lucas Parker provided outstanding research assistance.
Nicholas Li gratefully acknowledges financial support from the Social Sciences and Humanities Research
Council of Canada, the U.C. Berkeley Institute for Business and Economics Research, and the Center
for Equitable Growth. Shari Eli gratefully acknowledges the financial support of the NICHD grant
T32-HD007275 and NIA grant T32-AG000246. All errors are our own The views expressed herein
are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic
Research.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peerreviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.
© 2015 by Shari Eli and Nicholas Li. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two
paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice,
is given to the source.

Caloric Requirements and Food Consumption Patterns of the Poor
Shari Eli and Nicholas Li
NBER Working Paper No. 21697
November 2015
JEL No. I3,I31,I32,J1,O1,O53,R2
ABSTRACT
How much do calorie requirements vary across households and how do they affect food consumption
patterns? Since caloric intake is a widely-used indicator of poverty and welfare, investigating changes
in caloric requirements and food consumption patterns is important, especially for the poor. Combining
anthropometric and time-use data for India, we construct a quantitative measure of individual and
household caloric requirements. We then link our estimates of caloric requirements with consumption
data to examine how caloric requirements coupled with household expenditures shape food demand.
Our applications include the measurement of hunger and the role of caloric requirements in explaining
food consumption puzzles related to household-scale and changes in caloric intake over time.

Shari Eli
Department of Economics
University of Toronto
150 St. George Street
Toronto, ON M5S 3G7
and NBER
shari.eli@utoronto.ca
Nicholas Li
University of Toronto
150 St. George Street
Toronto, ON M5S 3G7
Canada
nick.li@utoronto.ca

1

1.

Introduction

There is a long tradition of using food consumption patterns to infer household welfare dating back to Ernst Engel’s pioneering household budget studies (Engel (1895)).
As households become richer, we expect them to spend a lower share of their budgets
on food, to consume more calories (up to satiation), and to consume more expensive
types of food. Recent work in the literature has focused on using food consumption patterns to measure inflation (Costa (2001), Hamilton (2001)), international pricedifferences (Almas (2012)), and hunger (Logan (2009), Jensen and Miller (2010))1 . The
cost of buying a set number of calories (and other nutrients) has also been used to
construct absolute poverty lines used to measure progress in poverty reduction and
as eligibility thresholds for government assistance.
While food consumption patterns clearly contain useful information, their relationship to household welfare is not always straightforward. Several recent studies
have documented “puzzles” or “paradoxes” in food consumption. Deaton and Dreze
(2009) document a decline in caloric intake for Indian households between 1983 and
2005 despite real expenditure growth. Deaton and Dreze (2009) show that the decline
occurs both because households at a given expenditure level spend less on food and
because within food they spend less on staples that are cheaper sources of calories.
Similar patterns have been documented by Du et al. (2002) and Clark et al. (1995) for
China and Great Britain during the Industrial Revolution. Deaton and Dreze (2009)
suggest that improvements in the disease environment and lower physical activity
levels may have lowered calorie requirements, thereby decreasing calorie and food
demands for a given level of income and prices. This would be consistent with modest gains in height and BMI observed over this period despite falling caloric intake.
Duh and Spears (2013) explicitly test whether the disease environment is related to
food consumption patterns and find some supporting evidence. Deaton and Dreze
(2009) do not argue for a large role of relative food vs. non-food prices but acknowledge that other factors may play a role, including changing consumption possibilities. 2 In a different context, Deaton and Paxson (1998) show that larger households
1

Older applications of calorie Engel curves include the construction of equivalence scales and
poverty measures (see Statistics Canada (2009), Barten (1964), and Deaton and Muellbauer (1986))
2
Gupta (2013) argues that conspicuous consumption (Veblen goods) may play some role in these
patterns for India. Basu and Basole (2013) argue that the decline is caused by rising expenditures on
health, education and transport, which have squeezed food from limited budgets, as well as a decline
in home food production. Smith (2013) argues that there may have been no decline in intake at all,

2
spend less on food per capita than smaller households with the same per capita expenditures. They argue that their finding is puzzling since larger households can
economize on shareable goods, making them able to afford more private goods such
as food. Deaton and Paxson (1998) suggest plausible explanations for their findings,
including that households have certain “caloric overheads” or fixed costs that would
lower the caloric requirements per capita of larger households.3
In this paper, we use data on individuals in India to measure variation in caloric
requirements across households and to examine how this variation affects food consumption patterns. Our first main contribution is to provide a quantitative measure
of individual and household caloric requirements for a developing country. To do
this, we combine anthropometric data, which enables us to estimate basic metabolic
requirements, with detailed time-use data matched to FAO activity-level measures,
which enables us to estimate activity levels. We then link our estimates of caloric
requirements with consumption data to examine how caloric requirements and total
household expenditures together shape food demand through the following: 1) the
budget share of food; 2) the staple share of calories; and 3) caloric intake. We then
explore to what extent differences in caloric requirements can explain differences in
food consumption patterns for India between 1983 and 2005, and between smaller
and larger households in a cross-section.
To measure caloric requirements, we follow the methodology adopted by the
FAO/UNU/WHO Export Consultation (1985,2001) and the Indian Council of Medical Research (1989,2009). This requires estimating the Rest or Basal Metabolic Requirements for each individual using data on height and weight from India’s National Family Health Survey (2005) and National Nutrition Monitoring Bureau. Combined with age, gender, and regression formulas calculated based on laboratory measurements, we estimate these metabolic requirements for individuals at rest. We then
combine these estimates with data on individual activity-levels using a detailed timeproviding evidence that India’s household surveys severely underestimate food consumed away from
home which has been increasing over the period studied.
3
The pattern observed by Deaton and Paxson (1998) for several countries has also been found for
the historical United States (Logan (2008)) and Poland (Gardes and Starzec (1999)). Some of the potential explanations considered in Deaton and Paxson (1998) have been explored already, including
Gibson (2002) and Gibson and Kim (2007) who argue that measurement error and recall bias are correlated with household size, Perali (2001) who argues that the finding is driven by restrictive functional
forms, Horowitz (2002) who argues that economic theory can be consistent with the empirical findings
so they are not a puzzle, and Abdulai (2003) who argues that bulk-discounting can explain part of the
decline.

3
use survey conducted in 1998-1999 by India’s National Sample Survey Organization.
Despite some limitations, our estimates of caloric requirements provide a useful starting point for analysis given the lack of direct measures.4
While our procedure for measuring caloric requirements adheres closely to the
one used by the WHO/FAO/UNU report and the ICMR, our goal is different. We
are not calculating a normative “recommended daily intake.” Instead, our goal is to
determine how differences in calorie requirements across different types of households interact with total expenditure to shape food consumption patterns. Thus, we
rely on common variables, which include household composition, occupation and
work patterns, and socioeconomic status, to match individual and household caloric
requirements to household-level consumption outcomes in India’s National Sample
Survey.
We find that our measure of caloric requirements has substantial predictive power
for caloric intake and food consumption patterns. While our measures of activitylevels and household-caloric requirements display fairly intuitive patterns – richer,
more educated and more sedentary individuals displaying lower caloric requirements – we also find some patterns that are less obvious. For example, we find
that caloric requirements do not vary greatly with household expenditure. We find a
higher intake-requirement elasticity for richer households than poorer ones, evidence
that appears inconsistent with a short-term calorie-based poverty trap.5 We also find
that the share of staples within the food budget suggested by Jensen and Miller (2010)
offers a better prediction of household caloric deficiency and hence hunger than real
4

We are aware of only two studies, both from the medical literature, that directly estimate caloric
requirements in India using the most reliable technique for free-living adults, the doubly labeled water
method. Borgonha et al. (2000) use the technique on 18 individuals – 6 urban slum dwellers, 6 students, and 6 rural residents – in Bangalore while GK Krishnaveni et al. (2009) use the technique on 8-9
year old middle-class children. Given the expense of accurately measuring caloric requirements using
direct methods, collecting a large representative sample sufficient for the type of analysis we perform
may be prohibitive. Our measures of activity-levels for India can also be compared to a recent paper
by Ng and Popkin (2013) who use less detailed data to estimate a 2.3% decline in activity-levels between 2000 and 2005 – we find a decline of 2.55% for rural males and 1.04% for rural females over
the corresponding period. Their results are based on Schedule 10 NSS data compiled and cleaned
by the ILO, with occupations matched to average weekly hours and activity-levels, combined with
gender-specific estimates of domestic, travel, and leisure activities from Chinese data during a period
of similar per capita GDP at PPP.
5
As discussed later, this is because the simultaneity implied by a two-way relationship between
caloric intake (income) and caloric requirements (work) would generate an upward bias but not for
the richer individuals for whom additional food consumption fails to yield additional productivity
and income.

4
expenditure or the share of food within the total budget.
We provide two applications of our measure that are relevant for the “consumption puzzles” for India and other developing countries described above. First, we examine household scale economies and find that larger households have lower caloric
requirements even when controlling for age/gender composition and per capita expenditure. Thus, we confirm the conjecture of Deaton and Paxson (1998) that larger
households economize on “physical effort” through multiple channels. Over certain
household size ranges, the decline in caloric requirements in household size is similar
in magnitude to the decline in caloric intake or food expenditure observed. Overall,
declining caloric requirements per member plausibly explains up to half of the decline in observed caloric intake per member for larger households.
Second, we examine the decline in caloric intake over time in India documented
by Deaton and Dreze (2009). We find that caloric requirements have only fallen modestly for rural households and mainly for those at the top of the expenditure distribution. This is because in spite of substantial declines in activity-levels (almost 6%
for rural adult males between 1983 and 2005), the average household in 2005 had a
higher share of adults (who have higher basal requirements and activity-levels than
children), which offset much of the decline in activity levels. This offset is largest in
urban areas where the shift towards less labor-intensive occupations was also smaller.
We also examine the direct effect of education, occupation, and domestic/farm activities along with relative prices and energy usage (e.g. electricity and fuel sources that
might replace physical effort) on caloric intake using Oaxaca-Blinder decompositions.
This avoids the need to estimate caloric requirements but allows these variables to affect food consumption through other channels. The results are similar in that changes
in demographic variables mostly offset changes in work variables in rural areas and
more than offset them in urban areas. We find fairly large effects of energy variables
and relative prices on caloric intake, particularly for rural households. Altogether
our results indicate that falling activity levels due to work cannot account for more
than about 25% of the decline in caloric intake in rural areas (and less in urban areas),
which suggests an important role for some of the other explanations offered in the
literature (e.g. improving disease environment, changes in consumption opportunities and prices, shifts in preferences, and non-classical measurement error in food
consumption data).
Our paper relates to a vast literature on food demand and consumption patterns.

5
Our main contribution is to provide a quantitative measure of caloric requirements –
an important “demand-shifter” for food – and examine how requirements affect the
relationship between total household budgets and food consumption patterns. To the
best of our knowledge, our paper is the first to estimate variation in household-level
caloric requirements using time-use and anthropometric data for this or any purpose
in the economics literature.6
Compared to indirect approaches that only correlate household attributes with
food consumption patterns, quantification of caloric requirements allows us to assess how much of this correlation operates through physiological channels versus
others. For example, occupation or demographic differences may be associated with
different prices, tastes, or intra-household bargaining beyond their effects on caloric
requirements. While our findings have implications for food consumption patterns
in rich countries, they are especially relevant to debates about poverty and welfare
measurement in developing countries where food takes up a large share of household resources, food prices and security weigh heavily in policy debates, and there is
larger variation in activity levels across households and over time.
Our paper proceeds as follows. Section 2 describes our data, our procedure for
estimating caloric requirements at the individual and household level, and our estimates of caloric intake. Section 3 provides an analysis of how caloric requirements
affect food consumption patterns across households. Section 4 provides our application to differences in food consumption across different household sizes. Section
5 examines changes in caloric requirements and food consumption over time, and
section 6 concludes.

2.

Data

2.1.

Caloric Needs

Since our contribution is to construct measures of caloric requirements, we provide a
detailed discussion of their construction below. We calculate caloric needs/total energy expenditure at the individual level using the World Health Organization (WHO)
factorial method. This involves multiplying two components: resting energy expen6

Other researchers have estimated population-level caloric requirements to examine the rise of
obesity in the West (Cutler et al. (2003)), whether children are a net drain on household resources Lee
and Kramer (2004), and the economic returns to slavery Fogel and Engerman (1974).

6
diture (REE), which measures the body’s energy expenditure at a complete state of
rest, and an activity level (AL), which measures the physical intensity of different
activities relative to a state of rest.
2.1.1.

Basal Energy Expenditure (BEE)

Resting energy expenditure (REE) can be accurately measured in a laboratory environment using various methods. Nutrition researchers typically measure a related
concept – Basal energy expenditure (BEE) – which is similar to REE but about 10%
lower due to strict testing conditions including 8 hours of sleep and 12 hours of fasting immediately preceding measurement in a reclining position. The difference is
largely due to dietary thermogenesis (i.e. the fact that metabolizing food uses additional energy).
Predictive formulas for BEE have been developed based on linear regression,
where the dependent variable is laboratory measured BEE and the typical independent variables are age, height, weight, and gender. The estimated formulas often
generate an excellent in-sample fit with R2 over 0.7 (Jeor and Stumbo (1999)). However, there are substantial differences in the formulas estimated on different sample
populations. We use the Henry (2005) equations that include height, weight, age
and gender to predict BEE because they are based on the largest international sample
and make use of all of the information available in our data (age, gender, height and
weight).7
To apply the Henry (2005) formulas, we need data on height and weight. For
adults over 18, we use micro data on individual heights and weights from the Na7

The original Harris-Benedict equations developed in 1918 are still used today. These appear to
overestimate BEE by 5% to 15% in modern populations, leading some researchers to advocate for the
Mifflin-St Jeor equations developed more recently (Jeor and Stumbo (1999)). The FAO/WHO/UNU
report (FAO/WHO/UNU Expert Consultation (2001)) uses the equations developed by Schofield et al.
(1985) despite criticism that the sample subjects (almost half based on Italian men sampled in the 1930s
and 1940s) had much higher metabolism than most Europeans and especially subjects from tropical
climates (Henry (2005)). In response, Henry (2005) developed formulas called the Oxford Equations
using a broader sample of populations and these typically imply a lower BEE than the Schofield et
al. (1985) equations. There have been laboratory measurements of BEE in India but none on a large
or representative sample of individuals and none generating predictive equations. Ferro-Luzzi et al.
(1997) attempt a validation of the FAO/WHO/UNU equations on Indian data and find a reasonable
fit. Based on a single study by Shetty et al. (1986), the Indian Council for Medical Research (Indian
Council of Medical Research (2009)) adopts a BEE based on the Schofield equation (for weight, age
and gender but not height) with a 5% downward adjustment for adults. The mean household BEE we
estimate with Henry (2005)’s “Oxford Equation” is within 2% of the ICMR and Mifflin-St Jeor formulas
but substantially lower (up to 6%) than the Schofield equations.

7
tional Family Health Survey (NFHS) third wave conducted in 2005.8 We use age,
gender, height and weight to directly calculate the BEE for each sample individual
within the available age range. Because we want to match this BEE with the activity
levels in the Time-Use data, we regress the formula based BEE from the NFHS on a
set of variables common to both the NFHS and the time-use data set. These include
a cubic in age, dummies for five levels of educational attainment (below primary,
primary, middle, secondary, post-secondary), a cubic in household size, household
gender/age composition ratios (males and females aged 0-2,3-4,5-9,10-14,15-17,1860,61+), household educational attainment ratios (none, some primary, primary, middle, secondary, post-secondary), gender and age of household head, head of household occupation (NCO1968 2-digits), and primary work status (classified as student,
domestic, or working). We then use the actual individual and household variables
in the Time-Use data set together with the regression formula estimated on NFHS
data to impute a predicted BEE for each individual in the Time-Use data set. For
individuals outside of the sample age range (younger than 15 or older than 49) we
calculate their predicted BEE as if they were 15 or 49, and then apply a scaling factor
using the BEE calculated using the Oxford equation and the average height/weight
for age for males and females taken from the National Nutrition Monitoring Bureau
(NNMB) (reported in Indian Council of Medical Research (2009)). The NNMB data
for calculating the BEE ratios for younger/older individuals come from the rural areas of 16 Indian states measured during 2000-2002; while these are slightly lower than
those in the 2005 NFHS for the common age ranges (0-4 and 15-17), they provide the
only population-level anthropometric measurements we could find for age ranges
not covered by the NFHS and we only use them for scaling the predicted BEE from
the NFHS. The NFHS regressions used for imputation are estimated separately for
men and women and for rural and urban areas.
The major difference between our measure of BEE and the one adopted in Indian Council of Medical Research (2009) is that our predictive equations are based
on the average body size of the Indian rural and urban populations around the year
2005 while the BEE used by the Indian Council of Medical Research (2009) to generate “recommended daily caloric intake” is based on the 95th percentile of the rural
population sampled by the NNMB.9
8

The 1998 survey only records height and weight for ever-married women aged 15-49, while the
2005 survey included all women aged 15-49 and all men aged 15-54.
9
Note that estimating minimal metabolic requirements also requires accounting for the effects of

8
2.1.2.

Activity Level

The second component for calculating total energy requirements is a measure of the
physical activity levels of each individual. The only direct measurement of activity levels in free-living Indian adults comes from Borgonha et al. (2000), who find
activity levels of 1.79, 1.54 and 1.9 for 6-person samples of urban students, urban
slums/undernourished and rural male adults. Indian Council of Medical Research
(2009) suggests activity levels of 1.53, 1.8 and 2.3 for sedentary, moderate and heavy
work respectively, which is a downward revision from factors of 1.6, 1.9, and 2.5 recommended in an earlier report Indian Council of Medical Research (1989) and falls
within the current FAO/WHO/UNU Expert Consultation (2001) ranges of 1.4-1.69,
1.7-1.99, 2.0-2.40. While these categorizations provide guidance about plausible values (e.g. physical activity levels above 2.4 are possible for short periods but difficult
to maintain over a full work day), they do not translate easily to household data.
Households differ in many ways, such as the (physically) intensive and extensive
margin of hours spent on market work, home production, and travel.
Our approach is to calculate physical activity levels at the individual level using
data from the National Sample Survey Organization’s Time-Use survey. The survey
was conducted from July 1998 to June 1999 for six Indian states. The survey collected 24-hour recall data for all household members aged 6 or older in 20 minute
dietary thermogenesis, which accounts for most of the difference between measured BEE and REE.
There are two common approaches to accounting for this difference. The first is to simply multiply BEE
by a 1.1 factor, the approach adopted in Cutler et al. (2003) and Jeor and Stumbo (1999). This allows for
a comparison of the theoretical caloric content of food with a complete measure of energy expenditure.
An alternative is to subtract the thermic effect of food on the caloric intake side. This allows for some
adjustments due to the type of calories consumed. Clinical studies have estimated that protein (20%30%) and alcohol (10%-20%) require more energy to metabolize than carbohydrates (5%-10%) or fats
(0%-3%), so the 10% figure often used is subject to variation due to dietary composition (Westerterp
(2004)). There is also some debate about the role of dietary fiber and “whole” vs. “processed” foods
in thermogenesis but the evidence is more mixed. Barr and Wright (2010) find that a “whole food”
sandwich had a dietary induced thermogenesis effect of 20% vs. 10% for a “processed food” sandwich
with similar caloric content. On the other hand, et al. (1994) find that high-fiber meals increase fullness
but actually lower thermogenesis. There is also some evidence that chilli – an integral part of most
Indian diets – increases thermogenesis (Clegg et al. (2013)). As the thermic effect of food is mostly tied
to calories consumed rather than activity levels or basal metabolism it could make sense to account for
it on the intake side when possible, as recommended in FAO/WHO/UNU Expert Consultation (1985).
However, in results not reported here but available by request we calculated thermic factors for each
household and found that while these decline with per capita expenditure (elasticity 0.002) and over
time (from 1.121 to 1.116) the effects were too small to be worth considering. Thus our approach is
to use theoretical caloric intake, and to use BEE together with activity levels that already account for
dietary thermogenesis.

9
intervals. Each 20 minute period is coded as one of 154 activities.10 Appendix table
9 provides rural and urban average time-use for selected aggregated categories. We
match each activity code to a value for that activity’s energy intensity relative to BEE.
There are many sources of data on the energy requirements of different activities but
we focus on the one provided in Annex 5 of FAO/WHO/UNU Expert Consultation
(2001), as these provide the best match to the activities in the time-use survey. We
also tried factors from et al. (2000) which were used in Cutler et al. (2003) and factors we matched to a popular website (www.caloriesperhour.com). All of the factors
are highly correlated across the 154 activities, e.g. the et al. (2000) measure has a
raw and rank correlation of 0.84 and 0.87 with the FAO measures but the two alternate matches yield slightly lower or higher activity levels overall. Appendix table 15
provides the time-use survey codes, descriptions, fraction of minutes for rural and
urban households for each code, and the matched activity level and description from
FAO/WHO/UNU Expert Consultation (2001) and et al. (2000). The match is not always exact and some judgment is required. Appendix Table 10 provides a sense for
how different data sources might generate differences in caloric requirements and
how different formulas or imputation methods might affect BEE calculations. The
most problematic activities to match are those recorded as “related activities,” which
we set equal to the (time-weighted) mean for the broad activity heading, and “travel”
activities, which do not list the mode of transport. For travel activities we pick a
value of 3 which in the range of “walking slowly” and “driving a motorcycle” in
the FAO/WHO/UNU Expert Consultation (2001) Annex 5 and lies between less intense activities like “sitting on a bus/train” (1.2), “driving a car/truck (2.0), “walking
around/strolling” (2.1) and more intense activities like “carrying a 20-30kg load on
head” (3.5), “walking quickly” (3.8), “cycling” (5.6). This procedure allows us to calculate a 24-hour activity levels for each individual over 6. For boys and girls under
age 6 we assign the mean value at age 6 that we observe in the data. As car ownership is very low in India and many other forms of transport (including bicycles,
motorcycles, animal-carts and public transit) are fairly energy intensive, we view this
as a reasonable approximation – to the extent that richer households use forms of
transport other than walking, this will still be reflected in our imputations through
the number of minutes spent on travel (i.e. the travel “extensive” margin).
10

Households were also asked about “variant” days, e.g. market days or weekends, and how many
days in the last week they spent on these. Our results are based on individual averages that include
“normal” and variant days.

10
2.1.3.

Adjustments

After multiplying the imputed BEE for each individual by the activity levels for that
individual, we also add additional calories to children under 18 due to the energy cost
of observed weight gain associated with average growth for their age/gender, which
we take as 2Kcal/g (FAO/WHO/UNU Expert Consultation (2001)). Theoretically,
any additional caloric intake above these requirements would lead to weight gain
and potentially additional growth in undernourished children. The one correction
we are not able to make given lack of data is the additional caloric intake required for
pregnant mothers which is estimated at 150-350 calories per day (Indian Council of
Medical Research (2009)).

2.2.

Caloric intake

We use the “thick” National Sample Survey rounds to compute caloric intake between 1983 (38th round) and 2004-2005 (61st round). The survey is a 30-day recall
based survey where quantities consumed from the market, home production, and
other sources are recorded for a detailed list of goods.11 The level of detail is such
that some goods – particularly processed foods and beverages – are difficult to match
to calorie data because the classification is vague and/or the quantity units are not reported, e.g. “cooked meals,” “prepared sweets,” “cold/beverages bottled/canned,”
or “salted refreshments.” We proceed by first generating a consistent set of goods
across the NSS survey rounds, which involves combining some goods together. For
the majority of goods we follow previous studies and use the caloric values reported
in Gopalan et al. (2004), which we supplement with additional data on caloric content
of foods from Karan and Mahal (2005) and the MedIndia web-site.12 We include calories from alcohol. For “other” goods and those with missing units in categories other
than beverages or processed food, we convert expenditures to calories using the regional mean calories per rupee for that category. This procedure covers between 91%
to 97.5% of expenditures across the NSS round/sector in our data, with lower match
rates in urban areas and later years. For processed foods and beverages other than tea
11

The 55th round for 1999-2000 used an additional 7-day recall period which seems to make it somewhat non-comparable to earlier and later rounds. It also differed due to no data on meals given to
non-household members and no domestic activities recorded for men in Schedule 10. While we include it in the later section on changes over time our results extending to the 61st round are robust to
dropping the 55th round entirely.
12
http://www.medindia.net/calories-in-indian-food/index.asp

11
and coffee, we assume that calories per rupee are equal to 50% of the calories/rupee
that can be directly converted across all goods, which makes them approximately as
cheap per calorie as milk. Deaton and Subramanian (1996) use a similar procedure
for “cooked meals” and use a 66% factor, implying a 50% markup over the “average
food basket” for cooked meals.13 The other concern when calculating caloric intake is
how to account for meals given to guests and others. These meals must be subtracted
from the recorded household food consumption. In addition, free meals received
from employers, schools, and other households need to be added to household food
consumption since they are not already included.14 Deaton and Subramanian (1996)
resolve this issue by regressing the measured caloric intake on the number of meals
given to guests at ceremonies, to guests at other occasions and to employees as well as
the number of meals consumed by household members. They find that meals given
to guests generate about twice the calories per meal as compared to meals given to
employees and household members. However, it is not possible to make an equivalent calculation for meals received and the later NSS rounds only record “meals to
non-household members.” Instead, we opt for a simple adjustment factor based on
the formula “adj. factor = (meals at home + meals away from home free)/(meals
at home + meals to others).”15 We therefore assume that households that consume
more calories per meal at home give and receive free meals that are symmetrical and
proportionately higher in calories.
We drop households for which the adjustment factor is greater than 2 or less than
0.5 as these are not likely to be very informative. Eliminating these observations in
13

The data we could find indicates ingredient costs make up 40% of the sale price at large Indian
restaurants (Federation of Hotel and Restaurant Associations of India (2004)) and the value for richer
countries is typically in the 20-35% range. A value of 50% puts the calories/rupee of processed foods,
beverages and cooked meals roughly equal to the dairy category, while a value of 66% puts it equal
to pulses or sugar. The results for rural households are not very sensitive to this assumption as
these goods make up a small share of expenditures throughout but rural-urban differences and urban changes over time are more sensitive.
14
Note that meals given to others are not recorded in the 55th NSS round. In addition, beginning
in the 66th round, meals received for free from others (and their imputed value) are recorded in the
detailed list of goods.
15
Note that the NSS also separately records meals away from home on payment for each individual.
In principle these should already be included in the detailed consumption schedule as “cooked meals”
although the latter should be higher as it also includes cooked meals purchased and provided to
non household members. In practice the detailed “cooked meals” measure is usually higher than
the “meals away from home on payment” although the two measure are highly correlated. In the
adjustment factor above our “meals at home” also includes the number of meals away from home
on payment, and is intended to capture differences in free calories received and calories given away
relative to the total calories calculated from the detailed food schedule.

12
any given round reduces our sample size by less than 1.1%. We also trim the 1% tails
of the caloric intake distribution. In practice, this means we exclude households with
a daily per capita caloric intake that is less than 1000 or more than 5000.

2.3.

Net caloric balance and weight change

For the six states in the 1998-1999 Time-Use Survey (Haryana, Gujarat, Madhya Pradesh,
Meghalaya, Orissa and Tamil Nadu), Panel A of Table 1 presents the following: 1)
our main estimates of activity levels (AF); 2) basal metabolic rates (BEE); 3) and total
caloric requirements (AF x BEE). We present the means for adult men (aged 18 or
older), adult women, and households in rural and urban areas. The activity levels
that we calculate for adult males are in line with those calculated directly in Borgonha et al. (2000), who found average activity levels of 1.54 (students) to 1.79 (slum
dwellers) for urban males and 1.9 for rural males. Rural females have higher activitylevels than urban females. Average activity levels are lower for households than for
adult individuals because younger children report lower activity levels.
While activity-levels are higher in rural areas than in urban ones, basal energy
expenditure is actually higher in urban areas because individuals in urban areas are
taller and heavier on average. The activity-level effect dominates overall, so caloric
requirements are typically higher in rural areas, by about 300 for adult males, 100 for
adult females, and 75 for the typical household.
Panel B presents our main estimates of caloric intake for the six Time-Use states
in 1993-1994. To derive these estimates, we take into account all of our adjustments
as well as component that we compute most directly based on quantity conversions
from Gopalan et al. (2004)). We also report the share of food expenditures covered
by this direct component as well as the adjustment factor for free meals away from
home and meals to guests. We do not observe intake for individuals in households.
However, we report intake for single male and female households even though these
are likely to be quite different than the typical adults in Panel A. Our household
measures are quite comparable to those calculated in Deaton and Dreze (2009) for
the same NSS round despite using only a subset of the states, and are fairly similar to
their calculations for the 55th survey round (1999-2000) as well.
Interestingly, our imputations imply a much greater dispersion of caloric intake
than requirements across households. One reason for this may be our inability to
capture idiosyncratic variation in metabolism across households. However, it seems

13
likely that food intake features both larger real shocks (e.g. festivals and holidays)
and random noise due to the 30 day recall period and the unboundedness of measured quantities (even though we bound caloric intake between about 1000 and 5000).
The time-use data is bounded by the 24 hours in a day and the maximum activitylevel factors.
Are our estimates of caloric intake and requirements plausible given observed
weight gain patterns? Given the numerous assumptions required to get to this point,
a direct level comparison is difficult. Notwithstanding the still unresolved controversies over adaptation to caloric deficits (see Dasgupta and Ray (1987)) and weight
loss, which are likely to be relevant in our setting given continued under-nutrition
and low BMI in India, the widely cited formula is that a 7700 calorie surplus (deficit)
leads to 1KG of weight gain (loss) (see Jeor and Stumbo (1999)).16
How much weight does the average Indian adult gain each year? We do not have
a direct estimate, but comparing men and women of different ages (and hence cohorts) in the 2005 NFHS data suggests an average weight gain of 0.17/0.43 KG per
year for rural/urban men and 0.18/0.35 KG per year for rural/urban women. Using
the 1998 NFHS data we can look at (approximately) the same cohort of rural/urban
women who gained on average 0.14/0.41 KG year between 1998 and 2005. These
numbers correspond to approximately 8 excess calories per day for urban residents
and 4 excess calories per day for rural residents. This is much smaller than the excess calories in our data of 121 and 71 calories per day for urban and rural residents
although those figures include children (whose growth requirements are already factored into our caloric requirement figures). The pattern of weight gain is at least
consistent with greater excess calories we observe in urban areas.
While these results suggest either underestimation of requirements or overestimation of intake, we have no particular reason to favor one interpretation over the
other and the fact that tiny differences in excess calories lead to large weight changes
over time suggests both that the standard formula is unrealistic and that any reasonable attempt to reconcile caloric intake and requirement in levels is likely to fail.17 We
16

The controversy arises in part because all three components of energy requirements (basic
metabolism, activity levels, and thermogenesis) are likely to respond to “shocks” to a previously
weight-stable adult.
17
Historically the FAO/WHO actually used caloric intake to measure caloric requirements under the assumption that most humans were weight stable; this only changed with the landmark
FAO/WHO/UNU Expert Consultation (1985) study that tried to measure caloric requirements requirements.

14
could increase imputed caloric requirements by using slightly higher activity levels
or a different BEE formula. Or, we could decrease imputed caloric intake using lower
conversion rates for foods that are missing direct conversion factors. However, any
overall scaling we do will not affect our main results which concern the percentage
differences in caloric intake or requirements across households.

3.

Caloric Requirements and Food Consumption
Patterns

We begin our analysis of the relationship between caloric requirements and food consumption patterns by examining how these measures vary across commonly classified variables in the National Sample Survey and Time Use data sets such as industry18 and household type.19 Table 2 presents sample means for rural areas in the six
Time-Use states in 1998-1999 (first three columns) and 1993-1994 (next four columns)
(for urban areas see appendix table 11). Columns 1-3 contain estimates of caloric
requirements, BEE, and activity levels, respectively. Columns 4-6 measure caloric intake, food share of expenditures, and grain share of food expenditures, respectively.
Column 7 contains real monthly expenditure per capita, which are henceforth deflated using a survey unit-value based price index allowing for comparisons over
time and across locations.20
Panel A of Table 2 groups households by industry type using one-digit National
Industry Classification (NIC) code. Agriculture and construction have the highest
18

We use the 1-digit NIC classification which is agriculture, mining, manufacturing natural materials, manufacturing non-natural materials, utilities, construction, wholesale/retail/hotel/restaurants,
transport, finance/insurance/real estate/business services, community/personal/social services, and
other
19
The NSS classifies household “types” as self-employed, casual labor, and “other” which includes
salaried individuals and those pension or other income.
20
Specifically, we use survey unit values for all goods with unit values in the data. We apply a
“first-round” quality correction by estimating the unit value elasticity with respect to expenditures
within villages/urban blocks and calculating the predicted unit value at the sample median expenditure. We then take median unit values in each state/sector relative to rural Maharashtra in 1993-1994,
which serves as our base and calculate a Tornqvist price index. Since most of our results are withinvillage/block – where households face the same prices – this correction is often unnecessary, but may
be important when looking at changes in caloric intake over time conditional on “real” expenditure.
We have also used the official India price indexes for urban workers and rural agricultural laborers.
These tend to show slower real expenditure growth, so while the results are qualitatively similar, the
size of the unexplained decline over time is larger using our survey based measure.

15
caloric requirements and activity levels, and mining has the second highest levels.
Retail, transport, services, and manufacturing of non-natural materials have the lowest caloric requirements. Despite having the lowest real expenditures, agricultural
households have middling levels of caloric intake, which is partly due to the fact that
they allocate a higher share of their budgets to food and grains. The overall pattern
suggests that per capita expenditure is the main predictor of caloric intake but that
caloric requirements also play a role.
Panel B of Table 2 displays the means by household type based on the NSS classification. Casual laborers have the lowest expenditure but highest caloric requirements,
while those in the “other” category have high expenditure but low caloric requirements. Panel C of Table 2 divides households by the educational attainment of the
household head. The results indicate that while per capita expenditure and caloric intake increase monotonically in education, caloric requirements decline monotonically
as expected. Appendix Table 11 presents the equivalent figures for urban households.
As one of our goals is to directly relate caloric requirements to the allocation of
budgets on calories, food and grains, we next impute caloric requirements for the
households that have detailed NSS consumption data. To do this, we first regress
individual-level caloric requirements measured in the 1998-1999 TUS on a series of
variables that are common to the TUS and the NSS Employment (Schedule 10) surveys.21 The list of common individual-level variables includes the following: a cubic
in age, a triple interaction of primary status, industry and education 22 , indicator variables for home production (collecting wood, food, or water, husking paddy, grinding
grain, preparing dung cakes, and gardening) and for rural areas only we include a
cubic in land owned and indicator variables for agricultural tasks (plowing, planting, weeding, other manual tasks, animal husbandry, fishing, forestry). The list of
common household-level variables include the following: cubic in real per capita
expenditure, cubic in household size, cubic in age of head, sex of head, scheduled
caste/scheduled tribe status, religion, the fraction of household members in each
male/female age cell (0-2,3-4,5-9,10-14,15-17,18-60,61+), and the triple interaction of
household one digit NIC, household type and household head education code. We
21

Note that our caloric requirement estimates in the TUS already involve the imputation of basal
metabolism based on age, gender and common socioeconomic variables in the NFHS, combined with
direct assignment of activity-levels based on reported time-use.
22
Primary status categories: self-employed, casual worker, salaried employee, other employment,
unemployment, in school, domestic work, retired/pensioner. Industry and education categories are
given in Table 2.

16
fit log caloric requirements (or activity levels) on these variables separately for rural/urban, male/female, and over 18/under 18 cells, using village/urban block fixed
effects to control for prices and other common factors. The fit of these regressions on
the time-use data is good with R2 in the 0.5 to 0.8 range, lower for urban households
and higher for rural households and children.
We then aggregate these individual-level imputed caloric requirements up to the
household level. As NSS rounds after 1994 do not survey the same households for detailed consumption and employment, for later years we can only use household-level
work variables for imputing caloric requirements if we are interested in caloric intake
(i.e. the variables available in NSS Schedule 1). Alternatively we can use detailed
individual-level matching but then we can only look at the food and grain share variables (i.e. the variables available in NSS Schedule 10). In the time-use data, the correlation of between actual household caloric requirements and caloric requirements
predicted by the common variables is 0.83 when using individual and householdlevel variables (then aggregating individuals) and 0.66 when using household-level
variables only.
We focus on the 1993-1994 NSS survey round and the six states in the time-use
data as this provides our best match of intake and requirement data. Figure 1 presents
plots of caloric intake, caloric requirements and activity levels against real per capita
expenditures.23 Panel A plots the data for rural households using a locally linear
regression, documenting that caloric intake is monotonically increasing in expenditures while caloric requirements are fairly flat and activity levels exhibit an inverse
U-shape. The sharp decline in activity levels for better off households is counteracted
by higher metabolic requirements, but even this decline in average activity-levels is
an order of magnitude smaller than the increase in caloric intake. This can be seen
more clearly in Panel B where we use a combined sample of rural and urban households and partial out both household demographic variables24 and village/urban
block dummies. The decline of activity-levels in expenditure is about an order of
magnitude smaller than the increase in caloric intake, and the slope of caloric requirements overall is close to zero. Thus to a first approximation, net caloric intake
23

Note that per capita caloric requirements differ from (unweighted) average activity levels due to
differences in the basal metabolisms that multiply each household members activity-levels, and that
our approach allows for differences in metabolisms due to age and gender as well as socioeconomic
characteristics.
24
These are a cubic in household size, cubic in age of head, sex of head, and fraction of household
members in each male/female age cell (0-2,3-4,5-9,10-14,15-17,18-60,61+)

17
(intake minus requirements) is monotonically increasing in per capita expenditure
for this population and conditioning on caloric requirements will not dramatically
change the slope of the calorie-expenditure relationship.
There is still however substantial variation in caloric requirements within a given
set of rich or poor households. Conditional on a similar budget, how do differences
in caloric requirements translate into food consumption patterns? While we expect
households with lower requirements to typically have lower intake for a given budget, due to lower spending on food and especially staple foods, what is less obvious
is whether this effect is stronger or weaker for poor households. A standard implication of a calorie-based poverty trap model is reverse causality from caloric intake
to requirements but only for poor households – consuming more calories allows for
more and harder work but this effect will be largest for the undernourished. Thus
a calorie-based poverty trap featuring simultaneity would tend to increase the slope
of the caloric intake-caloric requirement relationship, particularly for the poor. On
the other hand, poor households may have little ability or desire to adjust their food
budget due to other pressing needs. For example, a wealthy athlete may choose to
consume an enormous amount of calories but a poor athlete may be unable to do this
without sacrificing other basic needs.
To explore these relationships, Table 3 presents results from regressions of log
caloric intake on log caloric requirements and log per capita expenditure. We include
dummy variables for village/urban block to ensure we are comparing households
facing similar prices and retail environments. In some columns we also include controls for demographic characteristics to isolate variation in caloric requirements coming from activity-levels and socioeconomic height/weight differences, and in others
we also include the interaction of caloric requirements and total consumption expenditures. Both total expenditures and caloric requirements are positively associated
with caloric intake as expected regardless of demographic controls (columns 1 and 2).
The interaction between caloric requirements and per capita expenditures is positive
and statistically significant. This can be interpreted either as higher “pass-through” of
caloric requirements to caloric intake for rich households, or as a higher income elasticity of caloric intake for households with higher requirements. Appendix figures
6 and 7 capture this relationship more flexibly by estimating the elasticity of caloric
intake to requirements separately for each expenditure decile or head of household
education category and shows a similar pattern with higher elasticities for richer or

18
more educated households.
Although the overall magnitude of the calorie intake-requirement elasticities we
estimate are low, we view this as plausible in light of measurement error. At the
household level our caloric requirement measure features substantial classical measurement error due to multiple OLS-based regression imputations – the clinical formulas for basal metabolism based on age, gender, height, and weight have R2 in the
0.7-0.8 range, the formulas for predicting metabolism based on age, gender, and socioeconomic variables have R2 in the 0.14-0.37 range, and the formulas predicting individual activity-levels based on NSS Schedule 10 variables have R2 around 0.8. This
is beyond the limitations inherent to the time-use survey, our assignment of activity levels to time-use categories, or unobserved variation in metabolic requirements
due to genetics or other environmental factors. We thus view these elasticities as a
lower bound for the unmeasurable elasticity of caloric intake to caloric requirements,
but the lower bound is still potentially informative for differences between rich and
poor households.25 In appendix table 12 we present some selected coefficients on demographic, education and industry variables where intake or requirements are the
dependent variable. The estimated coefficients in these regressions are less subject
to measurement error. Examining the coefficients on education and work variables
side-by-side, the magnitudes are similar enough to be consistent with an average
“pass-through” of requirements to intake of close to one although this is less true of
demographic variables.
Table 3 columns four through nine present similar regressions using the share
of food in the total budget or the share of grains in the food budget as dependent
variables. As expected the food and grain shares decline in expenditures holding
requirements constant, and increase in requirements holding expenditures constant.
The interaction of expenditures and requirement is positive in both cases, which is
consistent with the notion that the consumption patterns of rich households are more
sensitive to variation in caloric requirements than those of poor households who may
be constrained both in terms of food composition and their ability to divert expenditures from non-food to food.
While the allocation of a fixed budget clearly respond to caloric requirements, a
related question is whether budget allocations are themselves directly informative
25

E.g. With classical measurement error in requirements the ratio of elasticities for rich and poor
households would still be correct.

19
about the net nutritional status of the household. Jensen and Miller (2010) suggest
that the staple share of calories offers a useful revealed preference approach to measuring hunger, and the literature using Engel’s law to measure bias in price indexes
and household equivalence scales makes a similar assumption that the budget share
of food is informative about the satisfaction of basic needs. Our data allow us to see
how net caloric intake – intake minus predicted requirements – is related to the measures proposed in the literature. Figure 2 provides a local linear regression estimate
of the % caloric gap (defined as log intake minus log requirements) on real per capita
expenditure, the food budget share, the share of grains in the food budget and the
share of grain calories in total calories. As expected given the previous discussion,
net calories are monotonically increasing in per capita expenditure, with a slightly
higher real per capita expenditure required in urban areas than rural areas to achieve
a zero deficit. Perhaps more surprising is that the food share, which ranges from 0.36
to 0.85 between the 1st and 99th percentile of households, is not a monotonic predictor of net calories. While urban households exhibit the expected decline in net calories
as the food share increases, net calories are actually increasing for rural households
over this range. This contrasts markedly with the results using the grain share of the
food budget or the grain share of total calories, both of which have a sharp negative
relationship with net calories that becomes flat at a similar threshold for rural and
urban households (about 0.4 for the grain share of the food budget and 0.75 for the
grain share of calories). Grain shares at or above these thresholds appear to be excellent predictors of a behavioral budgetary response to hunger, with decreases in grain
shares from these thresholds indicative of caloric satiation. The food share does not
seem useful (on its own) for identifying calorie-deprived households. Real expenditure is predictive of net calories but has two drawbacks: the constant slope makes it
hard to identify the zero net calorie threshold, and the level of real expenditures that
corresponds to zero net calories is somewhat different for rural and urban areas, suggesting that relative prices, alternative consumption opportunities and even different
preferences make it less useful for identifying hunger in different locations. These insights strongly support the view of Jensen and Miller (2010) that choices about how
the food budget is allocated across different types of food are more informative about
nutritional status than the overall budget or the allocation of this budget to food.26
26

An alternative exercise we have also pursued is to ask how well we can predict our “predicted
caloric requirements” using data on total expenditures and one food consumption data point, either
caloric intake, the food share, or the grain share of food. This is essentially the inverse of Table 3.

20
These findings also suggest that a reduction in caloric requirements holding expenditures constant is more likely to show up through declining grain shares of food than
a decline in the food budget share.

4.

Household Size and Food Consumption

Deaton and Paxson (1998) consider “caloric overheads” as one plausible explanation
for the drop in food expenditure per capita for larger households with similar demographic composition and per capita expenditures. For example, there are many activities that may be undertaken by a household but can be shared among household
members, such as gathering fuel and water, travel related to the purchase and sale
of goods, and certain domestic chores or economic activities that generate income
and consumption opportunities. These activities are more common in developing
countries, consistent with Deaton and Paxson (1998)’s finding that the drop in food
expenditure they document is largest there. To assess the quantitative importance
of this mechanism, we examine how caloric requirements vary with household size.
This would be very difficult without detailed individual time-use data as much of the
“sharing” may happen along margins that are otherwise not observable.
We restrict our analysis to that have between 2 and 8 household members, which
make up approximately 90% of the sample households.27 For food consumption we
use the 50th NSS round and states that are also in the time-use data; for caloric requirements we use the time-use survey as well as our imputations for the 50th NSS
round. We proceed by regressing log calories per capita, log food share, and log
caloric requirements per capita on household size dummies as well as numerous
controls including a cubic in log expenditure per capita, village/urban block dumWe find that caloric intake is the best predictor of caloric needs (R2 = 0.308) relative to the food
share (R2 = 0.256), the grain share of food expenditure (R2 = 0.265) or the grain share of calories
(R2 = 0.263). As calculating caloric intake requires more detailed data and may be difficult in some
settings, our results here confirm those of figure 2 that the grain (or other staples) share of food expenditure in conjunction with total expenditures may offer the best predictor of caloric requirements
across households with different demographics and activity-levels. When also conditioning on demographics the differences in predictive power of the different food measures are less pronounced but
the ordering is similar with the grain shares outperforming the budget share of food as a predictor of
caloric requirements.
27
One person households make up 5.4% of the 27,075 households in our sample but are problematic
for reasons that are clear in table 1. Measuring their caloric intake is difficult due to very high shares
of cooked meals and processed foods. Households with more than 8 persons make up the remainder.

21
mies, and our basic demographic composition variables (cubic in age of head, sex of
head, scheduled caste/scheduled tribe status, religion, and the fraction of household
members in each male/female age cell (0-2,3-4,5-9,10-14,15-17,18-60,61+)).28
In Figure 3, we report the coefficients on household size dummies where a household with two members is the omitted category – the coefficients correspond to percent deviations in the dependent variable relative to a two-person household. Note
that variation in log food share conditional on per capita expenditure is equivalent
to variation in per capita food expenditure, the outcome considered in Deaton and
Paxson (1998). Like them, we find that food expenditures decline with household
size. The decline is about 2% over the 2 to 8 person range. We observe an even larger
decline for caloric intake, up to 8%, which appears to contradict the possibility that
bulk-discounting – the ability to convert a given food expenditure into more calories
– can explain the decline.
Looking at caloric requirements in the 1998-1999 Time-Use Survey or imputed to
the 50th NSS round, we find a substantial decline in caloric requirements for larger
households of about 2% going from 2 to 8 person households. Like the decline in
food expenditures, the effect is concentrated between 2 and 5 and levels off after that.
29
The similarity of the magnitude and pattern of declines in log food expenditures
and caloric requirements is striking, but it is only about 1/4 to 1/3 of the magnitude
of the decline in caloric intake. However, if we only consider households between 3
and 6 persons, which make up 65% of the sample, the magnitude of the decline in
caloric intake and caloric requirements per capita are virtually identical.
In Table 4 we present regression results for a specification similar to Deaton and
Paxson (1998) with log household size as the variable of interest. Over the 2 to 8
person size range, the elasticity of caloric requirements per capita with respect to
household size is about -0.024. This is a bit less than half the magnitude of the elasticity of caloric intake with respect to per capita expenditures of -0.057. The magnitude
of the decline in food share in this log linear specification (column 5) is only -0.015,

28

Note that by construction it is impossible to hold demographic ratios constant over certain comparisons of household size (e.g. going from 2 to 3 members unless they are all in the same cell). Larger
households are likely to be different in many ways and in particular would typically have more children than adults and lower expenditures per capita, but here we simply follow the literature and use
additive and linear controls.
29
When we do not allow larger households to have higher BEE due to greater height and weight
this decline is closer to 3%. These results are available by request.

22
which is actually smaller than the decline in caloric requirements. 30
What drives our finding that caloric requirements decline in household size (holding per capita expenditures constant)? Table 5 explores this by documenting how
BEE and activity levels vary across households of different sizes with otherwise similar demographic features. Column 1 shows that BEE rises in household size because
members of larger households typically have higher heights and weights (conditional
on per capita expenditures and demographics). In column 2 we calculate BEE using
only age/gender data to omit these effects and find this effect substantially reduced –
to the extent we still find effects it is because of age variation of household members
within the age cells we use as demographic controls. Column 3 shows that activity
levels fall substantially for larger households, with an elasticity of about 0.05, similar
to what we observe for caloric intake.
To see where the differences in activity levels come from, columns 4 to 8 of Table 5 present results for log minutes per capita spent on market production (which
includes work of the self-employed), domestic work (which includes both free collection and other types of domestic labor), leisure, free collection (food, water, fuel,
and other materials) and travel. Holding per capita expenditures constant, larger
households spend less time on market production and much less time on home production. While the decline in home production time has an obvious interpretation in
terms of “caloric overheads” and shareable tasks, the decline in market time is more
surprising. We view the decline in market production as suggestive evidence that
larger households reap gains from heterogeneous abilities and specialization, allowing them to generate the same level of per capita expenditure with less physical effort.
Off-setting the decline in market and domestic production is the increase in leisure,
which may sometimes take the form of sports and exercise but usually involves less
physically taxing activities. The biggest decline in minutes per capita is seen for free
collection and travel activities, consistent with both large travel-related fixed costs
and the lower shadow price of travel and time-saving durables for larger families.31
30

As in Figure 3 the effects on caloric requirements are larger and our results are stronger when we
do not allow BEE to vary with household size.
31
We use logs to facilitate comparisons of magnitudes across larger and smaller households, which
means we drop many households that report no travel or free collection for the last two columns. The
results are qualitatively similar using levels and including zeros. Also note that our travel time results
are all on the extensive/minutes margin. On a per minute basis motorcycles or bicycles may have
similar or higher activity levels than walking, but by reducing time spent on travel relative to lower
intensity activities like leisure they could still lower the caloric requirements that we calculate.

23
While our results provide the first confirmation of Deaton and Paxson (1998)’s
conjecture that larger households have lower caloric requirements (holding per capita
expenditures constant), the decline in caloric requirements we observe would not be
large enough to account for the entire decline in measured caloric intake even with
a (partial) elasticity of caloric intake to requirements of one. This suggests that other
explanations may be equally important. At least for the Indian data, we view recall
errors for food (relative to non-food) that are positively correlated with household
size as the most promising.32 In particular, we show in appendix Table 13 that the
effect of household size on caloric intake and food expenditure is larger for (a) richer
households, (b) urban households, and (c) households in more recent periods. In
all three cases we observe greater consumption of processed food and more meals
outside the home. Although our estimates of caloric intake account for these to the
extent that they are observable, it is plausible that these types of food consumption
are underestimated for larger households when consumption is based on the 30-day
recall of a single individual.33 We thus view our results as complementary to more
systematic analysis of measurement error on the consumption side by Gibson (2002)
and Gibson and Kim (2007). Just as their work shows that there is typically some
“real” decline in food consumption in household size regardless of the measurement
method, our findings suggest that economies of scale in caloric requirements are an
important part – just not the only part – of the explanation for the Deaton and Paxson
(1998) puzzle.

5.

Trends in Food Consumption

Our previous results have been cross-sectional and control for village/urban block
dummies, which means the households being compared face similar environments
(including the disease environment, relative prices and availability of food and nonfood goods, culture and preferences, etc.). We now turn to an exploration of changes
in caloric requirements and food consumption over time. We begin by observing
in Table 8 that there have been substantial changes over time in the primary indus32

See Gibson (2002) and Gibson and Kim (2007) for more direct evidence of measurement error from
other countries.
33
In terms of caloric-requirement scale economies, we find slightly larger effects for urban households but substantially larger effects for poor households as well, which is inconsistent with caloricrequirement driving all of these patterns. These results are available from the authors by request.

24
try, education, home production and farm tasks, energy sources, relative prices and
durable ownership of the average Indian household between 1983 and 2005 according to the NSS. The changes in occupation are actually modest compared to much
larger changes in education, home production and especially electricity access. Another major change is the increase in the ratio of adults and seniors relative to children, from about 0.59 to 0.65 for rural households and 0.64 to 0.7 for urban households. Since Basal Requirements makes up well over half of caloric requirements,
and adults are also more active than children in our data, this suggests a powerful
force for rising caloric requirements over time. Data on durable ownership only exists from 1987 onwards, but indicates that car ownership is very low but bicycle and
motorcycle ownership is quite prevalent and rising. We construct price indexes using state-level median unit values and Tornqvist weights, where rural Maharashtra
in 1994 is the base. Relative prices for a NSS consumption group are calculated as
the ratio of the group index to the overall price index.34 Table 8 reports the large fall
in relative grain prices between 1983 and 1994 and the large swings in energy prices,
with a large increase between 1994 and 2005.
Many of these variables are common to the NSS and the Time-Use survey which
allow us to impute caloric requirements over time even though we only directly observe detailed time use for the 1998 cross-section. An important caveat of this exercise
is that extrapolating many years forward or backward in time may be less reliable. In
particular, the time allocated to different tasks for an individual with the same industry, education, domestic chores, household expenditure, or other attributes may be
quite different in 1983 or 2005 than in 1998 or the 1993-94 period we used for our earlier analysis. An additional caveat is that when extrapolating caloric requirements
forward and backward in time, we hold heights and weights constant for a given
age/gender cell, as we are less comfortable assuming that differences in height and
weight in the cross-section due to education, occupation, or demographic features of
the households would translate one to one into changes over time.35
34

We use the same quality correction procedure described earlier. The full set of groups (not reported
in the table) includes grains, pulses, milk, meat, oils, vegetables, fruit, beverages and processed food,
intoxicants, clothing, fuel and light (energy).
35
For example, in the cross-section height and weight may have a genetic component that will not
vary over time for the Indian population. Given lags in the transmission of nutritional status to height
and weight mediated by maternal nutrition, the cross-sectional differences we observe with respect to
certain household characteristics may not translate into population level differences over time in the
22 year time period we examine.

25
With these caveats, Figure 4 provides a plot of caloric intake and caloric requirement “Engel curves” for 1983 and 2005 for rural and urban sectors using NSS data.
We focus on the caloric requirements estimated using individual-level imputation
(NSS schedule 10) which offers a better fit and uses the most detailed data on individual activities that exists over the entire sampled period. As in figure 1, caloric
requirements tend to be much flatter in expenditures than caloric intake and to exhibit an inverted U-shape in log expenditure per capita. Holding real expenditure
constant, there is a noticeable drop in caloric requirements between 1983 and 2005
for rural households at the bottom and top of the expenditure distribution of about
100 calories, with only a slight decline in the middle. For urban households there is a
smaller drop at the top (about 80 calories) with no change or even a modest increase
at the bottom. Table 7 provides the unweighted sample means of actual caloric intake
and predicted caloric requirements at the household-level for the NSS survey rounds
between 1983 and 2005. The average rural household experienced a -0.82% decrease
in caloric requirements and the average urban household experienced a 1.35% increase in caloric requirements based on our measure.
We stress that this surprisingly modest change in caloric requirements is not due
to a lack of change in predicted activity-levels. Figure 5 documents substantial declines in activity levels for adult men and women (particularly rural men) of about
10% at the top of the expenditure distribution. Activity-levels also declined for male
and female children. Unlike household caloric requirements, individual activitylevels tend to decline monotonically in household expenditures so household expenditure growth contributed to the decline in average adult and child activity-levels. Table 7 documents declines in average activity levels as high as -5.89% for rural males or
as low as -0.17% for urban males, with rural and urban females in-between. However,
our data show that children have lower activity levels and lower basal requirements
than adults. Thus the change in household composition between 1983 and 2005 due
to lower child/adult ratios offsets most of the decline in activity levels in rural areas
and all of the decline in urban areas. Smaller household sizes holding demographics
constant also contributed to an increase in caloric requirements based on our analysis
above, but the change in household size was fairly small over this period.
The main conclusion of our exercise is that while many features of our estimated
household caloric requirements are qualitatively consistent with the broad patterns
for caloric intake – higher initial levels and higher declines over time for rural house-

26
holds, larger declines for rich households than poor households over time – the magnitude of decline is insufficient to account for the large drop in measured caloric intake in the NSS. Although we acknowledge potential underestimation of the decline
in activity-levels because we are unable to measure changes in activity levels that occurred for households with the same observed industry, education, domestic tasks
and real expenditures, our findings strongly suggest that demographic forces have
provided a substantial offset to any decline in activity levels.36
As an alternative to our imputation of caloric requirements over time, we also directly account for variables that may affect household caloric intake through the calorie channel using a Oaxaca-Blinder decomposition. A caveat to this exercise is that
many variables might be expected to impact caloric intake through channels other
than caloric requirements – for example, education may affect manual labor intensity
but also preferences (e.g. spending on a child’s education), farming may affect manual labor intensity but also the price paid for the food produced, and electricity usage
uses financial resources and may make non-food consumption choices more viable
in addition to lowering the physical effort required for domestic work. Nevertheless,
this approach offers an alternative way to decompose the contribution of different
factors to changes in caloric intake and does not require direct imputation of caloric
requirements.
To implement this decomposition, we first estimate a model using pooled crosssections from 1983, 1987-88 and 1993-94 (including year dummies) to predict log
caloric intake per capita for rural and urban households.37 The list of explanatory
variables we use (many of which are reported in Table 8) can be classified as real
expenditure per capita (deflated using state/sector-level quality-adjusted unit value
price indexes, entering as a third-degree polynomial), demographics (size, age and
gender composition, and household religion and caste/tribal status), occupation/education
(industry codes, self-employment/casual labor, and adult education variables), domestic tasks (dummies for whether anyone in the household engaged in tasks recorded),
farm activities (for rural households only), electricity/fuel (dummies for whether the
household has electricity and whether it uses wood or dung as a fuel source), and
36

As discussed earlier, we also somewhat underestimate this demographic offset since we hold
height/weight constant for given age/gender combinations where the trend has been towards greater
height and weight and hence higher basal requirements at any gender and age.
37
We use the earlier survey rounds to estimate the model as these include the largest list of variables
including both domestic/farm activities and measures of electricity access and cooking fuel source.

27
relative prices. We then use the coefficients estimated from these pooled “withinround” regressions together with the average changes in the explanatory variables in
the sample to predict a total change in log caloric intake for the average household
as well as the component of this change attributable to each factor. These estimates
are equivalent to the “explained” part of a Oaxaca-Blinder decomposition using the
pooled coefficients.38
Table 8 provides the results for caloric intake. These results generally reinforce the
conclusions of our previous exercise. Predicted caloric intake due to changes in all
explanatory variables lead to a similar decline in caloric intake for rural households (0.8%) which is only about a quarter of the decline observed (-2.8%). Predicted caloric
intake actually rises for urban households (4.2%) even though actual caloric intake
fell. The effect of changes in occupation, education, domestic work and farm tasks
on reducing caloric intake is substantial for rural households (-2.3%) and small for
urban households (-0.4%), with demographic changes partly offsetting their effects
in rural areas and completely offsetting them in urban areas. In both rural and urban
areas the growth in real expenditure would have predicted large increase in per capita
caloric intake of almost 10% for rural areas and over 6% for urban areas, consistent
with elasticities of caloric intake to expenditure of about 30% and a roughly similar
growth in real expenditures. The strongest force offsetting this increase are the effects
of changes in electricity and fuel usage and changes in relative prices, particularly in
rural areas. 39
38

In practice our results are very similar when using a single cross-sectional survey to estimate the
coefficients.
39
We caution that our relative price coefficients are estimated from state/sector-level cross-sectional
variation in average unit values and therefore cannot be reasonably considered causal elasticity estimates. Given that the usual concern is that price elasticities are biased downwards (due to measurement error and positive demand shocks/preference-shifters interacting with upward sloping supply
curves) we view this as suggestive evidence that relative price movements could play an even more
important role. We have also used price coefficients estimated using only price variation within states
over time, which typically leads to smaller effects that are still large relative to other factors. Like
Deaton and Dreze (2009) we observe a decline in relative food prices over most of the period we consider, particularly for staples. As they observe, this is inconsistent with the notion that relative prices
explain the decline in calories when the price elasticity is negative. However, Jensen and Miller (2008)
provide evidence that these elasticities could be positive for poor households, at least for dietary staples that act like Giffen-Goods. Changes in relative prices within food – particularly for meals out and
processed foods – are poorly measured in the NSS data and the changes in non-food prices are also
quite heterogeneous. While there is some potential to explore the role of prices – particularly due to
the PDS reforms in India in the early and late 1990s and the shift away from subsistence agriculture –
we leave this for future work as a discussion of heterogeneous prices, heterogeneous price elasticities
and the limitations of both survey-based unit values and official price indexes is not the focus of this

28
The results in tables 7 and 8 present the declines in mean caloric intake and requirements, but as figure 4 highlights the decline in intake and also requirements is
larger among richer households. In the appendix we also consider a non-parametric
Oaxaca-Blinder decomposition similar to DiNardo et al. (1996). This involves reweighting the observations from an earlier period (we use 1983) using their probability of appearing in the 2004-2005 sample given their observed characteristics.40
Appendix figure 9 presents the results of this exercise where we condition either on
expenditure and demographics only (two forces whose change between 1983-2005
would tend to increase caloric intake) or also including our occupation, education,
and electricity/fuel variables.41 The results are similar in that the distribution of calories per capita is shifted right due to expenditure and demographic effects (except at
the very bottom of the calorie distribution) and this is only partly offset by changes
in occupation, education, and electricity/fuel usage (concentrated at the top of the
distribution and for the rural sector).
In the Appendix we also present similar exercises for the food share and grain
share. Appendix Figure 8 presents the Engel curves for grain and food shares in 1983,
1993 and 2005. Appendix table 14 presents the mean decomposition and figures 10
and 11 present the non-parametric decompositions. In analyzing at these two margins that mediate the transmission of real expenditures to caloric intake, we highlight
three points. First, the main difference from the previous exercises is that in both cases
the rise in real expenditures per capita pushes in the “right” direction towards lower
shares of expenditure on food and grains, which is then reinforced by the variables
we consider as proxies for caloric requirements such as industry and domestic work
variables. The demographic variables still push in the “wrong” direction towards
higher food and grain expenditures. Second, the variables meant to capture caloric
requirements do a better job at explaining the decrease in mean and leftward shift in
the distribution of grain shares than food shares. This is consistent with our earlier
result that the grain share of food is more closely tied to caloric requirements than the
paper.
40
See their paper for a detailed description. In practice the exercise involves estimating a probit
regression for whether an observation appears in the later round unconditionally or conditional on
all observed characteristics, giving predicted probabilities P and P ∗. Each observation is then re∗(1−P )
weighted by P
P (1−P ∗) which gives more weight to observations in the earlier round that would be
more likely to appear in a later round (due to higher expenditures, education, etc.). One can then
calculate the counter-factual density function.
41
In this case we cannot use the change in schedule 10 domestic and farm variables since we do not
observe those variables in later rounds for the same households for which we observe calories.

29
food share. Third, Appendix figure 8 and figure 14 also highlight that the contributions of these two margins to the decline in caloric intake varies over two sub-periods
– the decline in the grain share of food is concentrated in the 1983-1993 period while
the decline in the food share is concentrated in the 1993-2005 period. This is further
evidence that there could be other factors at play, as declining caloric requirements
alone would be unlikely to generate differential movement in these margins during
the two periods.
Overall, the “predicted” change in caloric intake due to the changes in observed
characteristics of households explain only a small (less than 25%) share of the decline
in actual caloric intake for rural households between 1983-2005 and even less for
urban households. On their own, changes attributable to work variables have modest
effects that are not large enough to offset the effects of real expenditure growth, and
are themselves largely offset by changes in demographics. Instead, it appears that
other factors including changes in prices, access to new goods, preferences and the
disease environment may be necessary to account for the decline in caloric intake.
On the other hand, to the extent that the observed decline in caloric intake over time
in the NSS is an artifact of measurement (Smith (2013)) or a result of real expenditure
elasticities that are biased upwards (deemed plausible by Deaton and Dreze (2009)),
one could plausibly attribute a larger share of the decline in (real) caloric intake to
falling caloric requirements, particularly in rural areas.

6.

Conclusion

Given the massive economics literature using food consumption to infer changes in
welfare, poverty, price index bias, nutritional deficits and equivalence scales, it is
surprising how little attention has been paid to measuring the purely “biological”
demand for calories. Economists are rarely confronted with such an obviously quantifiable demand-shifter. While measuring this demand-shifter is a difficult task that
involves combining different data sources with estimates from the health and nutrition literature that themselves are far from settled (despite better measurement), we
find a substantial payoff.
We shed new light on numerous measurement issues and “puzzles” in the economics literature. While it is obvious that households with higher caloric requirements would consume more food, our finding that richer households in India are

30
more sensitive to changes in caloric requirements than poor households (who are
closer to subsistence and obviously hungrier to begin with) is less obvious. Similarly,
our results indicate that the grain share of food proposed by Jensen and Miller (2010)
is a useful indicator of hunger and caloric deficits with more attractive properties
than the budget share of food proposed by Engel or even expenditures deflated by
local price index.
While we provide evidence supportive of the conjectures in Deaton and Paxson
(1998) and Deaton and Dreze (2009) that caloric requirements are lower for larger
households and have declined over time at the individual-level, the magnitudes we
measure appear to be too low to fully resolve these consumption “puzzles” on their
own. Some of our conclusions require careful quantification informed by the nutrition literature. For example, we find that that the increase in the share of adults
relative to children in Indian households, with associated increases in activity levels
and metabolic requirements, is large relative to the decline in activity levels predicted
by occupational variables. Another example is that we find that the higher metabolic
energy requirements of larger households (due to greater height and weight) are not
enough to offset their lower activity levels, such that their caloric requirements are
lower overall.
While there are many interesting avenues for extending our findings, we are cautious in over-interpreting our results given the difficulties involved in measurement.
As measurement errors could be equally large on the intake and requirement side,
we believe that economists and nutritionists would benefit from closer collaboration
in developing measurement tools suitable for smaller field experiments and larger
national surveys, and by exploring the interplay of biological and economic factors
that together shape food demand, activity levels and anthropometric outcomes. As
technology for measuring intake and requirements improves and becomes cheaper,
incorporating biological considerations into models of consumer behavior is likely to
be a fruitful area of research, particularly in developing countries where food remains
a large share of the budget and where under-nutrition remains a serious problem.

References
Abdulai, Awadu, “Economies of Scale and the Demand for Food in Switzerland:
Parametric and Non-Parametric Analysis,” Journal of Agricultural Economics, 2003,

31
54(2), 247–267.
Almas, Ingvild, “International Income Inequality: Measuring PPP bias by estimating
Engel curves for food,” American Economic Review, 2012.
Barr, Sadie B. and Jonathan C. Wright, “Postprandial energy expenditure in wholefood and processed-food meals: implications for daily energy expenditure,” Food
Nutrition Research, 2010, 54.
Barten, Anton P., “Family Composition, Prices and Expenditure Patterns,” in Gordon Mills Hart, Peter E. and John K. Whitaker, eds., Econometric Analysis for National
Economic Planning, London: Butterworths, 1964.
Basu, Deepankar and Amit Basole, “The Calorie Consumption Puzzle in India: An
Empirical Investigation,” Working Paper, 2013.
Borgonha, S, P.S. Shetty, and A.V. Kurpad, “Total energy expenditure and physical activity in chronically undernourished Indian males measured by the doubly labeled
water method,” Indian Journal of Medical Research, 2000, 111, 24–32.
Clark, Gregoy, Michale Hubermand, and Peter Lindert, “A British Food Puzzle,” The
Economic History Review, 1995, 48(2), 215–237.
Clegg, M.E., M. Golsorkhi, and C.J. Henry, “Combined medium-chain triglyceride
and chilli feeding increases diet-induced thermogenesis in normal-weight humans,” European Journal of Nutrition, 2013, 52(6), 1579–1585.
Costa, Dora L., “Estimating Real Income in the US from 1888 to 1994: Correcting CPI
Bias Using Engel Curves,” Journal of Political Economy, 2001, 109(6), 1288–1310.
Cutler, David M., Edward L. Glaeser, and Jesse M. Shapiro, “Why Have Americans
Become More Obese?,” Journal of Economic Perspectives, 2003, 17, 93–118.
Dasgupta, Partha and Debraj Ray, “Adapting to Undernourishment: The Clinical
Evidence and Its Implications,” WIDER Working Paper, 1987.
Deaton, Angus and Christina Paxson, “Economies of Scale, Household Size, and the
Demand for Food,” Journal of Political Economy, 1998, 106(5), 897–930.

32
and Jean Dreze, “Food and Nutrition in India: Facts and Interpretations,” Economic
and Political Weekly, 2009, 44(7), 42–65.
and John Muellbauer, “On Measuring Child Costs: With Applications to Poor
Countries,” Journal of Political Economy, 1986, 94(4), 720–744.
and S Subramanian, “The Demand for Food and Calories,” Journal of Political Economy, 1996, 104(1), 133–162.
DiNardo, John, Nicole M. Fortin, and Thomas Lemieux, “Labor Market Institutions
and the Distribution of Wages, 1972-1993: A Semi-Parametric Approach,” Econometrica, 1996, 64(5), 1001–1044.
Du, S, B Lu, F Zhai, and B Popkin, “A New Stage of the Nutrition Transition in
China,” Public Health Nutrition, 2002, 5(1A), 169–174.
Duh, Josephine and Dean Spears, “Can Improving the Disease Environment Explain
India’s Calories Consumption Puzzle?,” Work in Progress, 2013.
Engel, Ernst, “Die Lebenskosten Belgischer Arbeiter-Familien Fruher and jetzt,” International Statistical Institute Bulletin,, 1895, 9, 1–74.
et al., A. Raben, “Decreased postprandial thermogenesis and fat oxidation but increased fullness after a high-fiber meal compared with a low-fiber meal,” American
Journal of Clinical Nutrition, 1994.
et al., Barbara E. Ainsworth, “Compendium of Physical Activities: an update of activity codes and MET intensities,” Medicine and Science in Sports and Exercise, 2000.
FAO/WHO/UNU Expert Consultation, “Energy and Protein Requirements,” World
Health Organization Technical Report Series 724, 1985.
, “Human energy requirements,” Food and Nutrition Technical Report Series, 2001.
Federation of Hotel and Restaurant Associations of India, “Restaurant Industry in
India: Trends and Opportunities,” Research Study, 2004.
Ferro-Luzzi, Anna, Cristina Petracchi, Rebecca Kuriyan, and Anura V. Kurpad,
“Basal metabolism of weight-stable chronically undernourished men and women:
lack of metabolic adaptation and ethnic differences,” American Journal of Clinical
Nutrition, 1997, 66, 1086–1093.

33
Fogel, Robert and Stanley Engerman, Time on the Cross: The Economics of American
Negro Slavery, Norton and Company, 1974.
Gardes, Francois and Christophe Starzec, “Economies of scale and food consumption:
a reappraisal of the Deaton-Paxson paradox,” Working Paper, 1999.
Gibson, John, “Why does the Engel method work? Food demand, economies of size
and household survey methods,” Oxford Bulletin of Economics and Statistics, 2002,
64(4), 341–359.
and Bonggeun Kim, “Measurement Error in Recall Surveys and the Relationship
Between Household Size and Food Demand,” American Journal of Agricultural Economics, 2007, 89(2), 473–489.
GK Krishnaveni et al., “Relationship between physical activity measured using accelerometers and energy expenditure measured using doubly labelled water in Indian Children,” European Journal of Clinical Nutrition, 2009.
Gopalan, C, B V Rama Sastri, and S C Balasubramanian, The Nutritive Value of Indian Foods, Indian Council of Medical Research, Hyderabad: National Institute of
Nutrition, 2004.
Gupta, Amlan Das, “Veblen Preferences and Falling Calorie Consumpton in India:
Theory and Evidence,” Working Paper, 2013.
Hamilton, Bruce W., “Using Engel’s Law to Estimate CPI bias,” American Economic
Review, 2001, 91(3), 619–630.
Henry, C.J.K., “Basal metabolic rate studies in humans: measurement and development of new equation s,” Public Health Nutrition, 2005.
Horowitz, Adam, “Household Size and Demand for Food,” Working Paper, 2002.
Indian Council of Medical Research, “Nutrient Requirements and Recommended Dietary Allowances for Indians,” National Institute of Nutrition, 1989.
, “Nutrient Requirements and Recommended Dietary Allowances for Indians,” National Institute of Nutrition, 2009.

34
Jensen, Robert and Nolan Miller, “Giffen Behavior and Subsistence Consumption,”
American Economic Review, 2008, 98(4), 1553–1577.
and , “A Revealed Preference Approach to Measuring Hunger and Undernutrition,” Working Paper, 2010.
Jeor, Sachiko T. St. and Phyllis J. Stumbo, “Energy Needs and Weight Maintenance
in Controlled Feeding Studies,” Well-Controlled Diet Studies in Humans, A Practical
Guide to Design and Management., 1999.
Karan, Anup and Ajay Mahal, “Health, nutrition and poverty: Linking nutrition to
consumer expenditures,” in “Financing and Delivery of Health Care Services in
India,” National Commission on Macroeconomics and Health, Ministry of Health
and Family Welfare, Government of India, 2005.
Lee, Ronald and Karen Kramer, “Children’s Economic Roles in the Maya Family Life
Cycle: Cain, Caldwell, and Chayanov Revisited,” Population and Development Review, 2004, 28(3), 475–499.
Logan, Trevon, “Economies of Scale in the Household: Puzzles and Patterns from the
American Past,” NBER Working Paper 13869, 2008.
, “The Transformation of Hunger: The Demand for Calories Past and Present,” The
Journal of Economic History, 2009, 69(2), 388–408.
Ng, Shu Wen and Barry Popkin, “Time Use and Physical Activity: A Shift Away from
Movement across the Globe,” Obesity Review, 2013, 13(8), 659–680.
Perali, Federico, “The Second Engel Law and Economies of Scale: an Empirical Puzzle to be Resolved,” Working Paper, 2001.
Schofield, W.N., C. Schofield, and W.P.T. James, “Basal metabolic rate – review and
prediction, together with an annotated bigliography of source material.,” Human
nutrition and Clinical Nutrition, 1985.
Shetty, P.S., M.J. Soares, and M.L. Sheela, “Basal metabolic rates of South Indian
males,” Report of FAO, 1986.
Smith, Lisa C., “The Great Indian Calorie Debate: Explaining Rising Undernourishment during Indias Rapid Economic Growth,” IDS Working Paper, 2013, 430.

35
Statistics
Canada,
“Low-Income
Cutoffs,”
http://www.statcan.gc.ca/pub/75f0002m/2009002/s2- eng.htm, 2009.

On-line:

Westerterp, Klaas R, “Diet induced thermogenesis,” Nutrition and Metabolism, 2004,
1:5.

36
Figures and Tables

Figure 1: Household-level log caloric intake, log caloric requirements, and log activity levels vs. log expenditure (1993-1994). See text for details of sample selection.
Panel A is for Rural households only, while Panel B uses all households but partials
out demographic and location variables (village/urban block dummies).

37

Figure 2: Predictors of net calories (1993-94). Net caloric intake (y-axis) is log household intake minus log household requirements (imputed to individuals using employment surveys and aggregated). See text for details of sample selection. Real
expenditures use local unit-value price indexes as deflators.

38

Figure 3: Variation in caloric intake and requirements with household size. Figure
plots the coefficients on household size dummies from a regression controlling for
per capita expenditure, demographic composition ratios, and other variables (see
text). Omitted category is 2-person households, so Y-axis depicts % deviations for
households with 3 to 8 members. Consumption data from 1993-1994 NSS. “Require
1994” based on caloric requirements imputed to 1993-1994 NSS (imputed to individuals using employment surveys and aggregated); “Require 1999” based on 1998-1999
Time-Use survey.

39

Figure 4: Household caloric intake and requirements over time. Requirements are
imputed to individuals using employment surveys and aggregated. Real expenditures use national unit-value price indexes as deflators.

40

Figure 5: Adult male and female activity levels over time. Activity-levels are imputed
using employment surveys. An activity level of one represents a state of total rest.

41

Table 1: Caloric requirements and intake: sample means and components

Rural
Men

Women

Urban
Household

Men

Women

Household

Panel A: Caloric Requirements (1999 Time Use Survey, 2006 NFHS/2002 NNMB)
Basal Requirement

Activity Level

Caloric Requirement

Observations

1450

1126

1154

1566

1224

1271

(102)

(52)

(152)

(111)

(76)

(178)

2.01

1.93

1.80

1.67

1.69

1.60

(0.46)

(0.35)

(0.28)

(0.38)

(0.24)

(0.20)

2916

2177

2140

2604

2072

2066

(685)

(402)

(467)

(606)

(309)

(405)

16351

16090

12543

7761

7324

5735

Panel B: Caloric Intake (1993-1994 NSS, Time Use States)
Caloric Intake

2923

2575

2211

2875

2592

2187

(785)

(813)

(655)

(860)

(881)

(670)

0.83

0.95

0.97

0.54

0.75

0.93

directly converted

(0.31)

0(.14)

(0.07)

(0.40)

(0.37)

(0.16)

Caloric intake excluding

2359

2374

2130

1384

1979

2005

(1163)

(875)

(653)

(1345)

(1335)

(709)

1.05

1.07

1.02

1.09

1.04

1.02

(0.14)

(0.21)

(0.09)

(0.21)

(0.17)

(0.11)

302

368

16126

575

228

10949

Fraction of food expend.

bev./processed/cooked meals
Meal adjust. factor

Observations

Alternative Estimates from Deaton and Dreze (2009)
1993-1994 NSS

2153

2073

1999-2000 NSS

2148

2155

Notes: Standard deviations in parentheses. Rural males and females refer to adults aged 18 or over.
Time-Use states are Haryana, Gujarat, Madhya Pradesh, Meghalaya, Orissa and Tamil Nadu.
Individual caloric intake is based on one-person households only.
Meal adjustment factor is “(meals at home + free meals away)/(meals at home + meals to guests)”

42

Table 2: Rural household food consumption and caloric requirements: by industry,
work type, education
Cal. reqs

Basal req.

Act. level

Cal. intake

Food share

Grain share

Real exp.

Panel A: Primary industry (1-digit National Industrial Classification)
Agriculture

2126.15

1123.65

1.81

2139.25

0.68

0.45

265.89

Mining

2038.35

1102.69

1.75

2122.23

0.66

0.47

285.89

Manufact. (natural)

1983.78

1162.96

1.68

2076.82

0.67

0.41

300.82

Manufact. (non-natur.)

1871.17

1113.40

1.64

1995.15

0.68

0.37

315.29

Utilities

1890.41

1116.59

1.65

2062.70

0.61

0.35

360.41

Construction

2109.08

1086.73

1.81

1988.93

0.66

0.39

278.70

Retail/wholesale/hotel/restaurant

1827.66

1170.02

1.58

2130.47

0.67

0.39

333.58

Transport/storage/communication

1857.90

1118.68

1.61

2074.33

0.66

0.34

315.77

Business services

1912.92

1198.40

1.61

2697.23

0.59

0.26

672.96

Personal/community/social services

1872.86

1177.53

1.60

2224.46

0.64

0.35

368.88

Other

1922.32

1144.64

1.63

2232.28

0.66

0.39

325.34

Panel B: Household work type
Self-employed

2081.53

1140.40

1.77

2249.15

0.67

0.42

299.81

Casual labor

2123.17

1107.61

1.81

1962.67

0.68

0.46

240.80

Other

1836.65

1158.93

1.58

2239.45

0.65

0.38

366.53

Illiterate

2142.39

1109.10

1.83

2063.84

0.68

0.46

246.23

Less than primary

2089.54

1122.39

1.78

2193.06

0.68

0.44

286.71

Primary

2073.47

1133.79

1.76

2133.76

0.67

0.39

302.48

Middle

2004.11

1146.88

1.71

2220.09

0.67

0.39

336.92

Secondary

1933.98

1176.71

1.65

2343.41

0.64

0.32

398.66

Post-secondary

1856.53

1217.74

1.58

2515.19

0.62

0.29

506.71

Panel C: Household head education

Notes: First three columns (Caloric Requirements, Basal Requirements and Activity Levels) are based on 1998-1999 Time-Use data.
Next four columns (Caloric Intake, Food share of budget, Grain share of food budget, Real expenditure) are from 1993-1994 NSS.

43

Table 3: Household food consumption patterns as a function of total expenditures
and caloric requirements (1993-1994 Time-Use States)
Dep. variable

Log caloric intake

Log caloric requirement

Log exp. per capita

Demographic controls

Grain share of food budget

(1)

(2)

(3)

(4)

(5)

(6)

(7)

(8)

(9)

0.310***

0.197***

-0.178*

0.0121***

0.0575***

-0.0743*

0.0587***

0.124***

-0.0185

(0.00756)

(0.0146)

(0.0972)

(0.00323)

(0.00650)

(0.0439)

(0.00356)

(0.00718)

(0.0428)

0.402***

0.385***

-0.120

-0.0609***

-0.0616***

-0.239***

-0.138***

-0.127***

-0.319***

(0.00361)

(0.00395)

(0.130)

(0.00153)

(0.00171)

(0.0588)

(0.00164)

(0.00172)

Cal. req. X exp.

Constant

Food share of budget

(0.0573)

0.0663***

0.0233***

0.0253***

(0.0172)

(0.00775)

(0.00755)

2.993***

3.587***

6.428***

0.909***

0.637***

1.637***

0.714***

0.000113

1.083***

(0.0551)

(0.120)

(0.736)

(0.0236)

(0.0530)

(0.331)

(0.0264)

(0.0578)

(0.324)

NO

YES

YES

NO

YES

YES

NO

YES

YES

R2

0.689

0.702

0.702

0.478

0.488

0.488

0.796

0.807

0.807

Observations

26,981

26,981

26,981

27,069

27,069

27,069

27,069

27,069

27,069

Notes: Robust standard errors in parentheses. *** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1. All regressions include village/urban block dummy variables.
Demographic controls include: a cubic in log household size, gender/age composition ratios, household head gender and cubic in age.

Table 4: Household size effects on caloric requirements, caloric intake and food share.

(1)

(2)

(3)

(4)

Log cal. requ. 1998-99 TUS

Log cal. requ. 1993-94 NSS

Log cal. intake 1993-94 NSS

Food share 1993-94 NSS

-0.0241***

-0.0243***

-0.0574***

-0.0145***

(0.00374)

(0.00201)

(0.00420)

(0.00340)

R2

0.686

0.827

0.717

0.474

Obs.

16,794

23,846

23,829

23,840

Dep. variable
Log household size

Note: Robust standard errors in parentheses. *** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1.
All regressions include basic demographic controls (see table 2), cubic in real per capita
expenditures and rural/urban block dummies.
Column 1 uses TUS data on activities without regression-based imputation.
Column 2 uses individual-level regression-based imputation with NSS Schedule 10.

44

Table 5: Household size and caloric requirements: channels
(1)

(2)

(3)

(4)

(5)

(6)

(7)

(8)

Basal no adj.

Basal adj.

Activity level

Market

Domestic

Leisure

Free col.

Travel

0.0312***

0.0149***

-0.0566***

-0.166***

(0.00135)

(0.00010)

(0.00364)

(0.0173)

-0.250***

0.107***

-0.572***

-0.687***

(0.0124)

(0.00493)

(0.0392)

(0.0411)

R2

0.921

0.942

0.423

0.420

0.447

0.793

0.485

0.559

N

16,794

16,794

16,794

16,534

16,743

16,794

7,653

5,894

Minutes per person on:
Dep. var. (in logs)

Log household size

Note: Robust standard errors in parentheses. *** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1
All regressions include basic demographic controls (see table 2), cubic in real per capita
expenditures and rural/urban block dummies.
Basal no adj.: Basal Energy Expenditure (BEE) which varies either based on gender and age.
Basal adj.: BEE due to gender/age but also height/weight differences related to socioeconomic variables.
Domestic activities include free collection (Free col.).
Travel includes both market and domestic related.

45

Table 6: Household changes over time: sample means for 1983, 1994, 2005
Rural 1983

Urban 1983

Rural 1994

Urban 1994

Rural 2005

Urban 2005

NSS Schedule 1 variables
Per capita real expenditure

297.79

410.32

308.94

444.41

354.72

552.26

Per capita caloric intake

2297.94

2192.97

2230.83

2208.00

2145.84

2133.41

Food share of budget

0.67

0.64

0.67

0.63

0.56

0.47

Grain share of food

0.53

0.36

0.41

0.29

0.35

0.26

Household size

5.24

4.94

4.91

4.60

4.93

4.51

Age of head

44.00

42.02

43.88

42.71

45.16

44.35

Male 18-59

0.25

0.33

0.27

0.33

0.27

0.34

Female 18-59

0.26

0.24

0.27

0.26

0.28

0.28

Male 60+

0.04

0.03

0.04

0.03

0.05

0.04

Female 60+

0.04

0.04

0.04

0.04

0.05

0.04

Demographic composition ratios

Household primary industry (NIC 1-digit)
Agriculture

0.74

0.09

0.70

0.08

0.64

0.06

Manuf. natural

0.05

0.15

0.05

0.11

0.05

0.12

Manuf. non-nat.

0.02

0.10

0.02

0.10

0.02

0.09

Construction

0.02

0.05

0.03

0.06

0.07

0.09

Retail

0.05

0.18

0.05

0.18

0.06

0.22

Transport

0.02

0.10

0.02

0.10

0.03

0.11

Business services

0.00

0.02

0.00

0.03

0.01

0.05

Social/personal services

0.06

0.24

0.07

0.24

0.06

0.18

Household head education
Illiterate

0.60

0.27

0.53

0.23

0.46

0.19

Some

0.15

0.13

0.16

0.13

0.11

0.08

Primary

0.13

0.17

0.12

0.13

0.15

0.14

Middle

0.08

0.15

0.10

0.15

0.15

0.18

Secondary

0.04

0.19

0.07

0.23

0.11

0.24

Post-secondary

0.01

0.09

0.02

0.13

0.03

0.17

Other variables
Electricity

0.14

0.57

0.36

0.82

0.54

0.92

Firewood

0.74

0.43

0.78

0.32

0.76

0.23

Dung

0.15

0.03

0.11

0.03

0.09

0.02

Rel. grain price

0.24

0.21

0.02

0.02

-0.03

-0.01

Rel. energy price

0.21

0.35

0.00

0.04

0.15

0.31

Bicycle

.

.

0.28

0.32

0.48

0.44

Motorcycle

.

.

0.02

0.09

0.08

0.25

Car

.

.

0.00

0.01

0.01

0.03

71374

38648

67046

41838

77140

42215

Plowing

0.12

0.00

0.08

0.00

0.06

0.00

Planting

0.08

0.00

0.06

0.00

0.06

0.00

Weeding

0.09

0.00

0.10

0.00

0.11

0.00

Animal husbandry

0.10

0.00

0.11

0.00

0.13

0.00

Collect wood

0.31

0.07

0.30

0.06

0.28

0.05

Collect food

0.17

0.03

0.15

0.02

0.12

0.01

Husk paddy

0.18

0.02

0.11

0.02

0.09

0.02

Grind grain

0.26

0.11

0.12

0.07

0.10

0.06

Prepare dung cakes

0.32

0.07

0.36

0.07

0.30

0.04

Collect water

0.43

0.28

0.41

0.24

0.31

0.16

Home garden

0.10

0.04

0.12

0.04

0.10

0.02

Observations

71374

38648

67046

41838

78183

43001

Observations

NSS Schedule 10 variables

All reported means use sample weights. For 1983 and 1994, the same households are sampled for Schedules 1 and 10.
Relative prices are the log ratio of group-level price indexes to an overall price index.
Price indexes are calculated relative to rural Maharashtra in 1994, using median unit values with quality correction and Tornqvist weights.

46

Table 7: Changes in caloric intake and requirements over time 1983-2005

1983

1987-88

1993-94

1999-00

2004-05

% change 1983-2005

A. Requirements: Mean per capita
Rural
Male activity level

2.03

1.99

1.97

1.96

1.91

-5.89%

Female activity level

1.95

1.92

1.92

1.91

1.89

-3.26%

Household cal. req.

2056

2048

2070

2061

2040

-0.82%

Urban
Male act. level

1.65

1.64

1.64

1.62

1.65

-0.17%

Female act. level

1.77

1.76

1.75

1.72

1.74

-1.94%

Household cal. req.

1972

1977

1988

1987

1999

1.35%

B. Household Caloric Intake: Mean per capita
Rural
Weighted

2230

2217

2160

2153

2079

-6.78%

Unweighted

2302

2351

2276

2286

2202

-4.34%

Deaton-Dreze (2009)

2240

2233

2153

2148

2047

-8.62%

Urban
Weighted

2064

2076

2091

2135

2034

-1.46%

Unweighted

2204

2242

2244

2304

2138

-2.99%

Deaton-Dreze (2009)

2070

2095

2073

2155

2021

-2.37%

Caloric requirement and activity-level imputation using NSS schedule 10, see text for details.
Male and female activity levels refer to adults aged 18-59.

47

Table 8: Percent change in caloric intake vs. 1983, actual and decomposition of predicted
1987-88

1993-94

1999-00

2004-05

Rural households
Actual

0.025

-0.005

0.000

-0.028

Total Predicted

-0.003

-0.021

-0.068

-0.008

Real expenditure

0.018

0.038

0.052

0.098

Demographics

0.003

0.009

0.010

0.015

Occupation/educ.

-0.003

-0.006

-0.016

-0.018

Domestic tasks

-0.001

-0.001

-0.001

-0.001

Farm activities

0.002

0.000

-0.003

-0.004

Electric/fuel

-0.003

-0.007

-0.011

-0.014

Relative prices

-0.020

-0.054

-0.100

-0.084

Urban households
Actual

0.022

0.024

0.052

-0.017

Total Predicted

-0.002

0.027

0.019

0.042

Real expenditure

0.015

0.038

0.074

0.063

Demographics

0.005

0.013

0.019

0.021

Occupation/educ.

-0.002

-0.002

-0.008

-0.004

Domestic tasks

0.001

0.001

-0.001

0.000

Electric/fuel

-0.014

-0.009

-0.045

-0.020

Relative prices

-0.007

-0.013

-0.021

-0.018

Notes: “Actual” is measured as the difference in mean log household intake vs. 1983.
“Total Predicted” is the sum of individual components; these are based on within-year
coefficient estimates from pooled data for 1983, 1987-88, 1993-94, and changes in the
mean sample household characteristics vs. 1983.
Relative prices are calculated as described in table .

1

A

Appendix

Figure 6: Intake-requirement elasticities by decile of per capita expenditure. We
regress per capita caloric intake on per capita caloric requirements for each per capita
expenditure decile in 1993-1994 (with or without controls for demographics and village/urban block dummies) and then plot the locally-weighted regression for the
coefficients on caloric requirements.

2

Figure 7: Intake-requirement elasticities by education category (no demog. controls).
We regress per capita caloric intake on per capita caloric requirements for each head
of household education class (0=illiterate and no school, 6=post-secondary) in 19931994 and report a line plot of the coefficients on caloric requirements.

3

Figure 8: Food share and grain share of food over time as a function of real expenditures. Real expenditures use national unit-value price indexes as deflators.

4

Figure 9: Caloric Intake: actual and counter-factual distributions for rural households. Figure depicts actual distribution of household caloric intake per capita for
1983 and 2005, along with counter-factual distributions based on re-weighting 1983
households based on the probability a household with similar characteristics is observed in 2005 (following DiNardo et al. (1996)). The characteristics used are either real expenditures and demographic variables (2005 exp./dem.) or all variables
(which also includes occupation/education, energy/fuel usage, and prices as described in the text).

5

Figure 10: Food share: actual and counter-factual distributions for rural households.
Figure depicts actual distribution of food share for 1983 and 2005, along with counterfactual distributions based on re-weighting 1983 households based on the probability
a household with similar characteristics is observed in 2005 (following DiNardo et al.
(1996)). The characteristics used are either real expenditures and demographic variables (2005 exp./dem.) or all variables (which also includes occupation/education,
energy/fuel usage, and prices as described in the text).

6

Figure 11: Grain share of food: actual and counter-factual distributions for rural
households. Figure depicts actual distribution of grain share for 1983 and 2005, along
with counter-factual distributions based on re-weighting 1983 households based on
the probability a household with similar characteristics is observed in 2005 (following DiNardo et al. (1996)). The characteristics used are either real expenditures and
demographic variables (2005 exp./dem.) or all variables (which also includes occupation/education, energy/fuel usage, and prices as described in the text).

7

Table 9: Minutes per day on various activities, by sector and gender (1998-1999 TimeUse Survey)

Activity

Household

Male adult

Female adult

Sector

Rural

Urban

Rural

Urban

Rural

Urban

Primary

649.75

73.94

314.13

38.14

153.28

18.13

Free collection

73.33

17.13

12.22

2.39

38.10

10.25

Secondary

98.22

192.74

52.46

107.57

15.27

20.10

Tertiary

113.87

485.63

69.81

305.96

12.62

41.83

Total Market

935.16

769.44

448.62

454.06

219.27

90.32

Cook

229.04

233.30

5.40

5.99

161.51

171.63

Other hh maint.

230.15

241.47

23.06

19.56

137.30

157.02

Care for others

65.84

71.04

10.07

10.62

47.27

55.23

Total Domestic

525.02

545.81

38.54

36.18

346.09

383.88

Learning

248.41

317.16

7.83

18.46

2.31

12.12

Social

262.69

515.60

56.81

118.41

34.55

113.95

Sleep

1841.55

1817.84

528.54

503.76

515.28

511.11

Television

104.39

313.43

27.27

74.14

23.51

91.94

Other

1024.33

747.90

332.41

235.48

298.99

236.69

Total Leisure

3481.37

3711.93

952.86

950.24

874.64

965.80

Note: children under 6 are excluded from the household measure because their minutes
are unrecorded. Primary, secondary, and tertiary refer to agriculture/fishing/forestry,
manufacturing and services respectively. “Market” time is not restricted to
wage/remunerated labor and includes self-employment and production for own consumption.

8

Table 10: Imputing caloric requirements and intake: sample means using 1998-99
Time Use Survey and 2006 NFHS/2002 NNMB
Rural
Adult M

Adult F

Urban

Child M

Child F

Adult M

Adult F

Child M

Child F

Basal Energy Expenditures: Different imputation methods and formulas
Impute BEE, Oxford eq.

Impute height/weight, Oxf.

Impute height/weight, ICMR(2009)

1450.48

1125.89

953.52

787.78

1565.52

1223.87

1059.36

855.74

101.55

52.35

270.16

200.24

110.70

75.69

309.84

218.86

1430.29

1127.70

885.02

840.77

1542.84

1228.38

990.74

910.82

132.32

49.40

311.84

169.50

134.84

76.06

352.44

184.74

1389.98

1134.01

986.53

904.77

1489.92

1236.04

1098.77

994.53

95.13

60.80

284.49

243.62

98.89

80.33

309.65

254.09

Activity level (sleep=1): Different activity schedules
FAO/WHO/UNU (2001)

et al. (2000)

“Calories per hr” web-site

N

2.01

1.93

1.45

1.46

1.67

1.69

1.42

1.41

0.46

0.35

0.25

0.24

0.38

0.24

0.22

0.15

1.89

1.90

1.42

1.43

1.64

1.67

1.39

1.38

0.44

0.34

0.24

0.24

0.44

0.28

0.22

0.16

2.29

2.12

1.62

1.61

1.93

1.80

1.56

1.54

0.54

0.41

0.32

0.29

0.60

0.29

0.27

0.21

16351

16090

11097

9570

7761

7324

4364

3858

In the paper we use actual height/weight/age/gender and the Oxford equations from Henry (2005) to estimate BEE,
and then imputes BEE based on common (NSS/TUS) characteristics. Alternately we can impute height and weight separately,
and then construct BEE based on the heights and weights imputed based on common (NSS/TUS) characteristics.
The Indian Council of Medical Research (2009) measure uses the same height and weight but a different BEE formula.
Adult refers to individuals aged 18 and older.

9

Table 11: Urban household food consumption and caloric requirements: by industry,
work type, education

Cal. reqs

BEE

Act.factor

Cal. intake

Food share

Grain share

Exp.

Panel A: Primary Industry (1-digit National Industrial Classification)

Agriculture

2131.83

1257.12

1.67

2177.70

0.67

0.37

298.88

Mining

1900.69

1137.58

1.62

2285.11

0.61

0.38

378.14

Manufacture (natural)

2012.79

1222.34

1.62

1995.38

0.65

0.32

360.24

Manufacture (non-natural)

2003.02

1232.74

1.59

2089.35

0.62

0.27

433.50

Utilities

1953.14

1274.88

1.52

2273.37

0.59

0.28

490.26

Construction

2365.02

1261.38

1.79

1948.66

0.65

0.35

316.99

Retail/wholesale/hotel/restaurant

1922.60

1239.09

1.53

1993.55

0.63

0.29

381.83

Transport/storage/communications

2001.44

1235.91

1.59

2002.42

0.64

0.32

345.05

Business Services

1958.76

1299.40

1.50

2368.47

0.58

0.23

623.35

Personal/community/social services

1959.33

1258.80

1.54

2112.23

0.62

0.28

430.35

Other

2012.37

1301.62

1.53

2244.61

0.63

0.28

460.77

Panel B: Household work type

Self-employed

1990.61

1246.15

1.57

2053.99

0.63

0.30

382.23

Casual labor

2113.62

1193.96

1.70

1887.04

0.67

0.37

270.22

Other

1984.24

1275.28

1.54

2149.79

0.62

0.28

440.28

Panel C: Household head education

Illiterate

2093.08

1196.99

1.70

1953.60

0.67

0.36

290.85

Some

2000.19

1212.43

1.61

1972.11

0.65

0.33

325.92

Primary

2010.38

1217.68

1.62

1972.80

0.65

0.31

343.98

Middle

2015.49

1227.00

1.60

2028.30

0.64

0.31

358.97

Secondary

1987.85

1274.22

1.54

2182.62

0.60

0.26

468.68

Post-secondary

2003.50

1309.28

1.52

2427.95

0.56

0.21

635.78

Notes: First three columns (Caloric Requirements, Basal Requirements and Activity Levels) are based on 1998-1999 Time-Use data.
Next four columns (Caloric Intake, Food share of budget, Grain share of food budget, Real expenditure) are from 1993-1994 NSS.

10

Table 12: Selected coefficients on household variables in regressions using caloric
intake or requirements as dependent variables
Data
Dep.var.

1993-94 NSS (all)

1999-00 NSS*

Log caloric intake per capita

1998-99 TUS*
Log caloric requirement per capita

Demographic ratios (male 18-59 is omitted)
F 18-59

-0.01

0.00

-0.25

M 60+

-0.02

-0.05

-0.17

F 60+

-0.03

-0.02

-0.48

M 0-2

-0.35

-0.29

-1.07

F 0-2

-0.32

-0.26

-1.53

M 3-4

-0.22

-0.23

-0.89

F 3-4

-0.23

-0.16

-1.17

M 5-9

-0.14

-0.09

-0.83

F 5-9

-0.16

-0.11

-1.02

M 10-14

-0.07

-0.04

-0.42

F 10-14

-0.10

-0.03

-0.68

M 15-17

-0.04

-0.02

-0.10

F 15-17

-0.07

-0.05

-0.38

Adult education ratios (no schooling omitted)
Some

-0.02

-0.04

0.01

Primary

-0.03

-0.02

0.00

Middle

-0.02

-0.05

-0.02

Secondary

-0.02

-0.11

-0.03

-0.03

-0.09

-0.06

Post-sec

Principal NIC code (agriculture omitted)
Mining

-0.04

-0.07

-0.04

Manufact. Oth.

-0.07

-0.04

-0.03

Manufact. Oth.

-0.08

-0.05

-0.05

Utilities

-0.08

-0.01

0.03

Construct.

-0.05

-0.02

-0.02

Trade/retail

-0.08

-0.07

-0.08

Transport

-0.06

-0.06

-0.07

FIRE

-0.07

-0.08

-0.03

Services

-0.06

-0.05

-0.05

-0.07

-0.03

-0.04

Other

Household type (self-employed omitted)
Casual labor

-0.04

-0.01

0.02

Other

-0.02

-0.05

-0.07

* Time-Use states only.
Regressions include cubic in household size and real expenditure
scheduled caste, tribe, religion, and head age and gender and state dummies.

11

Table 13: Regressions of log caloric intake per capita on household size for different
household types (rich/poor, urban/rural)
Year

1993-1994
Rural

2009-2010
Urban

Rural

Urban

Rich

Poor

Rich

Poor

Rich

Poor

Rich

Poor

-0.0559***

0.00210

-0.102***

-0.0170***

-0.104***

-0.0604***

-0.134***

-0.0717***

(0.00484)

(0.00334)

(0.00481)

(0.00642)

(0.00375)

(0.00403)

(0.00420)

(0.00725)

R2

0.657

0.711

0.657

0.691

0.703

0.764

0.710

0.791

Obs.

24,123

34,737

22,834

13,191

29,620

22,489

24,552

9,683

Log household size

Robust standard errors in parentheses
*** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1
Rich/poor defined as above/below 5.73 log real per capita monthly expenditure.
Sample only includes households with between 2 and 8 members.
Controls include cubic in log real expenditure, demographics, and rural village/urban block dummies.

12

Table 14: Percent change in food and grain shares, with decomposition

Rural food share

Urban food share

1983-2005

1983-1993

1993-2005

1983-2005

1983-1993

1993-2005

Actual sched. 1

-0.126

-0.014

-0.112

-0.153

-0.014

-0.139

Actual sched. 10

-0.072

-0.057

-0.079

Total Predicted

-0.064

-0.029

-0.035

-0.009

0.009

-0.018

Real expenditure

-0.010

-0.004

-0.006

-0.012

-0.007

-0.005

Demographics

-0.001

-0.001

0.000

-0.002

-0.001

-0.001

Occupation/educ.

-0.006

-0.002

-0.004

-0.005

-0.004

-0.001

Domestic tasks

0.000

0.000

0.000

0.000

0.000

0.000

Farm activities

-0.001

0.000

0.000

Electric/fuel

-0.039

-0.018

-0.021

0.012

0.023

-0.011

Relative prices

-0.007

-0.004

-0.003

-0.002

-0.002

0.000

Rural grain share of food
Actual sched. 1

-0.188

Actual sched. 10

-0.149

Total Predicted

-0.244

Real expenditure

-0.123

-0.065

Urban grain share of food

-0.065

-0.081

-0.070

-0.012

-0.026

-0.056

-0.150

-0.094

-0.119

-0.076

-0.043

-0.031

-0.012

-0.019

-0.018

-0.011

-0.007

Demographics

0.005

0.003

0.002

0.006

0.003

0.003

Occupation/educ.

-0.017

-0.007

-0.010

-0.007

-0.005

-0.003

Domestic tasks

-0.002

-0.002

0.000

-0.001

0.000

-0.001

Farm activities

0.000

-0.001

0.001

Electric/fuel

-0.184

-0.123

-0.061

-0.083

-0.051

-0.032

Relative prices

-0.015

-0.007

-0.008

-0.016

-0.012

-0.004

0.014

Notes: Actual change is measured as difference in food or grain share vs. 1983
using either schedule 1 (detailed consumption) or schedule 10 (broader consumption groups).
Predicted change and components based on combination of coefficients from pooled
within-year regressions for 1983, 1987-88, 1993-94 and difference in mean household
characteristics in the sample vs. 1983 using schedule 1 and 10.
Relative prices calculated at state-level; see text for description of variables.

13
Table 15: Caloric requirement imputation: Time-Use classification and activity factors
TUS code
111
112
113
114
115
116
117
118
119
121
122
123
124
125
126
127
128
129
131
132
133
134
135
136
137
138
139
140
141
142
143
144
145
146
147
148
149
152
153
154
155
156
157
159
161
162
163
164
165
166
167
168
169
211
212
213
214
217
218
219
221
222
223
224
225
226
227
228
229

TUS desc.
% Rur. time
PLOUGHING, PREPARING LAND, CL
0.0153
SEWING, PLANTING, TRANSPLANTI
0.0066
APPLICATION OF MANURE, FERTIL
0.0283
WEEDING
0.0103
SUPERVISION OF WORK
0.0049
KITCHEN GARDENING BACKYARD
0.0008
STOCKING, TRANSPORTING TO HOM
0.0021
SALE AND PURCHASE RELATED ACT
0.0003
TRAVEL TO THE WORK
0.0112
GRAZING ANIMALS OUTSIDE
0.0072
TENDING ANIMALS CLEANING, W
0.0093
CARING FOR ANIMALS : BREEDING
0.0009
MILKING AND PROCESSING OF MIL
0.0021
MAKING DUNG CAKES
0.0010
POULTRY REARING FEEDING, CL
0.0002
OTHER RELATED ACTIVITIES
0.0010
SALE AND PURCHASE RELATED ACT
0.0003
TRAVEL TO THE WORK
0.0016
NURSERY - SEEDLINGS
0.0001
PLANTING, TENDING, PROCESSING
0.0002
COLLECTING, STORING AND STOCK
0.0004
WOOD CUTTING, CHOPPING AND
0.0012
FISH FARMING, CLEANING SEA-BE
0.0008
CARE OF HOUSE PLANTS, INDOOR
0.0006
FLOWER GARDENING LANDSCAPIN
0.0001
SALE AND PURCHASE RELATED ACT
0.0002
TRAVELLING TO THE WORK
0.0007
FETCHING OF WATER
0.0022
COLLECTION OF FRUITS, VEGETAB
0.0020
COLLECTION OF MINOR FOREST PR
0.0008
COLLECTION OF FUEL/FUEL WOOD/
0.0013
COLLECTION OF RAW MATERIAL FO
0.0022
COLLECTION OF BUILDING MATERI
0.0000
COLLECTION OF FODDER
0.0013
SALE AND PURCHASE RELATED ACT
0.0011
COLLECTION OF OTHER ITEMS
0.0002
TRAVEL TO WORK
0.0009
MILLING, HUSKING, POUNDING
0.0007
PARBOILING
0.0002
SORTING, GRADING
0.0004
GRINDING, CRUSHING
0.0003
ANY OTHER RELATED ACTIVITY
0.0002
SALES AND PURCHASE RELATED AC
0.0000
TRAVEL FOR THE WORK
0.0001
MINING/EXTRACTION OF SALT,
0.0000
MINING/DIGGING/QUARRYING OF S
0.0009
DIGGING OUT CLAY, GRAVEL AND
0.0007
DIGGING OUT MINERALS MAJOR
0.0000
TRANSPORTING IN VEHICLES
0.0001
STORING, STOCKING
0.0001
ANY OTHER RELATED ACTIVITY
0.0002
SALE AND PURCHASE RELATED ACT
0.0000
TRAVEL FOR THE WORK
0.0003
BUILDING AND CONSTRUCTION OF DW
0.0032
CONSTRUCTION AND REPAIR OF AN
0.0001
CONSTRUCTION OF WALL, STORAGE
0.0004
CONSTRUCTION OF PUBLIC WORKS/
0.0006
ANY OTHER ACTIVITY RELATED
0.0005
SALES AND PURCHASE RELATED AC
0.0001
TRAVEL TO THE WORK
0.0006
FOOD PROCESSING AND COOKING F
0.0010
BUTCHERING, CURING, PROCESSIN
0.0001
MANUFACTURING OF TEXTILES S
0.0031
MAKING HANDICRAFTS, POTTERY,
0.0024
FITTING, INSTALLING, TOOL SET
0.0007
ASSEMBLING MACHINES, EQUIPMEN
0.0002
PRODUCTION RELATED WORK IN LA
0.0016
SALE AND PURCHASE RELATED ACT
0.0003
TRAVEL FOR THE WORK
0.0006
Continued on next page

% Urb. time
0.0007
0.0004
0.0022
0.0007
0.0006
0.0002
0.0003
0.0000
0.0009
0.0003
0.0009
0.0001
0.0003
0.0001
0.0000
0.0001
0.0001
0.0001
0.0000
0.0000
0.0000
0.0002
0.0004
0.0002
0.0002
0.0001
0.0001
0.0012
0.0010
0.0002
0.0001
0.0003
0.0000
0.0001
0.0001
0.0001
0.0001
0.0003
0.0000
0.0002
0.0003
0.0002
0.0001
0.0000
0.0000
0.0004
0.0003
0.0000
0.0001
0.0002
0.0002
0.0000
0.0002
0.0034
0.0001
0.0001
0.0004
0.0009
0.0001
0.0007
0.0021
0.0001
0.0074
0.0023
0.0018
0.0006
0.0030
0.0006
0.0014

FAO desc.
ploughing horse 4.8, buffalo 3
planting rice
fertilizing general
weeding general
standing
weeding garden
bundling rice
standing
depends on type
walking around/strolling
tending animals
tending animals
milking by hand
making mud bricks (squatting)
tending animals
standing
depends on type
Forester-nursery work
planting trees
picking by hand
4.2 chopping wood (for fuel).
line fishing 1.9, spear fishin
weeding garden
weeding garden
standing
depends on type
collecting water (from well)
picking fruit by hand
collecting wood (for fuel)
collecting wood (for fuel) is
collecting wood (for fuel)
builder carrying wood
carrying straw
standing
collecting wood (for fuel)
depends on type
pounding grain
standing
sorting ground nuts
grinding grain using millstone
standing
depends on type
shovelling
drilling with jackhammer
shovelling
shovelling
driving a car/truck
loading operations
standing
depends on type
Chiselling=5, sawing/planing a

standing
depends on type
bakery work
bakery work
textile factory work
shoemaker
textile factory work
textile factory work
textile factory work
standing
depends on type

FAO factor
4
3.7
5.2
4
1.4
3.3
3.7
1.45
.
2.1
4.6
4.6
3.6
3
4.6
0
1.45
.
3.6
4.1
3.4
5
2.3
3.3
3.3
1.45
.
4.5
3.4
3.3
3.8
3.3
6.6
3.1
1.45
3.3
.
5.6
1.45
1.9
4.6
0
1.45
.
4.6
3.9
4.6
4.6
2
3.2
0
1.45
.
5
5
5
5
0
1.45
.
2.5
2.5
3.1
2.6
3.1
3.1
3.1
1.45
.

Comp. desc.
clearing land
planting seedlings, shrubs, tr
walking, applying fertilizer o
weeding, cultivating garden
standing miscellaneous
general gardening
picking fruit off trees, picki
Sitting-light office work, etc
depends on type
farming, chasing cattle (non-s
farming, feeding cattle, horse
farming, taking care of animal
milking by hand moderate effor
FAO?WHO?UNU
farming, feeding small animals
Sitting-light office work
depends on type
planting seedlings, shrubs
forestry, planting by hand
picking fruit of trees,
forestry ax chopping slow
fishing general
general gardening
general gardening
Sitting-light office work
depends on type
farming, hauling water for ani
picking fruit of trees,
picking fruit of trees,
carrying, loading or stacking
picking fruit of trees,
carrying, loading or stacking
FAO?WHO?UNU
Sitting-light office work
picking fruit of trees,
depends on type
FAO?WHO?UNU
FAO?WHO?UNU
FAO?WHO?UNU
FAO?WHO?UNU
Sitting-light office work
depends on type
coal mining/general
coal mining/general
coal mining/general
coal mining/general
driving
shovelling coal
Sitting-light office work
depends on type
construction outside remodelli
construction outside remodelli
construction outside remodelli
building road
Sitting-light office work
depends on type
bakery general moderate effort
butchering
tailoring general
shoe repair general
machine tooling
automobile repair
automobile repair
Sitting-light office work
depends on type

Comp. factor
5
4.5
2.5
4.5
2
4
3
1.5
.
3.5
4.5
6
3
3
4
0
1.5
.
4.5
6
3
5
3
4
4
1.5
.
4.5
3
3
5
3
5
3.1
1.5
3
.
5.6
1.4
1.9
4.6
0
1.5
.
6
6
6
6
2
7
0
1.5
.
5.5
5.5
5.5
6
0
1.5
.
4
6
2.5
2.5
3
3
3
1.5
.

14

TUS code
311
312
313
314
315
317
319
321
322
323
324
325
326
327
329
411
421
422
431
441
451
461
471
481
491
511
521
531
541
551
561
562
571
572
581
591
611
621
631
641
651
661
671
681
691
711
721
731
741
751
761
771
781
791
811
812
813
814
821
822
831
832
841
851
852
853
861
862
863
871

TUS desc.
% Rural time
BUYING AND SELLING GOODS SU
0.0043
PETTY TRADING, STREET AND DOO
0.0018
TRANSPORTING GOODS IN TRUCKS,
0.0005
TRANSPORTING IN HAND CARTS, A
0.0002
TRANSPORT OF PASSENGER BY MOT
0.0001
ANY OTHER ACTIVITY
0.0005
TRAVEL TO WORK
0.0005
SERVICE IN GOVERNMENT AND SEM
0.0033
SERVICE IN PRIVATE ORGANISATI
0.0018
PETTY SERVICE : DOMESTIC SERV
0.0028
PROFESSIONAL SERVICES : MEDIC
0.0016
PROFESSIONAL SERVICES : COMPU
0.0003
TECHNICAL SERVICES: PLUMBING,
0.0004
OTHERS
0.0018
TRAVEL TO WORK
0.0015
COOKING FOOD ITEMS, BEVERAGES
0.0411
CLEANING AND UPKEEP OF DWELLI
0.0132
CLEANING OF UTENSILS
0.0090
CARE OF TEXTILES: SORTING, ME
0.0076
SHOPPING FOR GOODS AND NON-PE
0.0063
HOUSEHOLD MANAGEMENT: PLANNIN
0.0006
DO-IT-YOURSELF HOME IMPROVEME
0.0039
PET CARE
0.0003
TRAVEL RELATED TO HOUSEHOLD M
0.0050
HOUSEHOLD MAINTENANCE, MANAGE
0.0073
PHYSICAL CARE OF CHILDREN: WA
0.0093
TEACHING, TRAINING AND INSTRU
0.0008
ACCOMPANYING CHILDREN TO PLAC
0.0007
PHYSICAL CARE OF THE SICK, DI
0.0007
ACCOMPANYING ADULTS TO RECEIV
0.0001
SUPERVISING CHILDREN NEEDING
0.0037
SUPERVISING ADULTS NEEDING CA
0.0002
TRAVEL RELATED TO CARE OF CHI
0.0002
TRAVEL RELATED TO CARE OF ADU
0.0001
TAKING CARE OF GUESTS/VISITOR
0.0003
ANY OTHER ACTIVITY NOT MENTIO
0.0004
COMMUNITY ORGANISED CONSTRUCT
0.0000
COMMUNITY ORGANISED WORK: COO
0.0000
VOLUNTEERING WITH FOR AN ORGA
0.0000
VOLUNTEER WORK THROUGH ORGANI
0.0000
PARTICIPATION IN MEETINGS OF
0.0001
INVOLVEMENT IN CIVIC AND RELA
0.0001
INFORMAL HELP TO OTHER HOUSEH
0.0004
COMMUNITY SERVICES NOT ELSEWH
0.0001
TRAVEL RELATED TO COMMUNITY S
0.0001
GENERAL EDUCATION: SCHOOL/UNI
0.0239
STUDIES, HOMEWORK AND COURSE
0.0181
ADDITIONAL STUDY, NON-FORMAL
0.0002
NON FORMAL EDUCATION BY CHILD
0.0000
WORK-RELATED TRAINING
0.0001
TRAINING UNDER GOVERNMENT PRO
0.0000
OTHER TRAINING/EDUCATION
0.0002
LEARNING NOT ELSEWHERE CLASSI
0.0003
TRAVEL RELATED TO LEARNING
0.0036
PARTICIPATING IN SOCIAL EVENT
0.0012
PARTICIPATING IN RELIGIOUS AC
0.0032
PARTICIPATING IN COMMUNITY FU
0.0001
SOCIALIZING AT HOME AND OUTSI
0.0008
ARTS, MAKING MUSIC, HOBBIES A
0.0001
INDOOR AND OUTDOOR SPORTS PAR
0.0020
GAMES AND OTHER PAST-TIME ACT
0.0225
SPECTATOR TO SPORTS, EXHIBITI
0.0015
OTHER RELATED ACTIVITIES
0.0004
READING, OTHER THAN NEWSPAPER
0.0031
WATCHING TELEVISION AND VIDEO
0.0275
LISTENING TO MUSIC/RADIO
0.0040
ACCESSING INFORMATION BY COMP
0.0001
VISITING LIBRARY
0.0001
READING NEWSPAPER, MAGAZINES
0.0015
MASS MEDIA USE AND ENTERTAINM
0.0004
Continued on next page

Table 15 – continued from previous page
% Urban time
FAO desc.
0.0136
standing
0.0041
walking/strolling around
0.0015
driving a car/truck
0.0017
pulling a hand cart unloaded
0.0011
driving a car/truck
0.0024
0.0022
depends on type
0.0155
writing
0.0106
writing
0.0058
housework (unspecified)
0.0037
standing
0.0008
standing
0.0019
writing
0.0034
0.0058
depends on type
0.0424
peeling vegetables(1.9), makin
0.0122
Housework unspecified 2.8, Swe
0.0097
cleaning dishes
0.0105
washing clothes
0.0061
walking around/strolling
0.0008
writing
0.0036
housework (unspecified)
0.0001
child care(unspecified)
0.0034
depends on type
0.0050
housework (unspecified)
0.0094
bathing child (standing)
0.0021
standing
0.0007
depends on type
0.0005
child care unspecified
0.0001
depends on type
0.0028
child care unspecified
0.0002
child care unspecified
0.0002
depends on type
0.0001
depends on type
0.0007
child care unspecified
0.0005
.
0.0000
sawing softwood (intermediate
0.0000
peeling vegetab;es
0.0000
standing
0.0000
standing
0.0001
standing
0.0000
standing
0.0004
standing
0.0001
standing
0.0001
depends on type
0.0260
reading
0.0230
reading
0.0005
reading
0.0000
reading
0.0002
reading
0.0000
reading
0.0007
reading
0.0007
reading
0.0045
depends on type
0.0010
standing
0.0045
standing
0.0001
Dancing
0.0015
standing
0.0005
playing cards/board games
0.0025
Between running and batting/bo
0.0176
playing cards/board games
0.0022
watching tv
0.0008
watching tv
0.0051
reading
0.0764
watching tv
0.0022
listenening to radio/music ave
0.0001
watching tv
0.0003
reading
0.0061
reading
0.0015
reading

Factor
1.45
2.1
2
4.82
2
0
.
1.4
1.4
2.8
1.45
1.45
1.4
0
.
2.4
2.8
1.7
2.8
2.1
1.4
2.8
2.5
.
2.8
3.5
1.45
.
2.5
.
2.5
2.5
.
.
2.5
0
5
2.4
1.45
1.45
1.45
1.45
1.45
1.45
.
1.4
1.4
1.4
1.4
1.4
1.4
1.4
1.4
.
1.45
1.45
5
1.45
1.6
5.5
1.6
1.66
1.66
1.22
1.66
1.5
1.66
1.4
1.4
1.4

Comp. desc.
Sitting-light office work
walking slowly and carrying li
automobile or light truck driv
pushing a wheel chair
automobile or light truck driv
depends on type
Sitting light office work
Sitting light office work
shoe repair general
standing light (bartending, st
standing light (bartending, st
electrical work, plumbing
depends on type
cooking indian bread on an out
cleaning house or cabin, gener
washing dishes
implied walking putting away c
food shopping standing and wal
Sitting-light office work
home repair painting fence
feeding animals
depends on type
food shopping standing and wal
child care standing
Sitting-light office work
depends on type
elder care
depends on type
standing light (bartending, st
standing light (bartending, st
depends on type
depends on type
standing light (bartending, st
.
building road
cooking indian bread on an out
volunteering sitting, moderate
volunteering sitting, moderate
Volunteer sitting meeting, g
volunteer- standing, light wor
volunteer- standing, light wor
volunteer- standing, light wor
depends on type
Miscellaneous sitting, study
Sitting-light office work
Sitting-light office work
Sitting-light office work
Sitting-light office work
Sitting-light office work
Sitting-light office work
Sitting-light office work
depends on type
religious activities standin
religious activities standin
religious activities dancing
standing, talking outside home
miscellaneous sitting arts and
cricket
Miscellaneous sitting board
Miscelaneous sitting at spor
Miscelaneous sitting at spor
sitting reading
inactivity quiet watching tv
inactivity quiet watching tv
sitting reading
sitting reading
sitting reading
sitting reading

Factor
1.5
3
2
4
2
0
.
1.5
1.5
2.5
1.8
1.8
3.5
0
.
3
3
2.3
2.3
2.3
1.5
4.5
2.5
.
2.3
3
1.5
.
4
.
1.8
1.8
.
.
1.8
0
6
3
2.5
2.5
1.5
2.3
2.3
2.3
.
1.8
1.5
1.5
1.5
1.5
1.5
1.5
1.5
.
1.5
1.5
5
1.8
2
5
1.5
1.5
1.5
1.3
1
1
1.3
1.3
1.3
1.3

15

TUS code
891
892
911
921
922
931
932
941
942
951
961
962
971
981
982
991

TUS desc.
TRAVEL RELATED TO SOCIAL, CUL
TRAVEL RELATING TO SEARCH OF
SLEEP AND RELATED ACTIVITIES
EATING AND DRINKING
SMOKING, DRINKING ALCOHOL AND
PERSONAL HYGIENE AND HEALTH
WALKING, EXERCISE MINING, JOG
RECEIVING MEDICAL AND PERSONA
RECEIVING MEDICAL AND PERSONA
TALKING, GOSSIPING AND QUARRE
DOING NOTHING, REST AND RELAX
FORCED LEISURE
INDIVIDUAL RELIGIOUS PRACTICE
OTHER ACTIVITIES
RESTING/CONVALESCING DUE TO P
TRAVEL RELATED TO PERSONAL CA

% Rural time
0.0033
0.0001
0.3766
0.0563
0.0011
0.0444
0.0028
0.0002
0.0001
0.0486
0.0651
0.0012
0.0037
0.0038
0.0016
0.0037

Table 15 – continued from previous page
% Urban time
FAO desc.
0.0042
depends on type
0.0004
depends on type
0.3738
sleeping
0.0586
eating and drinking
0.0005
eating and drinking
0.0425
Average of washing hands/face
0.0044
Between running and batting/bo
0.0003
sitting quietly
0.0001
sitting quietly
0.0402
standing average for men and w
0.0540
sitting quietly
0.0009
sitting quietly
0.0069
standing
0.0043
standing
0.0015
lying
0.0032
depends on type

FAO factors expressed as PAL (physical activity level), from Annex 5 of FAO/WHO/UNU Expert Consultation (2001).
Compendium (Comp.) factors expressed as MET (metabolic equivalent task) from et al. (2000).

Factor
.
.
1
1.5
1.5
2
5.5
1.2
1.2
1.45
1.2
1.2
1.2
0
1.2
.

Comp. desc.
depends on type
depends on type
sleeping
eating sitting
eating sitting
grooming
sitting reading
sitting reading
sitting talking on the phone
lying quietly doing nothing
lying quietly doing nothing
inactivity light meditation
lying quietly doing nothing
depends on type

Factor
.
.
0.9
1.5
1.5
2
5
1.3
1.3
1.5
1
1
1
0
1
.

