                                 NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                           THE U.S. DEBT RESTRUCTURING OF 1933:
                               CONSEQUENCES AND LESSONS

                                           Sebastian Edwards
                                          Francis A. Longstaff
                                          Alvaro Garcia Marin

                                          Working Paper 21694
                                  http://www.nber.org/papers/w21694


                       NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                                1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                  Cambridge, MA 02138
                                     November 2015




Sebastian Edwards is with the UCLA Anderson School and the NBER. Francis A. Longstaff is with
the UCLA Anderson School and the NBER. Alvaro Garcia Marin is with the Universidad de Chile.
We are grateful for the capable research assistance of Colton Herbruck, Scott Longstaff, and Yuji Sakurai.
All errors are our responsibility. The views expressed herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily
reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.

© 2015 by Sebastian Edwards, Francis A. Longstaff, and Alvaro Garcia Marin. All rights reserved.
Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided
that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
The U.S. Debt Restructuring of 1933: Consequences and Lessons
Sebastian Edwards, Francis A. Longstaff, and Alvaro Garcia Marin
NBER Working Paper No. 21694
November 2015
JEL No. E43,E44,E65

                                             ABSTRACT

In 1933, the U.S. unilaterally restructured its debt by declaring that it would no longer honor the gold
clause in Treasury securities. We study the effects of the abrogation of the gold clause on sovereign
debt markets, the Treasury's ability to issue new debt, investors' willingness to hold Treasury bonds,
and on the Treasury's borrowing costs. We find that the restructuring was followed by a flight to quality
in the sovereign market. Despite this, there was little effect on the Treasury's ability to sell new debt
or the willingness of investors to roll over restructured debt. The Treasury incurred a marginally higher
cost of capital by issuing new bonds without the gold clause.


Sebastian Edwards                                   Alvaro Garcia Marin
UCLA                                                Universidad de Chile
Anderson Graduate School of Management              Department of Economics
110 Westwood Plaza, Suite C508                      Diagonal Paraguay 257
Box 951481                                          Santiago, Chile
Los Angeles, CA 90095-1481                          algarcia@fen.uchile.cl
and NBER
sebastian.edwards@anderson.ucla.edu

Francis A. Longstaff
UCLA
Anderson Graduate School of Management
110 Westwood Plaza, Box 951481
Los Angeles, CA 90095-1481
and NBER
francis.longstaff@anderson.ucla.edu
                                 1. Introduction


A recurrent myth regarding the U.S. economy is that the federal government has
never defaulted on its debt. This notion comes up every time the debt ceiling is
reached and Congress wrangles about increasing the public debt limit. Consider
the following quote from White House Press Secretary James “Jay” Carney in
2011:1

       “The United States government has never defaulted on its obligations
       to pay its debt. It has never, ever missed a payment. This is one of the
       reasons that “ﬂights to quality” typically involve buying U.S. Treasury
       debt. Uniquely in the history of sovereign borrowers, the United States
       has paid when it said it would pay.”

     However, the U.S. did restructure its debt unilaterally during the ﬁrst ad-
ministration of Franklin D. Roosevelt, and imposed a 41 percent loss on investors.
On June 5, 1933, Congress passed a joint resolution altering the nature of debt
contracts retroactively. Gold clauses, which established that debts were to be
paid in “gold coin,” were eliminated for all debts (public and private). This was
the ﬁrst step in what would become one of the largest transfers of wealth (from
creditors to debtors) in the history of the world. The next step took place on
January 31, 1934, when the U.S. dollar was oﬃcially devalued by 41 percent—the
price of gold went from $20.67 to $35.00 per ounce.2 In February 1935, the cycle
was closed when the Supreme Court, in a 5 to 4 decision, ruled that the abro-
gation of the gold clauses was constitutional. Investors collected their monies in
depreciated dollars. The debts involved (both public and private) amounted to
almost 1.7 times the nation’s GDP. Although in recent years most of the popular
press and news analysts have ignored this episode, a number of scholars have
acknowledged it. For example, Reinhart and Rogoﬀ (2009, p. 113) include it in
their list of sovereign defaults.3
       An important question, and one that has not been addressed in detail in
1
 Carney (2011) in http://www/cnbc.com/id/43140915. The distinction between
federal and state debt is important. A number of states defaulted during the 19th
and 20th centuries. For example, see MacDonald (2013) and Ang and Longstaﬀ
(2013).
2
 This number is close to the historical average market haircut of 37–40 percent
computed independently by Benjamin and Wright (2008), Cruces and Trebesch
(2013), and Edwards (2015a).
3
    See also Friedman and Schwartz (1963), Kroszner (1999), and Edwards (2015b).


                                          1
the literature, is the following: What were the consequences of the Treasury
reneging on its promises and implementing a generalized breach on contracts?
Understanding this issue is not only important from a historical perspective, it
is also relevant to understanding current events and to shed light on the likely
consequences of modern defaults, including the debt restructurings in Greece and
Argentina. According to traditional economic theory, the violation of contracts
should have a number of negative consequences for debtors. Among other things,
after defaulting and imposing losses on investors, debtors should have trouble
accessing capital markets and issuing new debt, the cost of capital should increase
signiﬁcantly, liquidity should be hampered, and there should be a “‘stigma eﬀect”
on new debt. At the aggregate level, a major credit event and a generalized
breach of contracts should result in increased uncertainty and a reduction in
investment and, thus, in a lower growth rate. This was indeed the view taken
by Friedman and Schwartz (1963, p. 699), who in the concluding chapter of
their monumental A Monetary History of the United States: 1857–1960, argue
that although the devaluation of the U.S. dollar had a positive eﬀect on liquidity,
“the abrogation of the gold clauses . . . had the opposite [negative] eﬀect by
discouraging business investment.” However, they oﬀer no empirical evidence on
the actual consequences of this chapter of U.S. history on investment or other
variables related to the functioning of the capital markets.
     Interestingly, since the publication of Friedman and Schwartz (1963), there
have been few analyses of the consequences of the abrogation of the gold clause
and the unilateral restructuring of the U.S. debt. Meltzer (2003) provides a
discussion of the abrogation proper, and of how yields on gold-linked prices im-
pacted the discussions at the Federal Reserve, but provides no analysis of how
this event aﬀected real or ﬁnancial variables. The same may be said about other
major works that cover this period, including research by Temin (1991), Eichen-
green (1992), Romer (1992), and Bernanke (2000). Important exceptions include
McCulloch (1980) who analyzed the consequences of banning indexed bonds be-
tween 1933 and 1977, and Kroszner (1999) who studied the evolution of diﬀerent
securities’ prices over a two-day window surrounding the Supreme Court’s ruling
on the gold clause cases in February 1935.
     The purpose of this paper is to ﬁll this void in the literature and to analyze
in depth the consequences of the abrogation of the gold clause. By studying in
detail this important and massive episode we hope to add to the understanding
of what happens in the aftermath of a major unilateral restructuring. Four key
results emerge from this analysis.

     First, we ﬁnd that after the abrogation of the gold clause, yields on the
dollar denominated debt of the remaining high credit quality sovereigns such
as the United Kingdom, France, and Switzerland quickly declined to near-zero


                                        2
or even slightly negative values. This phenomenon closely resembles the classic
ﬂight to quality pattern in the wake of major credit events such as the Long
Term Capital Management (LTCM) crisis following the Russian default in 1998,
or the recent global ﬁnancial crisis following the default of Lehman Brothers.

    Second, we ﬁnd that despite the apparent global ﬂight to quality, the Trea-
sury experienced little or no diﬃculty in issuing new debt. In particular, after
controlling for key debt features, we ﬁnd that Treasury auctions were just as
oversubscribed after the abrogation as before.

     Third, we ﬁnd that Treasury debtholders whose bonds were involuntarily
restructured were only slightly less willing to roll over these bonds into new
Treasury securities at maturity as before the abrogation. Thus, there is little
evidence that holders of restructured Treasury debt “voted with their feet” by
stigmatizing new debt issues.
     Fourth, we examine whether the abrogation of the gold clause aﬀected the
Treasury’s cost of debt by contrasting the yields on bonds with a gold clause to
the yields on newly issued bonds without the gold clause. We ﬁnd that prior to
the devaluation, there was no signiﬁcant diﬀerence in the yields of the two types
of bonds. After the devaluation, however, gold clause bonds traded at a four
to eight basis point premium to non-gold clause bonds. Curiously, the premium
for gold clause bonds persisted even after the Supreme Court decision. One
possible interpretation of this result is that investors continued to believe that
a return to the gold standard might occur once macroeconomic fundamentals
improved. Another possible interpretation is that the market believed there was
some probability that the Supreme Court would reverse itself and grant some
compensation to holders of gold clause securities. Indeed, during the years to
come, a number of lawsuits regarding the abrogation made it through the court
system. The Supreme Court, however, refused to hear any of these cases.
     By studying the eﬀects of the U.S. abrogation of the gold clause, this paper
contributes to the general literature on sovereign debt restructurings and defaults.
Important papers in that literature include Eaton and Gersovitz (1981), Mendoza
and Yue (2012), Reinhart and Rogoﬀ (2004, 2011), Lindert and Morton (1989),
and Cruces and Trebesch (2013). Our analysis diﬀers from previous work in
several respects. First, we focus on an episode in an advanced country which was
one of the two ﬁnancial centers of the world at the time the debt was unilaterally
restructured. Most previous work on this subject has focused on the eﬀects of
sovereign restructurings on economic conditions in periphery countries. Second,
we use daily time series on bond returns over a span of three years to analyze the
behavior of key variables around key moments in this episode. In contrast, in his
important contribution, Kroszner (1999) concentrates on returns during two days
surrounding the Supreme Court’s decision on the gold clause cases (February 16–

                                         3
18, 1935). Third, we use daily data to analyze whether the Treasury had problems
rolling over its maturing debt. This issue has been addressed recently by Cruces
and Trebesch who studied how soon emerging countries that restructured their
debts between 1978 and 2010 could assess capital markets again. Fourth, we use
our data set to analyze the extent to which the unilateral change in contracts
increased the cost of public debt in the U.S. Fifth, we complement the work
of Bernanke (2000) and others by comparing daily yields on sovereign debt in
the U.S. and other advanced nations under diﬀerent circumstances, (the United
Kingdom, France, and Switzerland).

     The rest of the paper is organized as follows. Section 2 provides historical
perspective on the abrogation of the gold clause in 1933, the subsequent oﬃcial
devaluation of the dollar in 1934, and the Supreme Courts gold clause decisions
in 1935. Section 3 examines whether a ﬂight to quality occurred in the sovereign
debt markets. Section 4 studies the eﬀects on the Treasury’s ability to issue new
debt. Section 5 examines whether there was any stigma attached to new debt
issued by existing bondholders. Section 6 studies the eﬀects on the Treasury’s
borrowing costs. Section 7 summarizes the results and discusses their implica-
tions.


                            2. Historical Background


On April 5, 1933, President Franklin D. Roosevelt, who had been in oﬃce for
exactly one month, issued an executive order requiring people and businesses to
sell, within three weeks, all their gold holdings to the government at the oﬃcial
price of $20.67 per ounce. The Secretary of the Treasury Will Woodin tried to
explain the policy by saying that “gold in private hoards serves no useful purpose
under current circumstances. When added to the stock of the Federal Reserve
Banks it serves as a basis for currency and credit. This further strengthening of
the banking structure adds to its power of service toward recovery.”4
     The weeks that followed changed America. Between March and June 1933,
Congress passed legislation that would fundamentally alter the way the economy
functioned, and would set the basis for the welfare state. On March 5, 1933,
President Roosevelt convened Congress into an extraordinary session, and the
legendary “Hundred Days” began.5



4
    The New York Times, “President Invokes Law on Hoarders,” April 6, 1933.
5
    For a contemporary description of that period see, for example, Moley (1939).


                                         4
2.1 Abrogation and Devaluation


While the foundations of the American economy were being changed by one act of
Congress after another, the gold saga initiated with the April 5, 1933, executive
order continued to unfold. On April 16, The New York Times reported that
global ﬁnancial markets “were in confusion as a result of the uncertainty that
still surrounds the United States Treasury Department’s attitude with respect
to gold exports.” The previous day, a Treasury spokesman had stated that only
three licenses for gold exports had been granted since April 6, and that new
requests would be judged “on their merits.” The Times commented that this
was “more or less meaningless in the circumstances.”6
     On April 19, 1933, President Roosevelt clariﬁed things, and explained that
the country was, in eﬀect, “oﬀ gold.” He told the press corps:

    “If I were to write a story, I would write it along the lines of a decision
    that was actually taken last Saturday, but which really goes into eﬀect
    today, by which the government will not allow the exportation of gold,
    except earmarked gold for foreign governments, of course, and balances
    in commercial exchange.”

He then explained that the main goal of abandoning the monetary system that
had prevailed since 1879 was to help the agricultural sector, which had been
struggling for over a decade. The price of gold had been ﬁxed at $20.67 per
ounce since 1834. He said: “The whole problem before us is to raise commodity
prices.” The oﬃcial announcement came the next day through Executive Order
No. 6111, which stated that “until further . . . order the export of gold coin, gold
bullion or gold certiﬁcates from the United States . . . are hereby prohibited . . . ”

     The reaction of global currency markets was instantaneous. In one day the
dollar, which had been stable until that point in its historical levels, lost 9.8
percent of its value relative to the Pound Sterling, and 7.8 percent relative to
the French Franc, one of the few currencies that was still on the gold standard.
Astute observers noticed that in spite of the major changes that had taken place
in the course of two weeks, there was a fundamental contradiction; while it was
illegal for Americans to hold the metal, and it was prohibited to make gold
payments to foreigners, the oﬃcial price was still $20.67 per ounce. On the other
hand, the value of the currency in global ﬁnancial centers ﬂuctuated according
to market forces. It would take the government almost a year to deal with this
thorny issue and to eliminate the inconsistency of a dual exchange rate regime
6
 “Foreign Currencies Continue to Advance against the Dollar,” The New York
Times, April 16, 1933. p. N7.


                                          5
where market and oﬃcial exchange rates could diﬀer by signiﬁcant margins.
     The next step came on May 12, 1933, when Congress passed the Agricul-
tural Adjustment Act (AAA). Title III of this legislation included the “Thomas
Amendment”— named after its author, Oklahoma’s Senator Elmer Thomas—
which authorized the President to increase the oﬃcial price of gold to up to $41.34
an ounce. Less than a month later, on June 5, a joint resolution of Congress an-
nulled all existing contracts denominated in gold dollars and stated that no such
contracts could be written in the future. This came to be known as “the abro-
gation of the gold clauses.” The government claimed that the Joint Resolution
of June 1933 didn’t imply “a repudiation of contracts.” Since gold payments
had been suspended in April, all Congress had done was clarify that “the holder
of an obligation cannot specify in what type of currency [gold or paper money]
the contract is payable.” The Secretary of the Treasury was quick to state that
the annulment of the gold clause “from all contracts and obligations, public and
private, should have no depreciating eﬀect on their value.”7
     The amount of debt aﬀected by the abrogation of the gold clause was enor-
mous, almost twice as large as the nation’s gross domestic product. Since World
War I most public debt—bonds, notes and certiﬁcates—were payable in “gold
coin” and many private bonds issued by railway companies and public utilities, as
well as commercial and residential mortgages, included gold clauses.8 According
to the administration’s estimates in 1933, $120 billion dollars of debt—national
income was only slightly higher than $66 billion—were linked to the value of gold;
of this, $100 billion corresponded to private debt and $20 billion to government
debt.

     In early August 1933, administration lawyers began to explore the possibility
of the government buying—on consignment—newly minted gold at a price that
exceeded the oﬃcial parity. Original discussions revolved around a price of $28
per ounce.9 On August 29, the plan was announced through Executive Order
No. 6261. This plan, which was the brainchild of Professor George F. Warren of
Cornell University, moved the U.S. closer to an oﬃcial devaluation of the dollar in
terms of gold. As explained by President Roosevelt himself, the price to be paid
for newly minted gold was to be “equal to the best price obtainable in the free
gold markets of the world.”10 On October 22, the President announced during
7
    Roosevelt signs gold clause ban,” The New York Times, April 6, 1933. p. 35.
8
 According to the Liberty Loan Legislation of 1917–1919, the U.S. was not al-
lowed to issue long-term debt that was not indexed to gold. Thus, all long term
federal public debt included a gold clause (see U.S. Treasury Department (1921)).
9
    Acheson (1965), pp. 177-178.
10
     Roosevelt (1938, Vol. 1, p. 352). For a detailed discussion of this period, see

                                          6
his Fourth Fireside Chat, that he was expanding the gold buying program. He
said that the “United States must take ﬁrmly in its own hands the control of
the gold value of our dollars.”11 During the months that followed, prices paid
for gold increased steadily from $29.01 per ounce on October 21, to $31.96 on
October 30, $33.32 on November 11, and $34.06 on December 30. It stayed at
that level until January 31, 1934.
     On January 31, 1934, President Roosevelt oﬃcially devalued the dollar by
ﬁxing the new price of gold at $35 an ounce. Conservatives deplored the decision,
and argued that it would inevitably lead to a steep decline in America’s power.
Others, including the farm lobby, were disappointed by what they considered
an insuﬃcient adjustment in the value of the dollar. In explaining the decision,
President Roosevelt said that the devaluation was necessary, since the nation had
been “adversely aﬀected by virtue of the depreciation in the value of currencies
to other governments in relation to the present standard of value.”12
     In Figure 1 we present weekly data on the USD/Sterling and USD/French
Franc spot exchange rates between 1921 and 1936. Both rates are in the form of
dollars per unit of foreign currency. This ﬁgure captures: (a) the return of the
U.K. to gold in May 1925; (b) the abandonment of gold by the U.K. in September
1931; (c) the re-pegging of the Franc to gold in late 1926; (d) the abandonment
of the gold standard by the U.S. in April 1933; (e) the period of a “managed”
currency between April 1933 and January 1934; and (f) the adoption of the new
dollar gold parity at $35 per ounce in January 1934.


2.2 The Supreme Court Rulings


Investors that had purchased securities protected by the gold clause—that is
securities that speciﬁcally stated that payment was to be made “in gold of the
present weight and ﬁneness”—claimed that the Joint Declaration of June 1933
was unconstitutional. Various lawsuits were ﬁled and made their way through
the court system. Four of them got to the Supreme Court, and were heard on
January 8–11, 1935.

    The ﬁrst two cases had to do with private debts. One referred to a railroad
bond (Norman v. Baltimore & Ohio Railroad Co.), and the second to a mortgage
debt secured by a bond denominated in gold dollars (United States v. Bankers

Edwards (2015b) and the references cited therein.
11
     Roosevelt (1938, Vol. 1, p. 426).
12
     Presidential Proclamation No. 2072. See Roosevelt (1938, Vol. 3, pp. 67-76).


                                         7
Trust). The third case involved a government bond in the series of the Fourth
Liberty Loan issued on October 15, 1918. The covenants for this 4.50 percent
gold bond expressly stipulated that “the principal and interest hereof are payable
in United States gold coin of the present standard of value” (Perry v. United
States). As in the Norman and Bankers Trust cases, the holder of this bond
asked to be paid $35 per troy ounce of gold. The Treasury refused, and made a
payment in paper dollars using the old parity of $20.67.per ounce of gold. The
fourth case referred to a gold certiﬁcate (Nortz v. United States).

    In these four cases the question before the Court was whether Congress
had the constitutional power to alter contracts. Under the Constitution, could
Congress annul private and public debt promises and, in the process, aﬀect the
wealth of debtors and creditors? And, if in the opinion of the Court, Congress
had exceeded its power, what were the damages?

     The Supreme Court ruled on February 17, 1935. In all cases the vote was
5 to 4 in favor of the government position. However, the majority used diﬀerent
arguments to decide each of the cases. In the private debt cases the majority,
led by the Chief Justice Charles Evans Hughes, pointed out that according to
the Constitution, Congress had the power to conduct monetary policy; more
speciﬁcally, under Article 1, Section 8, Congress had the power to “coin money,
[and] regulate the value thereof.” Thus, based on this constitutional prerogative
Congress could invalidate private contracts if they interfered with such power.

     In the case involving the Liberty Bonds, the majority used a diﬀerent rea-
soning. According to the opinion, which was also written by the Chief Justice,
Congress could not abrogate the gold clause for government debt. The reason
was that although Congress was allowed by the Constitution to regulate the
value of money, it could not use that power to invalidate obligations arising from
another of its constitutional powers, the power to borrow money on the credit
of the United States. Thus, concluded the majority, the abrogation of the gold
clause for government debt was unconstitutional. However, the Court added,
since gold holdings by private parties had been forbidden since May 1933, if the
claimant received payment in bullion for his Liberty Bond, he would be obliged
to sell it immediately to the Treasury at $20.67 an ounce. Thus, even though the
abrogation of the gold clause for government debt was unconstitutional, there
were no damages.

     There was a single dissent signed by the four conservative members of the
Court, known as the “Four Horsemen.” It was delivered by Justice James C.
McReynolds, who said: “The Constitution as many of us understood it, the
instrument that has meant so much to us, is gone.” He then talked about the
sanctity of contracts, government obligations, and repudiation under the guise of
law. It was clear, he stated, that Congress had the power “to adopt a monetary

                                        8
system. But because Congress may adopt a system, it doesn’t follow that this
may be enforced in violation of existing contracts.” He ended his allocution with
strong words: “Shame and humiliation are upon us now. Moral and ﬁnancial
chaos may be conﬁdently be expected.”13


                     3. Was There a Flight to Quality?


As discussed by Oliner and Rudebusch (1992), Gertler and Gilchrist (1993), Lang
and Nakamura (1995), Bernanke, Gertler, and Gilchrist (1996), Eichengreen,
Hale, and Mody (2001), Longstaﬀ (2004), Caballero and Krishnamurthy (2008),
Pavlova and Rigobon (2008), Beber, Brandt, and Kavajecz (2009), Guerrieri
and Shimer (2014), and others, major economic and ﬁnancial shocks are often
associated with a ﬂight to quality. In a classic ﬂight to quality, the prices of the
assets considered to be the safest in the market are rapidly bid up as investors
rebalance their portfolios towards less risky assets, resulting in a sharp increase
in the spread between these and other lower quality assets. Recent examples of
ﬂights to quality include the Russian default in August 1998 which triggered the
LTCM crisis, the aftermath of the Lehman default in 2008 in which a global ﬂight
to quality led to short-term Treasury yields approaching zero, and the Greek debt
crisis which resulted in German sovereign yields reaching zero or negative values
in response to the ﬂight of investors from the threat of broader credit contagion.
     In this section, we study whether the abrogation of the gold clause by the
U.S. resulted in a similar type of ﬂight in the global ﬁnancial markets. Prior to
the abrogation, the U.S. with its Aaa rating was viewed as one of the largest and
highest quality sovereign borrowers in the world, particularly given the numerous
sovereign defaults which had occurred during the 1930–1932 period.14 After the
abrogation, however, disillusioned investors may have turned to the highest-rated
bonds issued by the strongest remaining sovereign borrowers.

     In examining this issue, we make use of the fact that many sovereigns had
issued dollar denominated bonds that were listed on the New York Stock Ex-
change during the 1930s. Thus, we can contrast the yields on these sovereign
bonds directly with those for comparable Treasury bonds since the currency is
held ﬁxed. Among the bonds with the highest Moody’s Investor Services (1933)
13
  James C. Mc Reynolds “Corrected Dissent in the Gold Clause Cases,” Ten-
nessee Law Review, Vol. 18, 1945.
14
 A partial list includes Australia, Austria, Belgium, Brazil, Chile, Colombia,
Germany, Greece, Hungary, Italy, Mexico, Peru, Poland, Romania, Spain, and
Turkey. See Reinhardt and Rogoﬀ (2009).


                                         9
ratings was the Aaa-rated United Kingdom 5.50 percent bond maturing Febru-
ary 1937, the Aa-rated French 7.50 percent bond maturing April 1941, and the
Aa-rated Swiss 5.50 percent bond maturing April 1946. Interestingly, the non-
dollar denominated debt of these three countries received only a rating of A from
Moody’s.15 This suggests that these three sovereigns viewed the timely payment
of coupons and principal on their dollar denominated New York Stock Exchange
listed bonds as their highest priority. Thus, these bonds may well have been
viewed as among the safest bonds available in the markets.

     These three countries provide an interesting sample of very diverse coun-
tries. The U.K. had abandoned the gold standard in September 1931, and had
allowed the value of Sterling to ﬂuctuate in response to market forces. It had,
however, established the “Exchange Equalization Account” in 1932, a fund used
to intervene in the market from time to time in order to avoid very large ﬂuc-
tuations in the exchanges. France, on the other hand, continued to be ﬁrmly
“on gold.” It had returned to the gold standard in 1928 at a highly undervalued
currency value, and had been accumulating bullion at a very fast rate during the
early 1930s. Switzerland was also on gold, and it was universally considered to
have a strong ﬁscal and ﬁnancial position. The above points conﬁrm that after
the abrogation of the gold clause in the U.S., France and Switzerland would have
been considered strong countries, safe havens with quality debt. The fact that
the U.K. had already made adjustments and had given up attempts to cling to
the pre-War parity was also a positive, since it had put an end to uncertainty.

     We collected daily closing price quotations for the U.K., French, and Swiss
bonds described above. These three bonds are matched to the 2.75 percent
Treasury notes maturing December 1936, the 3.375 percent Treasury bonds ma-
turing 1941–1943, and the 3.750 percent Treasury bonds maturing 1946–1956,
respectively. The close match in the maturities of the sovereign and Treasury
bonds ensures that their yields are directly comparable.16 The price quotations
for all the bonds are hand collected from the Bond Sales of the New York Stock
Exchange section of The New York Times.

     Figure 2 plots the time series of yields for the matched sovereign-Treasury
15
  The U.K. retained an investment grade rating despite having abandoned the
gold standard in 1931. Technically, both the U.K. and France defaulted in 1932
on World War I related inter-allied debt owed to the U.S. However, since the
payments on the debt were linked to reparation payments by Germany (which
defaulted on its obligations in 1931), this has often been viewed as an “excusable
default.” See Reinhardt and Rogoﬀ (2009).
16
  As will be discussed later, we make the realistic assumption that callable Trea-
sury securities will be called at their ﬁrst call date.


                                       10
pairs of bonds for the period from January 1, 1933, to January 30, 1934 (we
focus on the period prior to the January 31, 1934, oﬃcial devaluation to avoid
confounding abrogation and devaluation eﬀects). Since the closing prices from
The New York Times are ﬂat prices, we ﬁrst add the accrued coupon to the
price of the bond before solving for the yield to maturity. Following standard
bond market conventions, the accrued coupon is computed using an actual/actual
daycount basis and the yield to maturity is based on semiannual compounding
but expressed as an annualized rate. As shown, the yields on the three Treasury
securities are relatively constant throughout the sample period. Thus, there is
little apparent eﬀect of the abrogation of the gold clause on the level of nominal
Treasury yields. In stark contrast, however, Figure 2 also shows that the yields
of all three sovereign bonds begin to decline precipitously immediately after the
abrogation. Within a few months of the abrogation, the yields of the U.K.,
French, and Swiss bonds all decline by hundreds of basis points. In each case,
the yields on the sovereign bonds quickly approach zero and even attain negative
values. This common pattern among all three sovereigns has all the hallmarks
of a classic ﬂight to quality.

      Figure 3 plots the yield spreads between the sovereign bonds and the match-
ing Treasury bonds. Table 1 provides summary statistics for these spreads.
Speciﬁcally, Table 1 reports the mean pre-abrogation spread, the mean post-
abrogation spread, and the change in the means, along with the corresponding
t-statistics. As shown, the yield spreads for the U.K., French, and Swiss bonds are
all signiﬁcantly positive during the pre-abrogation period, suggesting that their
credit was not viewed as strong as that of the Treasury. After the abrogation,
however, the yield spreads all declined very signiﬁcantly.

     These results raise many intriguing research questions. For example, why
were these bonds the focus of an apparent ﬂight to quality? As described above,
one possible reason was that these bonds with their Aaa or Aa ratings were among
the highest-rated sovereign debt issues in the market. A second reason could be
that the fact that these bonds were listed on the New York Stock Exchange may
have given investors conﬁdence about the ongoing liquidity and tradeability of
these bonds. On the other hand, the possibility that investors may have believed
that these bonds would be redeemed in gold at ”parity” exchange rates seems
unlikely since the United Kingdom abandoned the gold standard in 1931 and
France followed suit in 1936. Furthermore, the increases in these bonds’ prices
were larger than could have been explained by the devaluation of the dollar.




                                        11
         4. Was the Treasury’s Ability to Issue Debt Aﬀected?


In light of the previous results, a particularly important issue to address is
whether the abrogation of the gold clause aﬀected the Treasury’s ability to issue
debt. The literature suggests that sovereign defaults carry reputational costs that
may disrupt access to the capital markets. Key examples of this literature include
Eaton and Gersovitz (1981), Grossman and van Huyck (1988), Bulow and Rogoﬀ
(1989a, 1989b), and Tomz (2007). Gelos, Sahay, and Sandleris (2011) show that
the average duration of the exclusion is around ﬁve years. Dias, Richmond, and
Wang (2012), using a more restrictive deﬁnition for access to capital markets,
ﬁnd that half of the defaulters do not regain market access within seven years of
the end of the default. Cruces and Trebesch (2013) show that regaining market
access was slower for countries that imposed haircuts in excess of 50 percent.
This issue is particularly relevant since during the early stages of the Roosevelt
administration, the Treasury was under heavy pressure to raise funds because of
the large deﬁcit faced by the government. It is important to note that the vast
majority of Treasury debt during the 1930s was held by domestic investors; there
was relatively little foreign ownership of Treasury debt during this period.

     To explore this issue, we collected data on all Treasury auctions of certiﬁcates
of indebtedness (short-term coupon bearing Treasury securities), Treasury notes,
and Treasury bonds for the 1930–1936 period. The source of the data was the
Annual Reports of the Secretary of the Treasury on the State of the Finances for
the corresponding ﬁscal years. We obtained data on the type of security, coupon
rate, total oﬀering amount, total subscriptions received, and whether the issue
had a provision for the exchange of maturing or retiring securities for the issue.

     To examine the eﬀect of the Treasury’s ability to issue debt, we compute the
subscription ratio for each of the auctions. The subscription ratio is deﬁned as
the ratio of the total amount of subscriptions to the total amount of the issue. If
this ratio is below one, then the auction would be deemed a “failure” since the
Treasury would not be able to obtain its desired level of funding. If the ratio is
above one, however, then the issue is oversubscribed, allowing the Treasury to
raise the total amount of funding planned. In fact, when a Treasury auction is
signiﬁcantly oversubscribed, the Treasury is able to choose among the competing
bids and pick those that result in the lowest funding cost. Our approach will be
to contrast the subscription ratios during the three years prior to the abrogation
of the gold clause to the subscription ratios during the three following years.
     Table 2 reports summary statistics for the subscription ratios for the auctions
during the 1930–1936 period. As shown, the subscription ratio based on the
total amounts oﬀered and subscribed during the pre-abrogation period is 5.23.
In contrast, the corresponding ratio during the post-abrogation period is slightly

                                         12
higher at 5.93. At ﬁrst glance, these simple averages appear to suggest that
Treasury auction performance actually improved after the abrogation of the gold
clause. Table 2 shows, however, that there were some signiﬁcant changes in the
nature of the securities being auctioned by the Treasury in the post-abrogation
period. In particular, the Treasury began to auction more long-term bonds
and fewer short-term certiﬁcates of indebtedness in the post-abrogation period.
Furthermore, this trend towards increasing the average maturity of Treasury debt
occurred even though the yield curve steepened as short-term yields decreased
relative to longer-term yields.

     In light of this, we use a regression approach to conduct a more formal
analysis of the eﬀects of the abrogation on the Treasury’s ability to issue debt.
Speciﬁcally, we regress the subscription ratios for the individual auctions on a
number of control and explanatory variables. First, we include dummy variables
for whether the security being auctioned is a Treasury note or a Treasury bond.
Thus, the intercept in the regression reﬂects the ﬁxed eﬀect for certiﬁcate of in-
debtedness, while the coeﬃcients for these dummy variables reﬂect the incremen-
tal eﬀects for Treasury notes and bonds. By including these dummy variables,
we control for the possibility that some types of issues are more popular among
investors than others. Second, we also include a dummy variable for whether
the debt issue includes a provision for owners of maturing or retiring securities
to exchange their existing securities for the new debt issue. This provision could
potentially make an oﬀering more attractive to these investors since they are in
eﬀect able to purchase the new security at par rather than at the market price.
Including this dummy variable allows us to control for the eﬀects of the provision
on the auction outcomes. Next, we include the oﬀering size of the issue as well as
its coupon rate as control variables. Finally, we include a dummy variable that
takes value one for auctions after the June 1933 abrogation, and zero otherwise.
By including this dummy variable, we are able to test directly whether there
were changes in auction outcomes after the abrogation after controlling for the
other factors.

     Table 3 reports the regression results. In this table, and in all other ta-
bles in the paper, t-statistics are based on the standard Newey-West (1987) het-
eroskedasticity and autocorrelation consistent estimator of the covariance matrix.
As shown, there are clear diﬀerences in auction outcomes based on the type of
Treasury security being auctioned. The intercept for the regression is 8.57, while
the coeﬃcients for the Treasury note and Treasury bond dummy variables are
5.36 and 4.41, respectively. This suggests that there was a deﬁnite market pref-
erence for longer-term debt, which may help explain the Treasury’s tendency
towards issuing longer-duration securities during the study period. The coeﬃ-
cient for the exchange provision is positive, but not statistically signiﬁcant. Thus,
there is little evidence that allowing holders of maturing or retiring securities to

                                         13
exchange them for new issues results in better auction outcomes.
     The coeﬃcient for the size of the oﬀering is negative and marginally sig-
niﬁcant with a t-statistic of −1.95. Intuitively, this result makes sense since it
implies that larger security oﬀerings were more diﬃcult for the market to absorb.
This is consistent with the view that there was limited investment capital during
the Great Depression. In contrast, the coeﬃcient for the coupon rate of the issue
being auctioned is not signiﬁcant. This is likely because the Treasury chooses
the coupon rate for the oﬀering to allow the security to be priced at or close to
par. Thus, the coupon rate is determined endogenously by the current market
level of the term structure.
     Focusing now on the key issue of whether the Treasury found it more diﬃcult
to issue debt after the abrogation of the gold clause, Table 3 shows that the
coeﬃcient for the post-abrogation dummy variable is negative but not signiﬁcant.
Thus, there is no discernable correlation between the abrogation and auction
outcomes once the type of debt being issued and the size of the oﬀering are
controlled for.

     These results are consistent with the literature on excusable defaults. In
particular, Grossman and van Huyck (1988) suggest that some defaults are ex-
cusable, and that when that is the case, investors do not punish debtors. Dias,
Richmond, and Wang (2012) ﬁnd that market access occurs faster for defaulters
experiencing a natural disaster; half of them regain access to capital markets
within three years of the end of default. Edwards (2015a) shows that countries
facing more severe negative external shocks receive a more favorable treatment
from creditors. Finally, Drelichman and Voth (2015) provide historical evidence
supporting the view that excusable defaults do not aﬀect terms or conditions to
issue or maintain debt. Our results are consistent with the abrogation of the
gold clause having been viewed as an excusable default.


                    5. Was Treasury Debt Stigmatized?


A separate but related issue is whether the abrogation of the gold clause resulted
in infringed holders of gold clause bonds becoming disillusioned and less likely
to own Treasury securities in the future—in other words, stigmatizing Treasury
debt. This issue is closely related to recent research by Guiso, Sapienza, and
Zingales (2004, 2008), Alesina and Fuchs-Schündeln (2007), Brunnermeier and
Nagel (2008), Malmendier and Nagel (2011, 2015), and many others who show
that agents’ beliefs and investment decisions depend on their lifetime experiences.
    Ideally, we would like to have full information on the portfolio choices of

                                        14
gold clause bondholders in order to explore this issue. Although full information
is not available, the historical record does allow us to shed light on one key port-
folio decision. Speciﬁcally, whether holders of maturing or retiring gold clause
securities were willing to exchange them for non-gold clause securities when given
the option to do so. For example, if existing bondholders who lost their right
to redeem in gold subsequently chose to reduce their portfolio holdings of Trea-
suries, they could simply accept payment in cash when the bonds matured or
were called and reallocate their portfolio holdings to other asset classes. On the
other hand, if current bondholders chose to continue holding Treasuries, they
could avoid any minor transaction costs by rolling over their holdings into new
Treasury debt issues whenever the exchange provision was available.
     Table 4 provides summary information about the exchange outcomes for the
Treasury auctions during the 1930–1936 period in which the oﬀering included an
exchange provision. Of the 40 auctions with an exchange provision, 14 involved
the exchange of a gold clause security for another gold clause security, 10 involved
the exchange of a non-gold clause security for another non-gold clause security,
and 16 involved the exchange of a gold clause security for a non-gold clause
security. We are primarily interested in the outcomes for this latter category.
     As shown, even after losing their right to redeem in gold, more than 80
percent of the gold clause securities were still exchanged for new issues of Treasury
securities without the gold clause. This suggests that a large majority of the
infringed bondholders were willing to simply “forgive and forget” and continue
holding Treasury securities after the abrogation. This is consistent with the
“excusable default” theory discussed above.

     An interesting example of this is the case of the Liberty bonds which were
issued during 1917–1918 to fund the U.S. government during World War I. These
bonds were sold directly to the public who were encouraged to invest as a patriotic
duty. Many Hollywood celebrities helped popularize the bonds and held rallies to
encourage their sales including Al Jolson, Mary Pickford, and Charlie Chaplin.
The Girl Scouts and the Boy Scouts participated in drives to sell Liberty bonds.
On October 16, 1933, just over four months after the abrogation of the gold
clause, $1.9 billion of the 4.00 percent Fourth Liberty Loan bonds were called
by the Treasury for redemption at their next coupon payment date of April 15,
1934. By the call date, $1.728 billion of these bonds had been exchanged for new
Treasury bond issues, representing 90.95 percent of the total amount called for
redemption.
     On the other hand, the results in Table 4 also suggest that the participation
in the oﬀers to exchange gold clause securities for non-gold clause securities may
not have been as enthusiastic as for other types of exchange oﬀers. In particular,
the percentage of non-gold clause bonds exchanged for non-gold clause bonds in

                                         15
the post-abrogation period was nearly 98 percent. This contrasts, however, with
the percentage for the gold clause for gold clause exchanges in the period prior
to the abrogation which was only about 68 percent.

     To explore this issue in more depth, we use a regression framework that
allows us to control for other factors that may aﬀect the likelihood that investors
choose to roll over their Treasuries through an exchange. The dependent vari-
able in this analysis is the exchange ratio. Speciﬁcally, for each oﬀering with
an exchange provision, we compute the exchange ratio as the total amount ex-
changed divided by the total amount outstanding or available to exchange. To
control for possible changes over time in the tendency to roll over Treasury po-
sitions by exchanging them, we include a dummy variable that takes value one
in the post-abrogation period, and zero otherwise. To control for the size of the
transaction, we include the total outstanding amount of the maturing or retiring
security as an explanatory variable. Since the redemption of bonds through a
call by the Treasury may be perceived diﬀerently by investors than if the bonds
simply mature, we also include a dummy variable that takes value one if the ex-
change provision is associated with a call, and zero otherwise. Finally, to explore
whether investors are less likely to exchange abrogated gold clause bonds for is-
sues without the gold clause, we also include a dummy variable that takes value
one when a gold clause security is exchangeable for a non-gold clause security,
and zero otherwise.

     The results from estimating the regression model are reported in Table 5.
As shown, there is clear evidence that investors were more likely to roll over
maturing or retiring Treasuries through exchange in the post-abrogation period.
In particular, the coeﬃcient for the post-abrogation dummy variable is positive
and highly signiﬁcant. In contrast, the amount of the maturing issue has no
signiﬁcant eﬀect on the fraction that is exchanged.17
      Table 5 also shows that when the exchange provision occurs because the
original security is called by the Treasury, the fraction exchanged is signiﬁcantly
less than otherwise. The point estimate of the coeﬃcient for the dummy variable
for whether the original security was called indicates that the exchange ratio for
called securities is ten percent less than for noncalled securities. To understand
the intuition behind this result, we note that Longstaﬀ (1992) shows that the
Treasury followed a near-optimal strategy in calling issues of callable bonds dur-
ing the 1930–1950 period (in contrast to corporations which were far less eﬃcient
in calling their callable bonds). This implies that when the Treasury called a bond

17
  We also estimated the model using a logit transform of the exchange ratio since
the ratio is bounded between zero and one. The results are very similar to those
reported.


                                        16
issue, investors would only have been able to roll over their holdings into bonds
with lower coupon rates than the original called bonds. We conﬁrmed this con-
jecture by looking at the actual transactions where callable bonds were refunded
by new issues. Taken together, these considerations suggest that investors may
have responded negatively to having their investments in higher coupon bonds
terminated by the Treasury by being less willing to roll over called bonds into
new issues with lower coupon rates.

     Table 5 shows that a similar eﬀect may be associated with the situation
where securities with an abrogated gold clause matured or retired and were ex-
changeable into a new issue without the gold clause. In particular, the point
estimate for the coeﬃcient for the gold into non-gold dummy variable indicates
that this situation resulted in an exchange ratio nearly seven percent lower than
otherwise. The coeﬃcient for this dummy variable is also statistically signiﬁcant
as evidenced by its t-statistic of −2.31.
     In summary, these results suggest that infringed bondholders responded to
the abrogation of the gold clause by being less willing to exchange their gold
clause bonds for non-gold clause bonds. The magnitude of the eﬀect, however,
appears to have been relatively modest. For example, based on the coeﬃcient
estimates in Table 4 and on the averages for the sample, the eﬀect would be on
the order of reducing the exchange ratio from 89.06 percent to 82.25 percent.
This is broadly consistent with the unconditional averages shown in Table 4. To
put these results into perspective, we observe that the eﬀect of the abrogation of
the gold clause on investors’ willingness to exchange maturing or retiring issues
for new issues is only about two thirds as large as the eﬀect resulting from bonds
being called by the Treasury. Despite the fact that a number of bondholders sued
the Treasury because of the abrogation of the gold clause, these results suggest
that little stigma resulted from the abrogation since most investors voluntarily
exchanged their maturing abrogated bonds for new issues without the gold clause.


        6. What was the Eﬀect on Treasury Borrowing Costs?


We turn next to the important question of how the abrogation of the gold clause
may have aﬀected the Treasury’s borrowing costs. The literature suggests that
sovereigns with a history of defaults generally are charged higher rates when
they return to the capital markets. For example, see Lindert and Morton (1989),
Flandreau and Zumer (2004), Tomz (2007), and Cruces and Trebesch (2013).

     Providing a deﬁnitive answer to this issue is challenging for the simple rea-
son that there is no direct way of knowing the counterfactual of what Treasury
interest rates would have been had the gold clause not been abrogated. What we

                                       17
can do, however, is to contrast the yields on bonds with the gold clause issued
prior to the abrogation to the yields on bonds without the gold clause issued
subsequently. Given that the probability of the Supreme Court ruling the abro-
gation unconstitutional was far from zero, the diﬀerence in yields of gold clause
and non-gold clause bonds could provide insight into how the gold clause was
valued by investors in the market. For example, if the diﬀerence in yields were
zero, then one possibility might be that the gold clause was not valued, and,
therefore, its abrogation would likely have little eﬀect on rates. In contrast, ﬁnd-
ing a signiﬁcant diﬀerence in yields would provide evidence that the abrogation
may have had a major eﬀect on Treasury rates.
     To contrast the pricing of gold clause and non-gold clause bonds, we hand
collected daily closing price quotations for U.S. Treasury bonds for the January
1933 to May 1935 period. The use of this extended sample period allows us to
include all of the key events associated with the abrogation of the gold clause. The
price quotations are again obtained from the Bond Sales of the New York Stock
Exchange section of The New York Times. To check the accuracy of the data, we
also compared price quotations from The New York Times with price quotations
from The Financial and Commercial Chronicle and found the two sources to be
very consistent with each other. Although data for the U.S. Liberty bonds issued
during the World War I era are available, we do not include them in the analysis
since many of the Liberty bonds were called during the study period, rendering
their eﬀective maturity too short to be comparable to the other bonds.

     As described, our approach will be to contrast the yields on bonds with the
gold clause and issued prior to the abrogation to the yields of non-gold clause
bonds issued afterwards. In doing this, it is important to ensure that the two sets
of bonds be as comparable as possible. This is particularly relevant given the
term structure of interest rates steepened signiﬁcantly during the study period.
Thus, unless care is taken, there is a signiﬁcant risk of confounding gold clause
eﬀects with term structure eﬀects. To mitigate this risk, we only include bonds in
the two sets that have very similar coupon rates and maturities. Table 6 lists the
set of ﬁve gold clause bonds and the set of ﬁve non-gold clause bonds included in
the sample. As shown, the gold clause bonds have coupons ranging from 3.000 to
3.375 percent, while the non gold clause bonds have coupons ranging from 3.000
to 3.250 percent. The average coupon rate for the gold clause bonds is 3.250
percent, which is very close to the average coupon rate of 3.175 percent for the
non-gold clause bonds.
     Table 6 also shows that, with one exception, all of the Treasury bonds are
callable. The earliest call dates for the bonds, however, are not until 1940 or later.
Despite the long horizon until the bonds are ﬁrst callable, it is still important
to consider the possible eﬀects of the call feature on the analysis. In particular,


                                         18
Table 6 shows that the average prices of the callable bonds during the sample
period are all signiﬁcantly above par, implying that the implicit call option is
deep in the money. Given this, we control for the eﬀect of the deep-in-the-money
call feature on bond prices by assuming the most probable scenario in which
the call is exercised at the ﬁrst call date. Accordingly, we compute yields and
durations using the ﬁrst call date as the eﬀective maturity date.18
     Even though Table 6 shows that the two sets of bonds are generally compa-
rable in terms of their eﬀective maturity dates, it is clear that there may still be
slight diﬀerences in average eﬀective maturity across the two sets of bonds. To
address this, we construct indexes of the yields for the two sets of bonds in a way
that insures that both indexes are based on portfolios of bonds with identical
durations. This is done in the following way. Let Yt be the average yield for all
of the non-gold clause bonds in the sample at date t. Similarly, let Dt be the
average duration for these bonds. Now let XLt and DLt be the average yield
and duration, respectively, for the gold clause bonds with durations less than
Dt . Let XHt and DHt be the average yield and duration, respectively, for the
gold clause bonds with durations greater than or equal to Dt . We then construct
the yield index Xt for the gold clause bonds as the weighted average of XLt and
XHt , where the weights are chosen so that the weighted average of DLt and DHt
equals the duration Dt of the non-gold clause bonds. Finally, to guard against
the potential eﬀects of illiquid bond prices in constructing the yield indexes, in-
dex values are only included on days where all ﬁve gold clause bonds and all
issued non-gold clause bonds have current prices in the New York Times. The
upper panel of Figure 4 plots the time series of the two yield indexes. As shown,
the two time series track each other closely throughout the sample period.

     Next, we deﬁne the gold clause spread as the diﬀerence between the yield
index for non-gold clause bonds and the yield index for gold clause bonds. Given
this deﬁnition, a positive value for the gold clause spread implies that yields on
gold clause bonds are lower than those for non-gold clause bonds, or equivalently,
that gold clause bonds have higher prices than non-gold clause bonds. The lower
panel of Figure 4 plots the time series of gold clause spreads.
     Table 7 presents summary statistics for the gold clause spread for the entire
sample period as well as for four key subperiods. As shown, there is clearly a pos-
itive gold clause spread during much of the sample period. This provides support
for the view that bondholders valued the gold clause, even after it was abrogated.
In turn, this suggests that the Treasury did in fact increase its borrowing costs

18
  This is consistent with the evidence in Longstaﬀ (1992) that the Treasury was
very eﬃcient in calling its debt optimally. The results are similar when we use
the actual maturity dates for the bonds.


                                        19
by eliminating the gold clause. The actual magnitude of the increase, however,
is relatively modest since the average value of the gold clause spread is only 4.26
basis points over the sample period.

     Focusing on the four subperiods, the results in Table 7 may be summarized
as follows:
     • Subperiod 1—August 11, 1933 to January 30, 1934—is the period before
       the oﬃcial devaluation.19 As noted, during this period the gold clause had
       been abrogated, the oﬃcial value of the dollar in terms of gold was still at
       its historical (since 1834) level of $20.67 per ounce, and there had been no
       legal recourses ﬁled by aggrieved investors. That is, during these ﬁve months
       there we were still doubts about what would happen to securities payable in
       gold. The fact that the gold clause spread was equal to zero suggests that the
       market thought that the “oﬃcial” value of gold would not be altered. Given
       the existence of the “gold buying program” discussed above, and that the
       Administration had been willing to pay $35.06 per ounce, this is somewhat
       surprising.

     • Subperiod 2—January 31, 1934, to December 31, 1934—is the 11-month pe-
       riod immediately after the oﬃcial devaluation but before the Supreme Court
       heard the gold clause cases. During this period, the gold clause premium
       increased by almost 5 basis points to a mean value of 4.82 basis points. This
       is a small spread, but as may be seen from Table 7, it is very signiﬁcantly
       diﬀerent from zero (t-statistic = 18.88). This suggest that during this period
       the market believed that there was a positive probability that the Courts
       would rule that the combination of the abrogation and the oﬃcial devalu-
       ation were unconstitutional. If that was the case, the abrogation would be
       reversed, and holders of gold clause securities would have been paid at the
       higher price of $35 per ounce of gold.
     • Subperiod 3—January 1, 1935, to February 17, 1935—is the relatively short
       period surrounding the hearing of the gold clause cases and the announce-
       ment of the decision. During this period, the gold clause spread increased
       to almost an average of 9 basis points. As may be seen, the t-statistic shows
       that it was signiﬁcantly diﬀerent from zero. This result indicates that once
       arguments were made before the Court, markets believed that the proba-
       bility of an unconstitutional ruling had increased. This is consistent with
19
  Notice that during this period, the U.S. engaged in the “gold buying program,”
where the Treasury purchased newly minted gold—and occasionally gold in the
external market—at prices that exceeded the oﬃcial price of $20.67 per ounce.
As pointed out above, for all practical purposes, the U.S. was under a “dual
exchange rate regime” during this period.


                                          20
       the narrative provided by Meltzer (2003) in his monumental history of the
       Federal Reserve.
     • Subperiod 4—February 18, 1935, to May 31, 1935—begins on the day after
       the Supreme Court ruling that upheld the constitutionality of the Joint
       Declaration of Congress and goes through May 31, 1945. During this period,
       the gold clause spread continues to be signiﬁcantly positive (with a mean of
       8.43 basis points) and only slightly lower than its mean during subperiod
       3. Thus, the resolution of uncertainty about the constitutionality of the
       abrogation had only a small eﬀect on the gold clause spread. Furthermore,
       we collected additional data on selected dates during the 1935–1938 period
       and found that the gold clause spread remained at similar levels over this
       extended horizon.

     The persistence of the gold clause spread after the Supreme Court decisions
leaves us with an interesting puzzle. Is it possible that investors believed that
the abrogation of the gold clause and the subsequent devaluation were temporary
and would be reversed when the economic outlook improved? The fact that many
European countries suspended the gold standard during World War I and later
reinstated it during the 1920s provides precedent for the view that the abrogation
of the gold clause might only have been temporary. The abrogation of the gold
clause could have been reversed, for example, by a new ruling by the Supreme
Court.20

     In an eﬀort to shed additional light on this issue, we again use a regression
approach to examine the factors aﬀecting the gold clause spread. In particular,
we regress the spread on several key explanatory variables. The ﬁrst is the
price of gold as determined in the daily London ﬁxing and reported in The New
York Times. We include the gold price since it should clearly be an important
driver of the diﬀerential between gold clause and non-gold clause bonds.21 The
volatility of daily stock market returns is estimated using a Garch(1,1) model.
The intuition for including this variable is that stock market volatility reﬂects
uncertainty about economic fundamentals that could play a role in determining
investor expectations about a return to the gold standard. The third is a measure
of the liquidity of the Treasury security market. Speciﬁcally, we compute the ratio
of the total daily trading volume of Treasury securities to the total daily trading
20
  We note that there was precedent for the Supreme Court reversing itself. For
example, the Supreme Court reversed its earlier decision in Hepburn v. Griswold
in the legal tender or “greenback cases” of 1871, (Knox v. Lee and Parker v.
Davis).
21
  Towards the end of the sample period, the price of gold was essentially ﬁxed
and the variation in the gold price was minor.


                                         21
volume of all bonds. The data are collected from the New York Times. A decline
in this ratio would indicate that the Treasury market is playing a smaller role
in ﬁxed income markets, and vice versa. We also include several lags of the gold
clause spread in the regression to control for any persistence in the value of the
spread which might aﬀect inferences about the other explanatory variables.

     Table 8 reports the regression results. As shown, the ﬁrst three lags of the
gold clause spread are signiﬁcant, conﬁrming that there is considerable persis-
tence in the value of the spread.22 The coeﬃcient for the price of gold is positive
and highly signiﬁcant. This result is intuitive since the higher the price of gold,
the higher is the opportunity cost faced by a bondholder who is not able to re-
ceive payment in gold. Thus, this result indicates that the variation in the gold
clause spread rationally reﬂects economic fundamentals.

     The coeﬃcient for the volatility of the stock market is negative and signiﬁ-
cant. This negative relation is consistent with the interpretation that investors
may have had ongoing hopes that the gold standard might be reinstated once the
economic uncertainty associated with the Great Depression was resolved. Thus,
when stock market volatility increased, investors’ hopes for a quick return to the
gold standard faded, resulting in the decline in the gold clause spread. Finally,
the positive and signiﬁcant coeﬃcient for the Treasury market liquidity factor
suggests that as the Treasury bond market increased in importance, investors
may have viewed a remediation of the eﬀects of the abrogation as being more
likely, resulting in an increase in the gold clause spread.
     These results also shed light on the debate about the eﬀect of the gold
standard on sovereign funding costs. Early studies argued that one of the beneﬁts
of adopting the gold standard is access to cheaper funding, ﬁnding yields between
30–40 basis points lower for countries that adopted the gold standard during the
1870–1914 period (see Bordo and Rockoﬀ (1996) and Obstfeld and Taylor (2003)).
More recent evidence, however, challenges these results. Flandreau and Zumer
(2004) and Alquist and Chabot (2011) ﬁnd that there is no relation between
yields and the gold standard after controlling for diﬀerences in monetary and
ﬁscal policies and common risk factors. Our results indicate that bonds with the
gold clause had yields that were slightly lower on average than those without the
gold clause during the sample period




22
  Regression speciﬁcations including additional lagged values produce results
similar to those reported here.


                                        22
                                 7. Conclusion


In this paper we analyze an important, and almost forgotten, episode in U.S. eco-
nomic history: the unilateral restructuring of public and private debt contracts
by Congress in June 1933. Clauses that linked debt to the price of gold were
annulled in a retroactive fashion. This measure eventually resulted in losses of
the order of 41 percent.
     With few exceptions—the most notable being McCulloch (1980) and Kros-
zner (1999)—there has been almost no academic work on the consequences of
the abrogation of the gold clauses by Congress, and the consequent ratiﬁcation
of its constitutionality by the Supreme Court in February 1935.

     We are particularly interested in investigating the consequences of this gen-
eralized breach of contracts. Understanding this issue is not only important to
set the historical record straight, but it is also relevant to understand current
events, and to shed light on the likely consequences of modern defaults, includ-
ing debt restructuring in Greece and Argentina. According to traditional theory,
after unilaterally restructuring the debt and imposing large losses on investors,
debtors should have trouble accessing the capital markets and issuing new debt,
the cost of capital should increase signiﬁcantly, liquidity should be hampered,
and there should be a “stigma eﬀect” on new debt. At the aggregate level, a ma-
jor credit event and a generalized breach of contracts should result in increased
uncertainty and a reduction in investment and, thus, in a lower growth rate.

     Our results show that this episode did not have signiﬁcant eﬀects on the
U.S. Treasury’s ability to roll over maturing debt, or to issue new securities. We
also ﬁnd that investors did value the existence of a gold clause in contracts. Sur-
prisingly, this gold clause premium continued after the Supreme Court decision,
suggesting that the market thought that there was some probability that the
Supreme Court would reverse itself at some point in the future. Furthermore, we
ﬁnd that after Congress abrogated the gold clause, there was a ﬂight to quality
in global ﬁnancial markets. This was reﬂected by the fact that the spread of
foreign securities over U.S. Treasuries declined signiﬁcantly.
      The results in this paper leave us with some intriguing puzzles. For ex-
ample, why did the abrogation of the gold clause have such a small eﬀect on
the Treasury’s ability to issue new bonds or rollover existing debt? Was the
abrogation perhaps viewed as an excusable action necessitated by the economic
circumstances? Did the majority of debtholders actually understand that they
had suﬀered a loss through the abrogation, or was there some degree of “money
illusion” involved? The resolution of these puzzles may provide additional useful
insights into one of the most important episodes in U.S. economic history.


                                        23
                                 References


Acheson, D., 1965. Morning and Noon, New York: Houghton Miﬄin.

Alesina, A., and N. Fuchs-Schündeln, 2007. Goodbye Lenin (or Not?): The Eﬀect
of Communism on People, American Economic Review 97, 1507-1528.
Alquist, R, and B. Chabot, 2011. Did Gold-Standard Adherence Reduce Sove-
reign Capital Costs?, Journal of Monetary Economics 58, 262-272.

Ang, A., and F. A. Longstaﬀ, 2013. Systemic Sovereign Credit Risk: Lessons
from the U.S. and Europe, Journal of Monetary Economics 60, 493-510.
Beber, A., M. Brandt, and K. Kavajecz, 2009. Flight-to-Quality or Flight-to-
Liquidity? Evidence from the Euro-Area Bond Market, Review of Financial
Studies 22, 925-957.
Benjamin, D, and M. L. J. Wright, 2008. Recovery Before Redemption: A
Theory of Delays in Sovereign Debt Renegotiations, Working Paper, University
of California at Los Angeles.

Bernanke, B., 2000. Essays on the Great Depression, Princeton, NJ: Princeton
University Press.

Bernanke, B., M. Gertler, and S. Gilchrist, 1996. The Financial Accelerator and
the Flight to Quality, The Review of Economics and Statistics 78, 1-15.
Bordo, MD, and H. Rockoﬀ, 1996. The Gold Standard as a “Good Housekeeping
Seal of Approval,” Journal of Economic History 56, 389-428.

Borensztein, E., and U. Panizza, 2010. Do Sovereign Defaults Hurt Exporters?
Open Economics Review 21, 393-412.
Brunnermeier, M. K. and S. Nagel, 2008. Do Wealth Fluctuations Generate
Time-Varying Risk Aversion? Micro-Evidence on Individuals, American Eco-
nomic Review 98, 713-736.
Bulow, J., and K. Rogoﬀ, 1989a. A Constant Recontracting Model of Sovereign
Debt, Journal of Political Economy 97, 155-178.

Bulow, J., and K. Rogoﬀ, 1989b. Sovereign Debt: Is to Forgive to Forget?,
American Economic Review 79, 43-50.
Caballero, R. J., and A. Krishnamurthy, 2008. Collective Risk Management in a
Flight to Quality Episode, Journal of Finance 63, 2195-2230.



                                      24
Cruces, J., and C. Trebesch, 2013. Sovereign Defaults: The Price of Haircuts,
American Economic Journal: Macroeconomics 5, 85-117.
Dias, D., C. Richmond, and T. Wang, 2012. Duration of Capital Market Exclu-
sion: An Empirical Investigation, Working Paper, University of Illinois., Urbana-
Champaign.
Drelichman, M. and H.-J. Voth, 2015. Risk Sharing with the Monarch: Contin-
gent Debt and Excusable Defaults in the Age of Philip II, 1556-1598, Cliometrica
9, 49-75.

Eaton, J., and M. Gersovitz, 1981. Debt with Potential Repudiation: Theoretical
and Empirical Analysis, Review of Economic Studies 48, 289-309.

Eichengreen, B., 1992. Golden Fetters: The Gold Standard and the Great De-
pression, 1919–1939, Oxford, UK: Oxford University Press.
Eichengreen, B., G. Hale, and A. Mody, 2001. Flight to Quality: Investor Risk
Tolerance and the Spread of Emerging Market Crises. In Stijn Claessens and
Kristin Forbes, eds., International Financial Contagion, Kluwer Academic Pub-
lishers.
Edwards, S., 2015a. Sovereign Default, Debt Restructuring, and Recovery Rates:
Was the Argentinean “Haircut” Excessive?, Open Economies Review, 1-29.

Edwards, S., 2015b. Academics and Economic Advisors, Gold, the ‘Brains Trust,’
and FDR, National Bureau of Economic Research Working Paper No. 21380.
Flandreau, M., and F. Zumer, 2004. The Making of Global Finance 1880-1913,
Paris: OECD.

Friedman, M., and A. Schwartz, 1963. A Monetary History of the United States,
1867-1960, National Bureau of Economic Research, Inc.

Gelos, R.G., R. Sahay, and G. Sandleris, 2011. Sovereign Borrowing by De-
veloping Countries: What Determines Market Access?, Journal of International
Economics 83, 243-254.

Gertler, M., and S. Gilchrist, 1993. The Cyclical Behavior of Short-Term Busi-
ness Lending: Implications for Financial Propagation Mechanisms, European
Economic Review 37, 623-631.
Grossman, H. I., and J. B. Van Huyck, 1988. Sovereign Debt as a Contingent
Claim: Excusable Default, Repudiation, and Reputation, American Economic
Review 78, 1088-1097.
Guerrieri, V., and Shimer, R., 2014. Dynamic Adverse Selection: A Theory of

                                       25
Illiquidity, Fire Sales, and Flight to Quality, American Economic Review, 104,
1875-1908.
Guiso, L., P. Sapienza, and L. Zingales, 2004. The Role of Social Capital in
Financial Development, American Economic Review 94, 526-556.

Guiso, L., P. Sapienza, and L. Zingales, 2008. Trusting the Stock Market, Journal
of Finance 63, 2557-2600.

Kroszner, R.S., 1999. Is It Better to Forgive than to Receive? Repudiation of
the Gold Indexation Clause in Long-Term Debt During the Great Depression,
Unpublished Working Paper, University of Chicago.
Lang, W., and L. Nakamura, 1995. “Flight to Quality” in Banking and Economic
Activity, Journal of Monetary Economics 36, 145-164.

Levy-Yeyati, E., and U. Panizza, 2011. The Elusive Costs of Sovereign Defaults,
Journal of Development Economics 94, 95-105.

Lindert P.H., and P.J. Morton, 1989. How Sovereign Debt has Worked. In
Developing Country Debt and Economic Performance, ed. J. D. Sachs, 39-106,
Chicago IL: Univ. Chicago Press.
Longstaﬀ, F. A., 1992. Are Negative Option Prices Possible? The Callable U.S.
Treasury-Bond Puzzle, Journal of Business 65, 571-592.

Longstaﬀ, F. A., 2004. The Flight-to-Liquidity Premium in U.S. Treasury Bond
Prices, Journal of Business 77, 511-526.

MacDonald, J., 2013. A Free Nation Deep in Debt, Princeton, NJ: Princeton
University Press.
Malmendier, U., and S. Nagel, 2011. Depression Babies: Do Macroeconomic
Experiences Aﬀect Risk Taking?, The Quarterly Journal of Economics 126, 373-
416.

Malmendier, U., and S. Nagel, 2015. Learning from Inﬂation Experiences, The
Quarterly Journal of Economics, forthcoming.

McCulloch, J. H., 1980. The Ban on Indexed Bonds, 1933-77, American Eco-
nomic Review 70, 1018-1021.
Meltzer, Allan H., 2003. A History of the Federal Reserve, Volume 1: 1913-1951,
Chicago, IL: The University of Chicago Press, Inc.

Mendoza, E.G., and V.Z. Yue, 2012. A General Equilibrium Model of Sovereign
Default and Business Cycles, Quarterly Journal of Economics 127, 889-946.

                                       26
Moley, R., 1939. After Seven Years, New York: Harper and Bros.
Moody’s Investors Service, 1933. Moody’s Manual of Investments, American
and Foreign, Government Securities, New York NY: Press of Publishers Printing
Company.

Newey, W. K., and K. D. West, 1987. A Simple Positive Semi-Deﬁnite Het-
eroskedasticity and Autocorrelation Consistent Covariance Matrix, Econometrica
55, 703-708.

Obstfeld, M., and A. M. Taylor, 2003. Sovereign Risk, Credibility and the Gold
Standard, 1870-1913 versus 1925-31, Economic Journal 113, 241-275.
Oliner, S. D., and G. D. Rudebusch, 1992. Sources of the Financing Hierarchy
for Business Investment, The Review of Economics and Statistics 74, 643-654.

Pavlova, A., and R. Rigobon, 2008. The Role of Portfolio Constraints in the
International Propagation of Shocks, Review of Economic Studies 75, 1215-1256.

Reinhart, C. M., and K. S. Rogoﬀ, 2004. Serial Default and the “Paradox” of
Rich-to-Poor Capital Flows, American Economic Review 94, 53-58.
Reinhart, C. M., and K. S. Rogoﬀ, 2009. This Time Is Diﬀerent: Eight Centuries
of Financial Folly, Princeton, NJ: Princeton Univ. Press

Reinhart, C. M., and K. S. Rogoﬀ, 2011. The Forgotten History of Domestic
Debt. Economic Journal 121, 319-350.
Roosevelt, F. D., 1938. The Public Papers and Addresses of Franklin D. Roo-
sevelt, Volumes 1-5, New York, NY: Random House.

Romer, C. D., 1992. What Ended the Great Depression?, The Journal of Eco-
nomic History 52, 757-784.

Rose, A.K., 2005. One Reason Countries Pay their Debts: Renegotiation and
International Trade, Journal of Development Economics 77, 189-206.
Sturzenegger, F., and J. Zettelmeyer, 2008. Haircuts: Estimating Investor Losses
in Sovereign Debt Restructurings, 1998-2005, Journal of International Money
and Finance 27, 780-805.

Temin, P., 1991. Lessons from the Great Depression, Boston, MA: MIT Press
Books.

Tomz, M., 2007. Reputation and International Cooperation: Sovereign Debt
across Three Centuries, Princeton, NJ: Princeton University Press.



                                      27
Tomz, M., and M. Wright, 2007. Do Countries Default in “Bad” Times?, Journal
of the European Economic Association 5, 352-360.
Tomz, M., and M. Wright, 2013. Empirical Research on Sovereign Debt and
Default, Annual Review of Economics 5, 247-272.

United States Treasury Department, 1921. Liberty Loan Legislation, Washington
DC: Government Printing Oﬃce.




                                     28
       USD per unit of Foreign Currency




                                          10
                                                                                            USD/ Sterling    USD/ French Franc
                                           9
                                           8
                                           7
                                           6
                                           5
                                           4
                                           3
                                           2
                                               21   22   23   24   25   26   27   28   29    30    31   32   33   34   35   36


Figure 1: U.S. Nominal Exchange Rate. The figure plots the end-of-week nominal exchange rate
between the U.S. dollar and the Sterling and the French Franc for the period 1921 – 1936. Both rates
are in the form of ”dollars per unit of foreign currency”.
                               A. Great Britain and Ireland 5.50%, 1937

                   6.0%
                                                                          Bond   Treasury
                   5.0%
                   4.0%
                   3.0%
          Yields


                   2.0%
                   1.0%
                   0.0%
                   -1.0%
                   -2.0%
                       01/33     04/33           07/33            10/33          01/34



                                         B. France 7.50%, 1941

                   6.0%
                                                                          Bond   Treasury
                   5.0%
                   4.0%
                   3.0%
          Yield




                   2.0%
                   1.0%
                   0.0%
                   -1.0%
                   -2.0%
                       01/33     04/33           07/33            10/33          01/34



                                     C. Switzerland 5.50%, 1946

                   6.0%
                                                                          Bond   Treasury
                   5.0%
                   4.0%
                   3.0%
          Yields




                   2.0%
                   1.0%
                   0.0%
                   -1.0%
                   -2.0%
                       01/33     04/33           07/33            10/33          01/34



Figure 2: Yields on Sovereign Bonds vs. Yields for Matching Treasury Bond. The upper panel
plots the yields for the indicated Great Britain and Ireland bond and a Treasury bond with a matching
maturity. The middle panel plots the yields for the indicated French bond and a Treasury bond with a
matching maturity. The lower panel plots the yields for the indicated Swiss bond and a Treasury bond
with a matching maturity. The vertical line in each panel is for June 5, 1933, the date in which the
Congress passed House Joint Resolution to suspend the gold standard and abrogate the gold clause in
the national constitution. All yields are expressed as percentages.
                                               A. Great Britain and Ireland 5.50%, 1937

                                     300
                                     200
           Spread (basis points)     100
                                       0
                                    -100
                                    -200
                                    -300
                                    -400
                                    -500
                                    -600
                                       01/33     04/33             07/33              10/33   01/34



                                                           B. France 7.50%, 1941

                                     300
                                     200
           Spread (basis points)




                                     100
                                       0
                                    -100
                                    -200
                                    -300
                                    -400
                                    -500
                                    -600
                                       01/33     04/33             07/33              10/33   01/34



                                                         C. Switzerland 5.50%, 1946

                                     300
                                     200
           Spreads (basis points)




                                     100
                                       0
                                    -100
                                    -200
                                    -300
                                    -400
                                    -500
                                    -600
                                       01/33     04/33             07/33              10/33   01/34



Figure 3: Yield Spread Between Sovereign Bonds and Matching Treasury Bond. The upper
panel plots the spread between the indicated Great Britain and Ireland bond and a Treasury bond with a
matching maturity. The middle panel plots the spread between the indicated French bond and a Treasury
bond with a matching maturity. The lower panel plots the spread between the indicated Swiss bond and
a Treasury bond with a matching matching maturity. The vertical line in each panel is for June 5, 1933,
the date in which the Congress passed House Joint Resolution to suspend the gold standard and abrogate
the gold clause in the national constitution. All spreads are expressed as basis points.
                               3.8%
                                                                                  Non−
                                                                                     gold     Gold
                               3.6%
                               3.4%
                               3.2%
       Yield




                               3.0%
                               2.8%
                               2.6%
                               2.4%
                               2.2%
                                  08/33   11/33   02/34   05/34   08/34   11/34     02/35    05/35




                               16.0
       Spread (basis points)




                               12.0

                                8.0
                                4.0
                                0.0
                               -4.0

                               -8.0
                                 08/33    11/33   02/34   05/34   08/34   11/34     02/35    05/35



Figure 4: Gold Clause and Non-Gold Clause Yields and the Gold Clause Spread. The upper
panel plots the yields for the index of gold clause bonds and the index of non-gold clause bonds. The lower
panel plots the gold clause spread which is computed as the yield on the index of non-gold clause bonds
minus the yield on the index of gold clause. The yields are expressed as percentages. The gold-clause
spread is expressed in basis points.
                                                Table 1

Summary Statistics for Sovereign Minus Treasury Yield Spreads. This table provides summary
statistics for the diﬀerences between the yields of the indicated dollar-denominated sovereign bond and a
maturity-matched Treasury security. The spreads are measured in basis points. The pre-abrogation period is
from January 3, 1933 to June 4, 1933. The post-abrogation period is from June 5, 1933 to January 30, 1934.
The t-statistics are based on the Newey-West estimator of the covariance matrix. N denotes the number of
observations.



            Sovereign Bond and Period                             Mean                 tMean


            United Kingdom 5.50% February 1937

                 Pre-Abrogation                                  151.17               14.66
                 Post-Abrogation                                −183.99               −6.29

                 Change                                         −335.17               −9.98


            France 7.50% April 1941

                 Pre-Abrogation                                   73.05               11.76
                 Post-Abrogation                                −209.24               −7.98

                 Change                                         −282.34               −9.58


            Switzerland 5.50% April 1946

                 Pre-Abrogation                                  145.32               23.25
                 Post-Abrogation                                −184.61               −9.48

                 Change                                         −326.71              −14.72
                                               Table 2

Summary Statistics For Treasury Auction Outcomes. This table provides summary statistics relating
to the outcome of the Treasury auctions for certiﬁcates of indebtedness, Treasury notes, and Treasury bonds
during the pre-abrogation period (1/1930 to 5/1933) and the post-abrogation period (6/1933 to 12/1936).
The total amounts oﬀered and subscribed are expressed in $ millions. Ratio denotes the ratio of total amount
subscribed to total amount oﬀered. N denotes the number of auctions.



                                                   Amount           Amount
      Period                       Security        Oﬀered         Subscribed         Ratio        N



      Pre-Abrogation            Certiﬁcates           7,025          27,679.6         3.94        20
                                   T-Notes            4,175          38,257.7         9.16        10
                                  T-Bonds             2,100           3,684.0         1.75         3

                              All Securities         13,300          69,621.3         5.23        33



      Post-Abrogation           Certiﬁcates           1,850           6,520.5         3.52         3
                                   T-Notes            5,550          31,977.5         5.76        12
                                  T-Bonds             5,000          35,092.6         7.02        14

                              All Securities         12,400          73,590.6         5.93        29
                                          Table 3

Results from the Regression of the Subscription Ratio on Explanatory Variables. This table
reports the results from the regression of the subscription ratio (total subscriptions divided by total oﬀering
size) for the individual Treasury auctions of certiﬁcates of indebtedness, Treasury notes, and Treasury bonds
on the indicated explanatory variables. Treasury Note is a dummy variable that takes value one if the
auction is for a Treasury note, and zero otherwise. Treasury bond is a dummy variable that takes value one
if the auction is for a Treasury bond, and zero otherwise. Exchange Provision denotes a dummy variable
that takes value one if the auction includes an exchange provision, and zero otherwise. Issue Size denotes
the oﬀering size of the issue expressed in $millions. Coupon denotes the coupon rate for the issue being
auctioned. Post-Abrogation denotes a dummy variable that takes value one if the auction occurs after the
abrogation of the gold clause in June 1933, and zero otherwise. The t-statistics are based on the Newey-West
(1980) estimator of the covariance matrix (with three lags). The sample period is 1/1930 to 12/1936.




                Variable                              Coeﬃcient                    t-Statistic


                Intercept                                 8.5703                        2.80
                Treasury Note                             5.3630                        1.93
                Treasury Bond                             4.4099                        1.86
                Exchange Provision                        2.1175                        1.48
                Issue Size                               −0.0096                       −1.95
                Coupon                                   −0.9092                       −1.12
                Post-Abrogation                          −1.8494                       −0.75

                Adj. R2                                                               0.1538
                N                                                                         62
                                              Table 4

Summary Statistics For Exchange Outcomes. This table provides summary statistics for the outcomes
of auctions in which retiring Treasury securities are exchangeable at par for newly-issued Treasury securities.
Results are shown seperately for the cases where gold clause securities are exchanged for gold clause secu-
rities, gold clause securities are exchanged for non-gold clause securities, and non-gold clause securities are
exchanged for non-gold clause securities. The amount of the retiring securities outstanding and the amount
exchanged for newly-issued securities are are expressed in $ millions. Exchange Ratio denotes the ratio of
total amount exchanged to the total amount outstanding. N denotes the number of auctions.



       Type of                             Amount               Amount           Exchange
       Exchange                         Outstanding           Exchanged             Ratio           N



       Gold for Gold                        7,439.21            5,057.13             0.6798         14
       Non-Gold for Non-Gold                5,081.75            4,973.49             0.9787         10
       Non-Gold for Gold                   13,281.92           10,669.01             0.8033         16
                                        Table 5

Results from the Regression of the Exchange Ratio on Explanatory Variables. This table reports
the results from the regression of the exchange ratio (total amount of bonds oﬀered for exchange divided
by total outstanding amount of bonds) for the individual exchange oﬀerings on the indicated explanatory
variables. Post-Abrogation denotes a dummy variable that takes value one if the exchange oﬀering occurs
after the abrogation of the gold clause in June 1933, and zero otherwise. Amount Outstanding denotes the
total outstanding amount of exchangable bonds expressed in $millions. Called denotes a dummy variable
that takes value one if the exchangable bonds are being called, and zero otherwise. Gold to Non-Gold
denotes a dummy variable that takes value one if the exchange oﬀering converts a gold-clause security into
a non-gold clause security. The t-statistics are based on the Newey-West (1980) estimator of the covariance
matrix (with three lags). The sample period is 1/1930 to 12/1936.




               Variable                              Coeﬃcient                  t-Statistic


               Intercept                                0.7069                       6.84
               Post-Abrogation                          0.2887                       3.05
               Amount Outstanding                      −0.0001                      −0.56
               Called                                  −0.1007                      −2.25
               Gold to Non-Gold                        −0.0681                      −2.31

               Adj. R2                                                              0.3726
               N                                                                        40
                                                 Table 6

Summary Statistics for the U.S. Treasury Bonds. This table reports the average prices, yields, and
durations of the gold clause and non-gold clause bonds in the sample. The bond prices are full prices that
include accrued coupon. Yields are expressed as percentages. Duration is expressed in years. N denotes the
number of daily observations. The sample period is daily from January 1, 1933 to May 31, 1935.



                                           Year of    Average       Average       Average
       Coupon           Maturity          Issuance      Price         Yield      Duration        N


        Gold Clause Bonds

       3.375         Jun   1940-43           1928          103.82     2.823          5.65       659
       3.375         Mar   1941-43           1931          103.76     2.882          6.24       660
       3.375         Jun   1943-47           1927          103.60     3.021          7.97       658
       3.125         Jun   1946-49           1931          101.44     3.057         10.18       691
       3.000         Sep   1951-55           1931          100.14     3.043         13.61       690


        Non-Gold Clause Bonds

       3.250           Aug 1941              1933          104.01     2.724          6.36       523
       3.250∗        Oct 1943-35             1933          103.30     2.981          7.91       459
       3.250         Apr 1944-46             1934          104.04     2.847          8.17       329
       3.000         Jun 1946-48             1934          102.33     2.835          9.77       276
       3.125         Dec 1949-52             1934          104.56     2.806         11.93       131

∗
    Coupon is 4.250 until October 1934.
                                            Table 7

Summary Statistics for the Gold-Clause Spread This table reports summary statistics for the gold-
clause spread, deﬁned as the diﬀerence between the yield on the non-gold-clause bonds and the gold-clause
bonds. Spreads are expressed in terms of basis points. The t-statistic for the mean is based on the Newey-
West estimator of the variance (with ﬁve lags). N denotes the number of daily observations. The sample
period is daily from January 1, 1933 to May 31, 1935.




       Period                 From                 To              Mean          tMean          N


       1                  11-Aug-1933          30-Jan-1934         −0.04         −0.06        129
       2                  31-Jan-1934          31-Dec-1934          4.82         18.88        211
       3                   1-Jan-1935          17-Feb-1935          8.79         10.50         35
       4                  18-Feb-1935         31-May-1935           8.43         23.22         68

       Full Sample        11-Aug-1933         31-May-1935            4.26         9.82        443
                                         Table 8

Results from the Regression of the Gold Clause Spread on Explanatory Variables. This table
reports the results from the regression of the gold clause spread, measured as the diﬀerence between the yields
on gold clause bonds and on non-gold clause bonds, on the ﬁrst three lags of the gold clause spread and the
indicated explanatory variables. Gold Price denotes the daily London ﬁxing for gold. Volatility denotes the
volatility of daily stock returns computed using a Garch(1, 1) model. Liquidity denotes the ratio of total
Treasury security trading volume divided by total bond trading volume on the New York Stock Exchange.
All data are daily. The t-statistics are based on the Newey-West (1980) estimator of the covariance matrix
(with ﬁve lags). The sample period is August 11, 1933 to May 31, 1935.




                   Variable                        Coeﬃcient                    t-Statistic


                   Intercept                         −6.4892                         −2.77
                   Spreadt−1                          0.4727                          6.51
                   Spreadt−2                          0.1974                          2.37
                   Spreadt−3                          0.1922                          3.97
                   Gold Price                         0.2086                          2.92
                   Volatility                        −0.0006                         −2.07
                   Liquidity                          0.0011                          2.81

                   Adj. R2                                                          0.7379
                   N                                                                   443
