                                NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                  ENLARGING THE CONTRACTING SPACE:
       COLLATERAL MENUS, ACCESS TO CREDIT, AND ECONOMIC ACTIVITY

                                          Murillo Campello
                                          Mauricio Larrain

                                        Working Paper 21690
                                http://www.nber.org/papers/w21690


                      NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                               1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                 Cambridge, MA 02138
                                     October 2015




We thank Kevin Aretz, Patrick Bolton, Charles Calomiris, Geraldo Cerqueiro (discussant), Jess Cornaggia,
Bruno Ferman, Miguel Ferreira (discussant), Erasmo Giambona, Andrew Hertzberg, Jens Josephson
(discussant), Andres Liberman, Maria-Teresa Marchica, Rafael Matta, João Melo (discussant), Gabriel
Natividad, Tomek Piskorski, Katharina Pistor, Jacopo Ponticelli, Wenlan Qian (discussant), Adriano
Rampini, Jose Scheinkman, Philipp Schnabl, and Daniel Wolfenzon for their useful discussions and
suggestions. We also appreciate comments from seminar participants at Chinese University of Hong
Kong, Columbia Business School, Columbia--NYU Junior Corporate Finance Meeting, DePaul University,
European Bank for Reconstruction and Development, European Finance Association Meeting (Lugano),
FGV--São Paulo, Financial Intermediation Research Society Conference (Reykjavik), Georgetown
University, LUBRAFIN Meeting, Michigan State University, Symposium on Emerging Financial
Markets (Beijing), University of Houston, University of New South Wales, University of Notre Dame,
University of Queensland, and the World Bank. Felipe Silva and Pablo Slutzky provided excellent
research assistance. The usual disclaimer applies. The views expressed herein are those of the authors
and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.

© 2015 by Murillo Campello and Mauricio Larrain. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not
to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including
© notice, is given to the source.
Enlarging the Contracting Space: Collateral Menus, Access to Credit, and Economic Activity
Murillo Campello and Mauricio Larrain
NBER Working Paper No. 21690
October 2015
JEL No. G32,K22,O16

                                              ABSTRACT

Recent reforms across Eastern European countries gave more flexibility and information for parties
to engage in secured debt transactions. The menu of assets legally accepted as collateral was enlarged
to include movable assets (e.g., machinery and equipment). Generalized difference-in-differences
tests show that firms operating more movable assets borrowed more as a result of such reforms. Those
firms also invested more, hired more, and became more efficient and profitable following the changes
in the contracting environment. The financial deepening we document triggered important reallocation
effects: Firms affected by the reforms increased their share of fixed assets and employment in the economy.


Murillo Campello
Johnson Graduate School of Management
Cornell University
114 East Avenue
369 Sage Hall
Ithaca, NY 148531-6201
and NBER
campello@cornell.edu

Mauricio Larrain
Columbia University
3022 Broadway, 813 Uris Hall
New York, NY 10027
mlarrain@columbia.edu
1    Introduction

A large literature has looked at links between creditors’ rights and financial development, docu-
menting a positive relationship between creditor protection and the size of credit markets (e.g., La
Porta et al., 1997, 1998; Levine, 1998, 1999). Notably, existing analyses are often conducted with
country-level data, making it difficult to identify how different elements of financial contracting ul-
timately work in promoting credit expansion. Against the backdrop of this research, credit reforms
in emerging economies have focused on the allocation of control rights over assets in liquidation as
a way to facilitate contracting. We extend this literature by providing evidence on the micro-level
foundations of the connections between the contracting environment and credit expansion.
    Theory suggests that access to credit in imperfect capital markets depends on the menu of
assets that can be credibly offered as collateral by borrowers (Aghion and Bolton, 1992; Hart and
Moore, 1994). In this paper, we study reforms that emphasize the idea of enlarging the contracting
space (larger “collateral menus”) available to parties as a way to promote secured credit transac-
tions. We look not only at credit taking by firms, but also at how reform-enabled credit expansion
ultimately affects real aspects of economic activity. A recent reform in Romania is considered a
textbook example of a change that enlarged the menu of assets that can be used as collateral in
credit transactions (Fleisig et al., 2006). We thus start our analysis with the Romanian setting as
a basis to understand how the reform worked and to analyze the economic responses it triggered.
We subsequently generalize our analysis to a broader group of Eastern European countries, some
of which witnessed similar legal changes, but at different points in time.
    Throughout the 1990s, Romania’s Commercial Code only allowed for secured transactions
involving “immovable assets” (e.g., land and buildings). For practical purposes, “movable assets”
(e.g., machinery and equipment) could not be pledged as collateral. Around the world, firms’
movable assets comprise about half of their total fixed assets (Alvarez de la Campa, 2011); yet
in Romania, as well as in other Eastern European countries, firms had a hard time using those
assets to secure credit. In light of a legal framework that favored debtors, Romanian firms faced
difficulties in financing investment in machinery and equipment through alternatives such as leasing
and unsecured lending with contractual provisions. In the year 2000, the Romanian government
implemented Law 99, which transformed the framework in which debt contracts could be written,
giving Romanian firms a new alternative for financing machinery and equipment.
    In its essence, Law 99 eliminated the possessory nature of security interests. As an intended
consequence, the contracting framework no longer required the physical transfer of movable assets


                                                  1
to the creditor and made it possible for firms to give creditors “substitute” assets (e.g., similar
assets or cash equivalents) if mutually agreed. It also introduced a uniform electronic system of
real-time information on seniority of security interests over movable assets. Law 99 gave lenders
much larger latitude in the origination of credit facilities (e.g., varying syndication, subordination,
and maturity structure), allowing for more loans to be taken out of a new class of legally pledgeable
assets.
      From an empirical standpoint, the Romanian setting is unique in identifying the types of assets
that could allow for credit expansion under the collateral reform. As the law made it possible to
pledge movable assets as collateral for the first time, it would affect firms that make intensive
use of machinery and equipment in their operations. Immovable assets, on the other hand, were
used as collateral before 2000, and the reform had no bearing on contracts secured by real estate
assets. This institutional wrinkle helps us pin point the link between collateral menus and access
to credit.
      To estimate the effects of the collateral-menu-enlarging reform, we take advantage of the fact
that some sectors of the economy naturally use more machinery and equipment than others. We
conduct a difference-in-differences test in which we contrast firms operating in sectors with high
versus low demand for movable assets, before and after the passage of the law. To minimize
potential confounders (e.g., concurrent credit supply shocks) we benchmark the results from this
test against a test that measures pre–post reform changes along the high versus low demand for
immovable assets, which were not contemplated by the legal reform. We gauge the external valid-
ity of our inferences by extrapolating our tests to other Eastern European countries. While these
economies are comparable in relevant dimensions, the timing of the collateral reforms was not
contemporaneous (or did not happen at all), owing to idiosyncrasies affecting the speed of various
political processes.1 This time variation in the wave of reforms across Eastern Europe allows us
to exploit both within-country and cross-country contrasts.
      Our base tests show that firms operating in sectors more intensive in overall tangible assets
(the sum of movable and immovable assets) observe an increase in their leverage ratios after the
reform. As we break these effects across movable and immovable assets, however, we find that only
those firms operating in sectors intensive in movable assets observe an enhancement in their ability
to borrow. We look not only at the amount of debt firms raise, but also at the likelihood firms
  1
    During our 1996–2005 sample period, two other Eastern European countries enacted collateral reforms that
resembled Romania’s Law 99 (Latvia and Poland). Three other countries failed to pass any such laws during this
period (Czech Republic, Ukraine, and Russia). Finally, four other countries in the region had already reformed
their collateral laws prior to the beginning of our sample period (Bulgaria, Estonia, Hungary, and Lithuania).


                                                      2
start using debt in the first place. On this front, albeit statistically weaker, our results point to an
expansion of access to credit: firms operating more movable assets are more likely to abandon their
previous “zero-leverage” status. We also find that high-movable-assets firms accumulate less cash
in their balance sheets. Whether firms operate more or less immovable assets, in contrast, does
not have any effect on their use of debt financing nor on their savings policies following the reform.
   The increase in credit access that stems from operating more movable assets is economically
sizable. Controlling for key capital structure determinants such as firm size, age, and profitability,
a firm operating in the top quartile of the movable assets sectoral distribution observes an increase
in its leverage ratio by 3.7 percentage points more than its counterpart in the low movable-assets
ranking following the reform. This is a significant number when one considers that the average
debt-to-asset ratio of Romanian firms is just 10.5%; a 35% increase relative to the baseline. Using
the same comparison, the proportion of zero-leverage firms drops by 32 percentage points more in
the high-movable-assets category (or 57% of the sample mean) after the reform. This latter result
is statistically weaker for the average firm. As we investigate this effect in more depth, however,
we find that it is particularly significant for smaller firms in the economy.
   Our analysis goes further in showing how changing the ability to sign secured debt contracts
can have far-reaching implications for corporate outcomes across Eastern Europe. Using data from
10 countries in the region, we confirm that firms with more movable assets raise more debt and
save less cash after collateral-menu-enlarging reforms. We also show that they invest more in fixed
assets, which allows for more debt capacity. To gauge the effect of the spur in capital investment,
we consider a number of additional outcomes. First, we examine if firms changed their labor
demand and find that firms hire more workers. We look at measures of profitability and find that
they also increase for firms with more movable assets following reforms. Finally, we examine if
the increase in tangible assets and labor usage lead to changes in productivity. We find that firms
with more movable assets observe an increase in total factor productivity. Our findings imply that
firms not only raise more funds and grow more as a result of their enhanced debt capacity, but
also seem to establish a better asset mix.
   Looking at the economy-wide consequences of collateral reforms, we document important real-
location effects. Sectors that make more intensive use of movable assets witnessed a stark increase
in their share of aggregate fixed assets in Romania: from 37% to 52% between the pre- and post-
reform periods. These same sectors witnessed a significant increase of their share of employment
in the economy: from 31% to 38%. Similar patterns are found for Latvia and Poland, which re-



                                                   3
formed their legal contracting environment to allow for borrowing against movable assets in 1999
and 1998, respectively.
   We subject our results to a long battery of checks. Among others, we falsify our experiment by
testing for the introduction of “placebo reforms” in the year 2000 in the countries that share borders
with Romania (Bulgaria, Hungary, and Ukraine) as well as its largest trade partner (Italy). None of
these countries passed such reforms in or about 2000, yet one could worry that underlying economic,
geopolitical, or technological factors may have allowed firms in some movable-intensive sectors to
gain more access to debt starting in 2000. We find no significant changes in the credit capacity of
firms with movable assets in these placebo countries. As we detail below, our analysis also considers
sectoral dynamics (e.g., sensitivity to business cycle) and utilizes alternative econometric methods
(e.g., matching estimation) to ensure the robustness of our results.
   Due to data limitations, we are not able to fully observe the extent to which movable assets
were used to secure credit through other alternatives such as leasing prior to a collateral reform.
However, our experimental design shows strong evidence that firms operating more movable assets
borrowed more and invested more as a result of a reform that altered the terms of standard
secured lending. Simply put, we show that allowing firms to collateralize machinery and equipment
enlarged the debt contracting space, with positive consequences for access to credit and real
economic activity.
   Only a small literature has analyzed the impact of sudden changes in the contracting environ-
ment using detailed, country-specific firm data as we do in this paper. Lilienfeld-Toal et al. (2012)
and Vig (2013) look at reforms in India that empowered creditors in seizing assets of default-
ing firms. They find that strengthening enforceability led to a decline in borrowing, especially for
smaller firms, which is arguably a counterproductive outcome from a policy perspective. Assunção
et al. (2013) study a reform in Brazil that simplified the sale of repossessed cars used as collateral
for auto loans. The authors find that the change led to more lending, eventually allowing for
riskier borrowers to obtain loans for more expensive cars. These studies highlight the difficulties
policymakers face in predicting the outcomes of credit reforms.
   Our paper is closer in spirit to Haselmann et al. (2009), who study both bankruptcy and col-
lateral reforms in Eastern Europe. The authors find that such legal reforms led to more lending.
Our paper extends their work by identifying some of the mechanisms through which collateral
reforms led to higher firm borrowing. As Eastern European reforms expanded the collateral menu
to include movable assets, we exploit within-country variation in asset-type utilization intensity



                                                  4
around the reforms to identify that firms operating more movable assets borrowed more. More-
over, we show that beyond increasing credit, collateral reforms ultimately triggered changes in
firm-level real-side outcomes, such as increased investment, and economy-wide outcomes, such as
increases in the share of fixed capital in the economy.
        Our paper also adds to the literature that looks at the impact of collateral on leverage ratios.
Among recent studies, the emphasis has been on variations in the value (Gan, 2007), quantity
supplied (Campello and Giambona, 2013), or salability (Benmelech, 2009) of assets that are used
as collateral. Our study is different as it identifies the impact of the enlargement of the contracting
space — what is accepted as collateral — on access to debt financing. In this way, our results are
important for policymakers, who cannot alter asset liquidation values or their supply in secondary
markets, but can alter collateral menus as a way to enhance financial contractibility. Our paper
also stands out in that real-side outcomes such as productivity, labor, or profitability are only
rarely examined in conjunction with the impact of collateral on access to credit.2
        The remainder of the paper is organized as follows. Section 2 provides the institutional details
of the collateral reforms. Section 3 describes the data and explains our identification strategy.
Section 4 reports the results on access to credit and Section 5 the results on real economic activity.
Section 6 provides a number of validity and robustness checks. Section 7 concludes.


2        Institutional Setting

Research from the World Bank points to Romania as a textbook example of a country enacting
changes that significantly enhanced the law of secured transactions (Fleisig et al., 2006). In this
section, we start by describing Romania’s reform. We then discuss collateral reforms across a
broader group of Eastern European countries.

2.1       Collateral Reform in Romania

Firms operating in well-developed credit markets typically face three alternatives for financing
investment in machinery and equipment. The first alternative is secured lending. The firm obtains
a loan from the creditor and purchases the equipment, pledging it as collateral in a legally binding
contract. The creditor has a “security interest” — not ownership — over the equipment, which
it can enforce in the event of default. The second alternative is leasing. The leasing contract
    2
    One exception is Benmelech and Bergman (2011), who look at the impact of increases of creditors’ rights on
technological innovation in the airline industry across countries. Chaney et al. (2012) consider the impact of land
prices on the connection between collateral and investment.



                                                        5
guarantees the use of the equipment in exchange for regular payments from the lessee (firm) to
the lessor (creditor).3 One advantage of leasing is that ownership still lies with the lessor, which
allows for faster recovery in default. At the same time, moral hazard problems often arise from the
separation of ownership and control. The third alternative is unsecured lending, with contractual
provisions that indirectly try to make sure that the liquidation value of the equipment accrues to
the creditor (e.g., a combination of asset sales restrictions and anti-layering provisions).
    Prior to year 2000, Romania lacked a legal framework that allowed firms and creditors to write
secured loan contracts over machinery and equipment. Specifically, two major codes governed
secured transactions in Romania at the time: the Civil Code and the Commercial Code.4 Under
codified law, a creditor could secure a loan by creating a security interest over immovable assets
(“mortgage”) and over movable assets (“pledges”). Critically, however, pledges took the form of
possessory interests. This meant that the law did not allow parties to establish security interests
over movable assets without transferring actual possession to the creditor. In practical terms, a
firm could not pledge a piece of equipment to a third party and still physically control it (keep
it under its roof). In other words, the firm could not write a standard secured loan contract
with a bank. In principle, firms could still finance machinery and equipment investment through
leasing or unsecured credit. However, as explained above, in light of a legal framework that fa-
vored debtors, the market for leasing was bleak at that time.5 The country’s adherence to the
traditional (French-style) pledge system made it difficult for firms to use a host of its productive
assets as collateral in standard debt contracts. As we explain below, the year 2000 reform allowed
non-possessory secured lending over movable assets, giving Romanian firms a new alternative of
financing machinery and equipment.
    During the 1990s, the European Bank of Reconstruction and Development (EBRD) had been
advocating for secured transactions reforms in Eastern Europe. In January 1999, the Center for
the Economic Analysis of Law (CEAL), with the support of local attorneys and the World Bank,
drafted a proposal on the regulation of security interests over movable assets. Shortly after, in May
1999, the Romanian parliament passed Law 99, whose Title VI contained the “Legal Treatment
of Security Interests in Personal Property.” The new law was molded after Article 9 of the United
   3
     Evidence suggests that unconstrained firms prefer to finance their machinery and equipment investment via
secured lending as opposed to leasing (Eisfeldt and Rampini, 2009).
   4
     Romania’s Common Law system resembles the French Civil Code. See de la Peña and Fleisig (2004) for a
detailed description of the evolution of Romania’s legal framework for secured transactions prior to 2000.
   5
     In 1999, Romanian’s leasing market for machinery and equipment in terms of concluded contracts represented
only 0.02% of GDP (cf. Association of Leasing Companies of Romania). The comparable number for the United
States is at least five times higher (cf. Equipment Leasing and Finance Association).



                                                      6
States’ Uniform Commercial Code, seen as the state-of-the-art legislation on secured transactions
over movable assets. Law 99 came into full force in December 2000.
    Romania’s Law 99 vastly expanded the range of assets that could serve as collateral. It intro-
duced a broad system of security interests and derogated the old pledge regime. Importantly, the
law allowed parties to establish security interests over movable assets without having to transfer
possession of the asset to the creditor. The law also introduced the “Electronic Archive of Security
Interests in Personal Property,” a fully-automated system of registration of security interests over
movable assets that instantaneously files into a database notices that a security interest has been
taken over a movable asset.6 The law further awarded creditors legal powers to repossess collateral
in the event of default without court intervention, as long as a breach of the peace did not occur.
    Figure 1 plots the time evolution of the number of filings into the Electronic Archive (left
vertical axis). The archive’s entries have grown exponentially since its inception in 2000. The
movable assets archive system received 65,000 filings in 2001, rising to 360,000 filings in 2005.
As of 2005, cumulative gross filings amounted to roughly one million. The notice of the security
interest does not require filing the amount of the obligation secured, hence the amount of secured
credit cannot be determined from the number of filings. Nonetheless, several other indicators are
consistent with a rapid and large increase in the volume of credit granted to firms after the 2000
reform. For example, the number of borrowers reported in the Central Bank’s debtor registry rose
from 18,000 in 2000 to more than 100,000 in 2005 (Chaves et al., 2004). Along these lines, Figure
1 displays the evolution of the total volume of corporate bank credit as a share of GDP from 1996
to 2005 (right vertical axis). The fraction of corporate credit to GDP nearly tripled between 2000
and 2005, rising from 7% to 20%.

2.2    Collateral Reform in Other Eastern European Countries

We extend our study to a cross-country analysis by collecting information on collateral laws for
nine additional Eastern European economies. While these economies are comparable on a number
of dimensions — they inherent much of the same legacy of centralized, socialist-oriented, large
manufacturing base — the passage of collateral reforms was not contemporaneous, owing to var-
ious idiosyncrasies. Table 1 reports the relevant details of the collateral reforms observed in the
countries in the region during our sample period 1996–2005. Four of the countries had reformed
   6
     Romania’s registration system was the world’s most advanced at its inception, being the first to accept fillings
over the internet. Love et al. (2013) study the effects of the introduction of collateral registries across a large
number of countries.



                                                         7
 Figure 1: Evolution of Security Interest Filings and Corporate Credit in Romania

The figure plots the evolution of the number of security interest filings in the Electronic Archive of Security Interests
in Personal Property (red solid line) and the ratio between corporate credit and GDP in Romania (blue dashed
line). The gray vertical line denotes the year of the collateral reform.




                                                                            400000




                                                                                                                                                         30
                            Number of security interest filings (solid line)




                                                                                                                                                         Corporate credit to GDP (%) (dashed line)
                                                                                                                                                                                          25
                                                             300000




                                                                                                                                                                                 20
                                             200000




                                                                                                                                                                       15
                                100000




                                                                                                                                                             10
                                                         0




                                                                                                                                                         5
                                                                                     1996   1997   1998   1999   2000 2001   2002   2003   2004   2005
                                                                                                                    Year




their collateral legal frameworks by 1996, the first year of our sample period: Bulgaria, Estonia,
Hungary, and Lithuania. Two other countries reformed in the middle of our sample period: Latvia
passed the “Law on Commercial Pledge” in 1998 (effective in 1999) and Poland passed the “Law
on Registered Pledge” in 1996 (effective in 1998). The reforms in Latvia and Poland were similar
to the reform passed in Romania: they allowed parties to establish security interests over movable
assets without having to transfer possession to the creditor and they created a collateral registry
to register such security interests. Three remaining countries did not implement reforms over the
time period we study: Czech Republic, Ukraine, and Russia.


                                                                                                    Table 1 About Here

    In conducting our tests under a treatment effects framework, we generalize our findings by
integrating and comparing outcomes for firms operating in these different sets of countries.




                                                                                                                     8
3        Data and Empirical Strategy
3.1       Data

We use firm-level information from Amadeus, a commercial dataset compiled by Bureau van Dijk.
Amadeus contains financial statements from millions of companies operating in 35 European coun-
tries. Amadeus collects data from local information providers, which in most cases are the local
registries. In Romania, all joint stock companies, partnerships, and limited liability companies
are required to file their financial statements to the Romanian National Trade Register Office. As
a result, the data coverage of Amadeus for Romania is particularly comprehensive, covering the
majority of privately-held firms in the country. The filing requirements for other Eastern European
countries are less strict, which leads to a less comprehensive coverage.
        Our basic outcome variable is leverage, which should be plausibly affected by changes in the
menu of assets firms are able to offer as collateral for debt taking. We measure Leverage as the
ratio between total debt and the book value of assets. We define ZeroLeverage as a dummy vari-
able equal to one if a firm has no leverage and zero otherwise. We also glean additional insights
into firms’ borrowing by looking at their savings behavior; in particular, their need to carry cash
balances. We define Cash as the ratio of cash holdings and cash equivalents to total assets. Our
base analysis controls for the standard determinants of capital structure that are available in the
data (e.g., Rajan and Zingales, 1995; Lemmon et al., 2008). We measure Size as the log of total
assets; Age is the number of years the firm is in operation; Profitability is the ratio of earnings
before interest and taxes to total assets; and OverallTangibility is the ratio of fixed assets (i.e.,
property, plant, and equipment) to total assets.
        We also study the effect of collateral reforms on a set of real-side corporate outcomes. In-
vestment is the change in fixed assets scaled by lagged fixed assets; Employment is the number of
employees; total factor productivity (Productivity) is the residual from a Cobb-Douglas production
function;7 Sales is the log of sales. Following the literature on asset tangibility and leverage, we
focus on manufacturing firms (e.g., Campello and Giambona, 2013). We winsorize variables at the
upper and lower 1% to avoid the impact of extreme outliers.
        Table 2 reports summary statistics of Leverage, ZeroLeverage, and Cash for each of the 10
countries in the sample during the 1996–2005 period. The mean value of Leverage in Romania is
10.5%. Average leverage varies across the region, ranging from 4.4% in Russia to 18.9% in Latvia.
    7
     We define TFP for firm i in year t as log(T F P )it = log(y)it − α log(k)it − (1 − α) log(l)it , where y denotes sales,
k fixed assets, and l number of employees. We allow factor elasticities to vary across sectors. We measure the labor
elasticity for each sector as the average labor share of value added. See Larrain and Stumpner (2015) for details.


                                                             9
The fraction of zero-leverage firms also varies across countries. In Romania, on average, 57% of
the firms in the sample are financed entirely with equity. The country with the highest fraction
of zero-leverage firms is Russia (73%), while the country with the lowest fraction of zero-leverage
firms is Latvia (13%). Firms in Romania hold, on average, 7.9% of their assets in cash. The
average cash ratio ranges from 2.6% in Ukraine to 15.9% in Estonia. The average firm in the
sample is young and small, consistent with private sector enterprises in transition economies. For
example, the average Romanian sample firm is seven years old, has total assets worth $1.8 million
(in 2000 U.S. dollars), and hires 65 employees.


                                      Table 2 About Here

3.2   Test Strategy

Since a collateral reform allows firms to pledge movable assets as collateral, it should benefit
particularly firms operating in sectors that make intensive use of assets such as machinery and
equipment. To identify the effect of a reform, we take advantage of the fact that some sectors are
inherently more intensive in their demand for machinery and equipment than others.
   We exploit ex-ante variation in asset-type demand that stems from the nature of firms’ produc-
tion processes and conduct a difference-in-differences test around the passage of the reform. To do
so, we rank manufacturers according to a movable assets demand index (explained shortly). We
then assign to a “treatment group” those firms operating in sectors at the high-end of the sectoral
ranking. The “control group” consists of firms at the bottom of the ranking. Next, we calculate
the pre- versus post-reform difference in the outcome variable of interest (e.g., Leverage) for the
treated group, doing the same for the control group. Finally, we calculate the difference between
these two group differences. Our estimation accounts for both individual firm- and year-fixed
effects. As we discuss below, we provide a number of checks on the validity of our strategy.

3.3   Sectoral Asset Indices

In a legal framework where movable assets are considered “dead capital,” the use of movable assets
in firms’ production processes is likely to be a distorted representation of the underlying demand
for those assets. In particular, it is likely that movable assets are under-utilized. As such, even if
Amadeus provided data on the observed use of movable assets before the reform, we could not use
that information to make predictions about the impact of the collateral reform. Instead, we need



                                                  10
to gauge firms’ desired use of movable assets. To do so, we must identify comparable firms whose
use of movable assets are unconstrained by the severe legal frictions in place before the reform.

3.3.1   Index Construction

To construct a measure gauging the extent to which firms operate movable assets in the absence
of financing constraints, we look at data from the United States. We do so assuming that firms
in the United States more closely utilize a desired mix of assets in their production processes. We
take that such asset mix is driven by sector-specific characteristics and that different sectors may
make more or less intensive use of movable assets due to the nature of their output (governed by
production and technological parameters). The asset mix characteristic that matters the most for
our analysis has to do with asset tangibility. On that dimension, a regular firm operates both
fixed assets and other assets. To ease exposition, we divide a firm’s assets accordingly as follows:

                          T otal Assets = F ixed Assets + Other Assets.                          (1)

The first category encompasses assets such as machinery, equipment, land, and buildings. The
second includes assets such as cash and receivables. Notably, the collateral reform allowed firms
to pledge movable fixed assets such as machinery and equipment. The reform, however, did not
alter the pledgeability of immovable fixed assets such as land and buildings, which were already
pledgeable. The unique manner in which the reform affected some types of fixed assets suggests
the following decomposition:

             T otal Assets = M ovable Assets + Immovable Assets + Other Assets.                  (2)

With this differentiation in mind, we construct the movable assets index using data on manufactur-
ers from the United States as follows. First, we follow Campello and Giambona (2013) in identify-
ing information on the decomposition of firms’ fixed assets between: (1) machinery and equipment
and (2) land and buildings. This information is conveniently available for the 1984–1996 period in
the Compustat database; that is, it contains data on manufacturers’ asset-mix for the period prior
to the collateral reform. For each individual firm, we compute the time-average ratio of machinery
and equipment to total assets. Next, we follow the guidelines of the International Standard Indus-
trial Classification (ISIC) and divide the sample into 48 three-digit sectors. For each sector, we
calculate the movable assets index as the median of the movable assets-to-total assets ratio of the
firms operating in that sector. We do the same calculation for the land and buildings-to-total assets
ratio, thus computing an immovable assets index. Likewise, we use the fixed assets-to-total assets

                                                 11
                     Figure 2: Sectoral Index of Movable Assets Intensity
The figure plots the sectoral index of movable assets intensity for the 48 three-digit manufacturing sectors in the
sample (ISIC, Revision 3). The movable assets index is calculated as the median of the time-average ratio of
machinery and equipment to total assets across publicly traded firms in the United States in each sector during the
period 1984-1996. The figure is sorted in ascending order with respect to movable assets intensity.


                         (Machinery+Equipment)/Assets
                        0     .1     .2    .3     .4

                                                                           Precious metals



                                                                TV and radio transmitters
                                                             Special purpose machinery
                                                             Accumulaters and batteries
                                                                     Domestic appliances
                                                              Other electrical equipment
                                                                      Pesticides and paint
                                                                                    Plastics
                                                                       Optical instruments
                                                                                   Furniture
                                                                                    Rubber
                                                        Office and computing machinery




                                                                             Knitted fabrics
                                                              Sound and video recording
                                                                       Medical appliances
                                                                             Electric lamps
                                                                      Coke oven products
                                                             General purpose machinery
                                                                      Other food products
                                                                   Aircraft and spacecraft
                                                                        Fabricated metals
                                                                       Meat, fish and fruit
                                                                            Dairy products
                                                                Bodies for motor vehicles
                                                                            Motor vehicles
                                                                 Parts for motor vehicles
                                                                                Beverages
                                                                         Casting of metals
                                                                          Electronic valves
                                                                           Ships and boats
                                                                                   Tobacco
                                                                            Electric motors
                                                                Railway and locomotives
                                                        Electricity distribution apparatus
                                                                                 Publishing
                                                                              Other textiles
                                                                          Man-made fibres
                                                                     Transport equipment
                                                                                Sawmilling
                                                                       Spinning of textiles
                                                                           Basic chemicals
                                                                                    Printing
                                                                       Grain mill products
                                                                             Iron and steel
                                                                          Structural metals
                                                                Glass and glass products
                                                               Paper and paper products
ratio to compute an overall tangibility index. Overall tangibility equals 34% of total assets, on
average. Movable assets, in turn, represent 54% of the ratio between fixed assets and total assets.
The correlation between the movable and immovable assets indices is positive, but low (only 0.3).
    Figure 2 plots the movable assets index for the 48 sectors examined. The figure reveals a
substantial degree of cross-sectoral variation in the utilization of movable assets. Manufacturing
of precious metals, domestic appliances, and furniture are examples of sectors with low intensity in
movable assets used in production. In these sectors, machinery and equipment amounts to about
only 10% of total assets. In contrast, the manufacturing of structural metals, glass, and paper
represent examples of sectors with high use of movable assets. In these sectors, machinery and
equipment amounts to well over 30% of total assets.
    As we take our tests to other economies in Eastern Europe, we study the relative size of
movable-intensive sectors in the countries in our sample. We find that the fraction of aggregate
fixed assets allocated to sectors above the top quartile of the movable assets index in each sample
country is as follows: Bulgaria 53%, Czech Republic 40%, Estonia 51%, Hungary 38%, Latvia 40%,
Lithuania 46%, Poland 38%, Romania 40%, Russia 49%, and Ukraine 46%. The relatively narrow


                                                                       12
band in which these fractions are distributed may be unsurprising given that our sample countries
operated as central-planned economies for several decades leading up to the time period we study.

3.3.2    Index Utilization

Our approach does not require that the value of the index in each sector is the same in the United
States and Eastern Europe. The approach only assumes that the sectoral ranking of demand for
movable assets is sensibly similar.8 For example, the manufacture of paper products demands
intense use of large mills (heavy machinery and equipment), regardless of whether the factory is
operated in the United States, in Western Europe, or in Eastern Europe. On the other hand,
precious metal production is relatively less dependent on machinery, with most hard assets asso-
ciated with the plant, again independent of the country in which firm operates. As we restrict our
attention to traditional manufacturing activities in countries with sizable industrial sectors, our
working hypothesis appears to be plausible.
   Since we have data on overall tangibility for Romanian firms (that is, movable plus immov-
able assets), we can compare sectoral indices based on total asset tangibility across United States
and Romanian manufacturers as a way to assess the plausibility of our strategy. Indeed, we can
make that comparison with any other country that serves a reasonable benchmark for credit-
unconstrained financing. Our prior is that the observed asset mix of Romanian firms before the
2000 reform was distorted away from an optimal benchmark due to legal constraints. The col-
lateral reform, in turn, should make Romanian firms more able to utilize an optimal asset mix,
converging to the asset mix observed in the United States or other credit-unconstrained economies.
   To check this conjecture, for each year between 1996 and 2005, we calculate the sectoral overall
tangibility index using Romanian data as well as data from the United States and Germany. In
Figure 3, we plot the evolution of the correlation coefficient between the Romania- and United
States-based sectoral rankings of overall tangibility. Prior to the 2000 reform, the correlation
between both rankings is quite stable, hovering around the value of 0.35. After the reform, the
correlation increases steadily and by 2005 it is equal to 0.42. In the same figure, we plot the
correlation between the Romania- and Germany-based rankings of overall tangibility.9 The corre-
lation between the Romania- and Germany-based rankings exhibits a very similar behavior. The
correlation is stable prior to 2000, after which it starts to steadily increase. Figure 3 suggests
  8
    The approach is similar to that of Rajan and Zingales (1998), who build an international index for firms’
demand for external financing.
  9
    The Germany-based overall tangibility index is calculated using data from Amadeus.



                                                     13
      Figure 3: Evolution of Correlation Between Romania- and United States- and
                 Germany-based Rankings of Sectoral Overall Tangibility

The figure plots the evolution of the coefficient of correlation between the Romania- and United States-based, and
Romania- and Germany-based, rankings of sectoral overall tangibility index. The United States- and Germany-based
tangibility indices are calculated using 1996 data. The Romania-based tangibility index is calculated for each year
between 1996–2005. Overall asset tangibility for each sector is defined as the median of the ratio between fixed
assets and total assets across all firms operating in that sector.




                                                                                                                                                    Correlation Ranking Tangibility Romania-Germany
                                                                                                                                                                                                .55
                                                                       .44
                               Correlation Ranking Tangibility Romania-US




                                                                                                                                                                                          .5
                                                                .42




                                                                                                                                                                                   .45
                                                        .4




                                                                                                                                                                          .4
                                                .38




                                                                                                                                                                  .35
                                         .36




                                                                                                                                                           .3
                                .34




                                                                             1996   1997   1998   1999   2000   2001   2002   2003   2004    2005

                                                                                           Correlation Ranking Tangibility Romania-US
                                                                                           Correlation Ranking Tangibility Romania-Germany




that prior to the reform, firms in Romania displayed tangible-to-total asset ratios that were quite
different than those of comparable, credit-unconstrained firms based on either the United States
or Germany. Following the collateral reform, Romanian firms’ asset mix started to resemble more
closely the asset mix of foreign-based benchmark firms.


4      Credit Expansion
4.1     The Baseline Empirical Model

We start by estimating the following difference-in-differences specification to gauge the effect of a
collateral reform on firm financing:

                     Yist = αi + αt + βP ostt ∗ HighM ovableAssetss + γXist + ist ,                                                                                                                  (3)

where Yist denotes the outcome variable of interest (e.g., Leverage) for firm i in sector s in year t.
P ostt is a dummy that equals zero before the reform year and one afterwards. HighM ovableAssets
is a dummy that equals one if the firm belongs to the treated group (sectors in the top quartile
of the movable assets sectoral index) and zero if the firm belongs to the control group (sectors in

                                                                                                             14
the bottom quartile of the index).10 Xist denotes a vector of firm-level controls that includes Size,
Age, Profitability, and OverallTangibility. The specification includes a full set of firm-fixed effects
(αi ) and year-fixed effects (αt ). The firm-fixed effects control for time-invariant firm characteris-
tics. The year-fixed effects control for aggregate time-varying shocks. ist is the error term, with
standard errors clustered at the firm level.11 The coefficient of interest is β, which measures the
pre–post difference in the outcome of interest of firms operating in high-movable-assets sectors,
relative to the pre–post difference of firms in low-movable-assets sectors.
    A unique characteristic of the collateral reform is that it affected only movable assets, not
immovable assets. This provides for an extra identification wrinkle in our difference-in-differences
setting. In particular, one concern with our baseline test is that there could be a concurrent credit
supply shock at the time of the reform affecting all tangible assets — both movables and immov-
ables. Since immovable assets were allowed to be pledged before and after the reform, we address
this concern by adding to Eq. (3) an interaction term between P ost and a dummy that equals one
(zero) if the firm belongs to a sector in the top (bottom) quartile of the immovable assets sectoral
index. We denote this variable HighImmovableAssets.

4.2    Parallel Trends

Our difference-in-differences strategy assumes that, in absence of the reform, the change in the
outcome variables of interest would have been the same for firms in the treated and control groups.
Accordingly, it is important to check whether trends in the outcome variables for both groups were
similar (“parallel”) prior to the reform in Romania. We do so looking at the evolution of changes
in leverage ratios, the fraction of zero-leverage firms, and cash holdings before the reform. Panel
A of Table 3 reports the results for Leverage. The difference between the change in leverage for
the treated and control groups is not statistically different from zero. This holds for all pre-reform
horizons we consider, going back all the way to the beginning of our sample period. Panels B and
C show similar patterns for ZeroLeverage and Cash for the two comparison groups. In all, there
are no discernible differences in trends for either debt or cash ratios for our sample firms in the
high- and low-movable-assets categories before the collateral reform.

                                            Table 3 About Here
  10
     In Section 6, we compare the effects across different quartiles of the movable assets distribution. We also show
that the results are robust to using the original (continuous) version of the index.
  11
     Our results are robust to collapsing and comparing the data into a pre- and post-reform period, which ensures
that the standard errors are not artificially low due to serial correlation (Bertrand et al., 2004).



                                                         15
4.3      Leverage Ratios in Romania

Table 4 reports the results for Leverage in Romania. To build intuition, we start by estimating
the effect of the collateral reform across sectors with different intensities in overall asset tangi-
bility, which includes all types of tangible assets (movables and immovables). The estimates in
column (1) show that the reform increased leverage in firms operating in sectors with high overall
tangibility by 1.2 percentage points more than in firms in low-tangibility sectors. This base result
is statistically significant, but economically confounded because not all types of fixed assets were
affected by the reform. Accordingly, we break the overall tangibility effect into its different com-
ponents. In particular, because the collateral reform only boosted the pledgeability of movable
assets, there should only be an effect in sectors that are intensive users of movable assets. This
is what we find. According to column (2), the collateral reform increased leverage of firms in
movable-intensive sectors by 2.4 percentage points more than in sectors where firms operate fewer
movable assets. That is, for firms of the same size, age, profitability, and even overall tangibility,
those that operate in sectors that have higher use of movable assets observe a markedly higher
use of debt financing following the collateral reform. In column (3), we include the interactions
between the Post dummy and both the movable-assets and immovable-assets indicators.12 The
results confirm that the effects are only observed for firms operating in sectors intensive in mov-
able assets. The reform increased leverage of firms in movable-intensive sectors by 3.7 percentage
points more than in firms in non-intensive sectors. The effect is highly significant and of sizable
magnitude: it amounts to 35% of the average sample leverage (= 3.7%/10.5%).


                                           Table 4 About Here

       It is important that we examine the dynamic effect of the Romanian reform on firm leverage.
To trace out the year-by-year effects of the reform, we estimate a variant of Eq. (3):13
                                            5
                                            X
              Leverageist = αi + αt +              βτ Dτ ∗ HighM ovableAssetss + γXist + ist ,                 (4)
                                           τ =−4

where the reform dummy variables equal zero, except as follows: D−τ equals one in the τ th year
before the reform, while D+τ equals one in the τ th year after the reform. We exclude the re-
  12
     The number of observations decreases when we control for both indicators. The movable-assets dummy is
equal to one for sectors at the top quartile of the movable ranking and zero for sectors at the bottom quartile. The
estimation in column (2) thus excludes all sectors in the two middle quartiles of the movable assets ranking. When
we also control for the immovable-assets dummy in column (3), we exclude sectors in the middle quartiles of both
sectoral indices. Since the excluded sectors are not the same, there are fewer observations under column (3).
  13
     We thank a referee for suggesting this test to more fully describe the effects of the reform.


                                                         16
         Figure 4: Dynamic Effect of Collateral Reform on Leverage in Romania

The figure plots the dynamic impact of the collateral reform in Romania on leverage. In particular, the figure plots
the coefficient estimates of Eq. (4). We exclude the year of the reform, thus estimating the dynamic effect of the
reform relative to that year. The dashed lines denote 95% confidence intervals, where standard errors have been
clustered at the firm level.



                                          .06    .04
                               Effect on Leverage
                                       .020
                                          -.02




                                                       -4   -3   -2      -1        0       1        2       3   4   5
                                                                      Years Relative to Collateral Reform

                                                                               95% Confidence Intervals




form year, therefore estimating the dynamic effect of the reform on leverage relative to the year
of reform.14 Figure 4 plots the coefficient estimates and the 95% confidence intervals, which are
adjusted for firm-level clustering. The βτ estimates show no effects in the four years before the
reform was passed. After the reform, the effect on leverage materializes rather quickly. The dy-
namic estimates provide evidence that the collateral reform progressively led to higher leverage
ratios for firms operating more movable assets in a sensible fashion.

4.4     Leverage Ratios Across Eastern Europe

After analyzing the reform in Romania, we extend the analysis to the full sample of countries and
estimate the cross-country version of Eq. (3):

                   Yisct = αi + αct + βP ostct ∗ HighM ovableAssetss + γXisct + isct ,                                 (5)

where Yisct denotes the outcome variable of interest for firm i in sector s in country c in year t.
P ostct is a dummy that equals zero before the reform year and one afterwards in each country. The
  14
    The estimation follows the specification in column (3) of Table 4 and therefore controls for the interaction
between the post-reform and immovable-assets dummies.



                                                                                  17
specification includes a full set of firm-fixed effects (αi ) and country-year-fixed effects (αct ). The
main advantage of this specification over the one in Eq. (3) is the inclusion of country-year fixed
effects. The country-year-fixed effects control for all country-level, time-varying shocks. Because
we control for country-year fixed effects, the coefficient β is identified from the within-country vari-
ation in movable asset intensity across sectors. The standard errors are clustered conservatively
at the country level.15
       We report the results for Leverage in Table 5. As before, we first estimate the effect of the
collateral reform across sectors with different intensities in overall asset tangibility. Column (1)
shows that collateral reforms, on average, increased leverage for firms in high-overall-tangibility
sectors by 3.6 percentage points more than in firms in low-tangibility sectors. When we break
the overall tangibility effect into its different components, we again find that the effect is working
entirely through the movable-assets component. According to column (2), the typical collateral
reform increased leverage in firms operating in movable-intensive sectors by 4.1 percentage points
more than in firms in non-intensive sectors. From column (3), we also observe that the immov-
able assets coefficient is not statistically different from zero, while the movable coefficient becomes
slightly larger (the effect is 4.7 percentage points). In all, the results we obtain when analyzing
the entire Eastern European region resemble those of the more focused Romanian data analysis.


                                             Table 5 About Here

4.5      Propensity to Access Credit

The evidence above shows that firms operating more movable assets carry more debt in their bal-
ance sheets after a collateral reform. From the point of view of promoting access to credit, it is
important to know whether firms that previously did not use debt (“zero-leverage firms”) are able
to resort to this type of financing after the reform. To gauge this effect, we re-estimate Eq. (3)
using as dependent variable a dummy that equals one if the firm has no debt in its balance sheet
and zero otherwise (ZeroLeverage). Since the dependent variable is binary, we estimate a linear
probability model.16 Panel A of Table 6 reports the results for Romania and Panel B reports the
  15
     Haselmann et al. (2009) study the effects of bankruptcy and collateral reforms on bank lending and firm
leverage in a similar sample of Eastern European countries. In Table 11 of their paper, the authors report higher
leverage ratios following those reforms exploiting variation in the timing of the reforms across countries. Our
identification strategies differ in that we exploit within-country variation in movable assets intensity across sectors,
which allows new insights on the mechanism through which collateral reforms affect leverage.
  16
     We estimate a linear model instead of a Probit model, because fixed effects cannot typically be added to a Probit
model without inducing bias in the coefficients and standard errors.



                                                          18
results for the full sample of 10 countries.
   The results in Table 6 suggest that a collateral reform reduced the probability of a firm hav-
ing zero leverage in movable-intensive sectors (see column 1). In column (2), we control for the
interaction between the post-reform dummy and the immovable-assets dummy. The coefficient on
the movable dummy remains negative and becomes twice as large in magnitude: the probability
of a firm having zero leverage in movable-intensive sectors decreased by 32.4 percentage points
more than in non-intensive sectors. This is a sizable magnitude, accounting for 57% of the av-
erage fraction of firms with no leverage in the sample (= 32.4%/57.2%). The effect is estimated
less precisely, nonetheless, suggesting that we should examine more closely the sample variance
of this effect. We conjecture that this could be reflecting an heterogenous effect of the reform on
firms. This is a particularly important examination because it allows to gauge the distributional
effects of the reform. These types of distributional effects are often a relevant metric with which
policymakers evaluate reforms.
                                      Table 6 About Here

   To explore this dimension, we divide Romanian firms in movable-intensive sectors into deciles
according to size. Figure 5 reports the distribution of the fraction of zero-leverage firms within
each size bin for the pre- and post-reform periods (Panels A and B). Before the reform, 83% of
the firms in the smaller-size bins had no debt in their balance sheets. This fraction declines as we
move towards larger-size bins. After the reform, the fraction of zero-leverage firms declines across
all size bins, but the effect is concentrated primarily in the smaller-size bins (deciles 1 through
7). Panels C and D replicate the results for the sectors that are not intensive in movable assets.
The panels confirm that the effects of the reform are only present in sectors that intensively use
movable assets. Notably, the contrast of zero-leverage firms across high- and low-movable-assets
sectors disappears with the reform (compare Panels B and D).
   Panel B of Table 6 reports the zero-leverage results for our complete set of Eastern European
countries. In this case, even after controlling for the immovable-assets dummy, we observe a sig-
nificant effect of the reform on firms operating in movable-intensive sectors. Collateral reforms
introduced in Eastern Europe, on average, reduced the probability of a firm having zero leverage
in movable-intensive sectors by 21% more than in non-intensive sectors (column 4).




                                                19
      Figure 5: Distribution of Zero-leverage Firms Before and After the Collateral
                                   Reform in Romania
       Figure 7: Distribution of Zero-leverage Firms Before and After the Reform

 The figure reports the distribution of the fraction of zero-leverage firms in Romania. Firms are divided into deciles
The figure reports the distribution of the fraction of zero-leverage firms. Firms are divided into deciles
 according to size, where size is measured as number of employees. Panels A and B report the distribution for
according to size, where size is measured as number of employees. Panels A and B report the distribution
 sectors intensive in movable assets, over the pre- and post-reform periods, respectively. Panels C and D report the
for sectors intensive in movable assets, over the pre- and post-reform periods, respectively. Panels C and
 distribution for sectors not intensive in movable assets, before and after the reform. Movable-intensive sectors are
D report the distribution for sectors not intensive in movable assets, before and after the reform. Movable-
 those above the top quartile of the movable sectoral index; non movable-intensive sectors are those below the bottom
intensive sectors are those above the top quartile of the movable sectoral index; non movable-intensive
 quartile of the index.
sectors are those below the bottom quartile of the index.


                                                               A. Pre-Reform                                                                          B. Post-Reform




                                                                                                                      .8
                           .8
           Fraction of Zero-leverage Firms




                                                                                                      Fraction of Zero-leverage Firms
                                                                                                                               .6
                                   .6




                                                                                                                    .4
                        .4




                                                                                                        .2
            .2             0




                                                                                                                      0
                                             1



                                                   2



                                                       3



                                                           4



                                                                   5



                                                                         6



                                                                                7



                                                                                    8



                                                                                        9



                                                                                            10




                                                                                                                                        1



                                                                                                                                              2



                                                                                                                                                  3



                                                                                                                                                      4



                                                                                                                                                            5



                                                                                                                                                                  6



                                                                                                                                                                         7



                                                                                                                                                                             8



                                                                                                                                                                                 9



                                                                                                                                                                                     10
                                                                 Size Deciles                                                                             Size Deciles


                                                 A. Movable intensive sectors                                                               B. Movable intensive sectors

                                                               A. Pre-Reform                                                                          B. Post-Reform
                           .8




                                                                                                                      .8
           Fraction of Zero-leverage Firms




                                                                                                      Fraction of Zero-leverage Firms
                                    .6




                                                                                                                               .6
                         .4




                                                                                                                    .4
             .2




                                                                                                        .2
                           0




                                                                                                                      0
                                             1



                                                   2



                                                       3



                                                           4



                                                                   5



                                                                         6



                                                                                7



                                                                                    8



                                                                                        9



                                                                                            10




                                                                                                                                        1



                                                                                                                                              2



                                                                                                                                                  3



                                                                                                                                                      4



                                                                                                                                                            5



                                                                                                                                                                  6



                                                                                                                                                                         7



                                                                                                                                                                             8



                                                                                                                                                                                 9



                                                                                                                                                                                     10




                                                                 Size Deciles                                                                             Size Deciles


                                             C. Non-movable intensive sectors                                                           D. Non-movable intensive sectors




4.6     Cash Savings

Intuition suggests that firms with an enlarged capacity to borrow need to carry less cash in their
balance sheets — carrying cash is expensive if firms have easy access to credit (Acharya et al.,
2007). We study the effect of a collateral reform on corporate liquidity to better characterize
                                              54
our results. Savings capture the “dual” of debt and using this alternative proxy as a dependent
variable helps us guard against common endogeneity concerns in our standard leverage tests.

                                                                                                 20
         We report the results for regressions featuring the ratio of cash to assets as the dependent
variable (Cash) in Table 7. Panel A reports the results for Romania. According to the estimates,
the reform reduced cash holdings of firms operating in movable-intensive sectors by 1.9 percent-
age points more than of firms not making intensive use of those assets (column 1). The effect
becomes larger (2.6 percentage points) after controlling for the immovable-assets dummy (column
2). This is a sizable effect, accounting to 33% of the average cash-to-asset ratio in the sample
(= 2.6%/7.9%). Panel B reports the results for the full sample of Eastern European countries
(columns 3 and 4). The results are in line with what we observe for Romania. In all, our estimates
imply that better contracting terms for movable assets seem to make these assets more liquid and
firms responded by moving away from hoarding cash.

                                                Table 7 About Here


5         Real Economic Activity
5.1         Real Effects of Access to Credit

Having established that collateral reforms increased access to credit, we take our analysis one
step further and look at the real-side implications of these changes. Looking at how financing
decisions impact real corporate outcomes like investment and efficiency sets our study apart from
the literature and highlights the policy relevance of our findings. To conserve space, we focus
our analysis to the full sample of Eastern European countries.17 We estimate the cross-country
specification in Eq. (5) for each real outcome of interest.
         Table 8 reports the results. From this table onwards, we report results returned from the spec-
ification that controls for both the movable-assets and immovable-assets indicators. Column (1) of
Table 8 shows that collateral reforms in Eastern Europe, on average, increased the investment rate
in fixed assets in firms operating in sectors intensive in movable assets by 3.8 percentage points
more than in sectors that do not demand those assets. The magnitude of the effect is sizable,
amounting to more than 60% of the average sample investment rate (= 3.8%/6.3%). The results
in column (2) suggest that after a collateral reform, firms in movable-intensive sectors hired 2.6%
more workers. According to column (3), the productivity of firms in sectors with high movable
assets usage increased by 3.4 percentage points. Column (4) shows that profitability also increased
by 3.4 percentage points. Finally, column (5) shows that sales increased by 2.6 percentage points
    17
         The effects for Romania are similar and omitted for brevity.



                                                            21
more in sectors intensive in movable assets. For all these variables, the effect is uniform (i.e.,
indistinguishable) across sectors with different immovable-assets intensities.

                                             Table 8 About Here

      The fact that firms invested more in fixed assets following collateral reforms is notable and
consistent with a “credit multiplier” effect that has been long emphasized in the literature (e.g.,
Bernanke et al., 2000).18 To wit, we have shown in Tables 4 through 6 that following those re-
forms, firms in sectors intensive in movable assets borrowed more. Results in Table 8 suggest that
this extra borrowing was partly used to finance the acquisition of fixed assets, including machinery
and equipment. This further increased the debt capacity of these firms, because they could then
pledge their new machinery and equipment to borrow more, expanding their ability to acquire
additional fixed assets.
      There could be several reasons leading to the within-firm productivity improvements reported
in Table 8. One possibility is that firms are changing the composition of their assets towards a
more efficient mix as they become less credit constrained. The previous results on cash holdings
are consistent with this explanation. Firms responded to the reform by shifting away from liquid,
idle assets towards more illiquid, productive assets.

5.2      Industrial Composition Effects

By allowing movable assets to be pledgeable, a collateral reform could trigger a factor reallocation
process, changing the industrial composition towards sectors intensive in movable assets. The re-
sults in Table 8 suggest this effect works at the firm level. The results from the table also indicate
that firms become more efficient and profitable, which also points to improvements in the mix of
different types of assets used by individual firms. It is important, however, to assess the aggregate
implications of such findings.
      To do this, we calculate the share of aggregate fixed assets allocated to sectors intensive in
movable assets in the three countries that reformed during our sample period: Latvia, Poland, and
Romania. In Figure 6, we plot the evolution of these shares during 1996–2005 in each of the three
countries. According to Panel A, before the 1999 reform in Latvia, roughly 40% of total fixed as-
sets in the economy were used in movable-intensive sectors. After the reform, this share increased,
reaching nearly 48% by 2005. Panels B and C show more pronounced increases for Poland and Ro-
mania, respectively. In those countries, the share of fixed capital attributable to movable-intensive
 18
      Campello and Hackbarth (2012) provide evidence of a firm-level credit multiplier effect in the United States.


                                                          22
sectors were below the 40% mark before the collateral reforms, jumping to well over 50% just a few
years after. We also compute the share of aggregate employment in movable-intensive sectors for
Latvia, Poland, and Romania around their respective collateral reforms. For these aggregates, too,
we see pronounced increases following the reform dates. In Romania, for example, the employment
share of the reform-affected sectors increased from 30% in 1996 to almost 40% in 2005.
         In all, the collateral reforms led to a fast and pronounced sectoral change in those countries’
industrial structure and asset utilization mix, with implications for the profile of the industrial
workforce.


6         Validity and Robustness Checks

While attractive for identification purposes, difference-in-differences test strategies call for checks
on several dimensions. We conduct multiple tests designed to check the validity and robustness of
our results. Our test strategy is designed with a focus on the Romanian institutional setting and
we report checks that use Romanian data.

6.1         Confounding Effects

One concern with our difference-in-differences strategy is that there could have been alternative,
concurrent sectoral shocks causing users of movable assets to demand more credit after 2000. We
tackle this concern by conducting a placebo test and controlling for business cycle sensitivity.

6.1.1         Placebo Test

To rule out the alternative story of sectoral shocks specific to movable-intensive sectors, we con-
duct a placebo test looking at countries likely exposed to similar sectoral shocks. Our premise
is that sectoral shocks that could confound our results would affect not only Romania, but also
its neighbors and commercial partners. Our experiment falsely assumes that the three neighbors
of Romania for which we have data (Bulgaria, Hungary, and Ukraine) and its main commercial
partner (Italy) passed collateral reforms the same year than Romania.19
         We start by verifying that the change in leverage in movable-intensive sectors in Romania prior
to 2000 is not statistically different from the change in leverage in movable sectors in its three
neighbors and its main commercial partner.20 Next, we re-estimate Eq. (3) separately for each
of the four countries. Table 9 reports the results. Each estimation shows that there is no effect
    19
         Italy amounts to 20% of Romania’s total exports and 23% of its total imports during our sample period.
    20
         The results are not reported to save space, but are readily are available from the authors.


                                                           23
    Figure 8:
    Figure  6: Share
               Share of
                      of Fixed
                         Fixed Assets
                               Assets and
                                      and Employment in
                                                      in Movable-intensive
                                                         Movable-intensive Sectors
                                                                           Sectors
     Figure 7:
     Figure  7: Share
                Share of
                      of Fixed
                         Fixed Assets and Employment
                               Assets and Employment in
                                          Employment in Movable-intensive
                                                        Movable-intensive Sectors
                                                                          Sectors

  The figure plots the evolution of the share of aggregate fixed assets and the share of aggregate employment allocated
TheThefigure
        figureplots
               plotsthe
                      theevolution
                           evolution of
                                     of the
                                        the share
                                            share of of aggregate
                                                     of aggregatefixed
                                                                    fixedassets
                                                                           assetsallocated
                                                                                   and share   of employment
                                                                                           to sectors
                                                                                               sectors intensiveallocated
                                                                                                                 in movableto assets
                                                                                                                     movable   sectors
 toThe  figure
    sectors    plots
             intensivethe
                        inevolution
                            movable of  the
                                     assets share                  fixed
                                                        aggregate in
                                            during 1996–2005              assets
                                                                       Latvia    allocated
                                                                               (Panel      to
                                                                                       A), Poland      intensive
                                                                                                    (Panel       in
                                                                                                            B), and  movable
                                                                                                                     Romania assets
                                                                                                                              assets
                                                                                                                                (Panel
intensive   in movablein assets
   during 1996–2005
           1996–2005              during
                            Romania        1996–2005
                                      (Panel   A), Latvia
                                                    Latviain (Panel
                                                             Latvia B),
                                                                      (Panel
                                                                          and A),   Poland
                                                                               Poland        (Panel
                                                                                        (Panel       B), and Romaniasectors
                                                                                                C). Movable-intensive
                                                                                                    Movable-intensive     (PanelareC).
 C). Movable-intensive sectors are defined as those above the top quartile of the movable assets sectoral index.are
   during               in  Romania   (Panel  A),            (Panel  B),  and  Poland   (Panel  C).                     sectors
                                                                                                                        sectors  are
                                                                                                                                   The
Movable-intensive
   defined  as         sectors  are defined  as   those    above  the  top  quartile  of the  movable   assets sectoral  index.   The
 vertical   as those
   definedgray those   above the
                 lines above
                       depict the
                                   top quartile
                               the top  quartile
                                   collateral
                                                  of the
                                                  of
                                               reform
                                                      the movable
                                                            movable assets
                                                                     assets sectoral
                                                         dates of each
                                                                             sectoral index.
                                                                                      index. The
                                                                         country (Latvia:
                                                                                               The vertical
                                                                                                    vertical gray
                                                                                            1999, Poland:
                                                                                                             gray lines depict
                                                                                                            1998, lines
                                                                                                                         depict
                                                                                                                    Romania:
                                                                                                                                 the
                                                                                                                                 the
                                                                                                                         depict2000).
                                                                                                                                 the
vertical  grayreform
   collateral   lines depict
                       dates  the collateral
                             (Romania:        reform
                                          2000,  Latvia:dates  of each
                                                            1999,       country
                                                                  Poland:        (Latvia: 1999, Poland: 1998, Romania: 2000).
                                                                            1998).
   collateral reform dates (Romania: 2000, Latvia: 1999, Poland: 1998).




                                                                                                                                                                     .55
                                                            .55




                                                                                                                                                                    .55
                                                                                                                                                        sectors
                                                                                                                                                                   .55
                                                 sectors




                                                                                                                                                       sectors
                                                sectors




                                                                                                                                                movablesectors
                                         movablesectors
                                                              .45
                                                            .45




                                                                                                                                               movable
                                        movable




                                                                                                                                           ininmovable
                                    ininmovable




                                                                                                                                                                     .45
                                                                                                                                employmentin
                             assetsin
                                                            .45




                                                                                                                                                                    .45
                                                                                                                                                                   .45
                                                                                                                               employment
                            assets




                                                                                                                          Shareemployment
                       fixedassets
                      fixed
                Sharefixed
               Share




                                                                                                                         Share
               Share




                                                                                                                         Share
                                                              .35




                                                                                                                                                                     .35
                                                             .35




                                                                                                                                                                    .35
                                                            .35




                                                                                                                                                                   .35
                                                                1996 1997
                                                                1996 1997 1998
                                                                     1997 1998 1999
                                                                          1998 1999 2000
                                                                               1999 2000 2001
                                                                                    2000 2001 2002 2003
                                                                                         2001 2002
                                                                                              2002 2003 2004 2005
                                                                                                             2005                                                      1996 1997
                                                                                                                                                                            1997 1998 1999
                                                                                                                                                                                      1999 2000 2001
                                                                                                                                                                                                2001 2002 2003
                                                                                                                                                                                                          2003 2004 2005
                                                                                                                                                                                                                    2005
                                                                1996                               2003 2004
                                                                                                        2004 2005                                                      1996
                                                                                                                                                                       1996 1997 1998
                                                                                                                                                                                 1998 1999 2000
                                                                                                                                                                                           2000 2001 2002
                                                                                                                                                                                                     2002 2003 2004
                                                                                                                                                                                                               2004 2005


                                                                       A.
                                                                       A. Latvia:
                                                                          Latvia: Fixed Assets
                                                                                  Fixed Assets               A. Latvia                                                            B. Latvia:
                                                                                                                                                                                  B. Latvia: Labor
                                                                                                                                                                                             Labor
                                                                                                                                                                     .45
                                                            .55




                                                                                                                                                                    .55
                                                                                                                                                        sectors
                                                                                                                                                                   .45
                                                 sectors




                                                                                                                                                       sectors
                                                sectors




                                                                                                                                                movablesectors
                                         movablesectors




                                                                                                                                               movable
                                        movable




                                                                                                                                           ininmovable
                                    ininmovable
                                                              .45
                                                            .45




                                                                                                                                employmentin
                                                                                                                                                                     .4
                             assetsin
                                                            .45




                                                                                                                                                                   .45
                                                                                                                                                                   .4
                                                                                                                               employment
                            assets




                                                                                                                          Shareemployment
                       fixedassets
                      fixed
                Sharefixed
               Share




                                                                                                                         Share
               Share




                                                                                                                         Share
                                                              .35




                                                                                                                                                                     .35
                                                             .35




                                                                                                                                                                    .35
                                                            .35




                                                                                                                                                                   .35




                                                                1996 1997
                                                                1996 1997 1998
                                                                     1997 1998 1999
                                                                          1998 1999 2000
                                                                               1999 2000 2001
                                                                                    2000 2001 2002 2003
                                                                                         2001 2002
                                                                                              2002 2003 2004 2005
                                                                                                             2005                                                      1996 1997
                                                                                                                                                                            1997 1998 1999
                                                                                                                                                                                      1999 2000 2001
                                                                                                                                                                                                2001 2002 2003
                                                                                                                                                                                                          2003 2004 2005
                                                                                                                                                                                                                    2005
                                                                1996                               2003 2004
                                                                                                        2004 2005                                                      1996
                                                                                                                                                                       1996 1997 1998
                                                                                                                                                                                 1998 1999 2000
                                                                                                                                                                                           2000 2001 2002
                                                                                                                                                                                                     2002 2003 2004
                                                                                                                                                                                                               2004 2005

                                                                       C. Poland:
                                                                       C. Poland: Fixed
                                                                                  Fixed Assets
                                                                                        Assets                                                                                    D.
                                                                                                                                                                                  D. Poland:
                                                                                                                                                                                     Poland: Labor
                                                                                                                                                                                             Labor
                                                                                                            B. Poland
                                                              .55




                                                                                                                                                                     .45
                                                             .55




                                                                                                                                                         sectors
                                                            .55




                                                                                                                                                                   .45
                                                  sectors




                                                                                                                                                        sectors
                                                 sectors




                                                                                                                                                movablesectors
                                         movablesectors




                                                                                                                                               movable
                                        movable




                                                                                                                                             inmovable
                                      inmovable




                                                                                                                                                                   .35
                                                                                                                                employmentinin
                             assetsinin
                                                              .45




                                                                                                                                                                   .4.4
                                                             .45
                                                            .45




                                                                                                                                employment
                             assets




                                                                                                                          Shareemployment
                       fixedassets
                      fixed
                Sharefixed
                Share




                                                                                                                          Share
               Share




                                                                                                                         Share
                                                              .35




                                                                                                                                                                     .35
                                                             .35




                                                                                                                                                                    .25
                                                            .35




                                                                                                                                                                   .35




                                                                1996 1997
                                                                1996 1997 1998
                                                                     1997 1998 1999
                                                                          1998 1999 2000
                                                                               1999 2000 2001
                                                                                    2000 2001 2002 2003
                                                                                         2001 2002
                                                                                              2002 2003 2004 2005
                                                                                                             2005                                                      1996 1997
                                                                                                                                                                            1997 1998 1999
                                                                                                                                                                                      1999 2000 2001
                                                                                                                                                                                                2001 2002 2003
                                                                                                                                                                                                          2003 2004 2005
                                                                                                                                                                                                                    2005
                                                                1996                               2003 2004
                                                                                                        2004 2005                                                      1996
                                                                                                                                                                       1996 1997 1998
                                                                                                                                                                                 1998 1999 2000
                                                                                                                                                                                           2000 2001 2002
                                                                                                                                                                                                     2002 2003 2004
                                                                                                                                                                                                               2004 2005

                                                                      E. Romania:
                                                                      E. Romania: Fixed
                                                                                  Fixed Assets
                                                                                        Assets             C. Romania                                                            F.
                                                                                                                                                                                 F. Romania:
                                                                                                                                                                                    Romania: Labor
                                                                                                                                                                                             Labor




                                                                                                                    43
                                                                                                                    43
                                                                                                                    24
                                                                                                                    44
on the credit capacity of firms operating in high-movable-assets sectors. Since we only observe a
2000-specific effect in Romania, the results from Table 9 suggest that our results are not driven
by sectoral shocks affecting firms in movable-intensive sectors at this time.

                                          Table 9 About Here

6.1.2      Sensitivity to the Business Cycle

A related threat to identification is that different sectors react differently to the business cycle.
Romania experienced an economic recovery in 1998, two years before the collateral reform. Even
though there is time lag between the recovery and the reform, it is possible that sectors intensive
in movable assets are also more sensitive to business cycle movements. This would mean that
even in the absence of the reform, leverage could increase in movable-intensive sectors as a result
of higher credit demand. To rule out this possibility, we introduce an index of sectoral business
cycle sensitivity in our analysis. Using data from the United Nations Industrial Development Or-
ganization (UNIDO) over the 1990–2010 period, we define the sensitivity index as the coefficient
of correlation between sectoral output and countrywide output.21
       The correlation between the sectoral movable assets index and the business cycle sensitivity
index is only 0.17; which makes it unlikely that our results are driven by a differential response to
the business cycle. To rule out this alternative formally, nonetheless, we create a dummy variable
denoted HighSensitivity, which is equal to one for sectors in the top quartile of the cycle sensitiv-
ity index and zero for sectors in the bottom quartile. We re-estimate Eq. (3) adding an interaction
term between the post-reform dummy and the business cycle sensitivity dummy. The results are
reported in Table 10. The effect of the reform on Leverage, ZeroLeverage, and Cash in sectors
with different movable assets-intensity remains similar in magnitude to our benchmark estimates.
These results suggest that our main estimates are not confounded by economic movements that
may affect sectors differentially.

                                         Table 10 About Here

6.2      Dosage Effects

Throughout the analysis, we have defined the treated group as the firms in sectors in the top
quartile of the movable assets index and the control group as the firms in the bottom quartile.
  21
    UNIDO’s database is used in several cross-country, cross-sector studies like ours (e.g., Rajan and Zingales,
1998). UNIDO’s Industrial Statistics Database (INDSTAT) provides industrial indicators for 127 countries from
1990 to 2010, covering the universe of firms operating in each sector in each country.


                                                      25
In this section, we consider “dosage effects” of the collateral reform, comparing outcomes across
different quartiles of the movable assets sectoral distribution. If our test strategy is sound, we
would expect differences in outcomes to be larger (smaller) the farther (closer) is the distance
between treated and control groups in the movable assets distribution. In this exercise, we first
classify as treated those sectors in the third quartile and as control those sectors in the bottom
quartile of the movable assets index distribution. We then classify as treated the sectors in the
third quartile and as control the sectors below the second quartile. Finally, in order to fully exploit
the information in the movable assets distribution, we use the original (continuous) movable assets
index instead of the binary version.
   Table 11 reports the results. For ease of comparison, column (1) re-displays the results for our
benchmark treated–control classification (top versus bottom quartiles). Column (2) reports the
results for the first alternative classification, where we compare firms in the third and first quartiles
of the movable assets index. As expected, the effect is smaller in magnitude and estimated less
precisely than in the benchmark case. Column (3) reports the results for the second alternative
classification. In this case, the effect is not statistically different from zero. In sum, if we compare
sectors closer within the movable assets distribution, the observed effects become gradually smaller
in a sensible fashion. In the last column of the table, we use the original index. According to
the results, the effect of the reform is increasing in the movable intensity of the sector (the point
estimate is 0.042). This means that our results about the impact of the reform are robust to how
we treat the movable assets index for testing.

                                       Table 11 About Here

6.3   Matching Estimations

Another potential concern with the difference-in-differences estimation is that firms in movable-
intensive and non-intensive sectors may be too different regarding the covariates we use as controls
in our regressions. Our method may render inflated estimates if covariates do a poor job of ensur-
ing well-suited comparisons between treated and control units. Given that the treated and control
units belong to different sectors, we examine if this concern impacts our results.
   We start by comparing the covariates we use as controls in our regressions across Romanian
firms operating in movable-intensive sectors (treatment group) and firms in non-intensive sectors
(control group). The comparison is reported in Panel A.1 of Table 12, where median difference
tests suggest that firms in the treated and control groups are particularly different in dimensions


                                                   26
such as size and age.


                                     Table 12 About Here

    We use the Abadie and Imbens (2006) matching estimator to tackle concerns about poor
covariate overlap. The Abadie-Imbens estimator minimizes the Mahalanobis distance between the
vectors of observed covariates across treated and control units. Our matching procedure takes each
firm operating in a movable-intensive sector and finds the firm in a non-intensive sector that is
closest in terms of each one of the four covariates. The tests reported in Panel A.2 of Table 12 show
the success of our matching: the median size, age, profitability, and overall tangibility is virtually
identical across firms in the high- and low-movable-assets sectors after the matching is performed.
    We then proceed to perform a differences-in-differences test, controlling for immovable inten-
sity, computing the Abadie-Imbens’ average treatment effect on the treated estimate (ATT). We
report the results for our main outcome variables (Leverage, ZeroLeverage, and Cash) in Panel B
of Table 12. For ease of reference, we also report the benchmark regression results for Romania as-
sociated with these same outcomes, collected from previous tables. The estimates are remarkably
similar across the two methodologies and are estimated more precisely. In fact, after performing
the matching procedure, the effect of the collateral reform on ZeroLeverage becomes statistically
significant at the 10% level.


7    Concluding Remarks

Until the mid 1990s, the legal framework for secured transactions in Eastern Europe was very
weak. For practical purposes, creditors accepted only immovable assets (e.g., land and buildings)
as collateral; they did not accept movable assets (e.g., machinery and equipment). Investment in
machinery and equipment could be financed only through leasing and unsecured lending with con-
tractual provisions. In 2000, Romania passed a law that drastically improved the legal treatment
of movable assets as collateral (Law 99), giving firms a new alternative for financing machinery
and equipment. In this paper, we study the impact of this reform on the availability of credit and
real economic activity in Romania. We then generalize our analysis to a broader group of Eastern
European countries, some of which passed similar reforms during our sample period.
    We find that after the passage of Law 99, Romanian firms operating in sectors with more
intensive use of movable assets borrowed significantly more and hoarded less cash. We observe
the same pattern of findings across firms in the broader Eastern European sample, which adds

                                                 27
external validity to our results. We take our analysis one step further and study the real-side
implications of the reform-induced increase in access to credit. According to our results, after re-
forms enlarging collateral menus are passed, firms in movable-intensive sectors invest more in fixed
assets, hire more workers, and become more efficient and profitable. These reforms have profound
consequences for the industrial structure of the economies affected, leading to an increase in the
share of aggregate fixed assets and employment allocated to sectors intensive in movable assets.
   By emphasizing a detailed, micro-level analysis of the impact of collateral laws that affect differ-
ent types of assets differentially, we are able to describe the dynamics of the relationship between
the development of financial institutions — in particular, laws governing financial contracting
terms — and economic activity. In this way, our results are markedly important for policymakers
in emerging market countries, who do not have control over collateral values or their supply in
secondary markets, yet can alter collateral menus as a way to enhance financial contractibility.




                                                 28
References
 Abadie, A. and G. Imbens, 2006, “Large Sample Properties of Matching Estimators for Average
    Treatment Effects,” Econometrica 74, 235-67.

 Acharya, V., H. Almeida, and M. Campello, 2007, “Is Cash Negative Debt? A Hedging Perspec-
    tive on Corporate Financial Policies,” Journal of Financial Intermediation 16, 515-554.

Aghion, P. and P. Bolton, 1992, “An Incomplete Contracts Approach to Financial Contracting,”
    Review of Economic Studies 59, 473-94.

 Alvarez de la Campa, A., 2011, “Increasing Access to Credit through Reforming Secured Trans-
    actions in the MENA Region,” World Bank Policy Research Working Paper No. 5613.

 Assunção, J., E. Benmelech, and F. Silva, 2013, “Repossession and the Democratization of
    Credit,” Review of Financial Studies, 27, 2661-89.

 Benmelech, E., and N. Bergman, 2011, “Bankruptcy and the Collateral Channel,” Journal of
    Finance 66, 337-78.

 Benmelech, E., 2009, “Asset Salability and Debt Maturity: Evidence from 19th Century Ameri-
    can Railroads,” Review of Financial Studies 22, 1545-583.

 Bernanke, B., M. Gertler, and S. Gilchrist, 2000, The Financial Accelerator in a Quantitative
    Business Cycle Framework. In: Taylor, J., Woodford, M. (Eds.), Handbook of Macroeco-
    nomics, Vol. 1C. Elsevier, North-Holland, Amsterdam, 1341-93.

 Bertrand, M., E. Duflo, and S. Mullainathan, 2004, “How Much Should we Trust Differences-
    in-differences Estimates?, ” Quarterly Journal of Economics 119, 249-75.

 Campello, M. and E. Giambona, 2013, “Real Assets and Capital Structure,” Journal of Financial
    and Quantitative Analysis 48, 1333-70.

 Campello, M. and D. Hackbarth, 2012, “The Firm-Level Credit Multiplier,” Journal of Financial
    Intermediation 21, 446-72.

 Chaney, T., D. Sraer, and D. Thesmar, 2012, “The Collateral Channel: How did Real Estate
    Shocks Affect Corporate Investment,” American Economic Review 102, 2381-409.

 Chaves, R., N. de la Peña, and H. Fleisig, 2004, “Secured Transactions Reform: Early Evidence
    from Romania, ” CEAL Issues Brief. Center for the Economic Analysis of Law, Wash., DC.

 De la Peña, N. and H. Fleisig, 2004, “Romania: Law and Security Interests in Personal Property
     and Commentaries,” Review of Central and East European Law 29, 133-217.

 Eisfeldt, A. and A. Rampini, 2009, “Leasing, Ability to Repossess, and Debt Capacity,” Review
     of Financial Studies 22, 1621-57.

 Fleisig, H., M. Safavian, and N. de la Peña, 2006, Reforming Collateral Laws to Expand Access
     to Finance. Washington, DC: World Bank.

                                              29
Gan, J., 2007, “Collateral, Debt Capacity, and Corporate Investment: Evidence from a Natural
   Experiment,” Journal of Financial Economics 85, 709-34.

Hart, O. and J. Moore, 1994, “A Theory of Debt Based on the Inalienability of Human Capital,”
   Quarterly Journal of Economics 109, 841-79.

Haselmann, R., K. Pistor, and V. Vig, 2009, “How Law Affects Lending,” Review of Financial
   Studies 23, 549-80.

La Porta, R., F. Lopez-de-Silanes, A. Shleifer, and R. Vishny, 1997, “Legal Determinants of
   External Finance,” Journal of Finance 52, 1131-50.

La Porta, R., F. Lopez-de-Silanes, A. Shleifer, and R. Vishny, 1998,“Law and Finance,” Journal
   of Political Economy 106, 1113-55.

Larrain, M. and S. Stumpner, 2015, “Capital Account Liberalization and Aggregate Productivity:
    The Role of Firm Capital Allocation,” Working Paper, Columbia Business School.

Lemmon, M., M. Roberts, and J. Zender, 2008, “Back to the Beginning: Persistence and the
   Cross-Section of Corporate Capital Structure,” Journal of Finance 63, 1575-608.

Levine, R. 1999, “Law, Finance, and Economic Growth,” Journal of Financial Intermediation
   8, 8-35.

Levine, R., 1998, “The Legal Environment, Banks, and Long-run Economic Growth,” Journal
   of Money, Credit and Banking 30, 596-613.

Lilienfeld-Toal, U., D. Mookherjee, and S. Visaria, 2012, “The Distributive Impact of Reforms
    in Credit Enforcement: Evidence from Indian Debt Recovery Tribunals,” Econometrica 80,
    497-558.

Love, I., M. Peria, and S. Sandeep, 2013, “Collateral Registries for Movable Assets: Does their
   Introduction Spur Firms’ Access to Bank Finance ?” World Bank Working Paper 6477.

Rajan, R., and L. Zingales, 1995, “What Do We Know About Capital Structure: Some Evidence
   From International Data,” Journal of Finance 50, 1421-60.

Rajan, R., and L. Zingales, 1998, “Financial Dependence and Growth,” American Economic
   Review 88, 559-86.

Vig, V., 2013, “Access to Collateral and Corporate Debt Structure: Evidence from a Natural
   Experiment,” Journal of Finance 68, 881-928.




                                             30
                              Table 1: Description of Collateral Reforms in Eastern European Countries

     The table provides a brief description of the collateral laws passed between 1996–2005 in 10 Eastern European Countries. For the six reforming countries
     (Bulgaria, Estonia, Hungary, Latvia, Lithuania, Poland, Romania) we report the exact name and date of the collateral law, together with a short
     explanation of the content of the law change. For the three non-reforming countries, we report the existing legal framework for secured transactions
     throughout the sample period.


        Country           Collateral law


        Bulgaria          Law on Registered Pledges: 22 September 1996 (effective from 1 April 1997)
                          Allowed non-possesory interests over movables and created register for movables (Central Pledge Registry)

        Czech Republic    Unreformed
                          Existing framework governed by sections 152-174 of the Civil Code

        Estonia           Law on Commercial Pledge: 5 June 1996
                          Allowed non-possesory interests over movables and created registry for movables (Commercial Pledge Register)




31
        Hungary           Amendment to the Civil Code: 9 April 1996
                          Allowed non-possesory interests over movables and created registry for movables (Charges Register)

        Latvia            Law on Commercial Pledge: 21 October 1998 (effective from 1 March 1999)
                          Allowed non-possesory interests over movables and created registry for movables (Commercial Pledge Register)

        Lithuania         Law on Pledge over Movable Assets: 10 June 1997
                          Allowed non-possesory interests over movables and created registry for movables (Hypothecary Register)

        Poland            Law on Registered Pledge: 6 December 1996 (effective from 1 January 1998)
                          Allowed non-possesory interests over movables and created registry for movables (Pledge Registry)

        Romania           Law 99 Title VI, “Legal Treatment of Security Interests in Personal Property”: 27 May 1999 (effective from 1 December 2000)
                          Allowed non-possesory interests over movables, created registry for movables, and allowed out-of-court enforcement

        Russia            Unreformed
                          Existing framework governed by articles 334-358 of Civil Code and by Federal Law On Pledge of 1992

        Ukraine           Unreformed
                          Existing framework governed by Civil Code and by Law on Pledge of 1992
                         Table 2: Summary Statistics of Main Variables

The table reports the summary statistics of Leverage, ZeroLeverage, and Cash, for each of the 10 countries in the
sample, for the period 1996–2005. Leverage is defined as the ratio of total debt to total assets, ZeroLeverage is a
dummy equal to one if a firm-year has zero leverage and zero otherwise, and Cash is the ratio of cash holdings to
total assets.



                                 Leverage                    ZeroLeverage                    Cash
                         Obs     Mean       Std Dev    Obs     Mean     Std Dev      Obs     Mean    Std Dev

      Bulgaria          28710     0.097      0.201     29819    0.541       0.498   27876    0.143    0.195
      Czech Republic    24048     0.127      0.183     24312    0.277       0.448   23845    0.101    0.128
      Estonia            17079    0.095      0.166    17732     0.504       0.500   17598    0.159    0.195
      Hungary             4720    0.098      0.145     5590     0.236       0.425    3070    0.095    0.124
      Latvia              3436    0.189      0.213     3537     0.127       0.333    3382    0.055    0.080
      Lithuania           4242    0.115      0.156     4524     0.284       0.451    4231    0.057    0.084
      Poland             22145    0.100      0.153    26172     0.254       0.435   22752    0.066    0.096
      Romania           209415    0.105      0.229    238558    0.572       0.495   225707   0.079    0.140
      Russia            104576    0.044      0.148    106328    0.729       0.444   97503    0.085    0.150
      Ukraine            19292    0.068      0.155    19295     0.413       0.492   18660    0.026    0.061




                                                        32
         Table 3: Pre-reform Trends in Treated and Control Groups in Romania

The table reports the average change in Leverage (panel A), ZeroLeverage (panel B), and Cash (panel C) for
Romanian firms in the treated and control groups going back different years prior to the reform. The treated group
is conformed by firms in sectors above the top quartile of the movable assets index; the control group by firms in
sectors below the bottom quartile. The first row in each panel reports statistics for the change going back one
year prior to the reform. Subsequent rows go back further in time at larger increments. The table also reports the
differences in means and the p-value associated with a test statistic for the differences. Leverage is the ratio of total
debt to total assets, ZeroLeverage is a dummy equal to one if a firm has zero leverage and zero otherwise, and Cash
is the ratio of cash holdings to total assets.



                        Years prior to reform      Treated        Control   Difference   p-value

                                                              A. Change in Leverage
                                  One               0.006          0.006      0.000       0.945
                                 Two                0.018          0.017     0.001        0.856
                                 Three              0.026          0.029     -0.002       0.771
                                 Four               0.030          0.025     -0.004       0.696

                                                            B. Change in ZeroLeverage
                                  One               -0.001        -0.002      0.000       0.356
                                 Two                -0.002        -0.004      0.001       0.207
                                 Three              -0.004        -0.005      0.004       0.215
                                 Four               -0.004        -0.009      0.005       0.228

                                                                  C. Change in Cash
                                  One               -0.003        -0.006      0.002       0.697
                                 Two                -0.009        -0.013      0.004       0.617
                                 Three              -0.020        -0.026      0.005       0.523
                                 Four               -0.009        -0.016      0.007       0.607




                                                             33
          Table 4: The Effect of Collateral Reform in Romania: Leverage Ratio

The table presents the results from the following regression for Romania:

                          Leverageist = αi + αt + βP ostt ∗ HighAssetT ypes + γXist + ist ,

where Leverage is the ratio of total debt to total assets for firm i in sector s in year t. Post is a dummy equal to
zero before the reform date and one afterwards. HighAssetT ypes is a dummy equal to one for all sectors above the
top quartile of the corresponding sectoral index and zero for sectors below the bottom quartile. X is a vector of
firm controls. The specification includes a full set of firm-fixed effects (αi ) and year-fixed effects (αt ). The standard
errors are clustered at the firm level.



                                                                 (1)        (2)             (3)
                                                                          Romania

                       Post*High OverallTangibility          0.012**
                                                             (0.006)
                       Post*High MovableAssets                            0.024***      0.037***
                                                                           (0.006)        (0.013)
                       Post*High ImmovableAssets                                           -0.019
                                                                                          (0.013)
                       Size                                 0.017***      0.018***       0.019***
                                                             (0.002)       (0.002)        (0.002)
                       Age                                  0.009***      0.008***       0.009***
                                                             (0.001)       (0.001)        (0.001)
                       Profitability                        -0.061***     -0.061***     -0.062***
                                                             (0.004)       (0.004)        (0.004)
                       OverallTangibility                   0.022***      0.019***       0.019***
                                                             (0.006)       (0.006)        (0.006)

                       Firm-fixed effects                        Yes         Yes           Yes
                       Year-fixed effects                        Yes         Yes           Yes

                       Observations                          111,959       111,880        90,492
                       R-squared                              0.584         0.584          0.580




                                                            34
    Table 5: The Effects of Collateral Reforms in Eastern Europe: Leverage Ratio

The table presents the results from the following regression for the 10 Eastern European countries:

                        Leverageist = αi + αct + βP ostct ∗ HighAssetT ypes + γXist + ist ,

where Leverage is the ratio of total debt to total assets for firm i in sector s in year t. Post is a dummy equal to
zero before the reform date and one afterwards for each country. HighAssetT ypes is a dummy equal to one for all
sectors above the top quartile of the corresponding sectoral index and zero for sectors below the bottom quartile.
X is a vector of firm controls. The specification includes a full set of firm-fixed effects (αi ) and country-year-fixed
effects (αct ). The standard errors are clustered at the country level.



                                                               (1)          (2)          (3)
                                                                      Eastern Europe

                       Post*High OverallTangibility         0.036**
                                                            (0.015)
                       Post*High MovableAssets                            0.041**     0.047***
                                                                          (0.015)       (0.008)
                       Post*High ImmovableAssets                                         -0.007
                                                                                        (0.009)
                       Size                               0.012***        0.013***     0.014***
                                                           (0.003)         (0.003)      (0.004)
                       Age                                  0.008           0.008         0.010
                                                           (0.006)         (0.006)      (0.006)
                       Profitability                      -0.059***       -0.060***   -0.061***
                                                           (0.002)         (0.002)      (0.002)
                       OverallTangibility                 0.026***        0.024***     0.024***
                                                           (0.006)         (0.007)      (0.007)

                       Firm-fixed effects                      Yes          Yes          Yes
                       Country-year-fixed effects              Yes          Yes          Yes

                       Observations                         175,522       174,774      140,695
                       R-squared                             0.623         0.623        0.619




                                                          35
            Table 6: The Effects of Collateral Reforms: Propensity to Use Debt

The table presents the results from the following linear probability regression:

                     ZeroLeverageist = αi + αt + βP ostt ∗ HighM ovableAssetss + γXist + ist ,

where ZeroLeverage is a dummy equal to one if firm i in sector s in year t has zero leverage and zero otherwise. Post
is a dummy equal to zero before the reform date and one afterwards. HighM ovableAssetss is a dummy equal to one
for all sectors above the top quartile of the movable assets index and zero for sectors below the bottom quartile. X
is a vector of firm controls. The specification includes a full set of firm-fixed effects (αi ) and year-fixed effects (αt ).
Panel A reports the results for Romania and Panel B reports the results for the sample of 10 Eastern European
countries. Panel B replaces year-fixed effects with country-year-fixed effects (αct ). Columns (2) and (4) control for
the interaction between P ost and HighImmovableAssets. The standard errors in Panel A are clustered at the firm
level and in Panel B at the country level.



                                                         (1)       (2)              (3)         (4)
                                                          A. Romania               B. Eastern Europe

                 Post*High MovableAssets             -0.159***        -0.324      -0.180***      -0.208**
                                                      (0.056)        (0.337)       (0.018)        (0.083)
                 Post*High ImmovableAssets                            0.184                        0.039
                                                                     (0.338)                      (0.085)
                 Size                                -0.053***      -0.052***     -0.150***     -0.150***
                                                       (0.002)       (0.002)        (0.006)       (0.031)
                 Age                                 -0.281***      -0.297***        -0.018        -0.022
                                                       (0.012)       (0.018)        (0.021)       (0.079)
                 Profitability                        0.058***      0.058***       0.153***      0.152***
                                                       (0.005)       (0.006)        (0.012)       (0.009)
                 OverallTangibility                  -0.111***      -0.111***     -0.259***     -0.251***
                                                       (0.010)       (0.012)        (0.024)       (0.046)

                 Firm-fixed effects                     Yes            Yes           Yes           Yes
                 Year-fixed effects                     Yes            Yes           No            No
                 Country-year-fixed effects             No             No            Yes           Yes
                 Observations                         123,946        100,331       188,963       152,259
                 R-squared                             0.634          0.631         0.663         0.661




                                                             36
                Table 7: The Effects of Collateral Reforms on Cash Holdings

The table presents the results from the following regression:

                         Cashist = αi + αt + βP ostt ∗ HighM ovableAssetss + γXist + ist ,

where Cash is the ratio of cash holdings to total assets for firm i in sector s in year t. Post is a dummy equal to
zero before the reform date and one afterwards. HighM ovableAssetss is a dummy equal to one for all sectors above
the top quartile of the movable assets index and zero for sectors below the bottom quartile. X is a vector of firm
controls. The specification includes a full set of firm-fixed effects (αi ) and year-fixed effects (αt ). Panel A reports
the results for Romania and Panel B reports the results for the sample of 10 Eastern European countries. Panel
B replaces year-fixed effects with country-year-fixed effects (αct ). Columns (2) and (4) control for the interaction
between P ost and HighImmovableAssets. The standard errors in Panel A are clustered at the firm level and in
Panel B at the country level.



                                                       (1)       (2)              (3)         (4)
                                                        A. Romania               B. Eastern Europe

                Post*High MovableAssets             -0.019***    -0.026***     -0.017***     -0.023***
                                                     (0.004)      (0.010)       (0.006)        (0.009)
                Post*High ImmovableAssets                          0.010                        0.014
                                                                  (0.009)                      (0.009)
                Size                                -0.015***    -0.015***     -0.017***     -0.017***
                                                      (0.001)     (0.001)        (0.001)       (0.001)
                Age                                  0.011***    0.011***       0.004***      0.004***
                                                      (0.001)     (0.001)        (0.001)       (0.001)
                Profitability                        0.068***    0.067***       0.068***      0.067***
                                                      (0.002)     (0.003)        (0.002)       (0.002)
                OverallTangibility                  -0.051***    -0.053***     -0.050***     -0.051***
                                                      (0.003)     (0.003)        (0.003)       (0.003)

                Firm-fixed effects                     Yes           Yes          Yes           Yes
                Year-fixed effects                     Yes           Yes          No            No
                Country-year-fixed effects             No            No           Yes           Yes
                Observations                         123,510       99,968       187,585       151,150
                R-squared                             0.623         0.619        0.678         0.674




                                                           37
       Table 8: The Effects of Collateral Reforms on Other Corporate Outcomes

The table presents the results from the following regression for the 10 Eastern European countries:

                            Yist = αi + αct + βP ostct ∗ HighM ovableAssetss + γXist + ist ,

where Y is the is the outcome variable for firm i in sector s in country c in year t. Post is a dummy equal to zero
before the reform date and one afterwards for each country. HighM ovableAssetss is a dummy equal to one for all
sectors above the top quartile of the movable assets index and zero for sectors below the bottom quartile. X is a
vector of firm controls. The specification includes a full set of firm-fixed effects (αi ) and country-year-fixed effects
(αt ). The specification controls for the interaction between P ost and HighImmovableAssets. The standard errors
are clustered at the country level.



                                             (1)          (2)              (3)             (4)            (5)
                                         Investment    Employment      Productivity    Profitability     Sales


       Post*High MovableAssets             0.038***       0.026**        0.034***        0.034**        0.026***
                                            (0.015)       (0.016)         (0.016)        (0.019)         (0.014)
       Post*High ImmovableAssets             0.007          0.009          0.011          -0.004          0.002
                                            (0.001)       (0.005)         (0.008)        (0.009)         (0.004)
       Size                                0.022***      0.026***        -0.052***        -0.014       -0.078***
                                            (0.001)       (0.004)         (0.006)        (0.009)         (0.002)
       Age                                  0.004**       0.008**         0.013**         0.011*         0.004**
                                            (0.002)       (0.003)         (0.005)        (0.005)         (0.002)
       Profitability                      -0.007***        -0.001        -0.035***                     -0.033***
                                            (0.001)       (0.002)         (0.001)                        (0.003)
       OverallTangibility                 -0.043***      0.013***        0.036***        0.037***       0.024***
                                            (0.004)       (0.002)         (0.003)         (0.006)        (0.003)

       Firm-fixed effects                    Yes            Yes             Yes             Yes           Yes
       Country-year-fixed effects            Yes            Yes             Yes             Yes           Yes

       Observations                        152,186        152,259         152,259        152,259        152,259
       R-squared                            0.543          0.966           0.903          0.973          0.984




                                                           38
                                             Table 9: Placebo Test

We falsely assume that Romania’s three neighboring countries (Bulgaria, Hungary, and Ukraine) and its main
commercial partner (Italy) implemented a collateral reform in the same year than Romania. For each country, we
estimate the following regression:

                         Leverageist = αi + αt + βP ostt ∗ HighM ovableAssetss + γXist + ist ,

where Leverage is the ratio of total debt to total assets for firm i in sector s in year t. Post is a dummy equal to
zero before 2000 and one afterwards. HighM ovableAssetss is a dummy equal to one for all sectors above the top
quartile of the movable assets index and zero for sectors below the bottom quartile. X is a vector of firm controls.
The specification includes a full set of firm-fixed effects (αi ) and year-fixed effects (αt ). The specification controls
for the interaction between P ost and HighImmovableAssets. The standard errors are clustered at the firm level.



                                                       (1)          (2)           (3)           (4)
                                                     Bulgaria     Hungary       Ukraine        Italy

                  Post*High MovableAssets              -0.017       -0.016       0.033         0.001
                                                      (0.017)      (0.053)      (0.073)      (0.002)
                  Post*High ImmovableAssets            -0.010       -0.018       0.001        -0.007
                                                      (0.007)      (0.095)      (0.004)      (0.006)
                  Size                               0.051***       0.034      0.039***       0.029
                                                      (0.009)      (0.141)      (0.009)      (0.024)
                  Age                                 0.014*        -0.009      -0.013*     -0.001***
                                                      (0.008)      (0.026)      (0.007)      (0.000)
                  Profitability                        -0.027       -0.015     -0.055**       -0.018
                                                      (0.019)      (0.148)      (0.025)      (0.020)
                  OverallTangibility                    0.019       0.036        0.021      0.067***
                                                      (0.022)      (0.031)      (0.022)      (0.006)

                  Firm-fixed effects                    Yes          Yes          Yes           Yes
                  Year-fixed effects                    Yes          Yes          Yes           Yes

                  Observations                         6,539        4,700        9,859        159,202
                  R-squared                            0.715        0.991        0.814         0.638




                                                           39
                              Table 10: Controlling for Business Cycle

The table presents the results from the following regression for Romania:

           Yist = αi + αt + βP ostt ∗ HighM ovableAssetss + γP ostt ∗ HighSensitivitys + δXist + ist ,

where Y is either Leverage, ZeroLeverage, or Cash for firm i in sector s in year t. Post is a dummy equal to zero
before the reform date and one afterwards. HighM ovableAssetss is a dummy equal to one for all sectors above
the top quartile of the movable assets index and zero for sectors below the bottom quartile. HighSensitivitys is
a dummy equal to one for all sectors above the top quartile of the business cycle sensitivity sectoral index and
zero for sectors below the bottom quartile. X is a vector of firm controls. The specification includes a full set of
firm-fixed effects (αi ) and year-fixed effects (αt ). The specification controls for the interaction between P ost and
HighImmovableAssets. The standard errors are clustered at the firm level.


                                                           (1)            (2)             (3)
                                                        Leverage     ZeroLeverage        Cash

                     Post*High MovableAssets            0.040***         -0.365        -0.040***
                                                         (0.014)        (0.188)          (0.013)
                     Post*High ImmovableAssets            -0.002         0.082            -0.003
                                                         (0.015)        (0.129)          (0.012)
                     Post*High Sensitivity                -0.016         0.110             0.002
                                                         (0.011)        (0.377)          (0.008)
                     Size                               0.018***       -0.052***       -0.014***
                                                         (0.001)        (0.002)          (0.001)
                     Age                                0.006***       -0.024***        0.014***
                                                         (0.002)        (0.001)          (0.002)
                     Profitability                     -0.061***       0.051***         0.065***
                                                         (0.003)        (0.006)          (0.003)
                     OverallTangibility                 0.018***       -0.117***       -0.051***
                                                         (0.005)        (0.012)          (0.004)

                     Firm-fixed effects                    Yes            Yes             Yes
                     Year-fixed effects                    Yes            Yes             Yes

                     Observations                        79,512          88,375         88,040
                     R-squared                           0.578           0.640           0.615




                                                          40
                                          Table 11: Dosage Effects

The table presents the results from the following regression for Romania:

                       Leverageist = αi + αt + βP ostt ∗ HighM ovableAssetss + γXist + it ,

where Leverage is the ratio of total debt to total assets for firm i in sector s in year t. Post is a dummy equal to zero
before the reform date and one afterwards. HighM ovableAssetss is a dummy equal to one for all sectors above the
top quartile of the movable assets index and zero for sectors below the bottom quartile (column 1); equal to one for
sectors in the third quartile and zero for sectors below the bottom quartile (column 2); equal to one for sectors in
the third quartile and zero for sectors below the two bottom quartiles (column 3), and equal to the original sectoral
index (column 4). X is a vector of firm controls. The specification includes a full set of firm-fixed effects (αi ) and
year-fixed effects (αt ). The specification controls for the interaction between P ost and HighImmovableAssets. The
standard errors are clustered at the firm level.



                                                           (1)          (2)           (3)           (4)

             Post*High MovableAssetsQ4−Q1              0.037***
                                                        (0.013)
             Post*High ImmovableAssetsQ4−Q1              -0.019
                                                        (0.013)
             Post*High MovableAssetsQ3−Q1                             0.020**
                                                                      (0.009)
             Post*High ImmovableAssetsQ3−Q1                            -0.005
                                                                      (0.014)
             Post*High MovableAssetsQ3−Q2                                            0.002
                                                                                    (0.007)
             Post*High ImmovableAssetsQ3−Q2                                          0.000
                                                                                    (0.007)
             Post*MovableAssets                                                                  0.042**
                                                                                                  (0.020)
             Post*ImmovableAssets                                                                  -0.018
                                                                                                  (0.026)
             Size                                       0.018***     0.015***       0.013***     0.018***
                                                         (0.002)      (0.003)        (0.003)      (0.001)
             Age                                        0.111***       0.152        0.095***        0.064
                                                         (0.035)      (0.164)        (0.023)      (0.047)
             Profitability                             -0.066***     -0.079***     -0.067***    -0.068***
                                                         (0.004)      (0.007)        (0.007)      (0.003)
             OverallTangibility                         0.019***     0.040***       0.031***     0.027***
                                                         (0.006)      (0.012)        (0.011)      (0.005)

             Firm-fixed effects                           Yes           Yes           Yes           Yes
             Year-fixed effects                           Yes           Yes           Yes           Yes

             Observations                                90,492        11,222       33,820        194,302
             R-squared                                   0.580         0.628         0.596         0.595




                                                           41
                                     Table 12: Matching Estimation

Panel A compares the properties of treated, control, and matched-control firms in Romania, regarding the four
covariates: Size, Age, Profitability, OverallTangibility. The treated firms are those operating in sectors above the top
quartile of the movable assets index; control firms are those operating in sectors below the bottom quartile. Panel
A.1 reports the median value of each covariate for the treated and control group before matching, the difference of
the medians, and the p-value associated with a test statistic for the differences. Panel A.2 reports the same statistics
for the treated and control group after matching. Panel B reports the estimates of the effect of the collateral reform
in Romania on Leverage, ZeroLeverage, and Cash, controlling for immovable intensity. For ease of reference, the first
row reproduces the estimates of the benchmark estimator from Tables 4, 6, 7. The second row reports the average
treatment effect of the treated (ATT), controlling for immovable intensity, after matching the treated and control
group according to the four covariates.



                          A. Median for Treated, Control, and Matched Control Group

                                                Size       Age        Profitability    Tangibility
                    A.1 Before Matching
                    Treated                     10.97      8.00            0.10            0.39
                    Control                     10.90      6.00            0.08            0.37
                    Difference                  0.07       2.00            0.02            0.02
                    p-value                     0.00       0.00            0.00            0.00

                    A.2 After Matching
                    Treated                     10.97      8.00            0.10            0.39
                    Matched-control             10.96      8.00            0.10            0.39
                    Difference                  0.01       0.00            0.00            0.00
                    p-value                     0.42       0.99            0.99            0.68

                                    B. Benchmark and Matching Estimations

                                                        Leverage     ZeroLeverage          Cash

                    Benchmark estimator                  0.037***         -0.324        -0.026***
                                                          (0.013)        (0.337)         (0.010)

                    ATT estimator                        0.035***        -0.348*        -0.025***
                                                          (0.005)        (0.183)         (0.004)




                                                          42
