NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

TRAINING AND SEARCH ON THE JOB
Rasmus Lentz
Nicolas Roys
Working Paper 21702
http://www.nber.org/papers/w21702

NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
November 2015

We are grateful for helpful comments from Melvyn Coles, John Kennan, Chris Taber, as well as seminar
and conference participants at UW-Milwaukee, Penn State, McGill University, the Barcelona 2015
Summer Workshop on Matching and Sorting, The 2015 Econometric Society World Congress, The
NYU 2015 Search and Matching Workshop, and The 2015 Århus University Conference on Labour
Market Models and Their Applications. Rasmus Lentz acknowledges financial support from the National
Science Foundation, grant SES-1459897. The views expressed herein are those of the authors and
do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peerreviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.
© 2015 by Rasmus Lentz and Nicolas Roys. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed
two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice,
is given to the source.

Training and Search On the Job
Rasmus Lentz and Nicolas Roys
NBER Working Paper No. 21702
November 2015
JEL No. D21,D43,D83,E24,J24,J31,J33,J41,J62,J63,J64
ABSTRACT
The paper studies human capital accumulation over workers' careers in an on the job search setting
with heterogenous firms. In renegotiation proof employment contracts, more productive firms provide
more training. Both general and specific training induce higher wages within jobs, and with future
employers, even conditional on the future employer type. Because matches do not internalize the specific
capital loss from employer changes, specific human capital can be over-accumulated, more so in low
type firms. While validating the Acemoglu and Pischke (1999) mechanisms, the analysis nevertheless
arrives at the opposite conclusion: That increased labor market friction reduces training in equilibrium.

Rasmus Lentz
Department of Economics
University of Wisconsin, Madison
1180 Observatory Drive
Madison, WI 53706
and NBER
rlentz@ssc.wisc.edu
Nicolas Roys
University of Wisconsin-Madison
Department of Economics
1180 Observatory Drive
Madison 53703 WI
nroys@ssc.wisc.edu

1

Introduction

In the United States, worker reallocation between firms most commonly happens without
an intervening unemployment spell.1 Job-to-job transitions involve a direct competition
between the two employers, whereas reallocation through unemployment resets the worker’s
bargaining position to her valuation of unemployment.2 Christensen et al. (2005) show that
job-to-job reallocations are motivated by the worker’s search for more productive positions
and higher wages. In this paper, we study the investment in workers’ human capital, be
it general or specific, during their careers in a frictional setting with on-the-job search and
heterogeneous firms. Employment contracts specify employment history conditional training
and wage paths, as well as responses to outside competition for the worker. The inclusion of
on-the-job search and heterogenous firms in the frictional environment offers new insights into
the interaction between training and frictions as well as the implications for wage dynamics.
The impact of human capital accumulation on within and between firm wage dynamics
does not in qualitative sense vary by its specificity. Both perfectly general and perfectly
specific training result in increasing wages within the job as well as between jobs.3 The classic
distinction between labor market experience and firm tenure effects in wage regressions as
studied in among others Altonji and Shakotko (1987), Topel (1991), Altonji and Williams
(2005), Dustman and Meghir (2005), and Buchinsky et al. (2010) is therefore a murky
reflection of the specificity of accumulated human capital during careers.
The employment contracts in the paper are required to be renegotiation proof and as
a result they respond to outside competition in a manner identical to the offer matching
process in Postel-Vinay and Robin (2002). General training results in an increased valuation
of the worker across all potential employers. The occasional arrival of outside offers delivers
the valuation increase to the worker through higher wages either within the job if the outside
From Rogerson and Shimer (2011), the Current Population Survey implies an annual employment to
employment rate of about 0.31 for the period 2000-05. The corresponding employment to unemployment
hazard is 0.24. Finally, the unemployed job finding rate is 4.3 at annual frequency. These numbers are based
on a competing hazards interpretation of the monthly transition probabilities. As documented in Fujita
and Moscarini (2013), the numbers over-estimate reallocation to new employers through the unemployment
channel because a large part of the outflow from unemployment are recalls.
2
Recent notable exceptions are Fujita and Moscarini (2013) and Carrillo-Tudela and Smith (2014).
3
The one exception to this result is that wages with future employers after an unemployment spell are
unaffected by specific training. But even that exception is eliminated in settings with for example recall,
such as Fujita and Moscarini (2013) and Carrillo-Tudela and Smith (2014).
1

2

employer is not capable of matching the current employer’s willingness to pay, or in a new
match if it can.
Specific training increases the current employer’s valuation of the worker, only. But due to
productive heterogeneity across firms, the match is not insulated from increased competitive
pressure. More productive outside firms can challenge the current firm’s increased valuation
of the worker. Thus, similar to the case of general training, the occasional meeting with
more productive outside employers gradually delivers the valuation increase to the worker
either within the job if the outside employer’s valuation of the worker does not match that
of the current employer, or through a better bargaining position in a job with the new
employer. Thus, specific training delivers higher wages with future employers through a
better bargaining position, even though the training has no productive impact on the future
match.4 Furthermore, the competitive pressure from more productive employers forces an
increasing wage profile within the job as well.5
Frictional competition implies that the rents from productive gains caused by either
general or specific training are partially delivered to the worker ex post training. In line
with Becker (1964), firms therefore make workers “pay” for training up front through lower
wages during training, but the result now extends to specific training, as well. The analysis
imposes a hold-up problem on training through the introduction of worker risk aversion which
makes backloaded wage profiles costly. The hold-up problem reduces training intensity, and
again, the effect applies to both general and specific training.
Firm heterogeneity allows the analysis to consider variation in training across firms and
the possible impact of mismatch on training. Training can vary across firms purely due to
production function complementarities between firm productivity and worker human capital. In the risk neutral case where the hold up problem is absent from the analysis, training
is increasing (decreasing) in the firm type if and only if the production function is supermodular (sub-modular). This applies both to general and specific training. The hold-up
The model also implies that specific training has a positive selection effect on future employers; conditional on moving, specific training increases the expected productivity type of the future employer. This
is a well known concern that confounded the analyses in Altonji and Shakotko (1987) and Topel (1991).
The effect is distinct from the increased bargaining position whereby wages increase conditional on employer
type.
5
Thus, in contrast to Felli and Harris (1996) we obtain the result that purely specific training implies
increasing wages within the job.
4

3

problem by itself implies that training intensity is increasing in the generosity of a given
firm’s employment contract, and in our calibration to the U.S. economy, training is also on
average increasing in firm type.
That training varies across firms and in generosity cause us to reconsider the conclusions
in Acemoglu and Pischke (1999) regarding the relationship between training and frictions.
They argue that labor market friction relieves the hold-up problem associated with general
training through a reduction in the upward wage pressure ex post training. Therefore, in
a second best setting subject to a hold-up problem, increased labor market friction results
in more general training. Our analysis includes and validates this mechanism as a partial
equilibrium result, which now pertains both to specific and general training. In particular,
for a given employer type and generosity, an employment contract will provide more training
as labor market friction increases. However, increased labor market friction implies that
in equilibrium, workers have worse bargaining positions and they are matched with worse
firms. Given the imposed hold-up problem, training is decreasing in both of these dimensions.
In the calibrated model, the equilibrium effects turn out to dominate. And we reach the
opposite conclusion; that training is decreasing in the extent of labor market friction.
The worker’s human capital accumulation is employment history dependent. This is not
an unusual feature in models with learning by doing or with human capital depreciation
during unemployment. But in these cases, it is typically time spent in unemployment that
matters. In our setting, variation in human capital accumulation across workers is tied to
the degree of mismatch the worker has experienced throughout her career. Thus, there is
a positive association between favorable employment history realizations and human capital
accumulation.6 A wage variance decomposition that measures the contributions from human
capital variation as well as labor market frictions must in this case account for the positive
covariance between the two contributions.7 It also implies a positive sorting effect where
workers matched with better firms end up with more human capital, ex post. In our caliRecent results in Guvenen et al. (2015) find that wages are decreasing in the accumulation of mismatch
in the worker’s employment history, which is consistent with the mechanisms in our model with training
subject to hold-up and/or a super-modular production function.
7
An example of such a decomposition that accounts for a positive correlation between the two can be
found in Bagger and Lentz (2013). They emphasize that a positive correlation between favorable match
outcomes and worker human capital can arise through the reverse causality: that higher human capital
workers lose relatively more by mismatch and therefore search more intensely for favorable matches.
6

4

brated model, the positive correlation between worker human capital and firm productivity
turns out to be quite strong despite the absence of assortative matching.
General and specific training have sharply different implications for mobility, and they
also differ in terms of social efficiency. General training does not impact future worker mobility, at all: If the worker meets a more productive firm, the worker will move to it, regardless.
However, specific training implies that the current match moves up the “willingness to pay
for the worker” hierarchy. Therefore a worker may forego the opportunity to move to a
more productive firms and only improve his bargaining position with his current employer.
Specifically-trained workers have lower job-to-job hazard, everything else equal.
The two kinds of training differ in terms of social efficiency as well. In the risk neutral
case (that is, in the absence of the hold-up problem), general training is socially efficient.
However, specific training is too high and the problem is greater for lower productivity firms.
This is a feature of the wage determination process whereby a future firm always perfectly
compensates the current match for its destruction in case of a job-to-job move. The social
planner understands that a low productivity match is more likely to be destroyed in favor of
a better match and consequently invests less in specific training. But privately, the match
does not internalize the loss of specific capital associated with the worker moving since the
future firm is fully compensated for the loss. The analysis includes consideration of side
payment schemes that can resolve the inefficiency, although these schemes might be difficult
to implement in practice.
Section 2 contains the model description and the analysis. The general optimal contract
is analyzed in Section 2.3, and the risk neutral case is studied in Section 3 with a particular
focus on efficiency. Section 4 calibrates the model to the U.S. economy. Section 5 presents the
calibrated steady state equilibrium. In Section 6 we discuss the counter factual of changing
the level of frictions in the economy and relate the result to Acemoglu and Pischke (1999).
Section 7 concludes.

2

Model

There is a unit measure of workers who can be either employed or unemployed. Matches
between workers and firms are formed through a frictional search process. They produce an

5

output that generates a revenue stream. And, the firm can invest in two kinds of human
capital: General and specific.
Competition over workers takes place as in Lentz (2014). If a firm meets an unemployed
worker, it can make the worker a take-it-or-leave-it lifetime utility offer. The contract specifies a response to the event that the worker meets an outside firm. The worker will accept
employment with the outside firm if it can match the worker’s current contract. There is
limited commitment on the part of both firms and workers: Each can without cost leave the
relationship for their respective outside options. And, the contract is required to be renegotiation proof: In any state of nature, the contract must not be Pareto dominated by another
feasible contract. Consequently, contracts respond to outside meetings in a way identical to
outside offer matching.8 If the worker meets an outside firm that is willing to improve on the
worker’s current contract terms, the worker’s current contract responds by a continuation
utility promise equal to the minimum of the two firms’ willingness to pay for the worker.
A firm designs an employment contract to maximize its profits subject to the utility
promise it has made to the worker. An employment relationship delivers utility to a worker
in three ways: (1) The contract promises a wage payment stream as a function of the
employment history, which includes arrivals of outside meetings. (2) The contract promises
employment history contingent general and specific human capital training rates. (3) The
contract may facilitate rent extraction with future employers.
Denote by h the worker’s general human capital level, which we will also refer to as
the worker’s skill. Let m be the match specific capital level. Match specific capital affects
only the productivity of the current match, whereas general human capital applies to all
matches. While we refer to the accumulation of match specific capital as training, it accommodates a broader interpretation of investments in the surplus of the current match,
including intangibles like goodwill.9
Skills have two support points: Skilled (h = 1) and unskilled (h = 0). And, for match
specific capital, m ∈ {0, 1}. All workers are born into the labor market unskilled and unemployed. Human capital does not depreciate. It is straightforward to relax these assumptions,
but we maintain them throughout the paper for the sake of exposition and to ease the nuFor details, see Lentz (2014).
Many of the paper’s conclusions regarding the incentives to accumulate match specific capital apply to
a setup where the parties are learning about the productivity of the match.
8
9

6

merical solution of the model. Let fhm (p) be the output of a match between a productivity
p firm and a skill h worker with match specific capital m. It is strictly increasing in h, m,
and p.
The firm’s training decision is modeled as a choice that controls the stochastic process of
the worker’s human capital evolution. The firm picks the Poisson arrival rate η for which the
unskilled worker becomes skilled, and the Poisson rate µ by which a m = 0 match transitions
to m = 1. All firms have access to the same training technology, which is reflected in the
monetary general training cost ch (η) and specific training cost cm (µ). Both cost functions
are increasing and convex.
As emphasized by Becker (1964), privately efficient training decisions can be made if the
contract can make the worker “pay” for training up front through low initial wages. Reduced
training may result if it is costly to implement such a contract, and Acemoglu and Pischke
(1999) argue that in such a case labor market frictions help reduce the hold up problem in
general training. In our model, making the worker pay for training up front is made costly
through the assumption of risk aversion in worker preferences, and the degree of risk aversion
affects the magnitude of the cost.

2.1

Worker lifetime utility

Time is continuous and both firms and workers discount time at rate ρ. Workers die at
rate d. Workers are risk averse and consume whatever income they have at a given instant
which delivers utility, u (w), where w is the wage level. An unemployed worker with human
capital h receives benefits bh . All employed workers are laid off at exogenous layoff rate
δ. Unemployed and employed workers meet employment opportunities at rates λu and λe ,
respectively.
A firm’s willingness to pay V̄hm (p) as a function of its productivity, worker skill h, and
specific capital m is defined as the utility promise such that the firm’s discounted stream of
future profits from the match is exactly zero. It is a result in the analysis that this object
is monotonically increasing in p. Define the inverse function phm (V ) by V = V̄hm (phm (V )) .
Let Fh (V ) be the distribution of willingness to pay levels in the vacancy offer distribution
for skill h workers and m = 0. Furthermore, use the shorthand F̂h (V ) = 1 − Fh (V ) .

Denote by O V̄ ′ , V |V̄ an employment contract’s offer response to the worker meeting
7

an outside firm that has willingness to pay V̄ ′ , conditional on the firm’s own willingness to
pay V̄ and the contract currently delivering V . The optimal renegotiation proof strategy for
the firm is,




O V̄ ′ , V |V̄ = max V, min V̄ ′ , V̄ .

(1)

Thus, the contract matches the outside firm’s willingness to pay up to the firm’s own willingness to pay. In the case where the outside firm has willingness to pay less than V , the
contract continues unaffected.10 Alternatively, if outside meetings were contractable, the
results in Section 2.3 show that risk aversion implies that it is indeed optimal to keep the
utility promise constant in this case. Whenever V ≤ V̄ ′ ≤ V̄ , the firm sets the continuation
utility promise exactly sufficient to make the worker stay, and no more. For V̄ ′ > V̄ , it is
efficient for the worker to move to the outside employer. The firm would prefer to be able

to commit to O V̄ ′ , V | V̄ = V̄ ′ so as to allow for maximal rent extraction from the future
employer. However, the firm’s participation constraint, imposing that the discounted profit

value of the contract cannot be negative, and renegotiation proofness constrain the firm’s

continuation utility promise to O V̄ ′ , V | V̄ = V̄ .
Consider a skill h worker currently employed at a productivity p firm and match specific

capital m. Define the worker’s effective discount rate r = ρ + d. The lifetime utility of the
contract can be expressed recursively,
(r + δ + η + µ) V = u (w) + ηH + µM + δUh + V̇ +
"ˆ
#
V̄hm (p)


+ λe
(V ′ − V ) dFh (V ′ ) + F̂h V̄hm (p) V̄hm (p) − V
V

= u (w) + ηH + µM + δUh + V̇ + λe

ˆ

V̄hm (p)

F̂h (V ′ ) dV ′ ,

(2)

V

where the second line follows by integration by parts and the contract dictates the collection


w, V̇ , H, M, η, µ . The worker receives flow utility u (w) from the wage rate w. At Poisson

rate η, the worker’s human capital increases in which case the contract continues with utility
promise H. Similarly, at rate µ match specific capital increases and the contract continues
with utility promise M. At rate λe the worker meets an outside firm and the continuation
This is an immediate implication of a setting where the worker can choose to keep outside meetings
hidden. See Lentz (2014).
10

8

utility promise of the contract is specified by O V̄ ′ , V |V̄



in equation (1). H and M are of

course only relevant if h = 0 and m = 0, respectively. Since only in these cases will training
rates η and µ be positive. Finally, the value of unemployment Uh is given by,
rUh = u (bh ) .
The worker meets firms at rate λu . However, regardless of the type of the meeting, the
associated employment contract delivers utility promise Uh . Indeed, when a firm meets an
unemployed worker, it make her a take-it-or-leave-it lifetime utility offer, which she accept
as long as it exceeds the value of unemployment.

2.2

Firm profits

Let Πhm (V, p) be the optimal profit value to a firm with productivity p in an (h, m) state
match subject to a utility promise V . Following Spear and Srivastava (1987) and Thomas
and Worrall (1988), the firm’s valuation of the discounted stream of profits associated with
a contract can be written recursively by,
(r + δ) Πhm (V, p) =
+ λe

ˆ

(

fhm (p) − w − ch (η) − cm (µ)
max
(w,V̇ ,η,µ,H,M )∈Γhm (V,p)

V̄hm (p)

Π′hm (V ′ , p) F̂h (V ′ ) dV ′ + η [Π1m (H, p) − Πhm (V, p)]

V

+ µ [Πh1 (M, p) − Πhm (V, p)] + Π′hm (V, p) V̇

)

, (3)

where Π′hm (V, p) = dΠhm (V, p) /dV . The set of feasible contract design choices is given by,
(


Γhm (V, p) =
w, V̇ , η, µ, H, M
u (w) + ηH + µM + δUh + V̇ + λe

ˆ

V̄hm (p)

F̂h (V ′ ) dV ′ = (r + δ + η + µ) V

V

Uh ≤ M ≤ V̄h1 (p)
)

U1 ≤ H ≤ V̄1m (p) .
The last two set of constraints reflect the participation constraints of the worker and firm
both. The worker’s valuation of the contract cannot be less than the value of unemployment
and the discounted profit value of the contract cannot be negative.
9

It is assumed that production technology is such that the willingness to pay of a firm
is never strictly below the value of unemployment for a given human capital level. The
first constraint is the promise keeping constraint. The willingness to pay for a given human
capital level is given by,

2.3


Πhm V̄hm (p) , p = 0.

(4)

Optimal contract design

Let the Lagrange multiplier on the promise keeping constraint be γhm (V, p), where γhm (V, p) >
0 is a sufficient condition for the recursive formulation of the contracting problem to be
valid. Denote by ϕm (V, p) the Lagrange multiplier on the worker’s participation constraint,
U1m ≤ H. It is verified that the other constraints are not binding for the optimal contract.
Since unemployment benefits depends on general human capital, the worker participation
constraint might be binding when the worker becomes generally skilled. Since an increase
in match specific capital involves an increase in joint match value and neither the worker’s
or firm’s outside options are affected, the participation constraints will not bind in the case
when the worker becomes specifically skilled. In the following, we discuss the properties of
the optimal employment contract with a given productivity firm.
2.3.1

Profit function and willingness to pay

The profit function is decreasing and strictly concave. Lentz (2014) provides proof of concavity in the more general setting with hidden search (absent training decisions). It is also
straightforward to show that the firm’s willingness to pay V̄hm (p) is monotonically increasing
in all three arguments, which is a direct implication of the monotonicity of the production
function.
2.3.2

Wages

In the absence of minimum wages or other constraints on the wage design, the slope of the
profit function satisfies,
Π′hm (V, p) = − (r + δ) γhm (V, p) =

10

u′ (w

−1
,
hm (V, p))

(5)

which follows from the first order conditions on the choices of w and V̇ . By implication,
wages whm (V, p) are strictly increasing in the utility promise given concavity of the profit
function.
2.3.3

Tenure conditional utility promise and wage paths.

By the derivative of the Lagrangian ∂L/∂V = Π′ (V ), and the envelope theorem, one obtains,
Π′hm (V, p) + (r + δ) γhm (V, p) =

Π′′hm (V, p)
r + δ + λF̂h (V ) + ηm (V, p) + µh (V, p)

V̇hm (V, p) .

(6)

Together with equation (5), it must be that in the absence of outside offers and skill increases,
the optimal employment contract is flat,
V̇hm (V, p) = 0.

(7)

Thus, in the absence of outside offer arrivals or changes in human capital, the contract’s
wage profile is flat in tenure.11 In the limit case where the worker is risk neutral, the flat
contract remains optimal, but there is now a multitude of optimal paths. The analysis uses
the flat contract in the limit case where the worker is risk neutral.
Unconditionally, the employment contract involves expected changes in the utility promise
over job duration through two channels. The contract matches the willingness to pay of firms
that the worker meets, which in isolation implies an expected increasing utility promise path
in duration. For a given utility promise V , the expected growth rate in the utility promise
´ V̄ (p)
within the job due to on-the-job search is λe V hm (V ′ − V ) dFh (V ′ ) ≥ 0. By wages in-

creasing in the utility promise, on-the-job search in isolation implies an increasing wage path
in tenure. This is a simple replication of the offer matching process in Postel-Vinay and
Robin (2002). We include the argument here for completeness.
Furthermore, the continuation utility promise may change when the worker becomes generally skilled or specifically skilled. The following lemma characterizes the optimal contract’s
response to human capital changes.

As documented in Lentz (2014), the optimal contract will itself be backloaded (V̇ > 0) in the case where
the worker can engage in hidden search in order to increase the chance of an outside meeting.
11

11



Lemma 1. The optimal contract is for any p ∈ [0, 1] and V ∈ Uh , V̄hm (p) characterized by
1. V < Hm (V, p) < V̄1m (p) and V ≤ Mh (V, p) < V̄h1 (p) with strict inequality if p < 1.

2. Wages are smooth across human capital capital increases unless the participation constraint is binding: wh0 (V, p) = wh1 (Mh (V, p) , p) and w0m (V, p) = w1m (Hm (V, p) , p)
for ϕm (V, p) = 0. If ϕm (V, p) > 0 then Hm (V, p) = U1 and w0m (V, p) < w1m (Hm (V, p) , p).
Proof. The human capital change conditional utility promises satisfy the first order equations,
− (r + δ) ϕm (V, p)
ηm (V, p)
′
′
Πh1 (Mh (V, p) , p) − Πh0 (V, p) = 0.

Π′1m (Hm (V, p) , p) − Π′0m (V, p) =

(8)
(9)

If the worker participation constraint is not binding, ϕhm (V, p) = 0, the wage profile is flat
over human capital jumps,
Π′0m (V, p) = Π′1m (Hm (V, p) , p)
Π′h0 (V, p) = Π′h1 (Mh (V, p) , p) ,
which implies,
w0m (V, p) = w1m (Hm (V, p) , p)
wh0 (V, p) = wh1 (Mh (V, p) , p) .
If the worker’s participation constraint in case of a skill increase is binding, wages jump up
in case of a skill increase. This follows directly from the concavity of the profit function
and that wages are increasing in the utility promise. The participation constraint forces the
firm to offer a greater utility promise than the one that makes wages smooth across the skill
jump. By concavity the binding participation implies, Π′0m (V, p) > Π′1m (Hm (V, p) , p) and
therefore w0m (V, p) < w1m (Hm (V, p) , p).
Now, consider the claim that V < Mh (V, p) < V̄h1 (p) for p < 1. Proof is by contradiction.
Suppose first that Mh (V, p) = V̄h1 (p). For the sake of simplicity, take the case where

h = 1. Trivially, it must be that w11 V̄11 (p) , p = f11 (p) since there is no possibility of

future wage gains within the contract. It must then be that w10 (V, p) ≤ w10 V̄10 (p) , p ≤
12



< f11 (p). This is because at M1 (V, p) = V̄11 (p) the firm hands

over all gains to specific training to the worker. Hence, Π10 V̄10 (p) , p = 0 implies that

f10 (p) − cm µ V̄10 (p) , p

wages w10 cannot exceed production less training cost. Thus, Mh (V, p) = V̄h1 (p) implies

that w10 (V, p) < w11 (Mh (V, p) , p), violating (9). Suppose instead, also by contradiction
that M1 (V, p) ≤ V . By the utility promise constraint we have that,
(r + δ) M1 (V, p) = u (w11 (M1 (V, p) , p)) + δU1 + λe

ˆ

V̄11 (p)

F̂1 (V ′ ) dV ′

M1 (V,p)

= u (w10 (V, p)) + δU1 + λe

ˆ

V̄11 (p)

F̂1 (V ′ ) dV ′
M1 (V,p)

> u (w10 (V, p)) + µ (V, p) [M1 (V, p) − V ] + δU1 + λe

ˆ

V̄10 (p)

F̂1 (V ′ ) dV ′

V

= (r + δ) V.
The second equality follows from (9). The inequality follows directly from the presumption
that M1 (V, p) ≤ V and that V̄11 (p) > V̄10 (p). Therefore M1 (V, p) ≤ V is contradicted.
The basic intuition is that since wages are smooth across the human capital change, a
utility promise M1 (V, p) ≤ V implies greater future utility promise growth than prior to
the human capital increase. At an unchanged current wage level, a greater future utility
promise growth is inconsistent with a reduction in the utility promise. Hence it must be
that V < Mh (V, p) < V̄h1 (p). The p = 1 case is the exception. In this case M1 (V, 1) = V .
The reason being that V̄10 (1) is the upper bound on the support of F1 (V ). The fact that
the firm’s willingness to pay increases from V̄10 (1) to V̄11 (1) does not result in an increase
in the worker’s expected utility promise growth rate for any given utility promise, because
there are no outside firms to challenge the increase.
Arguments for h = 0 as well as the skill increase conditional utility promise V <
Hm (V, p) < V̄1m (p) go along the same lines.
Lemma 1 states that gains from human capital growth are strictly shared between firm
and worker. In the case of general human capital the worker will not manage to extract
all of the gains, confirming the arguments in Acemoglu and Pischke (1999) that frictions
allows the firm to extract some of the rents due to training. The more novel part of Lemma
1 is that it turns out that the same is true for gains from specific training: The frictional
competition environment with heterogenous firms forces the firm to hand over part of the
13

Figure 1: Expected Gains from On-the-Job Search
A specific human capital increase

A general human capital increase
V̄10 (p)

V̄01 (p)

V̄00 (p)

V̄00 (p)

V

V
p00 (V )
p10 (V )

p

p′

p00 (V )

p
p00 V̄01 (p)

p′


gains from specific training to the worker. Our setup provides a particular formalization of
Becker’s (1964) argument that competition can induce the firm to share the ex post returns
to even perfectly specific training.
An increase in either general or specific capital is for a given utility promise associated
with an increase in the worker’s expected net utility gains from outside meetings. However,
the exact source and magnitude of the gains depend on whether the capital gain is general
or specific. Consider an (h, m) = (0, 0) worker with a current utility promise of V who is
employed with a firm that has willingness to pay V̄00 (p). Using the productivity distribution
in the vacancy pool, Φ (p), define the worker’s expected utility growth rate from on-the-job
search,


Ω00 (V, p) = λe (1 − Φ (p)) V̄00 (p) − V + λe

ˆ

p

p00 (V )


V̄00 (p′ ) − V dΦ (p′ ) .

(10)

The first term on the right hand side of equation (10) reflects job-to-job transitions from the
current firm to an outside firm where the receiving firm will deliver an employment contract
with utility promise V̄00 (p) . The second term reflects how competition forces transfers from
the firm to the worker within the current match. If the worker meets a firm with productivity
p′ ∈ [p00 (V ) , p], the meeting results in the worker staying in the current match with an
increased utility promise of V̄00 (p′ ) > V .
Figure 1 illustrates the increased expected gains from on-the-job search. The figures are
stylized in that one would not generally expect V̄hm (p) to be linear. Suppose the worker
becomes generally-skilled. This event is illustrated in the left hand panel. Holding the current
14

utility promise fixed at V , the increased competitive pressure on the match is reflected in
the now greater expected utility growth rate from on-the-job search,
ˆ p



Ω10 (V, p) = λe (1 − Φ (p)) V̄10 (p) − V + λe
V̄10 (p′ ) − V dΦ (p′ ) .
p10 (V )

All outside firms are now willing to pay more for the worker, V̄10 (p′ ) > V̄00 (p′ ). In addition,
the support of firm types that can impose competitive pressure on the match expands downward from p00 (V ) to the lower firm type p10 (V ). Should the worker move, she will move
with a higher utility promise, V̄10 (p).
Consider alternatively an increase in specific capital from m = 0 to m = 1. This is
illustrated in the right hand panel. Holding the utility promise fixed at V , the competitive
pressure on the match increases to
Ω01 (V, p) = λe 1 − Φ p00

 

V̄01 (p)
V̄01 (p) − V + λe

ˆ

p00 (V̄01 (p))

p00 (V )


V̄00 (p′ ) − V dΦ (p′ ) .

In this case, the incumbent firm’s willingness to pay for the worker increases to V̄01 (p) >
V00 (p). Outside firms do not change their willingness to pay for the worker, but the upper
bound on the set of firms that will force up the utility promise within the job increases to

p00 V̄01 (p) > p. Furthermore, when the worker moves to a better firm, she moves with a

greater utility promise of V̄01 (p).

Thus, both in the case of a general and a specific capital increase, if the firm were to hold
the worker’s utility promise constant at V , the faster expected growth rate in future utility
promises would have to imply a drop in the current wage. By worker risk aversion, this is
suboptimal. Therefore, the optimal contract has an increase in the utility promise as either
general or specific capital increases.
2.3.4

Job-to-job mobility, tenure and wages

Both Altonji and Shakotko (1987) and Topel (1991) emphasize that tenure effects in wages
may be associated with a selection effect on the type of future firms which complicates the
distinction between experience and tenure effects in their analyses. Our analysis exhibits
exactly this effect in the case of specific human capital accumulation. As specific capital
increases, the firm type threshold such that the worker is indifferent between moving to it
and staying with the current firm goes up. Thus, conditional on moving, the expected firm
15

type of the new firm increases as specific capital goes up, and consequently increased specific
capital will have a positive wage impact beyond the current match through this selection
effect.
In addition, our analysis contains another important channel through which specific training will result in higher wages with future firms: Even though specific capital is not portable
between firms, bargaining position carries over. Specific training increases the willingness to
pay of the worker’s current employer, which means that conditional on moving, the worker
will do so with a greater utility promise with the new firm. Hence, even conditional on
the type of the future employer, specific training in the current firm raises wages with future employers - this despite the fact that the willingness to pay of the future employer is
unchanged.
Thus, specific training raises wages with future employers and within the current match.
General training does as well.
2.3.5

Training rates

The first order conditions for the two training rates are given by,
[Π1m (Hm (V, p) , p) − Π0m (V, p)] − Π′0m (V, p) [Hm (V, p) − V ] = c′h (ηm (V, p))
[Πh1 (Mh (V, p) , p) − Πh0 (V, p)] − Π′h0 (V, p) [Mh (V, p) − V ] = c′m (µh (V, p)) ,

(11)
(12)

where the capital change conditional utility promises satisfy equations (8) and (9).
The first order conditions on training state that the marginal cost of training must equal
the marginal profit gain from the increase in either general or specific human capital. The
first bracketed term on the right hand sides of the first order conditions (11) and (12) is the
direct jump in profits due to the capital increase. The second term reflects the profit value of
the change in worker’s utility promise, where by equation (5), Π′hm (V, p) = −1/u′ (whm (V, p))
is the profit impact of a one unit increase in the utility promise.
Increases in the human capital change conditional utility promises, Hm (V, p) and Mh (V, p),
reduce the direct profit gains from training, but the loss is compensated by the worker’s
greater expected utility gains, which are translated into current profits through reduced
wages today. In a risk neutral setting these two effects exactly offset each other and the
training decisions are unaffected by the particular choice of Hm (V, p) and Mh (V, p). Thus,
16

Becker’s (1964) insight that even though a perfectly competitive environment dictates that
the firm has to deliver all match surplus to the skilled worker, Hm (V, p) = V̄1 (p), the training choice remains privately efficient since the firm is perfectly compensated via lower wages
during the training period.
When the worker is risk averse, future utility promises can no longer be translated into
profits one-to-one through a lowering of current wages. Therefore, training comes to depend
on both the current utility promise V and the contract’s optimal choice of Hm (V, p) and
Mh (V, p). It follows by differentiation of the first order conditions (11) and (12) that,
−Π′′h0 (V, p) [Mh (V, p) − V ]
∂µh (V, p)
=
∂V
c′′µ (µh (V, p))
∂ηm (V, p) −Π′′0m (V, p) [Hm (V, p) − V ]
=
.
∂V
c′′η (ηm (V, p))
By Lemma 1, both specific and general training are increasing in the utility promise iff the
profit function is strictly concave in V , which is the case given u (·) strictly concave. We
discuss variation in training across firm types in detail in Section 4.
Risk aversion imposes the classic hold-up problem on the training choice: Increased
human capital (both general and specific) implies increased competitive pressure on the
match and consequently greater rents to the worker. The firm will want to reduce current
wages to capture the ex post rents flowing to the worker. However, risk aversion imposes a
cost on this mechanism. The concavity of the profit function is a reflection that the hold-up
problem is more severe for low utility promises because the contract is operating on a higher
curvature part of the worker’s utility function.

2.4

Steady state

Denote by ehm the mass of employment of general skill h workers in jobs with match specific
capital, m. Let uh be the mass of unemployed general skill h workers. Normalize the populaP
P
tion at unity, 1 = h (uh + m ehm ) . Furthermore, denote by Ghm (V, p) the cumulative dis
tribution of match states for type (h, m) matches, where by definition Ghm V̄hm (1) , 1 = 1.
The steady state conditions on the employment and unemployment stocks follow the simple
logic that the flow into the stock must equal the flow out.

17

The steady state condition on e00 G00 (V, p) is given by,
λu u0 Φ (p) + λe01
(ˆ
ˆ
p̄00 (V )

ˆ

p̄01 (V )
0

V̄00 (p′ )

e00

0

U

ˆ

p

p̄00 (V )

ˆ

V̄01 (p′ )

U0





F0 V̄00 (p) − F0 V̄01 (p′ ) g01 (V ′ , p′ ) dV ′ dp′ =

h
i
d + δ + η0 (V ′ , p′ ) + µ0 (V ′ , p′ ) + λF̂0 V̄00 (p) g00 (V ′ , p′ ) dV ′ dp′ +
ˆ

V

U

)
h
i
d + δ + η0 (V ′ , p′ ) + µ0 (V ′ , p′ ) + λF̂0 (V ) g00 (V ′ , p′ ) dV ′ dp′ .

The first term on the left hand side is the flow into the e00 G00 (V, p) pool from unemployment.
The second term is the flow in from the pool of matches with high match specific capital
where the worker nevertheless receives a better offer and consequently moves into low match
specific capital. The integral is over types of matches with high match specific capital.
The outer integral is over firms that have willingness to pay less than V . Any firm with a
willingness to pay more than V may be beat, but the worker would move into the e00 pool
with a utility promise greater than V . The inner integral is then all the possible utility



promises that workers may have in these firms. The term F0 V̄00 (p) − F0 V̄01 (p′ ) is

the probability that a worker in a type p′ firm will receive an offer that is better than her
current firm’s willingness to pay, but is from a type firm less than p. If that happens, the

worker moves into the e00 G00 (V, p) pool. The terms on the right hand side are standard:
The worker leaves the pool upon death, unemployment, general and specific skill acquisition,
and if the worker receives an outside offer that takes her out of the pool. The latter can
happen in two ways: If a worker is currently employed with a firm that has willingness to
pay less than V then an outside offer must be from a firm better than p to make her leave
the pool. If she is with a firm with willingness to pay greater than V , then it is sufficient
that the outside offer be better than V .
The steady state conditions on e01 G01 (V, p), e10 G10 (V, p), and e11 G11 (V, p) follow the
same type of argument and are given in Appendix A.

3

Risk neutral case

It is illustrative to consider the special case of risk neutrality. We obtain two new analytical
results. First, we find that in the risk neutral case, variation in training across firms are only
driven by technological properties, and in particular complementarities in the production
18

functions. Second, we find that specific training tends to be inefficiently high in low type
firms.

3.1

Training decisions

Assume u′′ = 0 and without loss of generality transform the utility function so that u′ (w) =
1. The profit function takes the form Πhm (V, p) = V̄hm (p) − V . The first order conditions
for the optimal contract’s training rates are then by equations (11) and (12),
c′h (ηm (V, p)) = V̄1m (p) − V̄0m (p)
c′m (µh (V, p)) = V̄h1 (p) − V̄h0 (p) .
It is immediately seen that the training rates do not depend on the particular utility promise
in the contract. The risk neutral case eliminates the hold-up problem from the analysis, and
in particular the variation of the severity of the problem as a function of the utility promise.
The firm’s willingness to pay solves,




(r + δ) V̄hm (p) = fhm (p) + δUh + (1 − h) ηm (p) V̄1m (p) − V̄hm (p) − ch (ηm (p))




+ (1 − m) µh (p) V̄h1 (p) − V̄hm (p) − cm (µh (p)) ,

where the dependency of the training rates on V has been eliminated. By differentiation it
follows that,
′
′
f11
(p) − f01
(p)
′′
[r + δ + η1 (p)] ch (η1 (p))
′
′
f11
(p) − f10
(p)
.
µ′1 (p) =
′′
[r + δ + µ1 (p)] cm (µ1 (p))

η1′ (p) =

The expressions for η0′ (p) and µ′0 (p) account for possible complementarities between general
and specific training both direct and through firm productivity,
′
′
f10
(p) − f00
(p) + µ1 (p) c′′m (µ1 (p)) µ′1 (p) − µ0 (p) c′′m (µ0 (p)) µ′0 (p)
r + δ + η0 (p)
′
′
′′
f (p) − f00 (p) + η1 (p) ch (η1 (p)) η1′ (p) − η0 (p) c′′h (η0 (p)) η0′ (p)
.
c′′m (µ0 (p)) µ′0 (p) = 01
r + δ + µ0 (p)

c′′h (η0 (p)) η0′ (p) =

′
In the case of a modular production function one immediately obtains that, ηm
(p) = µ′h (p) =

0. Thus, in the risk neutral case, if the production function does not have complementarities

19

between firm productivity and training, then training is constant across firm types. Competitive pressure varies across firms, but whatever the share of ex post gains to training it
delivers to the worker, the firm can translate it into profits through lower wages at the time
of training without any efficiency loss. Specifically, notice that the meeting rates λu and λe
do not affect V̄hm (p) and therefore do not impact the training levels.
In the risk neutral case, variation in training across firms is driven purely by complementarities in production between firm productivity and training. Positive complementarities
imply that training is increasing in firm type. Negative complementarities induce a negative
relationship between training and firm type.
Finally, the offer matching characteristic of the wage determination process implies that
competitive pressure (λe ) does not affect training in the risk neutral case: Whenever the
worker moves to another firm, that firm fully compensates the destruction of the previous
match. In particular, this includes the value of human capital investments that were made in
the match. Hence, the probability that a worker will move to another firm does not impact
the discount rate on human capital investments.
This result highlights the importance of the wage determination process as to whether
the firm’s position in the firm hierarchy directly affects training through the implied jobto-job transition rate. In our setting it does not. However, if the worker’s gains associated
with a move to another firm fall short of the old firm’s losses, one would expect that general
training be decreasing in the degree of competitive pressure on the match, since it now
raises the effective discount rate on the returns to human capital investments. Furthermore,
specific investment is stimulated since it is a way to reduce the match surplus destruction
associated with job-to-job transitions. In the Supplemental Appendix, Sanders and Taber
(2012) discuss such a case in an environment where wages are statically bargained based
on an outside worker option of unemployment and the current firm cannot provide side
payments to avoid the destruction of match surplus. Fu (2011) presents an analysis with a
super-modular production function and a piecewise wage posting environment where matches
are not necessarily fully compensated for their destruction when workers reallocate.

20

3.2

Social planner

General training is in the risk neutral case socially efficient.12 The proof is relegated to
Appendix B. For specific training, the environment has an intriguing inefficiency: In the
modular production function case, the decentralized economy provides the same level of
specific training everywhere on the ladder. However, the social planner solution for specific
training is increasing in firm type: The planner discounts match specific capital in low productivity firms at a greater rate because workers are more likely to reallocate to better firms.
Therefore, the social planner invests more in specific training further up the ladder. The
inefficiency in the decentralized economy is a result of future employers perfectly compensating the old match for its destruction, which includes the value of the match specific capital.
Thus, there is a private return to match specific capital investment that is not present in the
social returns. It implies that there tends to be too much specific training in low type firms.
The following formalizes the argument.
For simplicity, we disregard general human capital an assume a modular production
function. Without loss of generality assume fm (p) = f (p) + m. Consider a utilitarian social
planner problem of maximizing the contribution of a worker in a low match specific capital
match. Denote the contribution by,

ˆ
(r + δ) V0 (p) = max f (p) − cm (µ) + δU + µ (V1 (p) − V0 (p)) + λe
µ

= f (p) + δU + M (p) + λe

ˆ

1

[f ′ (p′ ) + M′ (p′ )] Φ̂ (p′ )
r + δ + λ1

p

Φ̂ (p′ )

1
′

[V0 (p ) − V0 (p)] dΦ (p)
p

dp′ ,

where the value of a high match specific capital match is,
ˆ 1
(r + δ) V1 (p) = f (p) + m + δU + λe
[V0 (p′ ) − V0 (p̃ (p))] dΦ (p)
p̃(p)

= f (p) + m + δU + λe

ˆ

1
p̃(p)

[f ′ (p′ ) + M′ (p′ )] Φ̂ (p′ )
r + δ + λ1

Φ̂ (p′ )

dp′ .

The threshold p̃ (p) is defined by V1 (p) = V0 (p̃ (p)) . Since V0 (p) < V1 (p) and the value is
increasing in p, it must be that p̃ (p) > p. The loss of firm specific capital that is associated
with switching firms must be compensated by a sufficiently large gain in firm type. The
With the exception of the case with production function complementarities in production: Specific
training is generally not provided efficiently which will carry over to general training in this case.
12

21



value of the investment option is,
M (p) = max [−cm (µ) + µ (V1 (p) − V0 (p))] .
µ

And the socially optimal specific investment choice solves,
c′m (µ (p)) = V1 (p) − V0 (p) .
Some algebra yields,
V1 (p) − V0 (p) = max

m + cm (µ) −

´ p̃(p) [f ′ (p′ )+µ[V1′ (p′ )−V0′ (p′ )]]Φ̂(p′ )
p

r+δ+λ1 Φ̂(p′ )

dp′

r+δ+µ

µ

.

(13)

Differentiation and the envelope theorem leads to,
"
#
′
Φ̂
(p̃
(p))
Φ̂
(p)
f
(p)
.
−
V1′ (p) − V0′ (p) =
r + δ r + δ + λe Φ̂ (p) r + δ + λe Φ̂ (p̃ (p))
By p̃ (p) > p it follows that V1′ (p) − V0′ (p) > 0. Therefore, the social planner’s choice of
specific investment is increasing in p, µ′ (p) = [V1′ (p) − V0′ (p)] /c′′m (µ (p)) > 0.

3.3

Commitment

The inefficiency in specific human capital training in low-type firms arises because a future
employer fully compensates the destruction of the match if the worker moves. Therefore, if
the current match can extract all rents from future employer meetings, it will internalize the
value of the destruction of match specific capital in case the worker moves. We propose an
instrument that achieves this outcome. The current firm can issue the following obligation:
If the worker moves, the firm will pay the holder of the obligation the difference between the
outside firm’s willingness to pay and its own willingness to pay, that is B = V̄ (p′ ) − V̄ (p)
where p′ > p is the type of the type of the outside firm and p is the type of the firm itself. In a

´ V̄ (1) 
competitive market the firm can sell this obligation at flow rate λe V̄ (p) V − V̄ (p) dF (V ) .

With the obligation, the firm’s willingness to pay for the worker comes to equal that of the
outside firm.13 Thus, the obligation allows for efficient separation and the current match
extracts all the rents from future employers.
This implies that with the obligation a firm
 type p will be setting a continuation value conditional on
a higher type outside firm meeting of V o V̄ ′ = V̄ ′ > V̄ , which would involve a violation of the firm’s
participation constraint should the worker decide to stay with the firm. Thus, the obligation needs to state
that in case the worker ends up staying with the current firm and it subsequently lays off the worker due to
a violation of the participation constraint, then the firm must honor the payment, B, to the holder of the
obligation in this case as well.
13

22

Returning to the example above where general human capital has been eliminated from
the analysis. Subject to the obligation, the value of the current contract to the worker is,
(r + δ + µ) V = w + µM + δU + λe

ˆ

V̄ (1)

F̂ (V ′ ) dV ′ .
V

The firm is maximizing the profit expression,
(r + δ) Π0 (V, p) = f0 (p) − w − cm (µ) + µ [Π1 (M, p) − Π0 (V, p)] − λe

ˆ

V̄ (p)

F̂ (V ′ ) dV ′ ,

V

where the expected liability payment from the obligation due to the worker quitting is
perfectly offset by the revenue flow from the sale of the obligation. Furthermore, linearity of
the profit function simplifies the profit loss integral from outside offers.
Insert the utility promise expression into the firm’s profits to obtain,


(r + δ) V̄0 (p) = f0 (p) − cm (µ) + δU + µ V̄1 (p) − V̄0 (p) + λe

ˆ

V̄0 (1)

F̂ (V ′ ) dV ′ ,

V̄0 (p)

where the optimal specific training rate solves,

c′m (µ) = V̄1 (p) − V̄0 (p) .
The firm’s willingness to pay in the m = 1 case satisfies,
(r + δ) V̄1 (p) = f1 (p) + δU + λe

ˆ

V̄0 (1)

F̂ (V ′ ) dV ′ .
V̄1 (p)

After a change of variable one obtains,


(r + δ + µ) V̄1 (p) − V̄0 (p) = f1 (p) − f0 (p) + c0 (µ) −


ˆ p̃(p) ′
f0 (p) + µ V̄1′ (p) − V̄0′ (p)
Φ̂ (p′ ) dp′ .
λe
r + δ + λe Φ̂ (p)
p

(14)

Equation (14) is identical to the planner solution (13). Hence, the privately optimal specific
training intensity coincides with that of the social planner.
Variations on the style of obligation as that above can in our analysis undo the limitations
to commitment that are implied by the renegotiation proofness restriction. We rule out
that markets exist for such instruments. Nevertheless, the mechanisms of the obligation
instrument above are instructive: Efficiency is obtained by adoption of side payments not
within the match, but rather with a third party so as to ensure a credible bargaining position
23

with a possible future employer of the worker. Side payments within the match will be
undone by other side payments in a renegotiation proof contract. Consider for example an
instrument such as an unvested pension scheme where the firm’s pension liability to the
worker is eliminated should the worker leave for another firm. At first glance, one might
expect that such a scheme would allow additional rent extraction from a future employer,
however the current firm has incentives to provide side payments so as to ensure efficient
separation and an elimination of its pension liability, and for practical purposes, the pension
scheme ends up being vested.

4

Model parametrization and calibration

The model is calibrated to the U.S. economy. We use the following functional forms:
u(w) =
ch (η) =
cm (µ) =
fij (p) =

c1−θ
1−θ
1+c1
ch0 η
1 + ch1
1+c1
(cm
0 µ)
1 + cm
1
hi + mj + p,

(i, j) ∈ {0, 1}2

Firm productivity is Pareto truncated below and above. The vector of parameters (ρ, θ, m)
is set a priori using estimates from the literature. We choose a coefficient of risk aversion
θ = 2. The death rate reflects an average working life of 40 years, m = 0.025. The discount
rate is set to a 5% annual rate, ρ = 0.05.
The remaining parameters are chosen to fit salient features of the U.S. labor market. To
discipline the model’s accumulation processes, we reproduce the age-earning profile. The
model’s distribution of firm productivity is calibrated to fit to the firm-average wage distribution. In addition, the job destruction rate δ = 0.24 is set to match the U.S. monthly
layoff rate of 2%, and the calibration of λ0 = 4.3 is set the fit the U.S. job finding rate out of
unemployment. We also match the U.S. annual job-to-job transition rate of 0.31.14 Finally,
we impose that both types of human capital are provided at the same intensity on average.
This corresponds to the employment to employment hazard rate reported by Rogerson and Shimer
(2011).
14

24

The age-earnings profile is obtained through the 1979–2010 survey years of the the National Longitudinal Survey of Youth, 1979. It is a representative sample of US households
that was administered yearly from 1979-1994 by the Bureau of Labor Statistics, and once
every two years since. We measure wages as the hourly pay rate at the time of the interview
and deflate it using a CPI index. The sample is restricted to individuals’ wage observations
after they left school and never went back. Potential experience is defined as age minus
age of entry in the labor market. We focus on males from both the core sample and the
supplemental sample using race specific weights to have a sample representative of the population. Years that individuals spend in the military are excluded. Furthermore, individuals
that spent more than two years in the military are excluded, entirely. We trim the top and
bottom 1% of wage observations. Our final sample contains 4,866 individuals and 65,484
and individual-year observations. The average number of observations per individuals is
13.5. Wages are regressed on a full set of dummies for potential experience and individual
fixed effects. We ask our model to match the dummies for potential experience. The first
year of wages are excluded from the calibration due to the model’s sharp assumption that
all workers start their careers with a lifetime utility equal to the value of unemployment.
The firm wage distribution is obtained from Compustat, which provides annual accounting data on publicly listed US firms. We focus on the year 2014 as it is the year with
the largest number of observations and we drop firms with less than 10 employees. Our
final sample contains 1,997 firms. We calculate average wage per firms using the number of
employees in the firms and the total wage bill.15 The model parameters are chosen to reproduce the dispersion in average-wage per worker weighting each observation by the number
of employees.
Figure 2 reports the fit of the model. The solid line is the model and the dots represents
data-points. The left-panel reports the age-earnings profile coefficients from the first year
of entry into the labor market experience until potential experience reaches 30. The right
panel report the deciles of average weighted by the number of employees. Our parsimonious
model does a good at reproduce the data patterns. We fit better the dispersion in average
wage at the top than at the bottom of the distribution.
15
The wage bill measure “ “represents salaries, wages, pension costs, profit sharing and incentive compensation, payroll taxes and other employee benefits.”

25

Figure 2: Model Fit
Age-earnings profile

2.0
1.5
1.0

b

b

b

b

b

b

b

b

b

b

b

b

b

b

b

b

0

b

b

b

b
b

b

b

b

1.5

b
b
b

1.0

b

0.5
0.0

b

b

b

b

Average firm wage

2.0

b
b
b

0.5

b

b

b
b

5

10

15 20
Years

25

0.0
0.0

0.2

0.4
0.6
0.8
Firm rank (CDF)

Note: Data points in green dots. Model estimate in solid black line.

h0 = m0
m
ρ
θ
p
δ
λ0
λ1
ch0
cm
0
ch1 = cm
1
h1 = m1
α
p

Table 1: Model parameters
I. Fixed
0.00 unskilled productivity
0.03 death rate
0.05 discount factor
2.00 risk aversion
1.00 Pareto distribution: lower-bound
II. Calibrated
0.24 job destruction rate
4.30 job offer rate: unemployed
1.79 job offer rate: employed
37.41 training cost: constant
12.20 training cost: variable
0.81 training cost: variable
3.83 skilled productivity
0.29 Pareto distribution: slope
24.60 Pareto distribution: upper-bound

26

1.0

The calibrated parameter values are reported in Table 1. We find that the unemployed
meeting rate is close to 2.5 times that of the employed meeting rate. Compared to for example
Jolivet et al. (2006), this implies a relatively small difference in the efficiency of unemployed
relative to employed search. In part, it is a reflection of the model’s accumulation of match
specific capital which in isolation reduces the job-to-job transition rate. Specific training
is provided at a third of the cost of general training. As we emphasize below, the model
implies significant positive sorting between firm productivity and both worker skill and match
specific capital. Hence, the model’s fit to the average firm wage distribution reflects both
productivity differences across firms, but also a sorting of more productive workers into more
productive firms.

5

Calibrated contracts and steady state

Figure 3 shows the employment contracts for the 50th and 90th percentile firm productivity
types as a function of the utility promise in the contract. The figure expresses the utility
promise in terms of the willingness to pay of a firm with a given productivity p. This is done
to facilitate comparison across contracts.
Within a contract, the wage is increasing in the utility promise. Holding the utility
promise constant wages are decreasing in the firm type. The latter is a well-known feature
of the outside offer matching feature of the wage mechanism, also seen in Postel-Vinay and
Robin (2002). For a given utility promise, an increase in firm type implies greater expected
gains from the on-the-job search process, which the firm can translate into higher profits
through lower current wages. The lower right hand panel in figure 3 shows the wage at full
surplus extraction across firm types, which is seen to be monotonically increasing in firm
type. Production function complementarities between human capital and firm productivity
can introduce a compensating differential between wages and training, but such considerations are not relevant given the modular production function specification in the current
calibration. However, even in this case, whether higher type firms on average give higher
wages depends on the composition of utility promises across its workers. We explore this in
the next section.
As expected, both general and specific training are increasing in the utility promise within

27

Figure 3: Employment contracts by firm type.
ηm (V̄m (p), pr )

0.20

0.10
0.08

0.15

0.06

0.10

0.04

0.05
0.00

0.02
0

4

8
p

12

16

whm (V̄hm (p), pr )

25

0.00

0

4

8
p

12

16

ηm (V̄m (p), p) and µh (V̄h (p), p)

0.4

20

0.3

15

0.2

10

0.1

5
0

µh (V̄h (p), pr )

0

4

8
p

12

16

0.0

0

5

10

p

15

20

25

Note: Firm type conditional contracts drawn for r = 0.5 and r = 0.9. Upper left panel: Solid lines for
m = 0 and dotted lines for m = 1. Upper right panel: Solid lines for h = 0 and dotted lines for
h = 1. Lower left panel: Dashed lines for (h, m) = (0, 0) and dotted lines for (h, m) = (1, 1).
Lower right panel: Training at full rent extraction. Solid lines for h = 0 and m = 0, respectively.
Dotted lines for h = 1 and m = 1, respectively.

a contract. For a given firm type, a lower utility promise implies a steeper expected future
wage path, which increases the severity of the hold up problem. Therefore, training is lower
for lower utility promises. The differences in competitive pressure across the two types of
training show up in the figures as well. Specific training within the 90th percentile firm is
almost constant in the utility promise whereas general training is considerably more sensitive
to the utility promise. The competitive pressure on future utility promises associated with
specific training is determined primarily by the firm’s position in the firm hierarchy: As
the match becomes more productive due to an increase in m, competitive pressure on the
worker’s future utility promises is only affected in the event that the worker meets a more

28

productive firm than the current firm. The wage is lowered up front to reflect the expected
utility promise gains associated with training. The only reason the current utility promise
does play a role in the provision of specific training is because the surplus loss associated
with lowering the worker’s wage is proportional to the worker’s marginal utility, which is
decreasing in the utility promise.
The increased competitive pressure associated with increased general human capital is
on the other hand primarily determined by the current utility promise, V . A meeting with
any productivity firm greater than p1m (V ) is associated with an increased utility promise
pressure due to the increase in h. Thus, for a lower V there is a larger mass of outside firms
that can exert pressure on the match. In combination with the greater marginal utility of
wages associated with the lower utility promise, V , the surplus loss of reducing the worker’s
wages up front in expectation of the future utility promise gains from general training is
more sensitive to V .
Finally, risk aversion is a separate source of positive complementarity between general
and specific training. If a worker’s skill increases, her utility promise increases and her
wages come to increase faster. The lower marginal utility of wages reduces the surplus loss
associated with the backloading of wages due to one type of training. This effect is related
to the strategic complementarity results in Balmaceda (2005) and Kessler and Lülfesmann
(2006) where the existence of non-contractable specific training can counteract the hold-up
problem in particular wage bargaining settings.

5.1

Training in steady state

The previous section highlights the importance of the utility promise composition within
firms as a determinant of realized training levels. Figure 4 shows the average steady state
training levels across firm types. Both general and specific training are on average increasing
in firm type. For a given utility promise, training is decreasing in firm type because of
the implied lower current wage and more severe hold up problem. However, between firm
competition is such that in steady state the higher utility promises in more productive firms
result in greater training, both general and specific.
The left panel of Figure 5 shows the accumulation of general, specific, and search capital
over the careers of a cohort of workers. All three stocks are accumulating over time, which

29

Figure 4: Steady state training across firm types
E[η0 (V, p) | p]

0.20

0.08

0.15

0.06

0.10

0.04

0.05
0.00

E[µ0 (V, p) | p]

0.10

0.02
0

5

10

15

p

20

25

0.00

0

5

10

p

15

20

25

Figure 5: Steady state capital accumulation and surplus share by cohort age
Capital Accumulation

1.0

E[Φ(p)|age]

0.8
0.6

0.7
0.6

E[h|age]

0.4

0.5
E[m|age]

0.2
0.0

Worker’s share of match surplus

0.8

0

5

10
15
20
Age (years)

0.4
25

30

0.3

0

5

10
15
20
Age (years)

25

30

in combination give rise to an increasing wage profile over experience as shown in the right
hand panel. Unemployment resets the search and specific capital stocks. Consequently, the
fraction of the population that is specifically trained does not go to one. It will also not be
the case that all workers will eventually find themselves employed with the best firm type.
But conditional on survival, all workers become generally skilled eventually given that there
is no depreciation of general human capital in the model. The right panel shows the worker’s
average share of match surplus by age.

30

Figure 6: Average human capital level by firm type.
E[h | p]

1.0
0.8

0.15

0.6

0.10

0.4

0.05

0.2

5.2

0

5

10

p

15

E[m | p]

0.20

20

25

0.00

0

5

10

p

15

20

25

Sorting

Higher rank firms provide more training and consequently their workers tend to have higher
human capital, both general and specific. That is, the steady state match distribution
exhibits a positive correlation between firm and worker productivity. Figure 6 shows the
average levels of human capital by firm type in the steady state. As can be seen the labor force
of higher ranked firms is both more skilled and has higher match specific capital as well. This
is not a result of positive assortative matching. In addition, there are no complementarities
in production in the calibration. It is a reflection of the state dependence in the model that
fortunate employment draws with more productive firms contribute not only to a better
contract value but also to a faster development of both general and specific skills.

6

Training and frictions

Acemoglu and Pischke (1999) emphasize that increased labor market friction allows firms to
provide more general training when it is costly to resolve the hold up problem by making the
worker pay for training up front through lower wages. Wasmer (2006) adds to the argument
that increased labor market friction will increase specific training in a setup where matches
invest in specific capital to reduce the risk of job destruction.
Figure 7 demonstrates the Acemoglu and Pischke (1999) mechanism within a given firm’s
contract. It shows the 90th percentile productivity firm’s training choices for λ = 1.0 and
e

λe = 2.0. The horizontal axis is the utility promise support of the contract represented by the
31

Figure 7: Firm type Φ (p) = 0.9 employment contract for λe = 1.0 and λe = 2.0.
η0 (V̄00 (p), p0.9 )

0.20

µ0 (V̄00 (p), p0.9 )

0.15

0.06

0.10
0.04

0.05
0.00

0

4

8
p

12

0.02

0

4

8
p

12

Note: Solid line drawn for λe = 2.0 and dashed line drawn for λe = 1.0.

willingness to pay of type p firm. The figure shows that holding the firm hierarchy position
associated with a given utility promise fixed, an increase in the contact rate is associated
with a decrease in training. For the given competitive position the greater contact rate
implies steeper future wages, a lower current wage, and therefore a more severe hold up
problem from training. This is exactly the Acemoglu and Pischke (1999) argument and in
our environment it applies not only to general training but also to specific training.
But the steady state utility promise composition within a firm’s labor force is not constant
in changes in the contact rate. Specifically, a higher contact rate implies a right shift of utility
promises due to greater competitive pressure between firms. Figure 8 shows the average
training levels by firm type in steady state for λe = 1.0 and λe = 2.0. It is seen that this
effect by itself substantially modifies the Acemoglu and Pischke (1999) mechanism to such an
extent that a substantial range of firm types actually increase training in steady state when
the contact rate goes up. This effect is more pronounced for general than specific training.
In addition to the composition of utility promises, overall training and accumulation of
skills in the economy also depend on the match distribution which is also affected by changes
in frictions. As the contact rate increases, worker mismatch will tend to decline in the sense
that workers will match with better firms. Since training is generally decreasing in mismatch,
one would expect an effect on training from changes in the match distribution as well.
The left hand panel in Figure 9 shows the average human capital levels in the steady

32

Figure 8: Average steady state firm type conditional training levels for λe = 1.0 and λe = 2.0.
E[η0 (V, p) | p]

0.20

0.08

0.15

0.06

0.10

0.04

0.05
0.00

E[µ0 (V, p) | p]

0.10

0.02
0

5

10

p

15

20

25

0.00

0

5

10

p

15

20

25

Note: Solid line drawn for λe = 2.0 and dashed line drawn for λe = 1.0.

Figure 9: Average steady state levels of general and specific human capital by λe .
E[h]

0.8

E[m]

0.14
0.13

0.7

0.12
0.6
0.5

0.11
0

1

2
λe

3

4

0.10

0

1

2
λe

3

4

state economy for different levels of contact rates. As can be seen, general skill is robustly
increasing in the contact rate, which is opposite to the intuition developed in Acemoglu and
Pischke (1999). The analysis in this paper embodies the central mechanism in their paper,
but it is dominated by composition effects from search on the job and the presence of firm
heterogeneity that is a natural consequence of a frictional labor market environment.
For the given calibration, match specific capital is non-monotone in the contact rate.
Specific training is increasing in firm type and eventually the improved match distribution
will result in more training as mismatch declines. However, for lower contact rates, the lower
training levels within firm type for given utility promises dominate and result in less specific

33

training.

7

Concluding remarks

We have in this paper put forth a framework for the study of wage dynamics that allows for
search frictions, tim heterogeneity and human capital accumulation. In contrast to passive
learning processes, we model the active investment in general human capital and match
specific capital in response to the magnitude of the returns. The intensity of labor market
competition is a primary factor in the determination of the returns to training, and we carry
out the analysis in frictional setting where heterogeneous firms naturally coexist and workers
can move directly between firms through a standard on the job search process. Optimally
designed employment contracts set wages and training rates conditional on the history of
the match.
We find that training varies by firm type. In isolation, the moral hazard problem associated with training implies that more productive firms train more. A super-modular
production function in human capital and firm productivity will amplify this relationship.
Thus, aggregate human capital accumulation comes to depend on the equilibrium match
distribution of worker over firm types, and we show that it is of first order importance in
the model calibrated to the US economy. For one, the classic Acemoglu and Pischke (1999)
result that increased labor market friction alleviates the hold up problem in training and
therefore results in more training is overturned through dominating equilibrium effects: Increased labor market friction results in worse matches and reduced bargaining positions both of which imply reduced training.
In terms of the classic decomposition of labor market outcomes into luck and skill, the
current analysis demonstrates that variation in skill is at least in part a result of variation
in luck. The calibrated economy displays substantial sorting despite the absence of complementarities in production and the absence of assortative matching. The positive relationship
between worker skill and firm productivity is a result of the faster accumulation of skill and
match specific capital in more productive firms. Consequently, more productive firms tend
to have more skilled workers as well as higher match specific capital.
The presence of firm heterogeneity also allowed us to point to an important feature of

34

wage dynamics and specific training: The presence of more productive firms than the current
firm implies that the match value increase associated with specific training can be contested
in the market by these more productive firms. Therefore, specific training is associated
with both increasing wages within the job as well as increased wages with future employers.
Consequently, the distinction between tenure and experience effects in wage dynamics is not
by itself sufficient to evaluate the importance of specific relative to general training. An
obvious avenue for future research is to utilize worker reallocation patterns to help with the
separate identification of the two processes: Specific training reduces reallocation whereas
general training has no impact on mobility in the model.

35

A

Steady state conditions

Assuming that unemployed workers do not turn down any meetings, the steady state conditions on the employment and unemployment stocks are,
(15)

(d + λu ) u0 = d + δ (e00 + e01 )
(d + λu ) u1 = δ (e10 + e11 )
ˆ
(d + δ + η̄0 + µ̄0 ) e00 = λu u0 + e01

(16)
0

1ˆ

V̄01

(p′ )


λF̂0 V̄01 (p′ ) g01 (V ′ , p′) dV ′ dp′

U0

ˆ

1

ˆ

(17)

V̄11 (p′ )


λF̂1 V̄11 (p′ ) g11 (V ′ , p′ ) dV ′ dp′ (18)
0
U1
!
ˆ 1 ˆ V̄01 (p′ )

d + δ + η̄1 +
λF̂0 V̄01 (p′ ) g01 (V ′ , p′ ) dV ′ dp′ e01

(d + δ + µ̄1 ) e10 = λu u1 + η̄0 e00 + e11
µ̄0 e00 =

0

U0

(19)

η̄1 e01 + µ̄1 e10 =
where µ̄h =

´ 1 ´ V̄h0 (p′ )
0

Uh

d+δ+

ˆ

0

1ˆ

V̄11

(p′ )


λF̂1 V̄11 (p′ ) g11 (V ′ , p′ ) dV ′ dp′

U1

µh (V ′ , p′ ) dGh0 (V, p) and η̄m =

´ 1 ´ V̄0m (p′ )
0

U0

!

e11 ,

(20)

ηm (V ′ , p′ ) dG0m (V, p).

The steady state conditions on e01 G01 (V, p), e10 G10 (V, p), and e11 G11 (V, p) are respectively,
e00

ˆ pˆ
0

V̄00 (p′ )

1 [M0 (V ′ , p′ ) ≤ V ] µ0 (V ′ , p′ ) g00 (V ′ , p′ ) dV ′ dp′ =
U0

e01

ˆ

p
0

ˆ

V̄01 (p)
U0

h
i
m + δ + η1 (V ′ , p′ ) + λF̂0 V̄01 (p′ ) g01 (V ′ , p′ ) dV ′ dp′ .

The steady state condition on e10 G10 (V, p) is,
p11 (V )

λu u1 Φ (p) + λe11

ˆ

p

+ e00

ˆ

p10 (V )

ˆ

0

0

e10

(ˆ

0

ˆ

V̄11 (p′ )

ˆ



U1
V̄00 (p′ )



F1 V̄10 (p) − F1 V̄11 (p′ ) g11 (V ′ , p′ ) dV ′ dp′

1 [H0 (V ′ , p′ ) ≤ V ] η0 (V ′ , p′ ) g00 (V ′ , p′ ) dV ′ dp′ =

U0

V̄10 (p′ )
U

h
i
d + δ + µ1 (V ′ , p′ ) + λF̂1 V̄10 (p) g10 (V ′ , p′ ) dV ′ dp′ +

ˆ

p

p̄10 (V )

ˆ

V

U

)
h
i
d + δ + µ1 (V ′ , p′ ) + λF̂1 (V ) g10 (V ′ , p′ ) dV ′ dp′ .

36

And finally, the steady state condition on e11 G11 (V, p) is,
e10

ˆ pˆ
0

V̄10 (p′ )

1 [M1 (V ′ , p′ ) ≤ V ] µ1 (V ′ , p′ ) g10 (V ′ , p′ ) dV ′ dp′ =
U0

e11

ˆ

p

0

B

ˆ

V̄11 (p)

U0

h
i
d + δ + λF̂1 V̄11 (p′ ) g11 (V ′ , p′ ) dV ′ dp′ .

Social planner, general human capital

Consider the case where human capital is only general. Assume a modular production
function and risk neutral workers. Without loss of generality assume fh (p) = f (p) + h, and
bh = fh (0) . Consider a utilitarian social planner problem of maximizing the contribution of
a worker in a low skill match. Denote the contribution by,

ˆ
(r + δ) V0 (p) = max f (p) − ch (η) + δU0 + η (V1 (p) − V0 (p)) + λe
µ

1
′

[V0 (p ) − V0 (p)] dΦ (p)

p

= f (p) + δU0 + H (p) + λe

ˆ

1

[f ′ (p′ ) + H′ (p′ )] Φ̂ (p′ )
r + δ + λ1 Φ̂ (p′ )

p

dp′ ,

where the value of a high match specific capital match is,
ˆ 1
(r + δ) V1 (p) = f (p) + 1 + δU1 + λe
[V1 (p′ ) − V1 (p)] dΦ (p)
p

= f (p) + 1 + δU1 + λe

ˆ

p

1

f ′ (p′ ) Φ̂ (p′ )
r + δ + λ1 Φ̂ (p′ )

dp′ .

The value of the investment option is,
H (p) = max [−ch (η) + η (V1 (p) − V0 (p))] .
η

And the socially optimal specific investment choice solves,
c′h (η (p)) = V1 (p) − V0 (p) .
Some algebra yields,
V1 (p) − V0 (p) =

r + δ + rch (η)
r (r + δ + η)

which implies,
V1′ (p) − V0′ (p) = 0
Therefore, the social planner’s choice of specific investment is constant in p, η ′ (p) = 0.
37



C

Numerical Solution

Firm productivity is discretized and each element of the grid {pj }j=1,...,Np has equal probabil1
.
Np

ity

All integrals are numerically approximated with Gauss-Legendre quadrature. We use

linear interpolation to approximate policy functions off the grid. We solve for the optimal
contracts using the following iterative algorithm. Use initial guesses for the functions F1 and
F0 .
1. Solve for V̄11j and the corresponding w using (2), (3) and (4).


2. For any V11 ∈ U1 , V̄11j , solve for the corresponding (w, Π) using (2), (3) and (5).
3. Solve for V̄10j and the corresponding (w, µ, Π) using (2), (3), (4) and (12).
4. Using the previous step, update F1 . Return to 1. until convergence.


5. For any V10 ∈ U1 , V̄10j , solve for the corresponding (w, η, Π) using (2), (3), (5) and
(12).

6. Solve for V̄01j and the corresponding (w, η) using (2), (3), (4) and (11).


7. For any V01 ∈ U0 , V̄01j , solve for the corresponding (w, µ, Π) using (2), (3), (5) and
(11). If the participation constraint is not satisfied, we set H = U1 .

8. Solve for V̄00j and the corresponding (w, η, µ) using (2), (3), (4), (11) and (12). If the
participation constraint is not satisfied, we set H = U1 .
9. Using the previous step, update F0 . Return to 5. until convergence.


10. For any V00 ∈ U0 , V̄00j , solve for the corresponding (w, η, µ, Π) using (2), (3), (5), (11)
and (12).

In step 5 and above, we check whether the participation constraint H ≥ U1 is binding.

38

References
Acemoglu, D. and Pischke, J.-S. (1999). The structure of wages and investment in general
training. Journal of Political Economy, 107(3):539–572.
Altonji, J. G. and Shakotko, R. A. (1987). Do wages rise with job seniority? Review of
Economic Studies, 54(3):437–459.
Altonji, J. G. and Williams, N. (2005). Do wages rise with job seniority? a reassessment.
Industrial and Labor Relations Review, 58:370–397.
Bagger, J. and Lentz, R. (2013). An empirical model of wage dispersion with sorting.
University of Wisconsin–Madison Working Paper.
Balmaceda, F. (2005). Firm-sponsored general training.

Journal of Labor Economics,

23(1):115–133.
Becker, G. S. (1964). Human Capital. University of Chicago Press, Chicago.
Buchinsky, M., Fougère, D., Kramarz, F., and Tchernis, R. (2010). Interfirm mobility, wages
and the returns to seniority and experience in the united states. Review of Economic
Studies, 77:972–1001.
Carrillo-Tudela, C. and Smith, E. (2014). Search capital. Working Paper.
Christensen, B. J., Lentz, R., Mortensen, D. T., Neumann, G., and Werwatz, A. (2005). On
the job search and the wage distribution. Journal of Labor Economics, 23(1):31–58.
Dustman, C. and Meghir, C. (2005). Wage, experience and seniority. Review of Economic
Studies, 72:77–108.
Felli, L. and Harris, C. (1996). Learning, wage dynamics, and firm-specific human capital.
Journal of Political Economy, 104(4):838–868.
Fu, C. (2011). Training, search and wage dispersion. Review of Economic Dynamics, 14:650–
666.
Fujita, S. and Moscarini, G. (2013). Recall and unemployment. Working Paper.
39

Guvenen, F., Kuruscu, B., Tanaka, S., and Wiczer, D. (2015). Occupational switching and
self-discovery in the labor market. Working Paper.
Jolivet, G., Postel-Vinay, F., and Robin, J.-M. (2006). The empirical content of the job
search model: Labor mobility and wage distributions in europe and the US. European
Economic Review, 50(4):877–907.
Kessler, A. S. and Lülfesmann, C. (2006). The theory of human capital revisited: On the
interaction of general and specific investments. The Economic Journal, 116:903–923.
Lentz, R. (2014). Optimal employment contracts with hidden search. NBER Working Papers,
(19988).
Postel-Vinay, F. and Robin, J.-M. (2002). Equilibrium wage dispersion with worker and
employer heterogeneity. Econometrica, 70(6):2295–2350.
Rogerson, R. and Shimer, R. (2011). Search in macroeconomic models of the labor market.
In Handbook of Labor Economics, Volume 4a. Elsevier Science B.V.
Sanders, C. and Taber, C. (2012). Life-cycle wage growth and heterogenous human capital.
Annual Review of Economics, 41(1):399–425.
Spear, S. E. and Srivastava, S. (1987). On repeated moral hazard with discounting. Review
of Economic Dynamics, pages 599–617.
Thomas, J. and Worrall, T. (1988). Self-enforcing wage contracts. Review of Economic
Studies, pages 541–554.
Topel, R. H. (1991). Specific capital, mobility and wages: Wages rise with job seniority.
Journal of Political Economy, 99(1):145–176.
Wasmer, E. (2006). Specific skills, search frictions, and firing costs. American Economic
Review, 96(3):811–31.

40

