NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

HOW DO RIGHT-TO-CARRY LAWS AFFECT CRIME RATES? COPING WITH
AMBIGUITY USING BOUNDED-VARIATION ASSUMPTIONS
Charles F. Manski
John V. Pepper
Working Paper 21701
http://www.nber.org/papers/w21701

NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
November 2015

We thank David Rodina for research assistance. We are grateful to Dan Black, Jennifer Doleac, Joel
Horowitz, Brent Kreider, and Daniel Nagin for helpful comments. The views expressed herein are
those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peerreviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.
© 2015 by Charles F. Manski and John V. Pepper. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to
exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including
© notice, is given to the source.

How Do Right-To-Carry Laws Affect Crime Rates? Coping With Ambiguity Using Bounded-Variation
Assumptions
Charles F. Manski and John V. Pepper
NBER Working Paper No. 21701
November 2015
JEL No. K14,K42,Z18
ABSTRACT
Despite dozens of studies, research on crime in the United States has struggled to reach consensus
about the impact of right-to-carry (RTC) gun laws. Empirical results are highly sensitive to seemingly
minor variations in the data and model. How then should research proceed? We think that policy
analysis is most useful if researchers perform inference under a spectrum of assumptions of varying
identifying power, recognizing the tension between the strength of assumptions and their credibility.
With this in mind, we formalize and apply a class of assumptions that flexibly restrict the degree to
which policy outcomes may vary across time and space. Our bounded variation assumptions weaken
in various respects the invariance assumptions commonly made by researchers who assume that certain
features of treatment response are constant across space or time. Using bounded variation assumptions,
we present empirical analysis of the effect of RTC laws on violent and property crimes. We allow
the effects to vary across crimes, years and states. To keep the analysis manageable, we focus on drawing
inferences for three states –Virginia, Maryland, and Illinois. We find there are no simple answers;
empirical findings are sensitive to assumptions, and vary over crimes, years, and states. With some
assumptions, the data do not reveal whether RTC laws increase or decrease the crime rate. With others,
RTC laws are found to increase some crimes, decrease other crimes, and have effects that vary over
time for others.

Charles F. Manski
Department of Economics
Northwestern University
2001 Sheridan Road
Evanston, IL 60208
and NBER
cfmanski@northwestern.edu
John V. Pepper
Department of Economics
University of Virginia
P.O. Box 400182
Charlottesville, VA 22904-4182
jvp3m@virginia.edu

1.

INTRODUCTION

Research on crime in the United States has commonly used data on county or state crime
rates to evaluate the impact of laws allowing individuals to carry concealed handguns – so called
right-to-carry (RTC) laws. Theory alone cannot predict even the direction of the impact. The
knowledge or belief that potential victims may be carrying weapons may deter commission of
some crimes but may escalate the severity of criminal encounters (see Donohue and Levitt, 1998).1
Ultimately, how allowing individuals to carry concealed weapons affects crime is an empirical
question.
Lott (2000) describes this empirical research to a lay audience in a book with the
provocative and unambiguous title More Guns, Less Crime. Yet, despite dozens of studies, the
research provides no clear insight on whether “more guns” leads to less crime. Some studies find
that RTC laws reduce crime, others find that the effects are negligible, and still others find that
such laws increase violent and/or property crime. In a series of papers starting in 1997, Lott and
coauthors have argued forcefully that RTC laws have important deterrent effects which can play a
role in reducing violent crime. Lott and Mustard (1997) and Lott (2000), for example, found that
RTC laws reduce crime rates in every violent crime category by between 5 and 8 percent. Using
different models and revised/updated data, however, other researchers have found that RTC laws
either have little impact or may increase violent crime rates. 2 Consider, for example, Aneja,

1

Donohue and Levitt (1998) formalize a simple stylized model showing that in illegal markets
with scarce resources, firearms (or lethality more generally) do not have a clear impact on violence.
This model also implies that the impact of firearms might vary across markets and over time, a
finding which is inconsistent with standard models used in empirical analysis. We elaborate in
Section 3.
2
See, for example, Black and Nagin (1998), Ludwig (1998), Ayres and Donohue (2003), and
Aneja et al. (2011).
1

Donohue and Zhang (2011), who make seemingly minor modifications to the basic model and data
(e.g., reducing the number of demographic covariates) used by Lott (2000). Whereas Lott (2000)
found that RTC laws decrease the different violent crime rates by between 5 and 8 percent, Aneja
et al. (2011) found that RTC laws have a negligible impact on murder and increase other violent
crime rates by 20 to 30 percent. Aneja et al. (2011) also report that many of the point estimates
are statistically insignificant.
This ambiguity may seem surprising. How can researchers using similar data draw such
different conclusions? In fact, it has long been known that inferring the magnitude and direction
of treatment effects is an inherently difficult undertaking. Suppose that one wants to learn how
crime rates would differ with and without a RTC law in a given place and time. Data cannot reveal
counterfactual outcomes. That is, data cannot reveal what the crime rate in a RTC state would
have been if the state had not enacted the law. Nor can data reveal what the crime rate in a nonRTC state would have been if a RTC law had been in effect. To estimate the law’s effect, one
must somehow “fill in” the missing counterfactual observations.

This requires making

assumptions that cannot be tested empirically. Different assumptions may yield different
inferences.
Yet the empirical research on RTC laws has struggled to find consensus on a set of credible
assumptions. Reviewing the literature, the National Research Council (NRC) Committee to
Improve Research Information and Data on Firearms concluded that it is not possible to infer a
credible causal link between RTC laws and crime using the current evidence (National Research
Council, 2005). Indeed, the Committee concluded that (p. 150): “additional analysis along the
lines of the current literature is unlikely to yield results that will persuasively demonstrate” this
link. The Committee found that estimates are highly sensitive to model specification. Yet there
2

is no solid foundation for particular assumptions and, as a result, no obvious way to prefer specific
results. Hence, drawing credible point estimates that lead to consensus about the impact of RTC
laws has thus far proven to be impossible.
How then should research proceed? We think that analysis of treatment response is most
useful if researchers perform inference under a spectrum of assumptions of varying identifying
power, recognizing the tension between the strength of assumptions and their credibility. Research
on RTC laws has commonly made invariance assumptions asserting that specified features of
treatment response are constant across space or time. These assumptions may be too strong to be
credible, but weaker assumptions asserting bounded variation may be credible.
For example, an invariance assumption may assert that neighboring states such as Virginia
and Maryland have identical environments and propensities for criminality. This assumption may
seem attractive because it enables contemporaneous comparison of the two states, but it may not
be credible. Yet it may be credible to assume that these states are similar to one another. Likewise,
an invariance assumption may assume that, in the absence of RTC statutes, Virginia and Maryland
would have experienced the same change in murder rates between two periods, say 1988 and 1990.
This assumption may also seem attractive because it enables difference-in-differences analysis of
treatment response but, again, it may not be credible. On the other hand, it may be credible to
assume that the two states would have experienced similar changes.
With this in mind, we formalize and apply a class of bounded-variation assumptions that
flexibly restrict the variation of treatment response across states and years. Throughout, we allow
for the possibility that the effects of RTC laws vary across years, states, and crimes. To keep our
task manageable, we mainly focus on drawing inferences on the impact of RTC laws in a single
state, Virginia, but also further illustrate the approach by examining what can be inferred about
3

the impact of RTC laws in Maryland and Illinois, two states that did not adopt RTC statutes during
the period we study.
The bounded variation assumptions we use generally do not point-identify the effects of
RTC laws on crime rates. Instead, they partially identify them, yielding bounds rather than point
estimates. Partial identification analysis of treatment effects from observational data was initiated
in Manski (1990) and has developed subsequently. Manski (2007) provides a textbook exposition.
Some applications to evaluation of criminal-justice policy include Manski and Nagin (1998),
Manski and Pepper (2013), and Siddique (2013). The closest methodological precedent to the
present study is the Manski and Pepper (2000) study of monotone instrumental variable
assumptions. The closest applied precedent is the Manski and Pepper (2013) analysis of the
deterrent effect of the death penalty, which applied some simple forms of the bounded-variation
assumptions used here.3
The paper is organized as follows: After providing a brief overview of the data in Section
2, Section 3 formally defines the empirical question and the selection problem, and then introduces
invariance and bounded variation assumptions. In Section 3, we illustrate the sensitivity of
inferences to different identifying restrictions but we do not argue in a favor of any particular

3

The only other related methodological work of which we are aware is Athey and Imbens (2006).
They too study inference on treatment response with data on repeated cross-sections. Their
changes-in-changes model weakens the assumption of homogeneous treatment effects made in
many studies by making treatment response a nonseparable function of the treatment and a scalar
person-specific unobserved variable. They assume that this response function is homogeneous
across persons and monotone in the unobserved variable. They combine their response model with
distributional invariance assumptions that enable one to infer certain counterfactual outcomes from
observations of realized outcomes. We share with Athey and Imbens the broad objective of
offering empirical research assumptions of varying strength and identifying power. We do not
assume their changes-in-changes model, and our assumptions that restrict variation in treatment
response differ from their distributional invariance assumptions.
4

assumption. In Section 4, we motivate particular bounded variation assumptions and present
results on the impact of RTC laws under these assumptions. The results are nuanced and not
amenable to a simple punch line conclusion. Inferences on RTC laws are sensitive to assumptions
and, even under relatively strong assumptions, the results vary across crimes, states and years.
RTC laws appear to reduce some crimes, increase others, and for some the results vary over time.
Section 5 draws conclusions.

2.

DATA

To evaluate the impact of RTC laws on crime, we use state level data on annual crime rates
(per 100,000 residents) from 1970 to 2007. We do not normalize crime rates to lie in the unit
interval or take the natural log of the crime rate, as is done in much of the literature. Rather we
are interested in directly studying state-year crime rates: 100,000 times the ratio of the number of
reported crimes to the population of the state. We mostly focus on crime rates in Virginia and
Maryland. To further illustrate the bounded variation assumptions, we briefly examine crime rates
in Illinois and Indiana in Section 4.3.
The crime data, obtained from the FBI’s Uniform Crime Reports (UCR), were originally
assembled by Lott and Mustard and have subsequently been modified, corrected, and updated
several times. Our analysis uses the iteration assembled and evaluated by Aneja, Donohue and
Zhang (2011). 4 For each state and year, we observe crime rates separately for murder, rape,

4

The data were downloaded from http://works.bepress.com/john_donohue/89/ in June 2012.
5

assault, robbery, auto theft, burglary, and larceny. For each state-year, we observe whether a RTC
statute is in place. 5
Figures 1A and 1B display the annual time series of murder and robbery rates in Virginia
and Maryland over the period 1970–2007. The figures reveal several interesting characteristics of
the crime rates. First, notice that except for murder rates in a few years during the 1970s, crime
rates in Maryland exceed the analogous rate in Virginia, in many cases by a substantial margin.
Second, the figures show well-known temporal patterns in crime: crime rates rose in the 1980s and
then declined sharply beginning in the mid-1990s. Crime rates in Maryland, which did not adopt
a RTC statute over this period, have more pronounced changes than those in Virginia, rising faster
in the 1980s and dropping faster in the 1990s. Virginia enacted a RTC statute in 1989.

3.

BASIC ISSUES IN INFERENCE ON AVERAGE TREATMENT EFFECTS, WITH AN

ILLUSTRATIVE APPLICATION

In this section, we formally define the empirical question and the selection problem, and
introduce invariance and bounded variation assumptions. We begin by defining the average

5

As of 2014, all 50 states have passed laws allowing citizens to carry concealed firearms. Not all
states, however, have RTC laws as defined in the empirical research. The research has classified
a state as having a RTC law when legal gun owners are allowed to carry concealed firearms,
perhaps after certification and training. These are often referred to as “shall issue” provisions, in
that the state shall issue a permit subject to the applicant meeting basic determinate criteria. Other
states require applicants to demonstrate “good cause” before granting a concealed carry permit.
These so called “may issue” states are not classified as having RTC laws. Today, ten states and
the District of Columbia have “may issue” provisions and forty-one states have “shall issue”
provisions. A recent wave of high profile state legislation allows citizens to openly carry firearms
in public, enacting so called “open carry” laws. While not considered in this analysis, the same
identification problems creating uncertainty in the research on RTC laws apply to any evaluation
of the impact of “open carry” laws on crime.
6

treatment effect and then assess the effect of a RTC law on the 1990 murder rate in Virginia. We
focus on this somewhat narrow question to clearly illustrate the utility of bounded variation
restrictions. In particular, we show how bounded variation restrictions provide an intuitive and
simple way to improve the credibility of empirical research. We also illustrate the sensitivity of
inferences to different identifying restrictions, without arguing in favor of any particular set of
assumptions. In Section 4, we use the observed data on crime rates to motivate a particular set of
bounded variation assumptions and explore, in some detail, the inferences that arise from this set
of assumptions.
In this paper, we do not provide measures of statistical precision when presenting our
empirical findings on the impact of RTC laws. That is, we perform a finite-population analysis
that views the states as the population of interest, rather than as realizations from some sampling
process. One reason is expositional, being that we want to focus attention on the identification
problem arising from the unobservability of counterfactual outcomes. Concerns with statistical
precision arise only when interpreting the available data on crime rates across states and years.
Turning to the available data, a fundamental reason for not performing statistical inference
is that measurement of statistical precision requires specification of a sampling process that
generates the data. Yet we are unsure what type of sampling process would be reasonable to
assume in this application. One would have to view the existing United States as the sampling
realization of a random process defined on a super-population of alternative nations.6 That is, one
would have to pose a random process generating actual American history, with its division of the
country into states with their populations of persons, as one among a set of possible histories that

6

See Cochran (1977) and Deaton (1997), among others, for expositions of the distinction
between finite-population and super-population analysis.
7

could have generated alternative state-year crime rates. But what random process should be
assumed to have generated the existing United States, with its realized state-year crime rates?
There is no obvious answer and the literature analyzing RTC laws has not engaged the question.
Existing methods for computing confidence intervals in partial identification analysis
assume that the data are a random sample drawn from an infinite population; see, for example,
Imbens and Manski (2004), Chernozhukov, Hong, and Tamer (2007), and Chernozhukov, Lee and
Rosen (2013). Likewise, random sampling assumptions are implicit in the inferential methods
used to estimate the standard errors of parameter estimates in the linear panel data models prevalent
in the existing literature on RTC laws.7 Random sampling assumptions, however, are not natural
when considering states or counties as units of observation.
A similar concern has been raised by Abadie et al. (2014), who note that state level analysis
“creates a problem for interpreting the uncertainty in the parameter estimates. If the
parameters of interest are defined in terms of observable variables defined on units in the
population, then if the sample is equal to the population there should be no uncertainty and
standard errors should be equal to zero.”
In the setting of a randomized experimental design, Abadie et. al. (2014) develop an alternative
conceptualization for drawing inferences when one observes the entire population. However, their
approach is not applicable in observational settings where the treatment, such as RTC laws, may
be endogenous.

7

There is an ongoing debate about the appropriate method of estimating standard errors for the
linear models used in the RTC literature (see Aneja et al., 2011, and NRC, 2005). Many researchers
report standard errors that allow for arbitrary correlation within a state or county – so called
state/county clustered standard errors – while others do not allow for such correlations. The NRC
report explains that these clustered sampling standard errors are inappropriate in the standard linear
panel data models (with fixed county effects) used in the literature. Our concerns are distinct from
these issues. We find no basis for reporting standard errors using any of the conventional methods,
allowing for clustering or not.
8

3.1

Average Treatment Effects and the Selection Problem

Consider the problem of inferring the average treatment effect (ATE) of a RTC statute on
the rate of commission of a specified crime in a specified year in a group of states that share
specified observed covariates:

(1)

ATEdx = E[Yd(1)|X] − E[Yd(0)| X].

Outcome Yd(1) denotes the crime rate if a state were to have a RTC statute in year d, Yd(0) denotes
the analogous outcome if the state were not to have a RTC statute, X denotes the specified
covariates, and d indicates the specified year. The average treatment effect measures how the
crime rate would differ if all states with covariates X were to have a RTC statute in year d versus
the rate if all such states did not have a RTC law. The ATE can vary with d and X. We follow the
literature by assuming that treatment response is individualistic; that is, a RTC law in state j may
impact crime in state j, but not elsewhere. Thus, there are no spillover effects to other states.
For each state j and year d, there are two potential outcomes, Yjd(1) and Yjd(0). The former
outcome is counterfactual if state j did not have a RTC statute in year d while the latter is
counterfactual if the state did have a RTC statute. The observed crime rate is Yjd(Zjd) = Yjd(1) Zjd
+ Yjd(0) (1 − Zjd), where Zjd = 1 if state j has a RTC statute in year d and Zjd = 0 otherwise. We
henceforth write Yjd = Yjd(Zjd) for short.
The fact that the data only reveal one of the two mutually exclusive outcomes constitutes
the selection problem. The implications for identification of the average treatment effect can be

9

seen by using the law of iterated expectations to decompose the two conditional expectations on
the right-hand side of (1) as follows:
(2)

ATEdx = E[Yd(1)|X, Zd = 1]P(Zd = 1|X) + E[Yd(1)|X, Zd = 0]P(Zd = 0|X)
− E[Yd(0)|X, Zd = 1]P(Zd = 1|X) − E[Yd(0)|X, Zd = 0]P(Zd = 0|X).

Observation of the realized crime rate, treatment (RTC statute), and covariates in each state j
reveals (Yjd, Zjd, Xjd). Hence, the data identify P(Zd|X), E[Yd(1)|X, Zd = 1], and E[Yd(0)|X, Zd =
0]. However, the data do not reveal the counterfactual means E[Yd(1)|X, Zd = 0] and E[Yd(0)|X,
Zd = 1]. Thus, ATEdx is not point-identified by the data alone.

3.2.

Invariance Assumptions

The conventional practice used to address the selection problem has been to invoke
assumptions that are strong enough to point-identity counterfactual mean outcomes and, hence,
the average treatment effect. These assumptions typically assert invariance of some kind. One
might, for example, assume that the ATE is constant across X and/or d.
To illustrate in a simple setting, consider inference on the impact of adoption of a RTC law
on the 1990 murder rate in Virginia (VA). Virginia enacted a RTC statute in 1989. In this case, d
= 1990, X = VA, and ZVA,1990 = 1. There exists only one state with X = VA, so P(Z1990 = 1|X =
VA) = 1. Hence, (2) reduces to

ATE1990,VA = YVA,1990(1) − YVA,1990(0).

10

The available data reveal that YVA,1990(1) = YVA,1990, but they do not reveal the counterfactual
quantity YVA,1990(0).
Table 1 displays the murder rates per 100,000 residents in Virginia and Maryland in 1988
and 1990. Neither state had an RTC statute in 1988. Virginia enacted one in 1989 but Maryland
did not. Thus, YVA,1990(1) = YVA,1990 = 8.81.
These data may be used to compute three simple estimates of the counterfactual 1990
murder rate in Virginia, YVA,1990(0), under alternative invariance assumptions:
(3) Time invariance: YVA,1990(0) = YVA,1988(0) = YVA,1988 = 7.75;
(4) Interstate invariance: YVA,1990(0) = YMD,1990(0) = YMD,1990 = 11.55;
(5)

Difference-in-difference invariance: YVA,1990(0) = [YMD,1990(0) − YMD,1988(0)] +

YVA,1988(0) = 9.67.

These, in turn, imply ATE estimates of 1.06, -2.74, and -0.86 respectively. Thus, the three
estimates yield empirical findings that differ in direction and magnitude.
Given certain invariance assumptions, each estimate appropriately measures the effect of
the RTC law on the 1990 murder rate in Virginia. The time invariance estimate is correct under
the assumption that no determinant of criminal behavior changed in Virginia between 1988 and
1990 except for enactment of the RTC statute. Interstate invariance of the 1990 murder rates is
correct under the assumption that the populations of Virginia and Maryland had the same
propensities for criminal behavior and faced the same environments except for the presence of the
RTC statute in Virginia.

The difference-in-difference (DID) estimate is correct under the

assumption that, in the absence of RTC statutes, Virginia and Maryland would have experienced
the same change in murder rates between 1988 and 1990. Thus, each of the three estimates can be
11

justified by specific invariance assumptions. However, the variation in empirical findings shows
that these invariance assumptions cannot hold jointly. Indeed, it may be that none of the
assumptions holds. Thus, the ATE may equal none of the values 1.06, -2.74, and -0.86.
The literature evaluating RTC laws has analyzed crime data across many states and years
rather than two states and two years. Having more data, however, does not reduce the dependence
of empirical findings on the assumptions that researchers maintain. It has been common, for
example, to assume a linear model with a homogeneous treatment effect and state-year fixed
effects.8 This model has the form

(6) Yjd(t) = θ·t + Xjdβ + αj + γd + εjd.

Here treatment t = 1 denotes the presence of an RCT law and t = 0 otherwise. The parameter θ is
the treatment effect, which does not vary with j and d. Thus, the model assumes that right-to-carry
laws have the same effect on crime rates, θ, in all states and years. Model (6) permits variation in
crime rates across states and years only through the composite additive intercept Xjdβ + αj + γd +
εjd. Here β is a parameter vector, while αj and γd are state and year fixed effects. The unobserved

The existing research on RTC laws does not formally model the selection process by which states
adopt RTC statutes or, in general, apply an invariance assumption that the response functions are
mean independent of observed instrumental variables. Notable exceptions are Lott and Mustard
(1997) and Lott (2000). While their main focus is on standard linear panel data models like (6),
they also present results under a variety of instrumental variable invariance assumptions. The
instruments include, among other variables, the levels and changes in property and violent crime
rates, the percent of the population in the National Rifle Association, and the percent voting for
the Republican presidential candidate. The resulting estimates imply that RTC laws reduced
violent and property crimes by nearly seventy percent. Other researchers have thought these
estimates to be implausibly large and, more importantly, the instrumental variable assumptions to
be invalid (Donohue, 2003).
8

12

variable εjd is a random state-year interaction assumed to have mean zero conditional on each
realized value of RCT and X.
This model relies on the invariance assumption that the effect of RTC laws, θ, is the same
for all states and all years. While this homogeneity assumption is convenient and has substantial
identifying power when combined with certain other assumptions, there is little support for the
notion that the effects of RTC laws are identical across states and time. In fact, the empirical
literature provides some evidence to the contrary; some estimated effects of RTC laws are found
to vary over time and across states (see Black and Nagin, 1988; NRC, 2005, Aneja et al., 2011).
The VA and MD crime rates displayed in Figure 1 provide direct evidence that the
invariance assumptions in (3), (4) and (5) do not hold across all years and states. Figure 1 displays
the annual murder rates in Maryland and Virginia, from 1970 to 2007. While neither state had a
RTC statute prior to 1989, crime rates vary over time and across states from 1970 to 1988. For
example, in 1988, the murder rate in Virginia was 1.89 less than the rate in Maryland in that year
and 0.39 greater than the Virginia rate in 1987.9 Thus, the invariance assumptions are violated in
the years before VA adopted a RTC statute, and the signs and magnitudes of these violations differ
over time and across assumptions.
While all three of these invariance restrictions are rejected in the pre-1989 period, the
existing literature on the effects of RTC laws on crime consistently applies these types of
invariance restrictions, especially variations of the DID model in (5) or the related model in (6).
In this setting, researchers implicitly assume that the invariance restrictions apply when outcomes

9

Also notice that the time invariance assumption does not hold in Maryland, where the murder
rate increased from 9.63 in 1988 to 11.55 in 1990.
13

are counterfactual even though they are rejected in periods where outcomes are observed. This is
hard to motivate and the literature using these invariance assumptions fails to do so.

3.3.

Bounded Variation Assumptions

3.3.1. The Assumptions
Invariance assumptions have a sharpness that often makes them suspect. Consider each of
the three equalities (3), (4), and (5) that point-identify the impact of the RCT law in Virginia in
1990. Why should any of them hold exactly? Why should the treatment effect be exactly constant
across states and years as assumed in the linear model (6)? Empirical researchers often say that
such assumptions are “approximations,” but they do not formalize what this means. Instead, they
perform analyses that use some invariance assumptions as if they are truth and that entirely dismiss
other assumptions.

For example, DID estimation maintains assumption (5) but places no

restrictions on response levels.
A simple way to improve the credibility of empirical research is to weaken invariance
assumptions to assumptions of bounded variation. In this paper we report empirical findings under
bounded-variation assumptions that weaken assumptions (3), (4), and (5) for a specified treatment
t as follows:

(7)

Bounded Time Variation: |Yjd(t) – Yje(t)| ≤ j(de),

(8)

Bounded Interstate Variation: |Yjd(t) – Ykd(t) | ≤ jk)d,

(9)

Bounded DID Variation: |[Yjd(t) – Yje(t)] – [Ykd(t) – Yke(t)]| ≤ (jk)(de),
14

where (j, k) are specified states, (d, e) are specified years, and (j(de)(jk)d, (jk)(de)) are specified
positive constants. To simplify the notation, we suppress the dependence of the δ values on the
treatment t. We also suppress for simplicity the logical requirement that crime rates must take
non-negative values. This requirement does not bind in the empirical analyses that we report.
The bounded time variation assumption restricts the absolute difference in treatment
response in state j between two years, say 1988 and 1990, to be less than j(de). Letting j(de) ≥ 0
weakens the traditional time invariance assumption by supposing that response may differ over
time by no more than j(de). The larger the selected value of j(de), the weaker the assumption.
Similarly, the bounded interstate variation assumption restricts the contemporaneous absolute
difference at year d in response between two states, say Virginia and Maryland, to be less than
(jk)d. Letting (jk)d ≥ 0 weakens the traditional invariance assumption by supposing that response
across the two states may differ by no more than (jk)d. The larger the selected value of (jk)d, the
weaker the assumption.
These bounded variation assumptions have identifying power because they imply that
counterfactual state-year murder rates are similar to observed rates in other states and years. The
degree of similarity is determined by the bound parameters (j(de)(jk)d, (jk)(de)).

These

assumptions resemble the smoothing assumptions made in kernel nonparametric regression
analysis, with δ acting as the bandwidth. An important technical difference is that the asymptotic
theory for nonparametric regression makes smoothing go to zero with sample size, so smoothing
is performed to achieve desired asymptotic statistical properties rather than identification. In

15

contrast, we impose smoothing assumptions that relate counterfactual quantities to observed ones
and thus provide identifying power.
It is also of interest to compare the bounded variation assumptions to those made in the
linear homogeneous model.

These assumptions are not nested.

The bounded variation

assumptions are weaker in two respects. First, they permit the ATE to vary across states and years,
whereas model (6) restricts the ATE to have the constant value θ across states and years. Second,
assumptions (7)-(9) do not impose a condition on mean variation in treatment response akin to the
restriction of model (6) that εjd has mean zero conditional on each realized value of RCT and X.
On the other hand, assumptions (7)-(9) restrict the potential magnitudes of time, interstate, and
DID variation in outcomes under a given treatment, whereas model (6) does not.

3.3.2. Findings for Virginia in 1990
Figure 2 shows bounds on ATE1990,VA for different values of j(de), where d = 1990, e =
1988, and t = 0. The traditional time invariance assumption (j(de) = 0) point identifies the ATE,
revealing that enactment of the RTC statute increases the murder rate by 1.06. Ambiguity about
the ATE increases with j(de). The figure shows that the bound on the ATE is entirely positive
when j(de) is less than one, but any value of j(de) larger than one renders it impossible to sign the
ATE. For example, when j(de) = 2, we know that YVA,1990(1) = 8.81 and YVA,1990(0)  [5.75, 9.75].
Hence, ATE1990,VA  [-0.94, 3.06].
Figure 2 also shows bounds on ATE1990,VA for different values of (jk)d, where k =
Maryland. The traditional interstate invariance assumption ((jk)d = 0) point identifies the ATE,
revealing that the RTC statute decreases the murder rate by -2.74. Ambiguity about the ATE
increases with (jk)d. The figure shows that the bound is entirely negative when (jk)d < 2.74 but
16

values in excess of 2.74 make it impossible to sign the ATE. For example, when (jk)d = 3, we
know that YVA,1990(1) = 8.81 and YVA,1990(0)  [8.55, 14.55]. Hence, ATE1990,VA  [-5.74, 0.26].
Bounded variation assumptions can be easily adapted to fit particular features of the
application.

For example, Figure 1 reveals that crime rates in MD generally exceed the

contemporaneous crime rates in VA, even in the years before 1989 when neither state had adopted
a RTC statute. One might therefore think it reasonable to make the bounded variation assumption
one sided; that is,

(10)

0 ≤ YMD,1990(0) – YVA,1990(0) ≤ (MD.VA)1990

Assumption (10) makes the lower bound on the ATE equal -2.74, the point estimate under
invariance assumption (4). The upper bound is identical to the one displayed in Figure (2).
Finally, letting (jk)(de) ≥ 0 weakens the traditional DID invariance assumption. The
traditional assumption ((jk)(de) = 0) point identifies the ATE, revealing that the RTC statute
decreases the mean murder rate by -0.86. Ambiguity about the ATE increases with (jk)(de), and for
values in excess of 1 it impossible to sign the ATE.

3.4.

Joint Bounded Geographic and Time Variation Assumptions

Rather than use a single invariance assumption in isolation, one may want to combine
assumptions. For example, one might simultaneously assume that Virginia and Maryland are
similar to one another and that Virginia had similar characteristics in 1988 and 1990. Here we
17

evaluate bounds on ATE1990,VA under joint interstate and time bounded variation assumptions, and
also under joint DID and time bounded variation assumptions.
Under a joint interstate and time variation assumption, the counterfactual murder rate
YVA,1990(0) is bounded as follows:

max(YMD,1990 −(MD,VA)1990, YVA,1988 −VA(1990,1988))
≤ YVA,1990(0) ≤

(11)

min(YMD,1990 + (MD,VA)1990, YVA,1988 +VA(1990,1988)).

A necessary condition for this assumption to be valid is that VA(1990,1988) + (MD,VA)1990 ≥ |YMD,1990
− YVA,1988|. Otherwise, the lower bound exceeds the upper bound.
Tables 2A and 2B display the upper and lower bound on the ATE under joint bounded
interstate and time variation assumptions, and under joint bounded DID and time variation
assumptions, respectively. Estimates highlighted in grey are not valid; the lower bound exceeds
the upper bounds. Estimates in pink (bold) identify the sign as negative, whereas those in green
(italics) identify the sign of the ATE as positive. Estimates not highlighted are partially identified,
but do not reveal whether adoption of the RTC law in 1989 increased or decreased the 1990 murder
rate in VA.
Focusing on the joint interstate and time variation assumptions, there are several interesting
findings. First, the necessary condition for validity of assumptions rules out a range of small values

18

of VA(1990,1988) and (MD,VA)1990 as infeasible. Thus, it cannot jointly be true that (Virginia,
Maryland) are highly similar in 1990 and that (1988, 1990) are highly similar years in Virginia.
Second, the assumptions point identify the ATE for a variety of feasible values (i.e.,
VA(1990,1988) + (MD,VA)1990 = 4), and they identify the sign of the ATE for others. For example,
when VA(1990,1988) = (MD,VA)1990 = 2, the ATE is identified to equal -1.2. When va(1990,1988) = 0.5
and (MD,VA)1988 = 3.5, the ATE is identified to equal 0.3. The sign of the ATE is identified to be
negative for all feasible (MD,VA)1990 ≤ 3, and greater than zero for all feasible VA(1990,1988) ≤ 0.5.
For larger values of VA(1990,1988) and (MD,VA)1990, the assumptions do not identify the sign of the
ATE.
Likewise, under joint DID and time variation assumptions, the sign of the ATE is identified
to be negative for all feasible (MD,VA)(1990, 1988) ≤ 1, and positive for all feasible VA(1990,1988) ≤ 0.5.
For larger values of VA(1990,1988) and (MD,VA)(1990, 1988), the assumptions do not identify the sign of
the ATE.
To summarize, in this section we have examined the sensitivity of inferences to different
bounded variation assumptions, focusing on the effect of the 1989 adoption of an RTC law on the
1990 murder rate in Virginia. We find that the sign of the ATE is identified for some assumptions,
but not others.

Especially interesting findings emerge when different bounded variation

assumptions are combined. In particular, we find that the strongest assumptions are ruled out,
including the traditional strict invariance assumptions. Less strong assumptions either point
identify the ATE or identify the sign of the ATE, while weaker ones do not identify whether
adoption of an RTC law increased or decreased murder in Virginia in 1990.

19

4.

EVALUATING THE IMPACT OF RTC LAWS USING BOUNDED VARIATION
ASSUMPTIONS

Whereas Section 3 assessed the sensitivity of inference to different assumptions, in this
section we evaluate the impact of RTC laws under particular bounded variation assumptions. We
begin in Section 4.1 by developing an approach for selecting the parameters  based on observed
data. Then, using these parameters, we present findings for Virginia in Section 4.2 and for
Maryland and Illinois in Section 4.3. The latter states did not adopt RTC statutes prior to 2007.
In Section 4.4 we discuss and summarize the results.

4.1.

Selecting the Bound Parameters

In Section 3, we assessed how inferences vary across different values of the bound
parameters. In this section we use observed data in VA and MD to develop sensible data-based
parameter values. In particular, we use data prior to 1989, when VA did not have a RTC statute,
to determine the minimum parameter values that would be required to make bounded variation
assumptions consistent with the observed data. While this approach does not ensure the validity
of the bounded variation assumptions, it provides a starting point for our analysis.
To illustrate the idea, consider the murder rates for Maryland and Virginia in 1987 and
1988, displayed in Table 3. The observed murder rates vary over time and across states: the 1988
murder rate in VA is 7.75 and the rate in MD is 9.63, while the analogous rates for 1987 are 7.36
and 9.55, respectively. Neither state had a RTC statute in these years, so these data can be used to
test whether invariance and bounded variation assumptions are valid. In fact, the data are

20

inconsistent with the time invariance assumption (3), the interstate invariance assumption (4) and
the DID assumption (5).
While the invariance assumptions are inconsistent with the observed pre-1989 data, the
bound parameters in assumptions (7), (8) and (9) can be chosen to ensure internal consistency.
The bounded interstate variation assumption in (8), for example, is valid in 1988 if (VA,MD)1988 ≥
1.88 (= 9.63 − 7.75). Likewise, the bounded time variation assumption is consistent with the VA
1988 murder rate if VA(1988,1987) ≥ 0.39 (= 7.75 − 7.36), and the DID assumption is valid if
(VA,MD)(1988,1987) ≥ 0.31. These restrictions on the bound parameters make the bounded variation
assumptions consistent with the 1987 and 1988 data.
Extending this approach to perform comparisons from 1970 to 1988, we find the minimum
values of the bound parameters required for the assumptions to be consistent with the data prior to
1989. To do this, we compute the minimum valid parameter value for each pair of adjacent years
from 1970 to 1988 (i.e., 1970 to 1971, 1971 to 1972, and so forth), and then select the maximum
of these values. Table 4 displays the minimum parameters that ensure the bounded variation
assumptions are consistent with the observed pre-1989 data on various crime rates. For murder,
the time variation parameter needs to be at least 2.0, the interstate variation parameter at least 2.7
and the DID variation parameter at least 2.3. For robbery, the analogous parameters are 30, 292,
and 55.
We use the parameter values displayed in Table 4 as a starting point for implementing the
bounded variation assumptions in (7), (8), and (9).

Of course, whether these particular

assumptions are valid is unknown, and one must invariably make judgements about the tradeoff
between the strength and credibility of assumptions and findings. Using these parameters as an
anchor, one might assess the sensitivity of findings by using some multiple of the maximum value
21

or some quantile of the distribution. Table 4, for example, shows the 0.75-quantile of the minimum
valid parameters for the DID assumption (DID_0.75). In this case, the DID parameter for murder
falls from 2.3 to 1.2, and for robbery falls from 55 to 27.

4.2. The Impact of a RTC Statute in VA

In this section, we use bounded variation assumptions with the parameter values displayed
in Table 4 as a starting point for drawing inferences on the impact of an RTC law on crime in
VA. Tables 5, 6, and 7 display bounds on the ATE of a RTC statute in VA by year, from 1990 to
2006, and for seven different crimes. Bounds highlighted in green (italics) identify the sign of the
ATE as positive and those in pink (bold) identify the sign as negative. Bounds highlighted in grey
are infeasible, the lower bound being above the upper bound. Bounds that are not highlighted do
not identify the sign of the ATE. Each set of results applies a different assumption.
We begin by first considering estimates under the joint time variation assumption (7) and
the one-sided interstate variation assumption (10) given the parameter values displayed in Table
4. For the time variation assumption, we use 1988 as the anchor year. That is, the counterfactual
crime rate is identified to lie between the 1988 crime rate plus or minus j(d,88). The estimates are
displayed in Table 5. Most results are inconclusive about the sign of the ATE but there are a few
notable exceptions. For murder, the bounds are consistently negative, suggesting that having an
RTC statute reduced the murder rate in VA in most years. For rape and assault, the bounds are
positive in some years. For auto-theft, burglary, and larceny the bounds are negative in some
years, especially post-2000. There are also a number of years where the bounds are infeasible.
22

These conclusions rely on a bounded time variation assumption in (7) that may not be
flexible enough to account for the large temporal changes in crime rates over the period 1970 to
2006. As noted above, to identify the counterfactual crime rate that would have occurred had VA
not adopted a RTC law, the time variation assumption in (7) adds and subtracts the j(d,88) to the
observed crime rate in 1988. This bound on the counterfactual crime rate does not depend on the
year under consideration, d – the bound is the same for 1989 and 2006 – even though there were
significant changes in observed crime rates over this period.
Consider, for example, the problem of inferring the effect of a RTC statute on the 2005
burglary rate in VA. From 1988 to 2005, burglary rates fell by nearly 50% in MD, from 1175 in
1988 to 644 in 2005. Yet, using the static bounded time variation assumption, we infer that had
the RTC statute not been adopted, the burglary rate in VA would have fallen by no more than 206
points or 33%, from 813 to 607. While the bounded variation parameter of 206 may be sensible
when evaluating the counterfactual crime rate in 1989, it is hard to defend when evaluating the
rate in 2005. Arguably, the static bounded time variation parameter developed in Section 4.1 does
not properly reflect the dramatic reduction in crimes rates in the 2000s.
Using this bounded time variation model implies that the RTC statute reduced the 2005
burglary rate by at least 212, from 607 to 395. Another option is to use a DID assumption to
simultaneously account for time series and geographic variation. Continuing with the example
above, the DID invariance assumption would identify the counterfactual 2005 VA burglary rate
by subtracting the observed time series difference in the MD crime rates, (1175 − 644), from the
observed VA burglary rate in 1988, 813. Thus, this DID assumption accounts for time series
variation using the observed changes in the MD crime rate.

23

Table 6 presents results for all seven crimes and all years under the DID invariance
assumption. As with the time variation assumption, we use 1988 as the anchor year for the DID
invariance assumption. For murder, the DID assumption estimates are strictly negative. For the
other crimes, the estimates are negative in earlier years, but tend to be positive in later years. For
example, the RTC statute is estimated to have increased the 2005 burglary rate by 112.4.
These results, however, rely on a strict invariance assumption. If we use the parameter
values in Table 4 to relax this invariance restriction to a bounded variation DID assumption, nearly
all of the estimated bounds except those for larceny include zero. That is, under the bounded DID
variation assumption, we cannot generally identify the sign of the ATE. To see this, add and
subtract the DID parameters in Table 4 to the point estimates in Table 6. For example, the impact
of RTC laws on the 2000 murder rate is bounded between [-0.6 − 2.3, -0.6 + 2.3] = [-2.9, 1.7].
The bound on the impact on the 2005 burglary rate is [-24, 248]. Interestingly, while this bound
includes zero it does not intersect with the estimate found under the joint time and interstate
variation model displayed in Table 5, and therefore implies that the two bounded variation models
cannot both be valid.
The results from these two DID assumptions provide a stark illustration of the tradeoff
between the strength of assumptions and conclusions. Under the strong invariance assumptions the
ATE is point identified while under the weaker bounded variation assumption one cannot generally
infer the sign of the ATE.
Partial identification methods allow us to formally bridge the gap between these two
extremes by considering middle ground assumptions that yield information on the sign of the ATE.
To do this, we continue to focus on applying DID bounded variation assumptions and also
introduce weak time and interstate variation assumptions that seem well suited for this application.
24

In particular, we impose the following three assumptions:
a. |[Yjd(0) – Yje(0)] – [Ykd(0) – Yke(0)]| ≤ (jk)(de), where (jk)(de) = DID_0.75 in Table 4
for d  [1990, 2006] and e = 1988;
b. YVA,d(0) ≤ YMD,d(0) for d  [1990, 2006];
c. YVA,d(0) ≥YVA,88(0) for d  [1990, 1996];
YVA,d(0) ≤ YVA,88(0) for d  [1999, 2006].
Assumption (a) is the DID bounded variation assumption where the bound parameter equals the
0.75 quantile of the distribution of the minimum bound parameters required for the assumptions
to be consistent with the data in each year prior to 1989 (see the DID_0.75 column in Table 4).
This assumption relaxes the strict invariance assumption where  = 0 but strengthens the bounded
variation assumption using the DID parameters in Table 4. Assumption (b) restricts the crime rate
in VA to be no greater than the crime rate in MD, a modified version of the one-sided bounded
interstate variation assumption in (10). Finally, assumption (c) is a bounded time variation
assumption that operationalizes the idea that crime rates rose in the early 1990s and fell in the
2000s.
Table 7 displays the estimates using these bounded variation assumptions. The results vary
by crime and year. We find that the RTC law in VA reduced murder and larceny rates in nearly
every year, but increased assaults after 1997. For other crimes, the sign of the bounds is generally
negative in the 1990s but positive or indeterminate in the 2000s.
Interestingly, these results are generally inconsistent with the standard assumption that the
ATE does not vary over time (see model 6). To see this, note that under the assumption that the
ATE is the same in every year, one can take the intersection of the bounds from each year to derive
25

a refined tighter bound. This is an instrumental variable bound, as defined in Manski (1990). Yet,
except for murder, the intersection bounds are empty; the lower bound exceeds the upper bound.
For example, the lower and upper intersection bounds for robbery are 23.2 and -78.2. Thus, this
bounded variation assumption is inconsistent with the homogeneous treatment effect assumption
in model (6).

4.3. The Impact of a RTC Statute in MD and IL

Finally, we consider using these bounded variation assumptions to infer crime rates in
Maryland (MD) and Illinois (IL). Inferring the impact of RTC in these states presents a unique
methodological challenge in that neither state adopted a RTC statute during the observed sample
period. Thus, bounded time and DID variation assumptions are not informative in this setting.
Invariance assumptions used in the literature, such as the homogeneous treatment effect model (6),
identify the ATE in states that have not adopted RTC statutes by assuming that the ATE does not
vary across states. One can use results from VA to infer the impact of RTC laws in MD, but this
invariance assumption does not seem credible.
Instead, we use a modified interstate variation assumption to provide information on the
counterfactual crime rate that would have been realized had a RTC statute been adopted. For MD,
the post-1988 crime rates in VA (recall that VA adopted a RTC statute in 1989) are used to bound
the counterfactual. In particular, let

(12)

YVA,d(1) ≤ YMD,d(1) ≤ YVA,d(1) + (Va,MD)d.

26

The lower bound reflects the assumption that crime rates in VA are no greater than crime rates in
MD and the upper bound follows from the bounded interstate variation assumption.
For IL, the post-1988 crime rate in Indiana (IN adopted a RTC statute in 1981) is used to
bound the counterfactual crime rate. In particular, let

(13)

YIN,d(1) ≤ YIL,d(1) ≤ YIN,d(1) + (IL,IN)d.

The lower bound reflects the assumption that crime rates in IN are no greater than crime rates in
IL and the upper bound follows from the bounded interstate variation assumption.
Table 8 displays the estimated bounds for murder, robbery and burglary. Reflecting, in
part, the fact that there is only one source of identifying information, most of the bounds are very
wide and do not identify the sign of the ATE. However, there are a few exceptions: the estimated
effect is negative for murder in MD for most years and for robbery in IL from 1990-1994. It is
positive for burglary in IL from 1999-2005.
The mostly inconclusive findings about the effect of RTC laws on crime in MD and IL
reflects the fact that these two states did not adopt a RTC statute. Bounded variation assumptions
have little identifying power in years when neighboring states have the same realized treatment
and when a particular state does not switch treatments across years. In the extreme, when all states
have the same policy that does not vary over time, these assumptions are uninformative. Thus,
without strong assumptions, it may be difficult to draw precise inferences on treatment effects in
states that do not vary treatment over time.

27

4.4

Discussion of Results

Our findings about the impact of RTC laws on crime are nuanced and not amenable to a
simple punch line conclusion. Inferences are sensitive to assumptions. Even under strong
assumptions, the results vary across crimes, states, and time. Under a middle ground DID bounded
variation assumption, we find that the RTC statute in VA reduces some crimes, increases others,
and has ambiguous sign effects on others. In MD and IL, we generally cannot identify the sign of
the ATE.
When the signs of the ATE are identified for VA, the magnitudes are generally large. For
example, using the middle ground DID assumption (see Table 7), RTC laws are estimated to
reduce the VA murder rate in 1995 by at least 14% (from 8.8 to 7.6), the rape rate by at least 6%,
the robbery rate by at least 37%, and the larceny rate by at least 13%. In contrast, in 2005 RTC
laws are estimated to reduce the murder rate by at least 12%, but increase the rape rate by at least
47%, the assault rate by at least 8%, the robbery rate by at least 3%, and the burglary rate by at
least 13%.
These findings of heterogeneous effects across years may partially explain why the
estimates obtained with homogenous response assumptions like (6) are sensitive to the years of
data included in the sample. Models estimated using more recent data tend to find that RTC laws
have negligible or even positive effects on violent crime, whereas the same models estimated using
data through the early 1990s tend to find that RTC laws decrease violent crime rates. See Aneja
et al., (2011) and the National Research Council (2005, Chapter 6, Tables 6-5 and 6-6).
Given that the estimated effects vary over time and across crimes, and in many cases do
not reveal the sign of the ATE, it is difficult to provide a simple assessment of the overall efficacy
28

of the RTC law in VA. One’s perspective will necessarily depend both on the assumption that
seems most plausible, if any, as well as how to weigh results that vary over time and across crimes.
Under the weaker assumptions, the estimated bounds generally do not identify the sign of the ATE
and thus provide little guidance about whether RTC laws increase or decrease crime. Under the
stronger DID invariance assumption (Table 6), RTC laws are found to have reduced crime in the
early 1990s and have mixed effects a decade later, in the 2000s. Similar but less definitive results,
are found under the middle ground assumption used to generate the results displayed in Table 7.
To assess the overall benefit of a RTC statute, one must somehow aggregate the effects
across the different crimes. Obviously, the decision of how to weight the effects for different
crimes is a complex and subjective undertaking. A simple metric might be to count the aggregate
change in crimes. In this case, using the results from Table 7, one would conclude that RTC laws
tended to decrease the number of crimes in the 1990s but increase the total number of crimes in
the 2000s.
Instead, one might adjust the raw counts for the fact that some crimes are more costly than
others. A number of researchers have estimated the average costs of different crimes. 10 By
combining the estimated effects of RTC laws on crime rates with a set of costs estimates, one can
compute how the average costs of crime would change if a RTC statute were to be adopted in VA.
While admittedly a tenuous exercise, this might provide a rough snapshot of the aggregate impact
of RTC laws on crime.

As might be expected, there is a great deal of variation in these cost of crime estimates, but they
all imply that murder is many times more costly than any other crime. For example, McCollister
et al. (2010) estimate that the average costs (in 2008 dollars) of a murder is nearly $9 million,
whereas the average costs of a rape, the next most costly offense, is $241,000.

10

29

A final complication in evaluating the impact of RTC laws arises because the results
reported are retrospective, not prospective. The two forms of analysis differ in their objectives.
Researchers performing retrospective analysis aim to learn past treatment effects in a study
population, asking questions such as: What do we know about the effects of RTC laws in Virginia
from 1990 to 2006? A central objective of prospective analysis is to inform treatment choice in a
future population, asking questions of the form: What would happen if a state were to adopt a RTC
statue in 2016?
Prospective analysis is more difficult than retrospective analysis. Empirical evidence on
treatment response is entirely absent prospectively, but it is partially present retrospectively after
the outcomes of realized treatments are observed. Under a time invariance assumption, as applied
in Assumption (6), the answer is straightforward. The impact of RTC laws does not vary over
time. Yet, this assumption is not tenable. One must address the forecasting problem inherent in
prospective inference.
In this paper, we have not considered prospective analysis. The literature on RTC laws,
including this paper, may provide policymakers useful retrospective information. It is not, per se,
informative about prospective questions, and in particular about what would happen if a RTC
statute were to be adopted in a state that does not currently have such a law.

5.

CONCLUSION: INCREDIBLE CERTITUDE

Given that research on RTC laws is often inconclusive, contradictory, and confusing, the
research community has been largely marginalized in this important policy debate.
30

Why?

Researchers are rewarded for producing simple findings leading to definitive policy prescriptions

– e.g., more guns leads to less crime – yet generating such findings requires strong assumptions
that cannot be persuasively defended. In this setting, researchers report findings with “incredible
certitude” rather than expressing due caution (Manski, 2013). Drawing inferences about the effects
of RTC laws, or guns policy more generally, is an inherently difficult undertaking: conclusions are
highly sensitive to the data and assumptions, the available data are limited, and a wide range of
assumptions, and thus conclusions, are consistent with the data. Researchers combining data with
different maintained assumptions reach different logically valid conclusions, yet fail to adequately
express sensitivity of the findings to untestable assumptions.
For empirical research on complex policies such as gun laws, and RTC laws in particular,
to be informative to the policy debate, we believe it is critical that the discussion move away from
this paradigm of incredible certitude towards an honest portrayal of partial knowledge (Manski,
2013). Adequate expression of caution goes beyond using temperate language, replicating results
under marginally different assumptions, or reporting confidence intervals. Although helpful, these
means of expressing caution do not go nearly far enough. Drawing inferences under a variety of
assumptions that are not credible does not resolve the problem. Adequate expression of caution
requires formal methods to perform empirical research under assumptions that are weak enough
to be credible.
In this paper, we develop and apply one such set of assumptions, namely bounded variation
assumptions. These assumptions, which relax the traditional invariance assumptions applied in
the literature, provide an intuitive, simple, and flexible way to improve the credibility of empirical
research, assess the sensitivity of inferences to different identifying restrictions, and apply middle
ground assumptions that sometimes identify the sign of the ATE.
31

The results reveal the inherent tradeoff between the strength of assumptions and findings.
Even under the strongest invariance models, the ATE of a RTC statute varies across crimes, states,
and time. Estimates found under the more credible bounded variation models suggest even greater
degrees of ambiguity with many results not identifying the sign of the ATE, and others varying
over time and across states. Certainly, our results are inconsistent with the notion that RTC laws
uniformly increase or decrease crime. In this light, we do not report findings with incredible
certitude: there are no simple conclusions. Still, our findings may inform the policy debate by
providing credible albeit ambiguous information and by constraining the resulting discussion to
lie within a set of credible bounds.

32

References

Abadie, A., S. Athey, G. Imbens and J. Wooldridge, (2014), “Finite Population Casual Standard
Errors,” Working paper.
Aneja, A., J. Donohue and A. Zhang (2011), “The Impact of Right-to-Carry Laws and the NRC
Report: Lessons for the Empirical Evaluation of Law and Policy,” American Law and Economic
Review, 13, 565-632.
Athey, S. and G. Imbens (2006), “Identification and Inference in Nonlinear Difference-in
Differences Models,” Econometrica, 74, 431-97.
Ayres, I. and J. Donohue (2003), ‘‘Shooting Down the More Guns, Less Crime Hypothesis,’’
Stanford Law Review, 55, 1193–1312.
Black, D and D. Nagin. (1998), “Do right-to-carry law deter violent crime?” Journal of Legal
Studies 27, 209-19.
Chernozhukov, V., H. Hong, and E. Tamer (2007), “Estimation and Confidence Regions for
Parameter Sets in Econometric Models,” Econometrica, 75, 1243-1284.
Chernozhukov, V., Lee, S., and Rosen, A. (2013), “Intersection Bounds: Estimation and
Inference,” 81, 668-737.
Cochran, W. (1977), Sampling Techniques, New York: Wiley.
Deaton, W. (1997), The Analysis of Household Surveys, Baltimore: The Johns Hopkins University
Press.
Donohue, J. (2003), “The Impact of Concealed-Carry Laws,” in J. Ludwig and P.J. Cook (editors),
Evaluating Gun Policy: Effects on Crime and Violence, Washington, DC: Brookings Institution
Press.
Donohue, J. and S. Levitt. (1998), "Guns, Violence, and the Efficiency of Illegal Markets,"
American Economic Review, 88, 463-67.
Imbens, G. and C. Manski (2004), “Confidence Intervals for Partially Identified Parameters.”
Econometrica, 72, 1845-1857.
Lott, J. (2000), More Guns, Less Crime: Understanding Crime and Gun-Control Laws, Chicago:
University of Chicago Press.
Lott, J. and D. Mustard (1997), ‘‘Crime, Deterrence and Right-to-Carry Concealed Handguns,’’
Journal of Legal Studies, 26, 1–68.
33

Ludwig, J. (1998), ‘‘Concealed Gun-Carrying Laws and Violent Crime: Evidence from State Panel
Data,’’ International Review of Law and Economics, 18, 239–254.
Manski, C. (1990), “Nonparametric Bounds on Treatment Effects,” American Economic Review
Papers and Proceedings, 80, 319–323.
Manski, C. (2007), Identification for Prediction and Decision, Cambridge: Harvard University
Press.
Manski, C. (2013). Public Policy in an Uncertain World: Analysis and Decisions, Cambridge:
Harvard University Press.
Manski, C. and D. Nagin (1998), “Bounding Disagreements about Treatment Effects: A Case
Study of Sentencing and Recidivism,” Sociological Methodology, 28, 99-137.
Manski, C. and J. Pepper (2000), “Monotone Instrumental Variables: with an Application to the
Returns to Schooling,” Econometrica, 68, 997–1010.
Manski, C. and J. Pepper (2013), “Deterrence and the Death Penalty: Partial Identification
Analysis Using Repeated Cross Sections,” Journal of Quantitative Criminology, 29(1), 123-141.
McCollister, K., M. French, and H. Fang (2010). “The cost of crime to society: New crime-specific
estimates for policy and program evaluation,” Drug and Alcohol Dependence, 102, 98-109.
National Research Council, (2005). Firearms and Violence: A Critical Review, ed., Wellford, C.,
J. Pepper, and C. Petrie, National Academy Press, Washington, D.C.
Siddique, Z. (2013), “Partially identified treatment effects under imperfect compliance: the case
of domestic violence,” Journal of the American Statistical Association, 108, 504-513.

34

1970
1972
1974
1976
1978
1980
1982
1984
1986
1988
1990
1992
1994
1996
1998
2000
2002
2004
2006

Rate (per 100,000)
1970
1972
1974
1976
1978
1980
1982
1984
1986
1988
1990
1992
1994
1996
1998
2000
2002
2004
2006

Rate (per 100,000)

Figure 1A: Murder Rate by Year and State

14

12

10

8

6
Virginia

Maryland

4

2

0

Figure 1B: Robbery Rate by Year and State

500

450

400

350

300

250
Virginia

200

150
Maryland

100

50

0

Figure 2: Bounds on the ATE as a Function of 
8
6
4

ATE

2
0

LB Time Invariance

‐2

UB Time Invariance

‐4

LB Interstate Invariance

‐6

UB Interstate Invariance

‐8
‐10
0 0.5 1 1.5 2 2.5 3 3.5 4 4.5 5 5.5 6



Table 1: Murder Rates per 100,000 Residents by Year and State
Year

Maryland

Virginia

1988

9.63

7.75

1990

11.55

8.81

Table 2A:

j(de)



0
0
0.5
1
1.5
2
2.5
3
3.5
4
4.5
5
5.5
6

LB
0.8
0.3
‐0.2
‐0.7
‐1.2
‐1.7
‐2.2
‐2.7
‐3.2
‐3.2
‐3.2
‐3.2
‐3.2

UB
‐3.2
‐3.2
‐3.2
‐3.2
‐3.2
‐3.2
‐3.2
‐3.2
‐3.2
‐3.2
‐3.2
‐3.2
‐3.2

Bounds on the Average Treatment Effect Given Bounded Interstate and Time Variation Assumptions
Virginia, 1990
jk)d
0.5
1
1.5
2
2.5
3
3.5
4
LB
UB
LB
UB
LB
UB
LB
UB
LB
UB
LB
UB
LB
UB LB
UB
0.8 ‐2.7
0.8 ‐2.2
0.8 ‐1.7
0.8 ‐1.2
0.8 ‐0.7
0.8 ‐0.2
0.8 0.3
0.8 0.8
0.3 ‐2.7
0.3 ‐2.2
0.3 ‐1.7
0.3 ‐1.2
0.3 ‐0.7
0.3 ‐0.2
0.3 0.3
0.3 0.8
‐0.2 ‐2.7 ‐0.2 ‐2.2 ‐0.2 ‐1.7 ‐0.2 ‐1.2 ‐0.2 ‐0.7 ‐0.2 ‐0.2 ‐0.2 0.3 ‐0.2 0.8
‐0.7 ‐2.7 ‐0.7 ‐2.2 ‐0.7 ‐1.7 ‐0.7 ‐1.2 ‐0.7 ‐0.7 ‐0.7 ‐0.2 ‐0.7 0.3 ‐0.7 0.8
‐1.2 ‐2.7 ‐1.2 ‐2.2 ‐1.2 ‐1.7 ‐1.2 ‐1.2 ‐1.2 ‐0.7 ‐1.2 ‐0.2 ‐1.2 0.3 ‐1.2 0.8
‐1.7 ‐2.7 ‐1.7 ‐2.2 ‐1.7 ‐1.7 ‐1.7 ‐1.2 ‐1.7 ‐0.7 ‐1.7 ‐0.2 ‐1.7 0.3 ‐1.7 0.8
‐2.2 ‐2.7 ‐2.2 ‐2.2 ‐2.2 ‐1.7 ‐2.2 ‐1.2 ‐2.2 ‐0.7 ‐2.2 ‐0.2 ‐2.2 0.3 ‐2.2 0.8
‐2.7 ‐2.7 ‐2.7 ‐2.2 ‐2.7 ‐1.7 ‐2.7 ‐1.2 ‐2.7 ‐0.7 ‐2.7 ‐0.2 ‐2.7 0.3 ‐2.7 0.8
‐3.2 ‐2.7 ‐3.2 ‐2.2 ‐3.2 ‐1.7 ‐3.2 ‐1.2 ‐3.2 ‐0.7 ‐3.2 ‐0.2 ‐3.2 0.3 ‐3.2 0.8
‐3.7 ‐2.7 ‐3.7 ‐2.2 ‐3.7 ‐1.7 ‐3.7 ‐1.2 ‐3.7 ‐0.7 ‐3.7 ‐0.2 ‐3.7 0.3 ‐3.7 0.8
‐3.7 ‐2.7 ‐4.2 ‐2.2 ‐4.2 ‐1.7 ‐4.2 ‐1.2 ‐4.2 ‐0.7 ‐4.2 ‐0.2 ‐4.2 0.3 ‐4.2 0.8
‐3.7 ‐2.7 ‐4.2 ‐2.2 ‐4.7 ‐1.7 ‐4.7 ‐1.2 ‐4.7 ‐0.7 ‐4.7 ‐0.2 ‐4.7 0.3 ‐4.7 0.8
‐3.7 ‐2.7 ‐4.2 ‐2.2 ‐4.7 ‐1.7 ‐5.2 ‐1.2 ‐5.2 ‐0.7 ‐5.2 ‐0.2 ‐5.2 0.3 ‐5.2 0.8

4.5
LB
UB
0.8 0.8
0.3 1.3
‐0.2 1.3
‐0.7 1.3
‐1.2 1.3
‐1.7 1.3
‐2.2 1.3
‐2.7 1.3
‐3.2 1.3
‐3.7 1.3
‐4.2 1.3
‐4.7 1.3
‐5.2 1.3

5
LB
0.8
0.3
‐0.2
‐0.7
‐1.2
‐1.7
‐2.2
‐2.7
‐3.2
‐3.7
‐4.2
‐4.7
‐5.2

UB
0.8
1.3
1.8
1.8
1.8
1.8
1.8
1.8
1.8
1.8
1.8
1.8
1.8

5.5
LB
UB
0.8
0.8
0.3
1.3
‐0.2
1.8
‐0.7
2.3
‐1.2
2.3
‐1.7
2.3
‐2.2
2.3
‐2.7
2.3
‐3.2
2.3
‐3.7
2.3
‐4.2
2.3
‐4.7
2.3
‐5.2
2.3

6
LB
0.8
0.3
‐0.2
‐0.7
‐1.2
‐1.7
‐2.2
‐2.7
‐3.2
‐3.7
‐4.2
‐4.7
‐5.2

UB
0.8
1.3
1.8
2.3
2.8
2.8
2.8
2.8
2.8
2.8
2.8
2.8
2.8

Table 2B:

LB

UB

Bounds on the Average Treatment Effect Given Bounded DnD and Time Variation Assumptions
Virginia, 1990
(jk)(de)
0.5
1
1.5
2
2.5
3
3.5
4
LB
UB
LB
UB
LB
UB LB
UB LB
UB LB
UB LB
UB LB
UB

0.8
0.3
‐0.2
‐0.7
‐1.2
‐1.2
‐1.2
‐1.2
‐1.2
‐1.2
‐1.2
‐1.2
‐1.2

‐1.2
‐1.2
‐1.2
‐1.2
‐1.2
‐1.2
‐1.2
‐1.2
‐1.2
‐1.2
‐1.2
‐1.2
‐1.2

0.8
0.3
‐0.2
‐0.7
‐1.2
‐1.7
‐1.7
‐1.7
‐1.7
‐1.7
‐1.7
‐1.7
‐1.7

j(de)



0
0
0.5
1
1.5
2
2.5
3
3.5
4
4.5
5
5.5
6

‐0.7
‐0.7
‐0.7
‐0.7
‐0.7
‐0.7
‐0.7
‐0.7
‐0.7
‐0.7
‐0.7
‐0.7
‐0.7

0.8
0.3
‐0.2
‐0.7
‐1.2
‐1.7
‐2.2
‐2.2
‐2.2
‐2.2
‐2.2
‐2.2
‐2.2

‐0.2
‐0.2
‐0.2
‐0.2
‐0.2
‐0.2
‐0.2
‐0.2
‐0.2
‐0.2
‐0.2
‐0.2
‐0.2

0.8
0.3
‐0.2
‐0.7
‐1.2
‐1.7
‐2.2
‐2.7
‐2.7
‐2.7
‐2.7
‐2.7
‐2.7

0.3
0.3
0.3
0.3
0.3
0.3
0.3
0.3
0.3
0.3
0.3
0.3
0.3

0.8
0.3
‐0.2
‐0.7
‐1.2
‐1.7
‐2.2
‐2.7
‐3.2
‐3.2
‐3.2
‐3.2
‐3.2

0.8
0.8
0.8
0.8
0.8
0.8
0.8
0.8
0.8
0.8
0.8
0.8
0.8

0.8
0.3
‐0.2
‐0.7
‐1.2
‐1.7
‐2.2
‐2.7
‐3.2
‐3.7
‐3.7
‐3.7
‐3.7

0.8
1.3
1.3
1.3
1.3
1.3
1.3
1.3
1.3
1.3
1.3
1.3
1.3

0.8
0.3
‐0.2
‐0.7
‐1.2
‐1.7
‐2.2
‐2.7
‐3.2
‐3.7
‐4.2
‐4.2
‐4.2

0.8
1.3
1.8
1.8
1.8
1.8
1.8
1.8
1.8
1.8
1.8
1.8
1.8

0.8
0.3
‐0.2
‐0.7
‐1.2
‐1.7
‐2.2
‐2.7
‐3.2
‐3.7
‐4.2
‐4.7
‐4.7

0.8
1.3
1.8
2.3
2.3
2.3
2.3
2.3
2.3
2.3
2.3
2.3
2.3

0.8
0.3
‐0.2
‐0.7
‐1.2
‐1.7
‐2.2
‐2.7
‐3.2
‐3.7
‐4.2
‐4.7
‐5.2

0.8
1.3
1.8
2.3
2.8
2.8
2.8
2.8
2.8
2.8
2.8
2.8
2.8

4.5

5

5.5
UB

LB

UB

LB

UB

LB

0.8
0.3
‐0.2
‐0.7
‐1.2
‐1.7
‐2.2
‐2.7
‐3.2
‐3.7
‐4.2
‐4.7
‐5.2

0.8
1.3
1.8
2.3
2.8
3.3
3.3
3.3
3.3
3.3
3.3
3.3
3.3

0.8
0.3
‐0.2
‐0.7
‐1.2
‐1.7
‐2.2
‐2.7
‐3.2
‐3.7
‐4.2
‐4.7
‐5.2

0.8
1.3
1.8
2.3
2.8
3.3
3.8
3.8
3.8
3.8
3.8
3.8
3.8

0.8
0.3
‐0.2
‐0.7
‐1.2
‐1.7
‐2.2
‐2.7
‐3.2
‐3.7
‐4.2
‐4.7
‐5.2

0.8
1.3
1.8
2.3
2.8
3.3
3.8
4.3
4.3
4.3
4.3
4.3
4.3

6
LB
0.8
0.3
‐0.2
‐0.7
‐1.2
‐1.7
‐2.2
‐2.7
‐3.2
‐3.7
‐4.2
‐4.7
‐5.2

Note: To simply the presentation of Tables 2a and 2b, the murder rates reported in Table 1 are rounded to the nearest whole number
(except for the 1990 murder rate in VA). Estimates highlighted in grey are infeasible, estimates in pink (bold) identify the sign to be
negative, and estimates in green (italics) are identified to be positive (dark green are point identified, light green are partially
identified).

UB
0.8
1.3
1.8
2.3
2.8
3.3
3.8
4.3
4.8
4.8
4.8
4.8
4.8

Table 3: Murder Rates per 100,000 Residents by Year and State
Year

Maryland

Virginia

1988

9.63

7.75

1987

9.55

7.36

Table 4: Bounded Variation Parameters

Murder
Rape
Aggravated Assault
Robbery
Auto Theft
Burglary
Larceny

Interstate Time
2.7
2.0
17
4
324
39
292
30
371
46
496
206
775
410

DID DID_0.75
2.3
1.2
6
3
60
34
55
27
61
43
136
67
175
93

Note: These parameters are found by taking the maximum of the
minimum parameter value for the models to be consistent with the
data in each year prior to 1989. The DID_0.75 parameter is the 0.75 quantile.

Table 5: Bounds on the ATE of a RTC Law in VA Given the Joint Interstate and Time Bounded Variation Model, by Year and
Crime

1990
1991
1992
1993
1994
1995
1996
1997
1998
1999
2000
2001
2002
2003
2004
2005
2006

Murder
Rape
Assault
Robbery
Auto Theft
Burglary
Larceny
LB
UB
LB
UB LB
UB
LB
UB
LB
UB
LB
UB
LB
UB
-0.2
2.2
-1.8
13.1
-18.5
41.4
-287.5
107.0
-52.8
701.8
-0.9
0.0
-18.5
-10.9
-0.5
0.3
-1.3
0.9
-4.1
21.8
-7.2
-22.1
-235.0
121.0
-35.4
521.0
7.1
28.1
7.2
7.0
-40.6
-51.4
-310.0
72.1
-242.9
310.3
0.3
1.9
-0.9
-0.6
-4.1
-0.2
-1.4
-1.7
0.8
-2.5
-348.0
28.5
-347.6
268.7
1.0
5.0
1.3
5.5
-59.2
-29.3
-2.6
4.7
-1.3
16.3
-8.6
20.6
-66.1
-115.8
-378.1
33.1
-370.6
171.2
-1.0
-0.2
-3.9
1.8
-52.6
-56.3
6.1
7.5
-2.1
-1.5
-9.7
-1.1
-421.7
-10.6
-402.1
-24.1
-4.4
4.2
-4.5
18.1
-19.0
19.9
-385.0
101.7
-2.3
-1.4
-66.7
-63.8
-406.3
-18.3
-2.5
0.1
-4.2
4.5
-2.8
45.6
-17.2
42.7
-65.3
27.4
-469.5
189.8
-369.4
-35.8
-4.5
4.1
-2.1
55.9
-36.1
23.8
-75.5
17.1
-595.6
175.4
-3.5
-1.1
-362.7
-46.1
-5.0
2.5
-6.5
65.7
-40.7
19.3
-84.7
8.0
-3.3
-0.6
-364.3
-135.7
-521.7
-2.2
-6.3
0.3
-52.8
7.1
-2.5
-0.1
-25.0
-5.5
-94.2
-1.6
-314.4
-177.3
-680.8 -263.9
-2.3
2.1
-46.3
13.6
-83.8
8.8
-3.2
-0.7
-23.2
-6.5
-333.6
-167.7
-530.8 -144.4
-46.1
13.8
0.0
2.7
-4.1
-1.4
-23.6
-2.3
-92.1
-1.8
-295.7
-171.1
-473.9 -165.1
-0.2
2.0
-32.6
44.6
-50.7
9.3
-3.9
-1.2
-102.0
-48.2
-308.4
-212.4
-364.9 -247.9
-35.2
38.0
-49.3
10.6
0.5
1.8
-4.2
-1.5
-112.0
-43.6
-277.5
-221.9
-280.2 -263.4
-34.3
42.9
-42.6
17.4
-260.1 -283.3
0.6
0.8
-3.7
-1.1
-134.3
-41.6
-249.9
-212.6
2.4
0.9
-37.2
40.0
-40.3
19.6
-408.4 -461.3
-4.5
-1.8
-152.0
-59.3
-250.9
-189.5

Note: Estimates highlighted in grey are infeasible, estimates in pink (bold) identify the sign to be negative, and estimates in green
(italics) are identified to be positive.

Table 6: The ATE of a RTC Law in VA Given the DID Invariance Model, by
Year and Crime Type

1990
1991
1992
1993
1994
1995
1996
1997
1998
1999
2000
2001
2002
2003
2004
2005
2006

Murder Rape Assault Robbery
-0.9 -4.7
-3.9
-52.0
11.1
-0.6 -5.9
-81.1
-1.4 -4.9
-10.0
-103.1
-2.6 -1.9
-11.5
-105.4
-1.0 -2.2
-0.7
-82.3
-2.4 -5.1
-9.5
-104.0
1.1
-2.2 -0.8
-83.0
1.5
28.6
-0.7
-23.7
3.3
38.9
-1.9
-4.7
5.1
48.6
26.1
-1.4
3.8
21.6
-0.6
-22.5
7.7
32.4
-1.3
-23.5
37.3
-2.2 10.1
-19.4
9.9
33.9
37.6
-2.0
20.9
50.4
-2.3 10.6
45.8
29.8
-2.0 10.7
65.8
33.5
-2.6 12.5

Auto
Theft
Burglary Larceny
246.3
-10.9
-26.9
45.4
-22.1
-12.9
-51.4
-61.8
-165.3
-29.3
-105.4
-206.9
-115.8
-45.2
-304.4
-56.3
-102.4
-499.7
-63.8
-44.0
-373.8
49.0
-7.1
-285.8
91.0
-0.5
-296.4
139.7
-2.0
-222.5
82.7
47.9
-381.7
36.8
28.7
-231.6
66.6
-1.8
-174.8
53.9
-48.2
-65.8
84.8
18.9
-43.6
112.4
39.1
-29.2
19.6
111.3
-109.3

Note: Estimates highlighted in grey are infeasible, estimates in pink (bold) identify the sign to be negative, and estimates in green
(italics) are identified to be positive.

Table 7: Bounds on the ATE of a RTC Law in VA Given the Joint DID, Interstate and Time Bounded Variation Model, by Year and
Crime Type

1990
1991
1992
1993
1994
1995
1996
1997
1998
1999
2000
2001
2002
2003
2004
2005
2006

Murder
Rape
Assault
Robbery
Auto Theft
Burglary
Larceny
LB
UB
LB
UB
LB
UB
LB
UB
LB
UB
LB
UB
LB
UB
-2.0
0.3 -7.9
-38.0
30.2
-53.6
27.8
153.2
291.6
-1.4
-79.2
-24.7
-94.3
-81.9
-1.7
0.6 -9.2
-23.0
45.2
-64.9
20.6
-47.8
138.6
-2.7
-108.3
-53.8
-83.4
-29.5
-44.1
24.1
-2.6 -0.3 -8.2
-1.7
-130.4
-75.9
-94.1
-8.7
-132.4
-104.5
-258.5
-72.1
1.4
-45.6
22.6
-3.7 -1.4 -5.2
-132.7
-78.2
-72.0
-12.9
-175.9
-142.4
-300.1 -113.7
-2.1
0.2 -5.4
1.1
-34.8
33.3
-115.7
-172.5
-109.6
-55.1
-158.6
-73.1
-397.6 -211.3
-43.6
24.5
-173.0
-216.2
-3.5 -1.2 -8.3
-1.8
-131.2
-76.7
-99.0
-13.6
-592.9 -406.5
-33.0
34.0
-114.6
-223.9
-3.4 -1.1 -4.1
-0.1
-110.2
-55.7
-106.5
-21.0
-467.0 -280.7
-1.9
0.4 -1.8
4.7
-5.4
62.7
-51.0
3.6
-74.5
60.3
6.2
91.7
-379.0 -192.6
-32.0
22.5
-71.0
67.0
0.1
6.6
4.8
73.0
48.2
133.7
-3.0 -0.7
-389.6 -203.3
-1.2
53.3
-69.5
65.4
1.9
8.4
32.1
82.7
97.0
182.5
-2.0 -0.2
-315.7 -129.4
-19.6
115.3
-1.7
0.6
13.5
11.6
-5.7
48.8
0.5
7.0
40.0
125.5
-474.8 -288.5
15.4
10.6
-6.0
79.5
-38.7
96.1
4.5
11.0
5.2
59.7
-2.5 -0.2
-324.8 -138.5
-44.5
41.0
-0.8
134.0
15.0
14.7
6.9
13.4
10.1
64.6
-2.4 -1.1
-267.9
-81.6
-13.6
121.3
-158.9
27.4
6.6
13.1
6.0
68.0
10.4
64.9
-2.1 -0.9
-55.7
-5.4
-74.2
112.1
7.4
13.9
3.3
55.0
23.2
77.7
17.4
152.2
-2.5 -1.1
-65.7
-0.8
-71.9
13.6
-54.1
132.2
7.4
14.0
11.7
79.9
2.6
57.1
45.0
179.8
-1.7 -0.8
-23.1
62.3
9.2
15.8
31.8
99.9
6.2
60.7
43.9
178.7
-202.4
-16.1
-2.5 -1.5

Note: Estimates highlighted in grey are infeasible, estimates in pink (bold) identify the sign to be negative, and estimates in green
(italics) are identified to be positive.

Table 8: Bounds on the ATE of a RTC Law in MD and IL given the Interstate Bounded Variation Assumption,
by Crime and Year

1990
1991
1992
1993
1994
1995
1996
1997
1998
1999
2000
2001
2002
2003
2004
2005
2006

Maryland
Illinois
Murder
Robbery
Burglary
Murder
Robbery
Burglary
LB
UB
LB
UB
LB
UB
LB
UB LB
UB
LB
UB
-240.6
83.0
-389.2
107.0 -4.2 0.6
-122.6
142.6
-2.7
0.0
-293.7
-69.8
-2.4
0.3
-269.7
53.9
-375.1
121.0 -3.8 1.0
-145.7
119.4
-341.7
-117.8
-291.8
31.8
-424.1
72.1 -3.2 1.6
-125.9
139.3
-3.3 -0.6
-291.0
-67.1
-294.1
29.5
-467.6
28.5 -3.8 0.9
-161.6
103.6
-4.4 -1.7
-261.0
-37.1
-271.0
52.6
-407.4
88.7 -3.8 1.0
-149.5
115.6
-2.9 -0.2
-240.7
-16.8
-292.6
31.0
-464.7
31.5 -2.2 2.5
-193.5
30.4
-89.1
176.1
-4.2 -1.5
-271.6
51.9
-406.3
89.9 -2.6 2.1
-151.6
72.2
-116.9
148.3
-4.1 -1.4
-2.6
0.1
-212.4
111.2
-369.4
126.7 -1.8 2.9
-143.8
80.1
-42.4
222.8
-193.4
130.2
-362.7
133.4 -0.6 4.1
-136.3
87.6
-20.2
245.0
-3.8 -1.1
-162.6
161.0
-364.3
131.8 -1.2 3.6
-108.6
115.3
1.2
266.3
-3.3 -0.6
-2.5
0.3
-167.1
156.5
-314.4
181.7 -1.5 3.3
-103.5
120.4
16.0
281.2
-156.2
167.3
-333.6
162.6 -1.1 3.6
-81.9
142.0
67.3
332.5
-3.2 -0.5
-151.3
172.3
-295.7
200.5 -1.7 3.0
-93.4
130.5
46.3
311.5
-4.1 -1.4
-151.0
172.5
-308.4
187.7 -1.6 3.1
-85.3
138.6
50.6
315.8
-3.9 -1.2
-138.2
185.4
-277.5
218.7 -1.1 3.7
-75.3
148.6
78.9
344.1
-4.2 -1.5
-158.8
164.8
-249.9
246.3 -0.4 4.4
-74.3
149.6
88.0
353.2
-3.8 -1.1
-155.2
168.4
-250.9
245.2 -0.2 4.5
-70.9
153.0
128.9
394.1
-4.5 -1.8

Note: For Maryland, the comparison state is Virginia. For Illinois, the comparison state is Indiana. Estimates highlighted in grey are
infeasible, estimates in pink (bold) identify the sign to be negative, and estimates in green (italics) are identified to be positive.

