                            NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




MOBILE MESSAGING FOR OFFLINE GROUP FORMATION IN PROSOCIAL ACTIVITIES:
                      A LARGE FIELD EXPERIMENT

                                      Tianshu Sun
                                  Guodong (Gordon) Gao
                                     Ginger Zhe Jin

                                     Working Paper 21704
                             http://www.nber.org/papers/w21704


                    NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                             1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                               Cambridge, MA 02138
                         November 2015, Revised February 2018




Previously circulated as "Mobile Messaging for Offline Social Interactions: a Large Field
Experiment." We thank participants of the International Industrial Organization Conference,
Workshop on Information and Network, Conference on Digital Experimentation, Conference on
Digital Big Data, Workshop on Health Information Technology and Economics, Conference on
Information Systems and Economics, as well as seminars at the Wharton School and Johns
Hopkins University for constructive comments. We are extremely grateful to people at the
Chinese blood bank for implementing the experiment and patiently answering many questions.
Sun acknowledges Doctoral Research Grant from CIBER and the US Department of Education.
This RCT was registered in the American Economic Association Registry for randomized control
trials under Trial number AEARCTR-0000935. The views expressed herein are those of the
authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.

© 2015 by Tianshu Sun, Guodong (Gordon) Gao, and Ginger Zhe Jin. All rights reserved. Short
sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission
provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
Mobile Messaging for Offline Group Formation in Prosocial Activities: A Large Field Experiment
Tianshu Sun, Guodong (Gordon) Gao, and Ginger Zhe Jin
NBER Working Paper No. 21704
November 2015, Revised February 2018
JEL No. D8,I18

                                            ABSTRACT

In this paper, we use mobile messaging to leverage recipients’ social ties and encourage offline
prosocial activities in groups. In particular, we conduct a randomized field experiment with 80,000
blood donors and study how behavioral interventions and economic rewards motivate offline
group formation. We find that two commonly used interventions—reminder messages and
individual reward—are ineffective in motivating group formation because they do not compensate
donors for the cost of bringing friends. In contrast, we find that group reward—a new reward that
is contingent on a donor bringing a friend—is effective in motivating group formation.
Furthermore, group reward tends to attract different types of donors, especially those who are
traditionally less active in online social settings but have more local social ties. Structural
estimation further reveals the underlying mechanisms, suggesting that group reward is four times
more cost-effective than individual reward in driving total donation. Our study suggests that
motivating offline group formation is a promising approach to boost prosocial activities.

Tianshu Sun                                       Ginger Zhe Jin
Marshall School of Business                       University of Maryland
3670 Trousdale Pkwy.                              Department of Economics
Los Angeles, CA 90089                             3115F Tydings Hall
tianshus@marshall.usc.edu                         College Park, MD 20742-7211
                                                  and NBER
Guodong (Gordon) Gao                              jin@econ.umd.edu
4325 Van Munching Hall
University of Maryland
College Park, MD, 20742
ggao@rhsmith.umd.edu




A randomized controlled trials registry entry is available at
http://www.socialscienceregistry.org/trials/935/history
                                               1. Introduction
        Individuals increasingly connect online and offline, influencing each other’s behavior on an
unprecedented scale. Given this trend, organizations are paying much more attention to social interventions
that influence consumer decision-making (Godes et al. 2005, Hill et al. 2006, Valente 2012). Although
much insight has been generated in online information sharing (Aral and Walker 2011, 2012, Bapna and
Umyarov 2015, Burtch et al. 2017, Susarla et al. 2012), less is known about how firms can use digital
interventions to improve offline social interaction. As Aral (2016) points out, “…there remains a danger in
relying too heavily on digital substrates to explore human behavior. Not only are digital samples biased
toward those who are more active online, potentially missing large swaths of society, but limiting inquiry
to digital behaviors constrains the theoretical reach of experimental work.” Hence, Aral (2016) calls for
networked experiments to link online treatment with offline behaviors.
         To answer this call, we study how mobile messaging can be used to motivate offline group
formation to encourage prosocial behavior. Group formation can help offline activities in several important
ways. First, many offline activities have inherent social elements. For example, significant utility may be
derived from the shared experience of consuming the same content (Becker 1991, Gilchrist and Sands 2016,
Ramanathan et al. 2013). Moreover, social image can be significantly enhanced by the presence of friends
(Ariely et al. 2009, Karlan and McConnell 2014). Finally, to the extent that friends are alike (i.e., homophily,
Aral et al. 2009), encouraging group formation can also be an effective way to reach latent participants.
        Given the importance of group formation in prosocial behavior, a key gap in the literature concerns
how to design digital interventions to motivate offline group formation (see detailed literature review in
Section 2). To address this question, we expand the theoretical framework in the literature and characterize
an individual by both her utility of participation and her utility of bringing a friend. We use the framework
in the blood donation setting to illustrate a donor’s decision between solo and donating with friends and
discuss the effects of different interventions. The perceived effects are empirically tested in a large-scale
randomized field experiment with 80,000 blood donors.
        As an important offline prosocial behavior, blood donation provides an excellent setting to address
our research question. Throughout the world, a major challenge to blood donation is low participation
(Lacetera et al. 2013, WHO 2015). Blood banks may boost participation by motivating individuals to donate
solo or with friend(s). Because almost all previous studies have focused on motivating solo donation (Goette
et al. 2010, Lacetera et al. 2012, 2014), little is known about the benefits and costs of motivating potential
donors to form a group and come to donate together (which we refer as group donation). Recent studies
have examined the effects of two major interventions: reminder message and individual reward (see
Lacetera et al. 2012, 2013, and 2014). Thus, the first question we aim to answer is how these two commonly
used interventions affect group donation. Moreover, what new interventions can be used to motivate group
donation? We propose two new interventions designed for group donation: One is to explicitly request a
potential donor to donate with a friend (referred to as a friend request), and the other is to provide a group
reward contingent on a donor bringing a friend and donate together (referred to as a group reward).
        With both existing and new interventions in mind, we design a randomized field experiment (1) to
identify the causal effects of existing interventions (reminder message and individual reward) and new
interventions (friend request and group reward) in driving group donation, (2) to understand the
mechanisms by which different interventions may compensate for the varying costs of solo and group
donation, and (3) to shed light on the best intervention design that will increase total donation and improve
cost-effectiveness for the blood bank.
        The experiment yields four main findings. First, we find that the two commonly used interventions
for solo donation—reminder message and individual reward—have an insignificant effect on group
donation. Second, friend requests alone do not work. Although the request reminds a donor to donate with
a friend, it also increases the perceived pressure when the donor cannot find a friend to bring, which may
potentially discourage the message recipient from donating alone. Third, the newly designed group reward
is most effective in motivating group donation. From a donor’s perspective, group reward is less desirable
than individual reward. However, from the blood bank’s point of view, group reward strategically removes
the reward for donating alone, differentially highlights the benefits of donating in a group, and nudges
donors into group donation. Finally, we find that group reward tends to attract different types of donors
than other treatments. Interestingly, donors that are more responsive to group reward are less likely to be
young and single1 but have stronger social ties in the local area and therefore face a lower cost of recruiting
friends for group donation.
        Our structural estimates further unveil a negative correlation between a donor’s cost of donation
and her cost of bringing a friend, which further explains the effectiveness of group reward. Structural
estimation also allows us to simulate the effects of the interventions that were not directly tested in our
experiment. Overall, our results suggest that blood banks can leverage group formation to stimulate
voluntary donation, but only with appropriate economic intervention (i.e., group reward). Based on our
results, the collaborating blood bank has already implemented group reward in a range of campaigns to
motivate group donation. Our study signifies the potentials of mobile messaging in boosting offline group
formation, and contributes to the IS research on the better design of digital interventions.


                               2. Related Literature and Our Contribution



1
 According to Pew Research (2014), young and single individuals are more likely than other demographics to be
active online.
        Our paper is closely related to two streams of literature: the IS literature on how firms use digital
interventions to influence offline behavior and the literature on motivating prosocial behavior, especially
in the context of blood donation.
               2.1 The IS literature on how digital interventions affect offline behavior
        IS researchers have actively explored the question of how to use digital interventions, especially
mobile messaging, to influence user behavior (Ghose et al. 2013, Ghose et al. 2015, Luo et al. 2014). Recent
studies on mobile messaging have begun to extend to the role of offline factors in driving customers’
engagement and purchasing behavior. For example, a series of studies have examined the moderating effect
of user geographic location (Fang et al. 2015, Fong et al. 2015, Ghose et al. 2013), local environment
(Andrews et al. 2016), shopping path (Ghose et al. 2015), timing (Luo et al. 2014), and weather (Li et al.
2016) on customers’ responses to digital messages. This stream of research has established the effectiveness
of digital messages in influencing individual behavior, such as clicking on ads (Andrews et al. 2016) and
purchasing tickets (Luo et al. 2014). A recent study by Aral and Nicolaides (2017) also finds that digital
notifications with information about peers’ exercise behavior have a positive and causal effect on a subject’s
exercise behavior.
        Our work extends their pioneering research in two ways. First, the existing literature has largely
focused on offline individual behavior, but it seldom considers offline social interaction among subjects. It
has been increasingly recognized that users are not isolated individuals, but are socially connected (Choi et
al. 2012, Lee and Bell 2013). Many offline activities—such as donations, shopping, and exercise—trigger
shared experience (Gilchrist and Sands 2016, Ramanathan et al. 2013), social image (Ariely et al. 2009,
Karlan and McConnell 2014), and other social elements. Therefore, there is a great potential to leverage
group formation to improve the effectiveness of digital interventions on offline activities. Our study
contributes to this underexplored frontier by examining the effects of mobile messaging on offline group
formation and total blood donation. Second, previous studies have focused on self-interested behavior, such
as shopping and exercise. Our study extends from self-interested activities to prosocial behavior (i.e., blood
donation). The mechanisms that influence offline prosocial behavior can be different from those that
influence self-interested behavior (Dube et al. 2017), and therefore more research on prosocial behavior is
warranted.
        Our work is also related to the IS literature of online networked experiments (Aral 2016).
Researchers in this field have examined the influence of an individual’s online connections on one’s own
behavior, such as product adoption (Aral and Walker 2011, 2012, 2014, Bapna and Umyarov 2015) and
crowdfunding contribution (Burtch et al. 2015). However, a large portion of social interactions remains
offline and likely invisible online. Focusing too much on the measurable online connections and outcomes
could constrain the theoretical reach of experimental work (Aral 2016). Motivated by this observation, we
examine an important offline activity—blood donation—and design interventions that motivate users to
form a group through any type of social connection. We show that motivating offline group formation
requires the recipient to incur a significant cost to identify and persuade a friend, but well-designed
economic reward can play an important role in compensating for this cost. Furthermore, we find that people
who tend to be less active online are more responsive to a mobile message that encourages them to form a
group offline.
                            2.2 The literature on motivating prosocial behavior
        Prosocial behaviors—such as recycling, energy saving, and blood donation—play a critical role in
society; however, they are often in short supply (Meier 2007). For example, there is a worldwide shortage
of blood supply due to low participation in blood donation, especially in developing countries (WHO 2015).
To increase participation, two broad intervention approaches are suggested in the literature: non-monetary
behavioral interventions and economic incentives. Rooted in psychology, behavioral interventions focus on
influencing people’s decision-making in a prosocial direction, usually by enhancing warm glow (Crumpler
and Grossman 2008) or social image (Ariely et al. 2009). Commonly used behavioral interventions include
reminding or asking individuals for donation (Andreoni and Rao 2011, Bruhin et al. 2015), priming
altruistic values or shortage information (Sun et al. 2016), or introducing a social norm (Goldstein et al.
2008). These tactics have been widely used in blood donation and have proven to be effective, according
to a systematic review of 29 studies (Godin et al. 2012). Compared to behavioral interventions, economic
reward for prosocial behavior is controversial due to concerns of crowd out (Buyx et al. 2009, Glynn et al.
2013, Gneezy et al. 2011). However, recent studies have found that individual-level economic reward is
highly effective in driving donation (Goette and Stutzer 2008, Iajya et al. 2013, Lacetera et al. 2012, 2014),
and researchers have called for more attention to this type of intervention (Lacetera et al. 2013).
        Until now, both behavioral interventions and economic rewards have focused on motivating solo
donation.2 However, little is known about the effects of these interventions on group donation. At the same
time, growing evidence suggests that group formation may be an important yet underexplored approach to
driving prosocial behavior. Researchers find that donors behave differently when surrounded by other
donors or watched by third-party observers (Andreoni and Bernheim 2009, Ariely et al. 2009, Karlan and
McConnell 2014). Such group effects usually lead to more contributions, although effectiveness depends
on group size (Goes et al. 2014, Toubia et al. 2013, Zhang and Zhu 2011), group composition (Chen and
Li 2009; Ren et al 2016), and information structure (Chen et al. 2010). However, these studies, which
employ either researcher-controlled assignments or policy changes, focus on the group effect after the group


2
 We find one study (Lacetera et al. 2014) examining the spillover effect of economic reward at the aggregate level.
However, that study does not explicitly examine offline group formation among donors.
is formed. In reality, donor groups are often formed endogenously before the charitable event. Given the
inherent costs of bringing friend(s), 3 there is surprisingly little research on how charities can actively
motivate individuals to form their own groups.
         We bridge the above two streams of literature by examining the role of behavioral interventions
and economic rewards in motivating group formation. In particular, we recognize that a donor can either
donate alone or donate in a group, and therefore our framework characterizes an individual by not only her
utility of donation but also the extra benefits and costs she will have in bringing a friend for group donation.
We also provide the first empirical test on how reminder messages and individual rewards                 the two most
commonly used interventions for solo donation               affect group donation. Furthermore, guided by a
theoretical framework (Section 3), we design two new interventions (friend request and group reward) and
compare them with the existing interventions. Our results suggest that charities can leverage group donation
to stimulate voluntary donation, but only with appropriate economic intervention.
                     3. How Interventions Affect Solo Donation and Group Donation
         In this section, we consider critical factors underlying an individual’s donation choices and
investigate how different interventions impact group donation. Our work focuses on motivating the subject
to reach out to friends by changing the message recipient’s utility via various interventions. Therefore, our
model naturally focuses on the recipient’s utility and decision-making. Below, we use four figures to show
that commonly used interventions (reminder messages and individual rewards) are not designed for
motivating group donation and may not be as effective as group reward.
         A potential donor i faces three choices: not donating, donating alone, and donating with a friend.
Given the importance of group donation, we characterize i’s utility along two dimensions. As shown in
Figure 1, the vertical axis ! represents the net utility that i expects to derive from donation regardless of
whether she brings a friend or not. The utility of donation may be jointly determined by altruism, warm
glow (Andreoni 1989), and the cost of donation, such as transportation or remembering to donate. The
horizontal axis # represents the extra utility i may obtain from group donation if she brings a friend and
they donate together. As discussed in the literature review, the extra utility of bringing a friend may be
determined by shared experience (Gilchrist and Sands 2016), positive social image that i may enjoy through
group donation (as compared to donating alone), as well as the costs of identifying (Beaman and Magruder



3
 Costs of bringing friend(s) may include: a) referral cost (Beaman and Magruder 2012): a donor may need to think
of potential donors in her social circle, reach out to them, and educate/persuade them about the donation; b)
coordinating costs for scheduling and transportation; and c) negative peer pressure (Calvó-Armengol and Jackson
2010): a donor may be reluctant to ask a friend to donate together if doing so amounts to asking for a favor or
imposing pressure on the friend. No matter whether the lack of group donation is due to coordination failure or
negative peer pressure, the design of external intervention has a potential to affect group donation decisions. Please
see more discussions in Section 3.
2012), persuading (Calvó-Armengol and Jackson 2010), and coordinating with the friend. Therefore, G can
be positive or negative depending on the magnitude of associated benefits and costs.
        Within our framework, all individuals in the population can be represented on this two-dimensional
plane. Figure 1 distinguishes three areas: i will not donate in the white blank area because ! < 0, ! + # <
0; i will donate alone in the dotted area where ! > 0 & # < 0; and i will donate with a friend in the gray
area where # > 0 & ! + # > 0. By expanding donor characterization from one to two dimensions, this
framework naturally incorporates group donation as one choice, thus allowing us to compare effects of
different interventions over both solo and group donation.
        Figure 2 considers a simple intervention that increases the return of donation from ! to ! + Δ!.
This can be achieved by offering individual rewards (Lacetera et al. 2014) or by sending a reminder message
to the donor and reducing her cost of remembering to donate (Bruhin et al. 2015). Compared with Figure
1, an increase in ! leads some non-donating people to donate alone (the black-lined dotted area), and some
non-donating subjects to donate with a friend (the white-lined gray area).
        Similarly, on top of Figure 1, Figure 3 increases the utility of bringing a friend from # to # + Δ#.
This can be achieved either by requesting i to bring a friend or by offering a group reward to i when she
brings her friend to donate together (note that the request to bring a friend can lead to social pressure, which
will be considered in Figure 4). Giving rewards to the friend can also reduce the persuasion cost of the
subject, thereby contributing to Δ#. Compared with Figure 1, Δ# encourages some non-donating subjects
to donate with a friend and some existing donors to switch from solo donation to group donation (both in
the white-lined gray area).
        Figure 2 and Figure 3 present an interesting contrast. Compared with Figure 1, both Figures 2 and
3 convert some non-donors into group donors (represented as the white-lined area below the horizontal
axis). This is because for some people group donation is more desirable than solo donation (# > 0), but
the total benefits are not sufficient to overcome the associated cost (! + # < 0). The introduction of Δ!
or Δ# helps to push them into group donation. In addition to this common effect, Δ! brings in another
group of donors who do not donate in Figure 1 but donate alone in Figure 2 (the dark-lined area). This
second group of donors includes primarily those who expect a negative benefit from group donation (# <
0) but who are almost ready to donate solo (! < 0 & ! + Δ! > 0). In comparison, Figure 3 brings in a
third group of donors who would have donated solo in Figure 1 but now donate in a group in Figure 3 (the
upper white-lined gray area). These donors enjoy high utility of donation but need a nudge to overcome the
small net cost of bringing a friend (# < 0 & # + Δ# > 0). In summary, Figure 2 and Figure 3 suggest that
both group and individual rewards can bring in extra donors, but they tend to attract different types of
donors: those who respond to group reward tend to have a lower cost (or higher utility) of forming groups.
        When an individual receives a message from the blood bank for group donation, she may feel an
additional social pressure to meet the expectation and bring a friend (DellaVigna et al. 2012). Thus,
donating alone needs to overcome an additional cost in social pressure (referred to as - ./ ), which
disappears when one donates with a friend. This insight is reflected in Figure 4, which adds - ./ to Figure
1. Compared with Figure 1, the no-donation area expands in Figure 4 (! − - ./ < 0, ! + # < 0), the
donation-alone area shrinks (! > - ./ & ! + # < ! − - ./ , 1ℎ34ℎ 3567389 # < −- ./ ), and the group-
donation area expands (! + # > 0 & # > − - ./ ). In other words, the social pressure created by the bank’s
request to bring a friend may lead to more group donation (the white-lined gray area) but less solo donation
(the dark-lined area).
        The following numerical example illustrates the different effects of solo and group rewards on
donor behavior and recruitment cost. Let us assume utility of donating ! ∈ −$5, $5 , and utility of
donating with friend(s) # ∈ −$5, $5 . The plane represents 100 potential donors, uniformly distributed
(later we relax the uniform distribution assumption in empirical estimation). We assume that each donor
will donate 1 unit of blood, and the economic reward (either solo or group) is $2 per donor. Therefore, if
there is no reward (Figure 1), there will be 25 solo donors (dotted area) and 37.5 donors who bring a friend,
leading to a total of 100 units of blood. In Figure 2, individual reward (   ! = $2) leads to 10 more solo
donors and 8 more group donors who would bring a friend. As a result, we have 26 extra units of blood
(1*10+2*8), with a total reward of $252 (as all donors receive $2 reward, including friend donors). Now
consider the group reward in Figure 3 (     # = $2). Compared with Figure 1, Figure 3 converts 10 solo
donors into group donors, in addition to another 10 new group donors, resulting in 15 solo donors and 57.5
donors who bring a friend. This leads to a net increase of 30 more units of blood ((2-1)*10+2*10). For the
blood bank, the total cost of the group reward is $2*2*(37.5+20) = $230. Compared with individual rewards,
group rewards lead to 4 units more blood but $22 less in reward costs. This clearly shows the advantage of
group reward. Group reward improves effectiveness and efficiency by allocating the reward to the right
margin: On the one hand, the group reward is targeted to compensate for the cost of bringing friends,
therefore converting individuals from solo donors to group donors. On the other hand, unlike individual
reward, group reward does not compensate those individual donors who would come to donate anyway,
therefore saving the cost for solo donations.
        In summary, our theoretical framework produces a few testable implications. (1) Compared to the
baseline (Figure 1), an increase in individual reward (Figure 2) leads some new donors to donate alone and
some other new donors to donate with a friend. (2) In comparison, an increase in group reward (Figure 3)
leads to more group donation than the baseline and the use of individual reward. (3) Part of the increase
comes from solo donors becoming group donors. Moreover, rewards for solo donation and group donation
motivate different types of donors: Donors motivated by group reward are likely to have relatively high
utility (low cost) of bringing a friend. (4) Finally, a reminder message for group donation may create social
pressure (Figure 4), which, if significant, may lead to less solo donation and more group donation than the
baseline.
         So far, Figures 2–4 illustrate three separate effects as denoted in Δ!, Δ# and - ./ . In reality, a
treatment may trigger multiple effects. For example, a friend request message may lower the cost of
remembering to donate (Δ!) and lower the cost of remembering to bring a friend (Δ#) but introduce social
pressure for group donation (- ./ ). Thus, the effect of friend request is a combination of Figures 2, 3, and
4. Similarly, a mobile message that contains group reward may remind the recipient to donate blood, remind
her to bring a friend, introduce social pressure for group donation, and provide group reward if she donates
with a friend. This treatment is another combination of Figures 2, 3, and 4 but with a different magnitude
of Δ#. Section 4 will articulate the content of our six mobile message treatments; Section 5 will elaborate
on how we separately identify the effects of Δ!, Δ#, and - ./ in structural estimation.
                                    4. Background and Experiment Design
         We collaborated with a centralized blood bank in a major city in China with a population of over 8
million. The blood bank is responsible for supplying blood to 18 hospitals in the city and is encouraged to
be self-sufficient in blood supply. In the past 10 years, the blood bank has recruited more than 400,000
whole blood donors, who contributed more than 500,000 donation episodes. Donations are collected by 17
bloodmobiles across the city and by special drives at universities, companies, and government agencies.
Our experiment focuses on donations collected by bloodmobiles.
         The experiment was run in a 15-day period from late December 2014 to early January 2015. We
started by choosing subjects from past donors of the blood bank based on three criteria: first, blood donated
by a particular donor must have passed a battery of blood tests, which is important because the bank aims
to increase supply of qualified blood; second, the donor has not donated in the last six months, as a 1998
nationwide law disallows any donor from donating whole blood twice within six months; third, the donor
has made at least one donation in the past 25 months. Because donors who donated a long time ago may
have moved out of the city, the last criterion is used to better capture donors who still reside in the city.4



4
  We choose to focus on past donors for several reasons. First, there are over 400,000 past donors in the
collaborating blood bank, representing a large number of eligible donors in the focal city. A significant portion of
the blood supply is also contributed by repeat donors. Thus, it is important to understand the effect of interventions
on their donation behavior. Second, in our experiment, the blood bank can vary the digital message to the past
donors at the individual level, but the bank does not have such good control over the message when reaching new
donors (usually accomplished through channels such as TV and newspaper ads). Third, detailed information on
demographics and donation history may significantly strengthen our analysis, but these are only available for past
donors. Finally, most blood banks in China are only able to send digital messages to previous donors who have
registered their contact information. Thus, our results on past donors have immediate implications to the practice.
        As discussed in the introduction, we aim to identify the effects of two commonly used interventions
(reminder message and individual reward) and two newly proposed interventions (friend request and group
reward) in driving solo and group donation. To accomplish this, we designed six different text messages.
Message 1 (T1) only reminds subjects to donate blood; message 2 (T2) adds an explicit reward for donation
(a supermarket voucher that is worth 30–50 RMB depending on the amount of blood donated, equivalent
to 5–8.3 US dollars). The average daily wage in this city in 2014 was about 100 RMB, so the reward amount
is non-trivial. Neither T1 nor T2 mentions group donation. In message 3 (T3), we request the subject to
donate with friend(s) but do not mention any economic reward; message 4 (T4) includes both a reminder
for donating with friend(s) and the economic reward. Note that in both T2 and T4, the reward is presented
as reward per donor, without any condition on whether the donor comes alone or with friend(s). Message 5
(T5) is similar to T4, except that the reward is conditional on donating with friend(s) (“…if you and your
friend(s) donate together, each one of you may get …”). Message 6 (T6) is similar to T4, but highlights
additional gifts available for all donors that come in a group (“…upon donation, every donor may get ….
If you and your friend(s) donate together, each one of you may get an additional gift.”). Table 1 summarizes
the behavioral interventions and economic rewards in each treatment group, with the exact messages
presented in Panel A.
        A sample of 80,000 past donors was randomly assigned into seven test groups. The first one is the
control group, with 14,000 subjects who received no message from the blood bank. Subjects in the
remaining six groups, with 11,000 subjects in each, received one of six different mobile messages, as
described above.
        Once the subjects decided to donate and visited the bloodmobile (either alone or in a group), they
first filled out a standard questionnaire on demographics and medical conditions, designed by the blood
bank to evaluate their eligibility to donate. The donors then underwent a blood screening test. While waiting
for the test results, they were asked to fill out an additional survey designed by the researchers. The survey
collected additional demographics and social information of the donor. The nurse then collected the surveys
and informed donors of the standard gifts and special rewards they would receive based on the donation
amount. The donors would then decide the donation amount and make the donation.
        In particular, donors who chose to donate 200ml would receive standard gifts (e.g., a souvenir such
as a cup or t-shirt). Donors donating 300ml of blood were eligible for a 30RMB supermarket voucher
(around $5), and those donating 400 ml were eligible for a 50RMB supermarket voucher. In addition, group
donors received an additional gift: a fruit cutting tool (worth about 10RMB) for each of them. These rewards
were dispensed to all donors, regardless of whether they were in our experiment or which message they
received. In other words, the only difference between treatment groups is the message they received from
the blood bank, not the actual gifts upon donation.
        The blood bank decided to apply the same rewards to all treatment groups due to a practical concern.
Ideally, it shall adhere to the exact reward scheme as delivered in each mobile message, which is easy to
do if there is only one intervention on-going. However, the goal of the experiment is to compare different
interventions at the same time so that confounding factors are minimized across interventions. In practice,
it is difficult for nurses to treat coming donors differently in a bloodmobile. Consider two adjacent donors,
one with T4, the other with T5 and both donating solo. Sticking to the exact message implies a 30–50RMB
reward for the first donor but zero reward for the second donor. Not only does this method require the nurse
to track everyone’s mobile message precisely, it may subject the bank to a claim of discrimination and
create chaos. The rewards that the bank gave out are at least as good as what was promised in the mobile
message, and donors in some of the test groups received a positive surprise after they came to the
bloodmobile. This is a necessary tradeoff due to the complexity of the offline operation and the sensitive
nature of blood donation.
        Because all our messages involving economic reward described the reward as “30–50 RMB in
supermarket voucher” and did not link the exact reward to a donation amount, most subjects in our
experiment did not know the correlation between reward and donation amount until they came to a
bloodmobile. This implies that the differential reward by donation amount should not affect a subject’s
decision of whether to donate (solo or with a friend); however, it will affect the subject’s donation amount
after they approach the bloodmobile. Throughout the paper, we refer to the decision of whether to donate
as the first stage, and refer to the choice of donation amount as the second stage. Our analysis focuses more
on the first stage, because the experiment generates clean, exogenous variations for the first stage, but the
second stage is subject to other difficult-to-control factors.
        The universal implementation of economic rewards does introduce a potential for treatment
spillover. Although our experiment was run in a short time (two weeks), we cannot rule out the possibility
that later donors may learn about universal rewards from earlier donors and depart from what is intended
in our mobile message. This is especially a concern for the group reward treatment (T5) because some
donors in T5 may choose to donate alone after they become aware of the reward for solo donation. This
spillover, if it occurs at all, tends to make T5 more similar to the individual reward treatment (T4), thus
leading us to underestimate the actual difference between T4 and T5. Therefore, our estimates on the effects
of group reward on group donation are likely conservative.
        After each donation, the nurse completed two tasks. First, if a donor donated with friend(s) or
brought non-donating friend(s), the nurse recorded the donor ID of each donor in the group, as well as the
number of non-donating friends with them; second, the nurse marked the donor ID on the survey form,
which helps us link the survey to the donor.5 All nurses went through a centralized training session before
the campaign and were instructed to strictly follow the same procedures for each donor. The survey is
designed to help us measure unobserved constructs, such as a donor’s cost of bringing friends, including
her social environment (e.g., whether her friends donated before) and her image motivation (e.g.,
willingness to share the donation experience).
         Finally, we augment the field experiment with rich archival data, including demographics (age,
gender, education, occupation, marriage status, resident status, and health indicators) and donation history
(across 10 years) for the 80,000 subjects in our experiment.
                                             5. Analysis and Results
         In this section, we first present reduced-form analysis of the treatment effect of different mobile
messages; we then build a structural model to characterize donor choice across the three choices (not to
donate, to donate alone, and to donate in a group). Structural estimation is complementary to the reduced-
form analysis because it sheds light on the underlying mechanisms and allows us to simulate the effects of
new interventions that were not directly tested in the experiment.
                                          5.1 Reduced-form Evidence
         We first check the validity of randomization. As shown in Table 2, there is no detectable variation
across the seven treatment groups in terms of gender, age, marriage status, residency, or the number of past
donations. The t-tests on equality across groups are insignificant at the conventional level. The well-
balanced sample indicates that our randomization was successful.
         Table 3 summarizes key outcomes across treatment groups. Panel A focuses on the subjects’ own
decisions to donate. On average, the donation rate in our sample during the campaign period is about 1%,
which is consistent with previous studies on blood donation (e.g., Lacetera et al. 2012, 2014). Comparing
T1 to T0 shows a sizable reminder effect. Although the donation rate is 0.71% in T0, it jumps to 0.98% in
T1 (t-test: p<0.05). Groups with economic rewards (T2, T4, T5, and T6) always have a donation rate greater
than 1% (all significantly higher than control, p<0.05).
         Table 3 Panel B turns to group donation, measured by the percentage of donors that bring one or
more donating friends. Compared to T0, reminder message (T1) and individual reward (T2) do not lead to
more group donation (t-test for T2=T0: p=0.379). Interestingly, friend requests (T3) are not effective in
motivating donors to bring friends at all. However, when the group reward is added to the treatment (T5),
there is a very large increase in donating friends (1.05% in T3 vs. 10.85% in T5, t-test p-value <0.001). In


5
  Our survey data only cover a subset (~50%) of experimental subjects who came to donate during the experiment
period. There was an initial miscommunication between the manager and the nurses in the field for the first several
days, which led to missing donor IDs on the survey. However, missing data caused by this managerial
miscommunication should not result in systematic differences in the survey response rate across test groups (joint t-
test of response rate across groups: p=0.66).
comparison, offering an individual reward per donor (T2 and T4) achieves a result halfway in between
(6.67% in T2 and 5.74% in T4, neither is significantly different from control). Offering individual reward
plus a small gift for group reward (T6) yields results that are slightly worse than individual reward alone
(4.03% in T6), but the difference between T4 and T6 is not significant (p=0.551). In addition, T6 has a
higher rate of bringing in non-donating friends. This might be because the extra gift (the fruit cutting tool)
is not attractive enough.
         We further test treatment effects using regressions. Table 4 reports the reduced form estimates on
three outcomes: donate or not (Column 1), bring donating friend(s) or not (Column 3), and total blood
collected (Column 5). The OLS regression on the subject’s first stage decision using the full sample (80,000
donors)6 reveals four findings: first, aligned with previous literature (Lacetera et al. 2012, 2013, 2014), both
the reminder message (T1) and individual reward (T2) have a positive and significant effect (Column 1) on
a donor’s decision to donate, relative to T0. However, these two commonly used interventions are not
effective in driving group donation (Column 3). Second, adding a friend request to the reminder message
(T3) does not lead to more group donation (Column 3), indicating that the behavior intervention is not
effective. Third, once the reward is conditional on donating with a friend (T5), there is a large increase in
group donation (Column 3). The comparison between T5 and T3 suggests that group reward has a
significant impact on group donation (t-test between T3 and T5: p<0.001). In addition, the treatment effect
of group reward is also significantly larger than that of all the other test groups (t-test: all significant). In
addition, it is more than two times the effect of individual reward (T2). This is consistent with our theoretical
framework; group reward is differentially compensating for the cost of bringing a friend for group donation.
Finally, adding a small group gift to individual reward (T6) increases the donation rate slightly beyond
individual reward alone (T2), but it does not lead to a significant increase in group donation (p=0.371). This
is not surprising; individual reward may motivate donors to donate alone, but the additional small gift is
not high enough to overcome the cost of bringing a friend. Columns 2 and 4 present regression results using
donation amount7 as an alternative to the dichotomous decision in Column 1 and 3, and we get consistent
findings. Finally, we examine the robustness of the findings using logistic estimation. Although the
multinomial logit estimator in discrete choice model is asymptotically unbiased, it has been shown that the


6
  The model specification is @AB4C58D = EF + EG ∗ IJ8KB58LBDG + EM ∗ -CLBJC79D . We report estimates based
on OLS (or linear probability model) in Table 4 for easy interpretation of the results. The findings are robust to
alternative estimation methods, such as the logit regression and rare-event logit and with/without controls.
7
  We code friend donation amount as 0ml if the focal donor does not bring any friend(s). One should not interpret
this friend donation amount as the friend’s subjective choice (i.e., actually choose to donate 0ml). Rather, here the
use of friend donation amount is mainly to decompose the total donation amount and to show where the addition
donation collected under the group reward comes from (i.e., more donation from a friend or more donation from the
focal donor). We thank one reviewer for constructive comments on this point.
finite sample bias tends to underestimate the probability of the rare event, and therefore might downward-
bias our estimates of the positive effects of the interventions (King and Zeng 2001a,b). We therefore have
applied the rare-event logit proposed by King and Zeng (2001a). All results are highly similar to those
                                               8
obtained using the linear probability model.
        Besides the effect on forming a group in donation, we also identify the effect of different
interventions on the total volume of donated blood, which is of central importance to the blood bank. Total
donation is defined as the sum of the donation amounts from the subject herself and her friends (if any). As
shown in Table 4, Column 5, the effect of group reward on total blood supply is significant. Compared to
the average donation amount in T0 (2.49ml per message recipient), group reward leads to an increase of
2.47ml, which is almost 100% more. This increase is larger than the effect of individual reward (1.59ml) at
the 10% significance level after we control for subject age, gender, and weight. The additional blood
collected through group reward intervention during the 15-day experiment period can support more than
50 elective surgeries.9 In fact, the blood bank has already implemented the group reward intervention in
multiple campaigns (e.g., on Valentine’s Day) after our experiment, demonstrating its effectiveness in
driving total donation.
        Table 5 turns to the donors’ choice of donation amount after they arrive at the bloodmobile. We
regress donation amount on whether the donor had a (donating or non-donating) friend present. The positive
and significant coefficient on this binary indicator suggests that donors who donate with a friend donate
about 10% (or 30ml) more blood than solo donors regardless of the treatments they were exposed to
beforehand. This is consistent with the image motivation effect identified in the literature (Ariely et al. 2009,
Karlan and McConnell 2014), and it provides another rationale for motivating people to come in a group.
We do not claim causality here; our treatments may affect the choice of coming alone or with a friend, but
they may not affect the donor’s choice of donation amount after she comes to the bloodmobile. The positive
correlation between donation amount and friend presence could pick up a positive group effect (due to
social image) and/or a selection effect (i.e., those donors who bring friend(s) may be willing to donate more
blood). In Table 5, we have controlled a range of donor demographics that may affect both the choice to
bring friend(s) and the choice of donation amount. However, the presence of a friend may still be correlated
with unobserved donor characteristics. Future research could create or explore exogenous variation in the
second stage to cleanly identify the mechanism (e.g., varying visibility of peer’s choice of donation amount).




8
  Results omitted due to space limitations but available from the authors.
9
  For example, about seven units of blood are needed for brain surgery, hip replacement, and cancer treatment on
average per patient (Lacetera et al. 2014). The calculation is based on comparisons between the control group and
the group reward treatment on the full sample.
        One concern is that group reward (T5) might suffer from cannibalization—a potential donor may
bring a friend who would donate anyway so that they qualify for the group reward. If that is the case, then
the effect of intervention on overall blood supply is smaller than it appears. We therefore conducted another
empirical test to explore the extent of such potential cannibalization. If cannibalization did occur, then the
donating friends in T5 should have a higher inherent donation propensity than friends under other treatments.
Although this inherent donation propensity is not directly observable, it should be positively correlated with
whether a donor has donated in the past or not. Therefore, should cannibalization occur, the donating friends
under T5 would be more likely to be existing donors at the blood bank, and they would have made more
donations in the past. To examine this possibility, we obtained the history for all donors who donated in the
past 10 years from 2005 until our experiment, which includes over half a million donations from more than
400,000 donors from the blood bank. We test whether the friends under T5 are more likely to be previous
donors or make more donations during the 10-year span. Our test shows that the friends under T5 are not
more likely to be existing donors.10 In fact, the percentage of friends with past donations is similar across
all test groups, as detailed in Footnote 11. The joint test on difference between test groups reveals
insignificant results, confirming that friends under T5 are similar to friends in other test groups.
        With the possibility in mind that the group donation reward might cannibalize the donating friends’
future donations, we further discuss several potential benefits of the group reward. First, nearly half (48%)
of the donating friends are new donors (who never donated in the past ten years). This population is typically
challenging for blood banks to reach and recruit. Second, for existing donors, group rewards may have
accelerated their donation thereby encouraged them to donate more within the same time span. Finally,
group reward can help recruit more donors and alleviate urgent short-term and seasonal blood shortages,
which is common in developing countries (WHO 2015).
        To further explore the mechanisms by which different interventions affect donation behavior in the
first stage, we analyze the heterogeneous treatment effects by interacting treatment indicators with donor
attributes. Table 6 looks at two outcomes: the dummy of donating or not and the total amount donated by
the donor and friends. Each column includes the interaction of one donor attribute and all the treatment
dummies.11 These regressions provide suggestive evidence that subjects that are married, local, older, and
more past donations are more responsive to group reward.12 This is sensible because these people are likely


10
   Specifically, the percentage of donating friends who are past donors is 52% for T5, similar to T1 (50% of
donating friends are existing donors), T2 (38%), T4 (50%), T6 (57%), as well as the mean value across all test
groups (51%).
11
   We do not put all demographics in one regression because many of them are highly correlated.
12
   Raw data further confirm that donors who respond under group reward (T5) are more likely to be married, local,
older, and have more donations in the past, whereas subjects who respond under individual reward (T2) are more
likely to be unmarried, non-local, younger, and have fewer past donations (Table 3 Panel A). A formal test shows
to incur a lower cost for bringing a friend. Although married and older people are generally less active in
online social settings (according to Pew 2014), our study suggests that with the right incentive design,
digital interventions can be used to leverage their offline social connections. Furthermore, using survey
data, we find evidence that donors who are motivated by group reward are more likely to hear about friends
donating in the past (T5>Control: p=0.09) and more willing to share the donation experience (T5>Control,
p>0.10), both of which indicate lower costs of bringing a donating friend. In addition, the donors who bring
friend(s) are much more likely to hear about friends donating in the past (Group>Solo: p<0.001), much
more willing to share donation experience (Group>Solo, p<0.01), and report higher willingness to donate
with friends in the future (Group>Solo on “Yes”: p=0.07). Interestingly, the main reasons reported for not
bringing friend(s) are “few of my friends want to donate blood” (i.e., local social environment) and “I want
to remain private” (i.e., willingness to share), rather than “hard to coordinate time” (i.e., coordination cost).
                                             5.2 Structural estimation
         In this subsection, we build and estimate a structural model on the donor’s choice of not donating,
donating alone, or donating with friend(s). We shy away from incorporating the donor’s choice of donation
amount on the bloodmobile because this subsequent stage is not as closely tied to our experiment design.
         Structural estimation is complementary to reduced-form analysis for at least three reasons. First,
each mobile message may represent a different combination of Δ! (changes in the utility of donation), Δ#
(changes in the utility of donating with a friend), and - ./ (social pressure of not complying with the request
to bring a friend). As discussed in Section 3, these elements affect a donor’s choice in a complicated way.
Thus, it is difficult to completely separate each element through reduced-form comparison across treatments.
To better capture the underlying mechanisms, we use a discrete choice model to characterize how different
interventions fine-tune the relative payoffs across the three donation choices. Second, the structural model
allows us to estimate (unobserved) individual primitives, especially the cost of donation and the cost of
bringing a donating friend. By introducing random coefficients on these two cost parameters, we can
identify their distribution and correlation and better capture the intuition behind donors’ choices. Third,
with structural estimates on individual primitives, we can simulate different combinations of behavioral
interventions and economic rewards, including those that were not explicitly tested in our experiment.
                                              5.2.1 Structural model


that donors who choose to come under T2 and T5 significantly differ across local (p<0.01), age (p<0.01), and total
number of past donations (p=0.09), but not in terms of gender and marital status. We also examine the heterogeneity
in the treatment effect of group reward on donating with friends. The interaction coefficients between moderators and
T5 are positive and larger than the interaction coefficients between moderators and all other groups. Specifically, we
found that subjects with more past donation are about twice as likely to donate with friends(s) under the group reward
than subjects with less donations in the past (interaction coefficient: 0.00468, p<0.001). The same trend also holds for
other moderators; however, the statistical test is underpowered due to the smaller number of group donations than
donations.
         Consider subject 3, deciding whether to donate (N) and whether to donate with friend(s) in a group
(O). She may incur cost and derive utility from donation (including warm glow or altruism, Andreoni 1989,
Lacetera et al. 2013), the net of which is denoted as PDQ . If she brings a friend to donate, she may incur extra
costs (including referral, persuasion, and coordination costs, Calvó-Armengol and Jackson 2010) and extra
utility (including shared experience, Gilchrist and Sands 2016, and enhanced social image, Karlan and
                                                         R                       R
McConnell 2014), the net of which is denoted as PD . In short, PDQ and PD aim to match the ! and # axes
in the theoretical framework, respectively.13
                                                                                                R
         Treatments in our field experiment introduce exogenous variations in PDQ and PD . In particular, the
key elements include sending a reminder message for donation (MSG), requesting group donation in the
reminder message (GMSG), offering a reward for the message recipient’s donation (S .T , referred to as self
reward), offering a reward for the message recipient when she brings a donating friend (S UT , referred to as
referral reward), and offering a reward for the donating friend (S VT , referred to as friend reward). It is worth
noting that the three rewards affect the donor’s utility in different ways: S .T compensates for the donation
cost of the focal donor, which, corresponding to Δ! in Figure 2, S UT compensates for the donor’s own
donation cost and her cost to bring a friend, conditional on group donation. S VT compensates the donating
friend and indirectly influences the focal donor by reducing her cost of persuading the friend. These
correspond to Δ# in Figure 3. Finally, our model also accounts for the cost of social pressure (- ./ ) (Figure
4) that a subject may incur when she receives a request for group donation but decides to donate alone
(DellaVigna et al. 2012).
         In short, behavioral interventions (MSG, GMSG) and economic rewards (S .T , S UT , S VT ) adjust
the relative payoffs across no donation, solo donation, and group donation. Most of our experimental
treatments (T2 to T6) combine multiple elements: T2 combines MSG, S .T and S VT ; T3 combines MSG,
GMSG and - ./ ;14 T4 combines MSG, GMSG, - ./ , S .T and S VT ; T5 combines MSG, GMSG, - ./ , S UT
and S VT ; and T6 combines MSG, GMSG, - ./ , S .T , S UT and S VT . T2, T4, T5, and T6 all include S VT
because the donating friend will receive the standard reward for donation directly. However, for a subject
in T5, her reward is conditional on donating with a friend; hence her reward is counted as S UT rather than
S .T . T6 offers a small gift for donating with a friend, in addition to what is offered in T4. This implies the
same S .T in T4 and T6, but an extra small S UT for our experimental subject (equal to the value of the small
gift) and a larger S VT for the donating friend (equal to the value of the regular reward for individual

13
   To keep the model parsimonious, we focus on the message recipient’s utility function, rather than explicitly
modeling the friend’s decision.
14
   Counting T3 as both MSG and GMSG recognizes the fact that a reminder to bring a friend also serves as a
reminder to donate. The same logic applies to T4, T5, and T6.
donation plus the value of the small gift). The exogenous variations in the experiment allow us to tease out
each element via structural estimation.
         Assuming the effect of all elements is linear (DellaVigna et al. 2012), we write the latent utility
function for a donor’s decision as follows,15 with the utility of no donation (N = 0, O = 0) as a baseline:
                  WD O|N = 1 = PDQ + E Z[\ ∙ S^# − - ./ ∙ #S^# ∙ 1 − O + E .T ∙ S .T
          R
     +(PD +E VT ∙ S VT + E \Z[\ ∙ #S^# + E UT ∙ S UT ) ∙ O + _ `F ∙ 1 − O ∙ aD + _ `` ∙ O ∙ aD + b DQR
                                c3d873ℎCCN N, O = 6JCe WD N, O > WD N f , O′
                                         ∀ {N f , O′} =   0,0 , 1,0 , 1,1
where N is a dummy denoting whether to donate or not, O is a dummy denoting whether to bring a friend
and donate together, and X denotes the donor’s demographics and donation history. _ `F captures how the
utility of solo donation varies by donor attributes; _ `` captures how the utility of group donation varies by
donor attributes; the error term follows type I extreme value distribution. In addition, we estimate the two
                            R
constant terms, PDQ and PD , as random coefficients and allow them to be arbitrarily correlated. This way,
we capture unobserved donor heterogeneity and relax the independent and irrelevant alternatives (IIA)
assumption in a conditional logit model. 16 Specifically, for those donors with relatively low cost for
donation and high cost of bringing a friend, not donating (d=0) may be a closer substitute for donating alone
(d=1, g=0) than for donating with a friend (d=1, g=1); but for those with low donation cost and low cost of
bringing a friend, donating alone and donating with a friend may be closer substitutes. The random
coefficient model is the preferred approach to relax the IIA assumption and to quantify the correlation
between the two unobserved donor heterogeneities (Nevo 2000, Imbens and Wooldridge 2007).
         To summarize, the key structural parameters are: i) the net utility derived from donation (PDQ ) and
                                              R
the net utility from bringing a friend (PD ), ii) the decrease in mental cost when receiving a reminder
message (E Z[\ ),17 iii) the increased donation cost due to social pressure if one cannot meet the request to
bring a friend (- ./ ), iv) the decreased mental cost of bringing a friend thanks to the reminder message of


15
   It is possible that in the case of no donation, a donor may still have some guilty feeling for not fulfilling the
request from the reminder message for donation (MSG) and the reminder message for group donation (GMSG).
Thus, E Z[\ in the current model should be interpreted as a sum of the reminder effect and the social pressure effect
on no donation. More specifically, the reminder effect increases the donor’s utility of coming to donate, and the
social pressure effect decreases the utility of not coming to donate. Similarly, E \Z[\ represents the sum of the
reminder effect of bringing a friend and the social pressure effect of ignoring the message and not donating. Finally,
- ./ is the additional social pressure of coming alone, but it cannot meet the request of bringing friend(s), compared
to simply ignoring the message.
16
   We sincerely thank the AE and one of the reviewers for the comment and the suggestions.
17
   The reminder message could be interpreted as a signal of blood shortage. If the reminder message increases the
altruism or warm glow that the subject feels in donation, it is captured in E Z[\ as well. We thank one referee for
pointing out this possibility.
group donation ( E \Z[\ ), v) the increased utility derived from receiving economic rewards
(E .T , E VT and E UT ), vi) the effect of donor attributes on the utility of self and group donation (_ `F , _ `` ), and
                                                                              R
vii) the standard deviation of the two random coefficients (PDQ and PD ), as well as the correlation between
them.
                                             5.2.2 Structural estimates
         Table 7 reports our structural estimates.18 Panel A reports the estimates for alternative-invariant
coefficients, with the net utility from donation (P Q ) and net utility for bringing friends (P R ) based on a
small and representative baseline group (female, education>9 years, weight in lower half, under 35, non-
married, non-local). Panel B reports the alternative-specific coefficients of P Q KLN P R in other
demographic groups. We can use them to further calculate the net utility for every subject in the experiment.
For instance, P Q and P R is precisely estimated as -6.20 and -3.75 in Panel A, which we interpret as the
average utility of donating and bringing in a friend for a donor with the baseline demographics; Then, for
a donor with similar demographics but local and less educated (education<=9 years), the estimate of her
utility of donating is -5.52 (-6.20+0.51+0.17) and the utility of bringing in a friend is -4.22 (-3.75-
0.97+0.50). By repeating the process for every subject and averaging across all subjects, we found the
average cost of donation to be -5.10 and the average cost of bringing friends which is -2.90. They are largely
consistent with the insights from the baseline group.19
         In comparison with the population average of donation cost (-5.10), the most effective behavioral
intervention (reminder message) and economic reward (S UT ) only lead to an increase of utility by 0.31 and
1.12, respectively. These estimates are unitless, but their relative values suggest that the most effective
interventions can only overcome 6–22% of the huge donation cost facing an average message recipient.
Moreover, the net utility of bringing a donating friend (P R )is estimated to be -2.90, suggesting that many
donors face extra cost in bringing a donating friend, but this extra cost is only 57% of the average cost of
donation. This makes group reward attractive to the blood bank because it is less costly for an existing
donor to bring a friend (-2.90) than for the bank to recruit a donor from scratch (-5.10). In addition, the
standard deviations of the two random coefficients are also significant, suggesting non-trivial unobserved
heterogeneity in the cost of donation and the cost of bringing in a friend. The negative correlation between
these two costs suggests that more donors are distributed in the upper left and lower right quadrants of
Figure 1. Thus, group reward, which by design compensates for the sum of the two costs, can take advantage
of this negative correlation and effectively drive group donation. Behavioral interventions and economic


18
   For comparison, we also estimate a conditional logit model. Point estimates from the random coefficient model
are similar to those in the conditional logit model. For the random coefficient logit model, we have also tested
different specifications, such as including random coefficients for interventions.
19
   We thank the AE for this insightful suggestion.
rewards can help overcome these costs. The reminder message for donation is effective in reducing the cost
of donation by 0.31 (roughly 6% of the average cost of donation in our population). However, the friend
request has little extra impact on either solo donation or group donation. Turning to economic rewards,
reward for self donation (S .T ) contributes relatively little value beyond the reminder message (0.11 for one
unit of reward, insignificant). Thus, it seems inefficient to allocate funding to reward self-donation. In
contrast, referral reward significantly increases the utility of group donation (by 1.11 for one unit of reward,
roughly 21.7% of the typical cost of donation). The effect of friend reward is comparable in reducing the
cost of bringing a donating friend (by 1.02 for one unit of reward).
        Overall, structural estimates allow us to measure individual-level primitives and understand the
effects of different elements in driving donation choice. Compared to reduced-form analysis, they provide
several additional insights: (1) the cost of bringing friend(s) is smaller than the average cost of donation;
thus, it is more effective to encourage existing donors to bring their friends than to directly reach out to new
donors. The negative correlation between these costs further suggests that the blood bank may stimulate
more donations at a lower cost by motivating group donation; (2) the cost of bringing a friend is still
substantial, thus external interventions are needed; (3) referral reward (to the subject) and friend reward (to
the subject’s friend) are more effective in increasing a donor’s utility than self-reward, and therefore they
may serve as more cost-effective ways to encourage donation. We observe significantly more group
donation in T5, because T5 includes both referral reward and friend reward.
        Finally, our results also show that utility structure may vary across demographic groups. As
reflected in Table 7 Panel B, the three types of heterogeneity, namely age, marriage and local residence,
may positively affect the utility of donation and bringing friends in the same direction. On the other hand,
gender and education affect the two utilities in opposite directions. Less educated males have lower cost
for donation than more educated females, but have a higher cost to bring friends. Such heterogeneity has
important implications to the blood bank. For example, compared to the less educated males (utility of
donation – utility of bringing friends = -0.42), the cost advantage of motivating group donation become
more salient for less educated females (-1.31), more educated males (-1.56), and educated females (-2.45).
Therefore, blood banks can use individual award more effectively on past donors who are male and less
educated. On the other hand, if blood banks wish to take advantage of group effect and motivate group
donation, they should target past donors who are female and more educated. A direct simulation based on
our structural estimates shows that for 10,000 female subjects, group reward may lead to about 113 donors,
which is more than 30% increase than targeting individual reward (86 donors). The majority of the increase
comes from additional increase in the number of group donors (18 versus 1).
                                           5.2.3. Counterfactuals
         Equipped with structural estimates, we perform a series of policy simulations to compare different
combinations of behavioral interventions and economic rewards (Table 8). Specifically, different policies
correspond to different reward scheme as defined by a set of {S .T , S VT , S UT }. For instance, under group
reward T5, S .T = 0 but S VT = 1 KLN S UT = 1 , whereas under reminder message T1, S .T = 0 and
S VT = S UT = 0. For each policy, we can calculate the utility that a donor can derive from each option
using expression in 5.2.1 and then directly use the random coefficient model to predict the probability of
the donor choosing a certain option. Finally, we aggregate the probability of choosing a certain option
across all users, which would give us the percentage of users for each option (not donate, donate alone,
donate with friends) under a specific policy.20
         The counterfactuals reveal several insights that are not directly observable in the reduced-form
analysis. First, group reward—modeled as referral reward (S UT ) plus friend reward (S VT )—is much more
cost-effective than the commonly used individual reward (modeled as self-reward S .T plus friend reward
S VT ). The last column of Table 8 shows the average reward per donor under different reward schemes. In
the individual reward scheme, because each donor gets one unit of reward, the reward per donor is naturally
1. In the group reward scheme, rewards are only promised to those who donate together (there are 0.13%*2
= 0.26%). Therefore, on average, the blood bank’s recruitment cost as measured by the ‘unit of reward per
donor’ is only 0.21 unit ( = 0.26% divided by 1.21%). This suggests that group reward can be more than
four times as cost effective as individual reward. This is because group reward would only occur if donors
donate in a group. Thus, in the majority of cases in which donors donate alone, the blood bank does not
need to pay any group reward; those donors are willing to donate anyway. The funds saved could then be
used to increase group reward. As shown in Table 8, at the same level of reward (2 units), group reward
would lead to almost 100% more donors (2.88% vs. 1.46%) at a significantly lower cost per donor (1.34 vs.
2 unit per donor, or about 33% lower).
         Second, we simulate a series of new interventions that were not directly tested in the field
experiment, such as friend reward only (S VT , which only rewards the donors that are brought by a subject,
but not to the subject herself) and referral reward only (S UT , which only rewards the subject that brings a
friend but offers no reward to her donating friend). These interventions require special implementation
procedures21 and are difficult to test in separate experiments. However, our simulations shed light on their


20
   Recall that the bank had to give out universal rewards to different treatments in our experiment, because the six
treatments were run at the same time. We believe this design is unlikely to affect our structural estimates, but even if
there is spillover between our experimental treatments, our estimates tend to underestimate the effect of group
reward hence the counterfactual results presented here are likely conservative.
21
   For instance, referral reward to donors who bring friend(s) (S UT ) can be implemented by sending a secret
message with a reward voucher to the focal donor after donation. We thank one reviewer for comments on its
implementation.
potential impact on the blood supply as well as their cost-effectiveness. Specifically, friend reward (S VT )
and referral reward (S UT ), when used alone, are not very effective in driving total blood supply (around
0.01   0.02% increase in both solo and group donation rate, as compared to the effect of reminder only).
However, when we combine the two rewards (S VT + S UT , corresponding to group reward in T5), group
donation increases by 0.11 percentage points. The above comparison reveals that the joint use of friend
reward (S VT ) and referral reward (S UT ) is important in that referral reward motivates the focal donor to
bring a friend, whereas the friend reward helps her to persuade and compensate her friend. Finally, when
the three rewards are used together (S .T + S VT + S UT ), we see an increase in both solo and group
donations, but no further synergy effect. This finding is consistent with the prediction that reward for solo
donation and reward for group donation tend to motivate two different types of donors in the population.
        Overall, our simulations demonstrate the effect of alternative interventions that were not tested in
the experiment and provide additional insights on why group reward works. We acknowledge that the above
policy simulations are based on parameters derived from our experiment. Therefore, the magnitude of the
simulated intervention is influenced by how the recipients perceive and interpret the mobile messages.
                                               6. Conclusion
        In this study, we examine how charities can take advantage of offline group formation to encourage
prosocial activities. We find evidence of substantial costs in association with offline group formation. We
further show that group reward designed to compensate for a donor’s cost of bringing friends can be
effective in driving group formation. Interestingly, our study suggests that individuals who are traditionally
less active in online social interactions may have a lower social cost in the offline setting. Thus,
organizations can take advantage of this comparative strength and use digital interventions to leverage their
offline social connections.
        This study provides both a framework for and large-scale evidence of the effectiveness of group
reward, which are significant contributions to the literature on how to motivate pro-social activities. It
contributes to the growing literature of prosocial behavior and motivation (e.g., Jabr et al. 2014, Goes et al.
2014, Lacetera et al. 2012, 2014; Andreoni and Rao 2011; DellaVigna et al. 2012). Although various
economic and non-economic behavioral interventions have been examined in the literature, they mostly
focus on solo donation. Building on the existing studies, we are among the first to extend the scope of the
study to examine how to motivate a donor to bring her friends to donate together. Based on the effectiveness
of the mobile messaging in this study, we also call for more studies in the IS discipline on how to use digital
interventions to boost user offline social interactions, an area that has been under-explored (Ghose et al
2015; Luo et al 2014).
        Our new framework reveals interesting mechanisms underlying group donation (Figures 1-4) and
potential rich heterogeneity among users in the costs of group formation versus the cost of donation. This
framework could help organizations decide how to design optimal interventions and what sub-populations
to target using different rewards. Our study highlights motivating group donation as an alternative effective
approach to recruit participants in prosocial activities (Lacetera et al. 2013). Charity organizations could
focus more on a donor’s social capital and design innovative intervention strategies to unleash such
potential.
        Our study offers significant practical value. In recent years, the need for better policies to motivate
voluntary donation in healthcare has been emphasized due to increasing shortages in human blood, organs,
and tissues (Kessler and Roth 2012, WHO 2015). Our study shows that the additional blood collected
through a group reward strategy can support a good number of additional surgeries. In addition, group
reward is four times as cost effective as rewarding individual donors. Given the value of one unit of blood
to patients and to the healthcare system, group reward represents a particularly efficient strategy. Using
mobile messaging to leverage a donor’s social network, our study opens a new path to address the challenge
of blood shortages in healthcare, and should particularly benefit those organizations that are constrained by
financial resources and face difficulty recruiting new donors.
        We would like to acknowledge several limitations, which represent opportunities for future
research. First, our experiment focuses on a donor’s group donation decision in the first stage and is not
designed to draw causal inferences on the effect of friend presence on donor’s choice of donation amount.
Future research could create exogenous variation in the second stage to cleanly identify the mechanism.
Second, our experiment targeted past donors. Past donors in general are more likely to have friends who
are willing to donate (homophily) and have a lower cost to persuade friends (using their own experience);
thus, they might be more likely to respond to interventions and bring friend(s) to donate together. First time
donors might respond to the incentives differently, which warrants further exploration. Third, because our
experiment lasted two weeks, it is possible that later donors might learn from earlier donors that actual
rewards may exceed what is promised in the mobile message, especially in the group reward treatment (T5).
This spillover, if it occurs at all, tends to make T5 more similar to the individual reward treatment (T4),
thus leading us to underestimate the actual difference between T4 and T5. Therefore, our estimates of the
effects of group reward are likely conservative. Fourth, our study focuses on the short-term impact of the
interventions. Future work can examine how the long-term donation behavior of focal donors and their
friends is affected, especially whether the group rewards might crowd out future donations. In addition,
readers and practitioners should be aware of the potential negative effect of monetary incentives, as
specified by Heyman and Ariely (2004). Finally, our findings are based on blood donation in China.
Although we believe that blood donation is a typical pro-social activity, and social connection and
friendship are prominent in pro-social activities in both Eastern and Western cultures, readers are advised
to be cautious in extending the findings beyond the original context.
Acknowledgement:
We thank the Editors and three anonymous Reviewers for constructive and insightful comments. We
thank seminar and conference participants at Johns Hopkins University, Wharton School, University of
Chicago, Stanford Digital Marketing Conference, International Industrial Organization Conference
(IIOC), Conference on Information Systems and Economics (CIST), and INFORMS for all the
suggestions. We are extremely grateful to people at the Chinese blood bank for implementing the
experiment and patiently answering many questions. Sun acknowledges the Research Grant from USC
Institute of Outlier Research, Adobe Faculty Research Award, CIBER at University of Maryland and the
US Department of Education. All errors are ours. All rights reserved.

                                               References
Andreoni J (1989) Giving with impure altruism: Applications to charity and Ricardian equivalence. Journal
    of Political Economy 97(6):1447–58.
Andreoni J, Bernheim BD (2009) Social image and the 50–50 norm: A theoretical and experimental
    analysis of audience effects. Econometrica 77(5):1607–1636.
Andreoni J, Rao JM (2011) The power of asking: How communication affects selfishness, empathy, and
    altruism. Journal of Public Economics 95(7):513–520.
Andrews M, Luo X, Fang Z, Ghose A (2016) Mobile ad effectiveness: Hyper-contextual targeting with
    crowdedness. Marketing Science 35(2):218–233.
Aral S, Muchnik L, Sundararajan A (2009) Distinguishing influence-based contagion from homophily-
    driven diffusion in dynamic networks. Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences
    106(51):21544–21549.
Aral S, Walker D (2011) Creating social contagion through viral product design: A randomized trial of peer
    influence in networks. Management Science 57(9):1623–1639.
Aral S, Walker D (2012) Identifying influential and susceptible members of social networks. Science
    337(6092):337–341.
Aral S, Walker D (2014) Tie strength, embeddedness, and social influence: A large-scale networked
    experiment. Management Science 60(6):1352–70.
Aral S (2016) Networked Experiments: A Review of Methods and Innovations. The Oxford Handbook on
    the Economics of Networks, Oxford, UK (Oxford University Press).
Aral S, Nicolaides C (2017) Exercise contagion in a global social network. Nature Communications, 8,
    14753.
Ariely D, Bracha A, Meier S (2009) Doing good or doing well? Image motivation and monetary incentives
    in behaving prosocially. The American Economic Review 99(1):544–555.
Bapna R, Umyarov A (2015) Do your online friends make you pay? A randomized field experiment on
    peer influence in online social networks. Management Science 61(8):1902–1920.
Beaman L, Magruder J (2012) Who gets the job referral? Evidence from a social networks experiment. The
    American Economic Review 102(7):3574–3593.
Becker GS (1991) A note on restaurant pricing and other examples of social influences on price. Journal
    of Political Economy 99(5):1109–16.
Bruhin A, Goette L, Roethlisberger A, Markovic A, Buchli R, Frey BM (2015). Call of duty: the effects of
    phone calls on blood donor motivation. Transfusion. 55(11):2645-52.
Burtch G, Ghose A, Wattal S (2015) The hidden cost of accommodating crowdfunder privacy preferences:
    A randomized field experiment. Management Science, 61(5): 949–962.
Burtch G, Hong Y, Bapna R, Griskevicius V (2017) Stimulating online reviews by combining financial
    incentives and social norms. Management Science, Article in Advance.
Buyx A (2009) Blood donation, payment, and non-cash incentives: Classical questions drawing renewed
    interest. Transfusion Medicine and Hemotherapy 36(5): 329–339.
Calvó-Armengol A, Jackson M (2010) Peer pressure. Journal of the European Economic Association.
     8(1):62-89.
Chen Y, Li SX (2009) Group identity and social preferences. The American Economic Review 99(1): 431–
     457.
Chen Y, Maxwell F, Konstan J, Li SX (2010) Social comparisons and contributions to online communities:
     A field experiment on movielens. The American Economic Review 100 (4): 1358–1398.
Choi J, Bell DR, Lodish LM (2012) Traditional and IS-enabled customer acquisition on the internet.
     Management science 58(4):754–769.
Crumpler H, Grossman P (2008) An experimental test of warm glow giving. Journal of public Economics.
     92(5):1011-21.
DellaVigna S, List J, Malmendier U (2012) Testing for altruism and social pressure in charitable giving.
     The Quarterly Journal of Economics 127(1):1–56.
Dube JP, Luo X, Fang Z (2017) Self-signaling and pro-social behavior: A cause marketing mobile field
     experiment, Marketing Science, 36(2): 161-186.
Fang Z, Gu B, Luo X, Xu Y (2015) Contemporaneous and delayed sales impact of location-based mobile
     promotions. Information Systems Research 26(3):552–564.
Fong NM, Fang Z, Luo X (2015) Geo-conquesting: Competitive locational targeting of mobile promotions.
     Journal of Marketing Research 52(5):726–735.
Firth, D (1993) Bias reduction of maximum likelihood estimates. Biometrika 80(1):27–38.
Ghose A, Goldfarb A, Han SP (2013) How is the mobile Internet different? Search costs and local activities.
     Information Systems Research 24(3): 613–631.
Ghose A, Li B, Liu S (2015) Digitizing offline shopping behavior towards mobile marketing. Proceedings
     of the International Conference on Information Systems (ICIS) Dallas TX.
Gilchrist DS, Sands EG (2016) Something to talk about: Social spillovers in movie consumption. Journal
      of Political Economy 124(5):1339-1382
Glynn S, Williams A, Nass CC, Bethel J, Kessler D, Scott E, ... Schreiber G (2003) Attitudes toward
      blood donation incentives in the United States: Implications for donor recruitment. Transfusion,
      43(1): 7–16.
Gneezy U, Meier S, Rey-Biel P (2011) When and why incentives (don’t) work to modify behavior.
    Journal of Economic Perspectives 25(4):191–210.
Godes D, Mayzlin D, Chen Y, Das S, Dellarocas C, Libai B, Pfeiffer B, Sen S, Shi M (2005) The firm’s
     management of social interactions. Marketing Letters 16(3/4):415–28.
Godin G, Vézina-Im LA, Bélanger-Gravel A, Amireault S (2012) Efficacy of interventions promoting
     blood donation: A systematic review. Transfusion Medicine Reviews 26(3):224–237.
Goes PB, Lin M, Au Yeung CM (2014) Popularity effect in user-generated content: Evidence from online
     product reviews. Information Systems Research 25(2):222–238.
Goette L, Stutzer A (2008) Blood donations and incentives: Evidence from a field experiment, Working
     paper 3580. Retrieved from http://papers.ssrn.com/sol3/papers.cfm?abstract_id=1158977
Goette L, Stutzer A, Frey BM (2010) Prosocial motivation and blood donations: A survey of the empirical
    literature. Transfusion Medicine and Hemotherapy 37(3):149–154.
Goldstein NJ, Cialdini RB, Griskevicus V (2008) A room with a viewpoint: Using social norms to motivate
     environmental conservation in hotels. Journal of Consumer Research 35:472–482.Hill S, Provost F,
     Volinsky S (2006) Network-based marketing: Identifying likely adopters via consumer networks.
     Statistical Science 21(2):256–76.
Heyman J, Ariely D. (2004) Effort for payment: A tale of two markets. Psychological Science. 15(11):787–
     793.
Imbens G, Wooldridge J (2007) What’s new in econometrics? Lecture 11 Discrete Choice Model, NBER
     Lectures.
Iajya V, Lacetera N, Macis M, Slonim R (2013) The effects of information, social and financial incentives
     on voluntary undirected blood donations: Evidence from a field experiment in Argentina. Social
     Science Medicine 98:214–223.
Jabr W, Mookerjee R, Tan Y, Mookerjee V (2014) Leveraging philanthropic behavior for customer support:
     the case of user support forums. MIS Quarterly 38(1):187–208.
Karlan D, McConnell MA (2014) Hey look at me: The effect of giving circles on giving. Journal of
     Economic Behavior Organization 106:402–412.
Kessler J, Roth A (2012) Organ allocation policy and the decision to donate. The American Economic
     Review 102(5):2018–47.
King G, Zeng L (2001a) Logistic Regression in Rare Events Data. Political Analysis, 9, 137–163.
King G, Zeng L (2001b) Explaining rare events in international relations. International Organization, 55(3),
     pp.693-715.
Lacetera BN, Macis M, Slonim R (2012) Will there be blood ? Incentives and displacement effects in pro-
     social behavior. American Economic Journal: Economic Policy 4(1):186–223.
Lacetera N, Macis M, Slonim R (2013) Economic rewards to motivate blood donations. Science
     340(6135):927–928.
Lacetera N, Macis M, Slonim R (2014) Rewarding volunteers: A field experiment. Management Science,
     60(5):1107–1129.
Lee JY, Bell DR (2013) Neighborhood social capital and social learning for experience attributes of
     products. Marketing Science 32(6):960–976.
Li C, Luo X, Cheng Z, Wang X (2016) Sunny, rainy, and cloudy with a chance of mobile promotion
     effectiveness. Working Paper, Fox School of Business, Temple University.
Luo X, Andrews M, Fang Z, Phang CW (2014) Mobile targeting. Management Science 60(7):1738–1756.
Meier S (2007) A survey of economic theories and field evidence on pro-social behavior. In Economics
     and Psychology: A Promising New Cross-Disciplinary Field, ed. Bruno S. Frey and Alois Stutzer, 51–
     88. Cambridge: MIT Press.
Nevo A (2000) A practitioner's guide to estimation of random Coefficients logit models of demand.
     Journal of Economics Management Strategy 9(4):513 548.
Pew Research Center (2014) Social networking fact sheet, accessed at: http://www.pewinternet.org/fact-
     sheets/social-networking-fact-sheet/.
Ramanathan S, Vohs K, McGill AL. (2013) How do friends and strangers interpret shared experiences?
     Synchrony as relationship-bolstering or experience-heightening. in Advances in Consumer Research
     Volume 41, eds. Simona Botti and Aparna Labroo, Duluth, MN: Association for Consumer Research.
Ren R, Chen J, Riedl J (2016). The Impact and evolution of group diversity in online open collaboration.
     Management Science, 62(6): 1668–1686.
Sun T, Lu SF, Jin GZ (2016) Solving shortage in a priceless market: Insights from blood donation. Journal
     of Health Economics 48:149–165.
Susarla A, Oh J, Tan Y (2012) Social networks and the diffusion of user-generated content: Evidence from
     YouTube. Information Systems Research 23(1):23–41.
Toubia O, Stephen AT (2013) Intrinsic vs. image-related utility in social media: Why do people contribute
     content to Twitter? Marketing Science 32(3):368–392.
Valente TW (2012) Network interventions. Science 337(6090):49–53.
World Health Organization (WHO 2015) Blood Safety and Availability, fact sheet #279, updated June
     2015, http://www.who.int/mediacentre/factsheets/fs279/en/.
Zhang XM, Zhu F (2011) Group size and incentives to contribute: A natural experiment at Chinese
     Wikipedia. The American Economic Review 101(4):1601–15.
                                                                                   !: Utility of donation
                              !: Utility of donation




                                                       #: Utility of                                          #: Utility of
                                                       donating with                                          donating with
                              0                        friend(s)                                              friend(s)
                                                                                    0


                                                                                                            ! + Δ! = 0




                                                        !+# =0


                                                                                                               !+# =0
                                                                                                        ! + Δ! + # = 0
         Figure 1: Benchmark with Csp=0                                 Figure 2: Add Δ! > 0 to Figure 1

                 # + Δ# = 0       !: Utility of                        # = −- ./        !: Utility of
                                   donation                                              donation




                                                                                                            ! = - ./

                              0                                                    0
                                                       #: Utility of                                         G: Utility of
                                                       donating with                                         donating with
                                                       friend(s)                                             friend(s)




                                                                                                         !+# =0
                                                   !+#=0
                                            ! + Δ# + # = 0

         Figure 3: Add Δ# > 0 to Figure 1                                Figure 4: Add Csp>0 to Figure 1


Legend
   solo donors

   group donors

   newly added solo donors due to individual reward in Figure 2

   newly added group donors due to individual reward in Figure 2


   newly added group donors due to group reward in Figure 3 and Figure 4


   reduced solo donors due to social pressure in Figure 4
Table 1 Panel A: Mobile Messages Used in the Experiment
Mobile messages to the subjects in the experiment (across one control group and six treatment groups) are as follows:
             Control         T1                  T2                 T3                 T4                      T5                        T6

 Test       No         Reminder          Reminder           Reminder           Reminder              Reminder                  Reminder
 Group      message    message           message            message            message               message                   message
                                         +                  +                  +                     +                         +
                                         Individual         Request to         Request to bring      Request to bring          Request to bring
                                         reward             bring friend(s)    friend(s)             friend(s)                 friend(s)
                                                                               +                     +                         +
                                                                               Individual reward     Group reward              Individual reward
                                                                                                                               +
                                                                                                                               Small group gift

 Sample     14000      11000             11000              11000              11000                 11000                     11000
 Size

 Mobile                Merry             Merry              Merry              Merry Christmas       Merry Christmas and       Merry Christmas and
 Message               Christmas         Christmas and      Christmas and      and Happy New         Happy New Year!           Happy New Year!
 Content               and Happy         Happy New          Happy New          Year! Please          Please donate blood       Please donate blood
                       New Year!         Year! Please       Year! Please       donate blood          when it is suitable for   when it is suitable for
                       Please donate     donate blood       donate blood       when it is suitable   you before Jan. 03. You   you before Jan. 03. You
                       blood when it     when it is         when it is         for you before Jan.   are also welcome to       are also welcome to
                       is suitable for   suitable for you   suitable for you   03. You are also      bring friend(s) to        bring friend(s) to
                       you before        before Jan. 03.    before Jan. 03.    welcome to bring      donate with you. If you   donate with you. Upon
                       Jan. 03.          Upon donation,     You are also       friend(s) to donate   and your friend(s)        donation, every donor
                                         every donor        welcome to         with you. Upon        donate together, each     may get a supermarket
                                         may get a          bring friend(s)    donation, every       one of you may get a      coupon worth 30–50
                                         supermarket        to donate with     donor may get a       supermarket coupon        RMB. If you and your
                                         coupon worth       you.               supermarket           worth 30–50 RMB.          friend(s) donate
                                         30–50 RMB.                            coupon worth 30–                                together, each one of
                                                                               50 RMB.                                         you may get an
                                                                                                                               additional gift (a fruit
                                                                                                                               cutting tool).
Table 1 Panel B: Experimental Design

                        Test Group                           Commonly-used Interventions   Newly-proposed Interventions
                                                                             Individual                   Group reward
                                                             Reminder to                   Reminder to
                                                                            reward (for                     (for group
                                                               donate                      bring friend
               Elements in Mobile Message                                  every donor)                       donors)
   T0 (Control)
   T1 (Reminder to self)                                             X
   T2 (Reminder to self + Individual reward)                         X           X
   T3 (Reminder to self + Reminder to bring friend)                  X                           X
   T4 (Reminder to self + Individual reward + Reminder
      to bring friend)                                               X           X               X
   T5 (Reminder to self + Reminder to bring friend +
      Group reward)                                                  X                           X              X
   T6 (Reminder to self + Reminder to bring friend +
      Individual reward + Small group gift)                          X           X               X              X*
* In T6, the small group gift is a fruit cutting tool worth about 10 RMB.


Table 2: Randomization Check

                           Number of                                Age                                     Number of past
      Test Group            subjects              Male         (as of 2014)    Married     Local resident     donations
          T0                 14000               60.6%             27.87       39.3%          38.3%             1.43
          T1                 11000               60.6%             27.93       39.3%          38.4%             1.44
          T2                 11000               60.2%             27.96       39.3%          37.8%             1.42
          T3                 11000               60.9%             27.84       39.7%          37.9%             1.42
          T4                 11000               60.0%             28.01       39.6%          38.8%             1.44
          T5                 11000               60.9%             27.85       39.6%          37.9%             1.44
          T6                 11000               60.8%             27.73       38.6%          38.3%             1.44
      p-value of
      joint t-test                               0.774             0.327        0.852          0.891            0.481
Table 3: Summary Statistics
Panel A: Summary Statistics of Donation Rate and Donor Demographics
                                                                                 Donor Demographics
     Test        Total          Donate
    Group                                                                                                               Number
                                   (%)                Male            Age>=35#          Married         Local      of Past Donations
     T0         14,000         99 (0.71%)            70.71%             37.37%          59.72%          21.21%             2.13
     T1         11,000        108 (0.98%)            60.19%             36.11%          63.41%          19.44%             2.42
     T2         11,000        120 (1.09%)            65.00%             30.83%          57.45%          16.67%             1.92
     T3         11,000         95 (0.86%)            72.63%             36.84%          71.83%          25.26%             2.07
     T4         11,000        122 (1.11%)            66.39%             31.97%          53.68%          24.59%             2.22
     T5         11,000        129 (1.17%)            63.57%             46.51%          65.31%          31.01%             2.55
     T6         11,000        124 (1.13%)            73.39%             28.23%          50.52%          20.97%             2.26
    Total       80,000             797               67.25%             35.38%          59.77%          22.84%             2.23
                                                          t-test (p-values reported below)
    T1=T0                       0.0299**              0.107              0.849           0.640            0.762            0.292
    T2=T0                     0.00242***              0.371              0.313           0.766            0.425            0.417
    T4=T0                     0.00149***              0.497              0.402           0.429            0.552            0.733
    T5=T0                     0.000234***             0.255              0.152           0.462          0.0807*            0.107
    T6=T0                     0.000899***             0.672              0.155           0.226            0.966            0.629
     T1=T5                        0.154               0.581            0.0948*           0.796         0.0348**            0.598
     T2=T5                        0.541               0.810          0.00969***          0.266         0.0071***         0.0104**
     T3=T5                      0.0210**              0.153              0.134           0.392            0.311          0.0704*
     T4=T5                        0.635               0.633            0.0159**         0.0991*           0.226            0.181
     T6=T5                        0.734             0.0964*          0.00236***        0.0350**         0.0572*            0.233
     T1=T3                        0.377             0.0597*              0.913           0.288            0.324            0.211
     T1=T6                        0.277             0.0328**             0.209           0.079*           0.783            0.536
     T3=T6                      0.0490**              0.906              0.185        0.00539***          0.453            0.487
Note:
***p<0.01, **p<0.05, * p<0.1. We report t-test for pairs with statistically significant difference in at least one outcome across all the outcomes.
#
  : the median age is 35 among donors.
Table 3 Panel B: Summary Statistics of Group Donation Behavior

                           Among all subjects in the test group                           Among all donors in the test group
                              (unconditional probability)                                     (conditional probability)
  Test group        Solo        Donate with               Donate with              Solo        Donate with            Donate with
                  donation    donating friend(s) non-donating friend(s)          donation   donating friend(s) non-donating friend(s)
                    (%)              (%)                      (%)                  (%)             (%)                    (%)

      T0          0.621%             0.0286%                0.0571%              87.88%            4.04%                  8.08%
      T1          0.873%             0.0182%                0.0909%               88.89%           1.85%                  9.26%
      T2          0.918%             0.0727%                0.1000%               84.17%           6.67%                  9.17%
      T3          0.773%             0.0091%                0.0818%               89.47%           1.05%                  9.47%
      T4          0.955%             0.0636%                0.0909%               86.07%           5.74%                  8.20%
      T5          0.982%             0.1273%                0.0636%               83.72%           10.85%                 5.43%
      T6          0.927%             0.0455%                0.1546%               82.26%           4.03%                  13.71%
                                                            t-test (p-values reported below)
    T1=T0       0.0322**            0.719                    0.377                 0.835             0.474                  0.768
    T2=T0       0.0114**            0.126                    0.262                 0.434             0.379                  0.781
    T4=T0      0.00452***           0.224                    0.377                 0.701             0.568                  0.976
    T5=T0      0.00212***       0.000620***                  0.865                 0.373           0.0206**                 0.489
    T6=T0      0.00913***           0.558                  0.0108**                0.233             0.998                  0.146
   T1=T5          0.380         0.000351***                  0.500                 0.257          0.00175***                0.306
   T2=T5          0.608            0.0739*                   0.368                 0.920             0.133                  0.304
   T3=T5         0.0921*        0.000108***                  0.653                 0.224          0.00101***                0.297
   T4=T5          0.826           0.0370**                   0.500                 0.826            0.0656*                 0.445
   T6=T5          0.660          0.00734***                0.0246**                0.660           0.0138**               0.0220**
   T2=T3          0.241           0.0370**                   0.653                 0.269            0.0632*                 0.938
Note: ***p<0.01, **p<0.05, * p<0.1. We report t-test for pairs with significant difference in at least one outcome across all the outcomes.
Table 4: OLS Estimates of the Treatment Effect on the Decision of Self-Donation, Group Formation, and Amount of Blood Donated
                                     Amount of
    Dependent     Donate or not        subject’s       Bring donating       Amount of friend        Amount of subject +
    Variable                        donation (ml)           friend(s)         donation (ml)          friend donation (ml)
        T1         0.00274**           1.071**             -0.000105             -0.0868                    1.020**
                    (0.00127)           (0.454)           (0.000289)             (0.152)                     (0.508)
        T2         0.00379***         1.479***              0.000438              0.103                    1.582***
                    (0.00127)           (0.454)           (0.000289)             (0.152)                     (0.508)
        T3           0.00171             0.686             -0.000192             -0.0942                      0.592
                    (0.00127)           (0.456)           (0.000290)             (0.152)                     (0.511)
        T4         0.00399***         1.611***              0.000345              0.112                    1.723***
                    (0.00127)           (0.454)           (0.000289)             (0.152)                     (0.508)
        T5         0.00478***         1.929***            0.00100***            0.503***                   2.469***
                    (0.00127)           (0.455)           (0.000290)             (0.152)                     (0.510)
        T6         0.00427***         1.697***              0.000174              0.143                    1.877***
                    (0.00127)           (0.454)           (0.000289)             (0.152)                     (0.508)
       Male          0.00101            -0.0156          -0.000405**             -0.0733                    -0.0928
                   (0.000891)           (0.319)           (0.000203)             (0.107)                     (0.357)
       Age        0.000399***         0.177***           2.47e-05***           0.00980**                   0.189***
                    (4.12e-05)         (0.0148)            (9.39e-06)           (0.00493)                   (0.0165)
     Weight       0.000118***         0.0521***             2.34e-06            0.000889                  0.0534***
                    (4.03e-05)         (0.0144)            (9.20e-06)           (0.00483)                   (0.0162)
                                                      Test of equivalence (p-value)
      T1=T5            0.129           0.0748*          0.000306***           0.000248***                 0.00723***
      T2=T5            0.462             0.350              0.0656*             0.0130**                     0.100*
      T3=T5          0.0228**         0.0102**          0.000106***           0.000220***                0.000528***
      T4=T5            0.556             0.510              0.0322**            0.0152**                      0.167
      T6=T5            0.706             0.630            0.00688***            0.0252**                      0.272
      T3=T4          0.0902*          0.0552**              0.0804*               0.201                    0.0362**
      T3=T6          0.0567*          0.0361**                0.234               0.142                    0.0174**
    N of obs           80000             80000                80000               80000                       80000
        R2            0.0020             0.0028              0.0004               0.0003                     0.0026
Note: ***p<0.01, **p<0.05, * p<0.1. Standard errors are reported in parenthesis. All results are robust under alternative models (e.g., logit).
Table 5: The Impact of Friend Presence on a Subject’s Donation Amount
Sample = Subjects who donated in the experiment
          Dependent Variable                            Amount of Subject’s Donation
           [Sample Average]                                        [326.68]
                                                (1)                 (2)                    (3)
                    T1                        17.21*               13.57                  12.31
                                              (10.42)             (9.459)                (9.006)
                    T2                       20.28**             22.36**                19.57**
                                              (10.17)             (9.212)                (8.778)
                    T3                         14.37               11.06                  10.90
                                              (10.76)             (9.741)                (9.285)
                    T4                       26.55***            27.81***               24.81***
                                              (10.13)             (9.174)                (8.740)
                    T5                       28.18***            25.15***               24.51***
                                              (10.01)             (9.075)                (8.649)
                    T6                       22.90**             26.36***               22.68***
                                              (10.10)             (9.147)                (8.715)
         1(if come with friend)              29.14***            31.85***               26.53***
                                              (7.626)             (6.930)                (6.630)
                   male                                         -22.44***              -22.80***
                                                                  (6.247)                (5.956)
               current_age                                       2.552***               2.083***
                                                                  (0.246)                (0.321)
                  weight                                         1.204***               1.291***
                                                                  (0.276)                (0.264)
              local_resident                                                              4.306
                                                                                         (5.895)
                married                                                                  -9.454
                                                                                         (7.078)
            Observations                       797                   797                   797
                  R2                          0.032                 0.211                 0.288
Note: ***p<0.01, **p<0.05, * p<0.1. Standard errors are reported in parenthesis.
Table 6: Heterogeneous Treatment Effects Based on the Subject’s Marital Status, Locality, Age, and Past Donation History
   Dependent Var.                            Donate or Not                                        Amount of Self + Friend Donation
    Demographic                                                           Past                                                          Past
      Dummy             Married          Local         Age>=35         donation>2      Married         Local        Age>=35          donation>2


         T1             0.00151        0.00272**       0.00238*         0.00150         0.439          1.024*         0.879            0.595
         T2             0.00276*      0.00404***      0.00397***      0.00387***        1.110*        1.574***      1.564***         1.683***
         T3             8.40e-07        0.000993        0.00129         0.00143        -0.0503         0.336          0.388            0.581
         T4            0.00351**       0.00322**      0.00401***       0.00309**       1.450**        1.372**       1.718***          1.310**
         T5             0.00270*       0.00294**        0.00235        0.00259*        1.362**        1.744***       1.448**         1.441***
         T6           0.00397***      0.00386***      0.00458***       0.00327**       1.657***       1.598***      1.786***         1.526***
    Demo Dummy        0.00574***        0.00447*      0.00647***       0.0145***       2.232***        1.825*       2.607***         6.596***
     T1 x demo          0.00429         0.000174        0.00161        0.0122***        2.032*        -0.0151         0.632           4.137**
     T2 x demo          0.00374         -0.00136       -0.000582       -0.000274        1.738          0.284          0.203            -0.834
     T3 x demo          0.00529*        0.00439         0.00135         0.00223         2.009*         1.586          0.744            -0.127
     T4 x demo          0.00169         0.00597        -1.92e-05       0.00964**        0.970          2.750*        0.0822           4.458**
     T5 x demo         0.00665**       0.0123***       0.0107***       0.0217***       3.592***       4.812***      4.467***         10.22***
     T6 x demo          0.000901        0.00251         -0.00154       0.00994**        0.663          1.794          0.364           3.371*
      N of Obs           80,000          80,000          80,000          80,000         80,000         80,000        80,000           80,000
         R2              0.001           0.001           0.002           0.005          0.001          0.001          0.002            0.006
Notes: Columns for married control for the dummy variable that indicates missing values in Married.
***p<0.01, **p<0.05, *p<0.1. Standard errors not reported due to space limit.
Table 7: Structural Estimates for First Stage Decision (Not Donate, Solo, Group Donation)
(Base outcome: not donate)

Panel A: Individual Primitives and the Effect of Interventions
(Alternative-Invariant Coefficient)
                                                                 Coefficient   Standard Error
             Net utility from donation (! " )                      -6.20            0.27
                                               $
          Net utility for bringing friend(s) (! )                  -3.75            0.84

           Reminder for self donation (% &'( )                      0.31            0.13


     Social Pressure for solo donation after receiving
          reminder for bringing friend(s) () *+ )                  0.023            0.08
          Reminder for bringing friend (% (&'( )                   -0.52            0.42

        Reward to subject for self-donation (% *, )                 0.11            0.08
       Reward for subject's friend donation (% -, )                 1.02            0.46
       Reward to subject for group donation (% ., )                 1.12            0.42
        Standard dev. of random coefficient (! " )                 2.37*
                                                $
        Standard dev. of random coefficient (! )                   0.85**
                                            $
           Covariance between (! " ) and (! )                     -1.86**

  Panel B: Individual Demographics (Alternative-Specific Coefficient)
            Solo Donation Alternative (0 12 )              Coefficient         Standard Error
              Male and weight in upper half                         0.08            0.09
             Female and weight in upper half                        0.59            0.14
                         Male                                       0.52            0.10
                       Age >=35                                     0.24            0.09
                        Married                                     0.57            0.10
                     Local resident                                 0.51            0.09
                  Education <=9 years                               0.17            0.10

            Group Donation Alternative (0 11 )                   Coefficient   Standard Error
             Male and weight in upper half                         -0.20            0.49
            Female and weight in upper half                         0.67            0.45
                         Male                                      -0.37            0.41
                      Age >=35                                      0.23            0.42
                       Married                                      0.45            0.44
                    Local resident                                  0.50            0.38
                 Education <=9 years                               -0.97            0.62
Table 8: Policy Simulation of Different Combinations of Interventions

                                                             Average Prob. of          Average Prob. of            Total
                                                                                                                                      Total Unit of
                                                            Subject Coming for        Subject Coming for         Number of                                  Reward per
                                                                                                                                         Reward
                                                              Solo Donation            Group Donation             Donors                                      Donor
                                                                                                                                     to the Donors4
                                                                    (1)                       (2)                (1)+(2)*2
                  No treatment                                    0.69%                     0.02%                  0.73%                 0.00%                  0.00
             Reminder for self donation                           0.93%                     0.03%                  0.98%                 0.00%                  0.00
           Reminder for self donation +
          Reminder for bringing friend(s)                          0.95%                     0.02%                  0.99%                0.00%                  0.00

    Reward to subject for self donation (SR)                       1.04%                     0.03%                  1.09%                1.07%                  0.97
  Reward for subject's friend's donation (FR)1                     0.95%                     0.04%                  1.04%                0.04%                  0.04
  Reward to subject for bringing a friend (BR)2                    0.95%                     0.05%                  1.05%                0.05%                  0.04

       Individual reward treatment: SR + FR                        1.06%                     0.05%                  1.16%                1.16%                  1.00
        Group reward treatment: FR + BR3                           0.95%                     0.13%                  1.21%                0.26%                  0.21
                     SR + BR                                       1.06%                     0.05%                  1.15%                1.15%                  1.00
                   SR + FR + BR                                    1.06%                     0.14%                  1.34%                1.48%                  1.10
             SR (2 Unit) + FR (2 Unit)                             1.18%                     0.14%                  1.46%                2.92%                  2.00
             FR (2 Unit) + BR (2 Unit)                             0.95%                     0.97%                  2.88%                3.86%                  1.34

Note:
1. Under FR (friend reward only), the blood bank offers a reward to the donors that are brought by the subject, but not to the subject herself. This is potentially
useful, as the subject’s willingness to donate plus the friend reward might persuade the friend(s) to donate together in a group. The friend reward only policy may
also remove friend(s)’ concern about whether the subject has any conflict of interest and enhance the social image of the subject.
2. Under BR (referral reward exclusively for donors who bring a friend), the blood bank secretly offers a reward only to the donors that bring friend(s), but not to
those friend(s). The policy can be implemented by sending a secret message with the reward voucher to the subject donor after donation.
3. FR+BR is group reward; SR+FR is individual reward; SR only, FR only, BR only, and SR+BR are counterfactual policies that are not tested in the experiment.
4. As introduced in our experiment design and empirical analysis, one unit of reward equals 50 RMB.
