                              NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                     NONLINEAR PRICING IN VILLAGE ECONOMIES

                                       Orazio Attanasio
                                       Elena Pastorino

                                      Working Paper 21718
                              http://www.nber.org/papers/w21718


                    NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                             1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                               Cambridge, MA 02138
                          November 2015, Revised July 2018




We are grateful to V.V. Chari, Aureo de Paola, Tom Holmes, Bruno Jullien, Toru Kitagawa,
Aprajit Mahajan, Costas Meghir, Matt Mitchell, Mark Rosenzweig, Holger Sieg, Kjetil
Storesletten, Chris Taber, Joel Waldfogel, and Frank Wolak for helpful suggestions, and several
seminar audiences for comments. Eugenia Gonzalez Aguado, Sam Bailey, Ross Batzer, Javier
Brugues- Rodriguez, Sanghmitra Gautam, and Pedro Veloso have provided superlative research
assistance. We especially thank Kai Ding, Keyvan Eslami, and Rishabh Kirpalani for many
useful comments and Joan Gieseke for her invaluable editorial assistance. The paper is a greatly
revised version of Attanasio and Pastorino (2010). The views expressed herein are those of the
authors and not necessarily those of the Federal Reserve Bank of Minneapolis, the Federal
Reserve System, or the National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.

© 2015 by Orazio Attanasio and Elena Pastorino. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not
to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit,
including © notice, is given to the source.
Nonlinear Pricing in Village Economies
Orazio Attanasio and Elena Pastorino
NBER Working Paper No. 21718
November 2015, Revised July 2018
JEL No. D42,D43,D82,I38,O12,O13,O22
                                           ABSTRACT
This paper analyzes and estimates the impact of quantity discounts for basic staples in rural
Mexico. We propose a model of price discrimination that nests those of Maskin and Riley (1984)
and Jullien (2000), in which consumers differ in their tastes and, due to subsistence constraints, in
their ability to pay for a good. We show that, under mild conditions, a model in which consumers
face heterogeneous subsistence or budget constraints is equivalent to one in which consumers
have access to heterogeneous outside options. We then rely on known results (Jullien (2000)) to
characterize the equilibrium price schedule. We analyze the effects of nonlinear pricing on
market participation, as well as the impact of a market-wide income transfer on the price
schedule, when consumers are differentially budget constrained. Such a transfer, which is a
common policy in developing countries, stimulates consumption by increasing households’
ability to pay but also typically leads to an increase in the intensity of price discrimination. We
prove that the structural parameters of the model are identified from data on prices and quantities
in a given market. The intuition behind this identification result is that the equilibrium price
schedule in a market is a function of the distribution of consumers’ willingness and ability to pay,
which, in turn, is related to the distribution of quantities. We estimate the parameters of the model
using data from municipalities and localities in Mexico on three commodities, rice, kidney beans,
and sugar, which are consumed by most households and are part of the evaluation component of
the well-known conditional cash transfer program Progresa. The model fits the data remarkably
well. Interestingly, we find that nonlinear pricing is beneficial to a large number of households,
especially those who consume small quantities, relative to linear pricing. Available evidence
indicates that the program had no effect on average prices. We show, however, that the program
has affected the slope (in quantity) of the price schedule, which has become steeper as implied by
our model, and has thus lead to an increase in the degree of price discrimination. We also show
that, empirically, accounting for the impact of the hazard function of the distribution of quantities
on prices, as consistent with our model, explains a large fraction of the shift in the price schedule
induced by the program.
Orazio Attanasio
Department of Economics
University College London
Gower Street
London WC1E 6BT
UNITED KINGDOM
and NBER
o.attanasio@ucl.ac.uk
Elena Pastorino
Stanford University
Hoover Institution and Economics Department
579 Serra mall
94305
Stanford University
Palo Alto, CA 94305
and the Federal Reserve Bank of Minneapolis
epastori@stanford.edu

A supplementary appendix is available at http://www.nber.org/data-appendix/w21718
1        Introduction
Quantity discounts, in the form of unit prices declining with quantity, appear to be pervasive in developing
countries. McIntosh (2003), for instance, documents differences in the price of drinking water paid by
poor households in the Philippines, whereas Fabricant et al. (1999) and Pannarunothai and Mills (1997)
document similar differences in the price of health care and services in Thailand and Sierra Leone. Attanasio
and Frayne (2006) show evidence that consumers purchasing basic staples in Colombian villages face price
schedules rather than linear prices: within a village, relatively richer households buy larger quantities and pay
substantially lower unit prices for homogeneous commodities. Similar patterns arise in rural Mexico, as we
document here. This evidence is commonly interpreted as symptomatic of poor households paying more than
rich ones for the same goods they purchase. Since the poor are close to subsistence in developing countries,
by this argument, nonlinear prices are usually considered to have undesirable distributional implications.
        This view is consistent with the implications of the nonlinear pricing model of Maskin and Riley (1984),
henceforth the standard model, in which consumers differ in their marginal willingness to pay for a good.
This model explains quantity discounts as arising from a seller’s incentive to screen consumers by their
preferences through the offer of multiple price and quantity combinations. One of its key insights is that
the ability of a seller to discriminate across consumers implies not only that the consumption of (nearly) all
consumers is depressed relative to first best but also, crucially, that consumption distortions tend to be more
severe for purchasers of smaller quantities, typically poorer consumers in developing countries.
        The standard model, however, assumes consumers differ only in their tastes, are unconstrained in their
ability to pay, and have access to similar alternatives to purchasing from a particular seller or in a given mar-
ket. This framework thus naturally accounts for the dispersion in the unit prices of goods that absorb a small
fraction of consumers’ incomes, in settings in which consumers have access to similar outside consumption
opportunities.1 As such, the standard model abstracts from key features of food markets in developing coun-
tries, in which households typically face subsistence constraints on the consumption of basic staples, spend
a large fraction of their income on food, and have access to alternative consumption possibilities, through
self-production or highly subsidized government stores, that are uncommon in developed countries.
        To rationalize the occurrence of quantity discounts in settings that are typical of developing countries, we
propose a model of price discrimination that explicitly formalizes households’ subsistence constraints and
allows households to differ in both their marginal willingness to pay and their absolute ability to pay for a
good. The model also incorporates a rich set of alternatives to purchasing in a particular market that differ
across consumers. The model we propose is structurally identified from information just on the distribution
of prices and quantities in a market. We estimate the model on data from a sample of villages in rural
Mexico collected to evaluate the conditional cash transfer program Progresa and show that it successfully
fits the observed differences in prices and quantities consumed within and across villages. We find that,
contrary to common intuition, nonlinear pricing is beneficial to a large number of households, especially
    1
        Formally, consumers are assumed to be able to pay more than their reservation prices for a good. See Che and Gale (2000).



                                                                  1
those who consume less, relative to linear pricing. We also characterize and estimate the effect of income
(cash) transfers in this framework and find that in the villages we study, the Progresa transfers stimulated
consumption but also induced an increase in the intensity of price discrimination, which affected negatively
both beneficiaries of the transfers as well as non-eligible households.
   This paper makes four important contributions. First, from a theoretical point of view, we show that
when facing subsistence constraints, consumers can be formally thought of as facing an additional budget
constraint on the expenditure on a seller’s good. In the language of the literature on auctions and nonlinear
pricing, consumers are budget constrained, and their constraints depend on their preferences and incomes.
This class of models has been considered in general to be intractable. We show that even when consumers
differ in both their tastes and budgets, a model with budget-constrained consumers maps into the class of
nonlinear pricing models with so-called countervailing incentives, in particular the one of Jullien (2000),
in which consumers have heterogeneous outside options. By relying on this formal equivalence between
models, we can exploit existing results to characterize optimal nonlinear pricing. In such an environment,
nonlinear pricing has more desirable welfare properties than those implied by the standard model, as it leads
to higher levels of consumption, even above first best, lower marginal prices, and for sufficiently comparable
outside options across the two models, higher consumer surplus. Intuitively, since the existence of budget
constraints implies that there is a maximum price that a consumer can pay, budget constraints effectively
limit sellers’ ability to extract consumer surplus. In these instances, nonlinear pricing may be preferable to
linear pricing, especially because it may lead to a higher degree of market participation.
   Second, we show that the model’s primitives and structural parameters are identified just from informa-
tion on the distribution of prices and quantities in one market. The intuition behind this result is relatively
simple. In the model, a price schedule is set by a seller to discriminate among consumers with different tastes
and budgets, and therefore it depends on the distribution of consumers’ characteristics. Since this latter dis-
tribution is reflected in that of quantities, the observed distribution of quantities can be used to pin down
the determinants of a price schedule. The estimation approach we propose crucially relies on the seller’s
optimality conditions, which imply that the difference between prices and marginal costs depends on the
difference between the cumulative multiplier associated with consumers’ participation constraints and the
distribution function of consumers’ preferences. The approach we propose, relying on this relationship, al-
lows us to discriminate between different versions of the model, including the standard model that our model
nests, and therefore to identify the distinct welfare implications of different types of price schedules.
   Third, we estimate the model for three commodities in a large number of villages in rural Mexico. We
use data from the high-quality surveys collected for the evaluation of the conditional cash transfer program
Progresa, which have been extensively used. Although we can achieve nonparametric identification, to
improve efficiency and be able to deal with the small number of observations in several villages, we choose
specific yet flexible functional forms for the relevant objects. We show that our model fits remarkably well
the data we use and is robust to key parameterizations. In particular, the estimates of the model’s primitives
satisfy the model’s restrictions on the monotonicity of the hazard rate of the distribution of consumers’


                                                       2
unobserved marginal willingness to pay, as well as the inverse relationship between marginal utility and
quantity consumed, without being imposed. We are also able to test different versions of the model and show
that the standard model is rejected in all villages.
   Fourth, although the effect of conditional cash transfer programs including Progresa on average prices
has been studied before and often detected to be negligible or absent, we show that the program has induced
significant shifts in price schedules that might have had important distributional implications. Furthermore,
using an approximate reduced-form version of the optimality conditions for sellers’ and consumers’ behavior,
we show that our model is able to explain a large fraction of the shift in price schedules we document.
   The intuition for some of our theoretical results is simple and deserves a mention, in particular, the impact
of nonlinear pricing on market participation and of income transfers on prices. As for market participation,
we show that nonlinear pricing can be efficiency enhancing relative to linear pricing by leading to greater
market participation, when consumers are differentially constrained in their access to a market. Specifically,
by allowing a seller to tailor prices and quantities to consumers’ willingness (and ability) to pay, nonlinear
pricing enables a seller to trade at a profit with consumers with more stringent subsistence constraints—
typically poorer consumers purchasing smaller quantities—or with access to especially attractive outside
options. Such consumers would be excluded from the market under linear pricing and so are better off under
nonlinear pricing. The reason is as follows. To induce such consumers to participate, a seller needs to offer
a low enough marginal price. Since the marginal price is constant and equals the unit price under linear
pricing, such a low linear price would lower profits from all consumers for the benefit of including just a few
more. Thus, including these consumers would not typically be profitable at linear prices.
   In terms of the impact of income (cash) transfers on prices, we show that these policies not only encourage
consumption but also provide an incentive for sellers to take advantage of consumers’ greater ability to pay.
In particular, targeted cash transfers that are more generous for poorer households, who tend to purchase
smaller quantities, lead not just to a greater demand for a seller’s good but also to higher prices for at least
some consumers. Depending on the distribution of tastes and outside options across consumers, transfers can
give rise to increases in the unit prices of low quantities but decreases in the unit prices of high quantities.
Although the average impact on unit prices is therefore ambiguous, we prove that overall transfers lead to
an increase in the degree of price discrimination, thereby exacerbating some of the consumption distortions
associated with nonlinear pricing.
   Our empirical results are consistent with these intuitions. Our estimates imply that sellers have substan-
tial market power in the villages in our data and exercise it by price discriminating across consumers through
distortionary quantity discounts. However, the pattern of consumption distortions we detect is mostly oppo-
site to that implied by the standard model. In particular, in most villages, the consumption of households with
intermediate to large taste for a good is the most compressed relative to first best, whereas a sizable fraction
of consumers of low to intermediate quantities, with low to intermediate tastes, do not suffer large distortions.
Under the standard model, instead, these latter consumers would suffer the largest distortions. Interestingly,
several consumers of the smallest quantities consume quantities above first best rather than, as often argued,


                                                       3
below it—in the standard model, as mentioned, consumption is below first best for all consumers.
    When comparing observed nonlinear pricing to a counterfactual scenario in which sellers cannot price
discriminate, we find that nonlinear pricing leads to greater consumer and social surplus for most consumers
with low to intermediate types, especially consumers of the smallest quantities. A large fraction of such
consumers would be excluded under linear pricing and thus benefit from nonlinear pricing. On the contrary,
consumers of large quantities tend to be better off under linear pricing.
    Several studies have analyzed the effect of transfers on the price of commodities and have found no
impact. Hoddinott et al. (2000), for instance, conclude that “there is no evidence that Progresa communities
paid higher food prices than similar control communities” (p. 33). Similarly, Angelucci and De Giorgi
(2009), when assessing the impact of Progresa on the consumption of non-eligible households, consider the
possibility that their results are mediated by changes in local prices but dismiss this possibility based on their
empirical analysis. Thus, the consensus seems to be that Progresa did not have noticeable effects on local
prices. Our finding that cash transfers implemented by Progresa have had a significant impact on prices (and
in particular on price schedules) is therefore novel, as far as we know. Importantly, we show that the effects
of the program on the price schedule that we document can be explained by our model.2
    The reason for the difference between our results and those in the existing literature is as follows. Most
of the studies that have looked at the effect of cash transfers on prices focus on average changes in unit prices
associated with the introduction of cash transfers but fail to account for the nonlinearity of unit prices when
assessing the impact of transfers on prices. Our model implies that income transfers to consumers affect
equilibrium prices, as sellers adjust their price schedules in response to consumers’ greater incomes. In line
with this prediction, we find that the schedule of unit prices becomes significantly steeper after transfers are
introduced, with unit prices increasing at low quantities but decreasing at high quantities. Since the resulting
average impact of cash transfers on unit prices is much less pronounced—in fact, insignificant according
to our estimates—we also show that ignoring the variability of unit prices with quantity leads to a much
smaller estimate of the price effect of transfers, as consistent with the results in the literature. When, instead,
the dependence of unit prices on quantity is explicitly taken into account, the price effect is substantial: by
increasing consumers’ ability to pay, cash transfers also effectively increase a seller’s market power and the
intensity of price discrimination. Such a change in equilibrium prices affects not just households who are
beneficiaries of the program but also non-eligible households. Cash transfers can then lead to much lower
consumer surplus gains than typically inferred.
    As for the rest of the paper, in Section 2, we discuss our sample of rural villages included in the evaluation
of Progresa. In Section 3, we present our model, characterize optimal nonlinear pricing, and analyze its
implications for consumption, market participation, and the impact of income transfers. In Section 4, we
prove that our model is identified and propose an estimation strategy. In Section 5, we present our estimates,
assess their welfare implications, and evaluate the effect of the Progresa transfer on prices. Finally, Section
6 concludes the paper.
   2
     Interestingly, Cunha et al. (2017), who analyze a different program that included cash and in-kind transfers, find that the latter
significantly reduced prices. Once again, this pattern is consistent with our model, as discussed in Section 3.

                                                                  4
2     Quantity Discounts: The Case of Mexico
Here we provide a description of our data from the Progresa program and evidence of quantity discounts.
Data: Background and Description. The dataset we use was collected to evaluate the impact of the con-
ditional cash transfer program called Progresa, which was started in 1997 under the Zedillo administration
in Mexico. The program consists of cash transfers to eligible families with children, conditional on behavior
such as class attendance by school-aged children and regular visits by young children to health centers, as
well as attendance of education sessions on nutrition and health by mothers. Among the villages targeted
by the first wave of the program expansion between 1998 and 2000, about 70% of households were deemed
eligible. Eligibility was determined on the basis of a survey that collected information on a set of poverty
indicators considered difficult to manipulate, such as the material of the roof or floor of a household’s home.3
    In this first phase targeted to marginalized rural communities, the Progresa grant consisted of two com-
ponents. The first one was targeted to families with children less than 6 years old and was conditioned on
children being brought to health centers with some regularity. The second component was targeted to fam-
ilies with children between ages 9 and 16 and was conditioned on regular school attendance. Although the
program administration was relatively strict in enforcing these conditionalities, they were not very binding
for several households—for instance, households with primary school aged children whose school atten-
dance is very high. For eligible households, the grant was substantial. On average, grants amounted to 25%
of their income and consumption, therefore constituting a large fraction of it.
    Since the first rollout of the program was targeted to about 20,000 marginalized localities and would take
about two years to be implemented, the program’s administration and the government decided to use it for
evaluation purposes, by randomizing the timing of part of the rollout. In particular, in 1997 the program
selected 506 localities in 7 states, each belonging to one of 191 larger administrative units, municipalities, to
be included in the evaluation sample. Each municipality is composed of several localities, not all of which
were included in the evaluation survey. Of these localities, 320 were randomly chosen and assigned to early
treatment in that the program started there in the middle of 1998; the remaining 186 were assigned to the
end of the rollout phase, so the program started there in December 1999. Households in these localities were
followed for several periods. We use the waves of October 1998, May and November 1999, and November
2000 and 2003. Some waves, such as those collected in 1997 and April 2000, could not be used because they
do not contain information on household expenditure, which we rely on.
    The evaluation data have been used extensively in recent years and are remarkable for at least three rea-
sons. First, the randomized rollout of the program in a subset of the villages—at least for the first waves—
introduced substantial exogenous variation in the resources available to some households, which we exploit
to examine key implications of the model we propose, in particular about the impact of cash transfers on
prices. Second, the data provide a census of 506 villages in that all households in the relevant localities are
    3
      A first registration wave in 1997 was complemented by some further registrations in early 1998, the so-called densificados, as
the program administration assessed eligible households to be too few, which led to a slight modification of eligibility rules. We
consider these added families as eligible.


                                                                 5
surveyed, therefore allowing us to estimate the entire distribution of quantities and prices in each village, at
least for commodities whose purchase is common. Third, the data are very rich and exhaustive. The con-
sumption and expenditure module in the survey contains key information for the purpose of our paper. Each
household is interviewed and asked to report not only the quantity consumed of each of 36 food commodities
during the week preceding the interview, but also the quantity purchased and its monetary value. The data
also contain information about quantities consumed and not purchased, for instance, acquired through self-
production or received as a gift or a payment in kind. The food items recorded include fruits and vegetables,
grains and pulses, and meat and other animal products, and are supposed to be exhaustive of the foods con-
sumed by households. In what follows, we focus on commodities that are relatively homogeneous in terms
of quality, and are purchased and consumed by most households, as explained below.
   Since the survey contains information on the quantities purchased of each recorded item as well as on
total household expenditure on each item, it is possible to compute unit values, as measured by the ratio
of expenditure to quantity purchased. From now on, we refer to unit values as prices. Attanasio et al.
(2013) discuss some of the measurement issues associated with the construction of unit values, ranging from
measurement error to the heterogeneous quality of goods and to the nonlinearity in quantity we model here.
However, they find that average and median unit values well approximate local prices, which are available
for some commodities in the locality survey and are collected from local stores. They also find that unit
values closely match data from national sources on prices.
   Progresa was targeted to marginalized communities, where marginalization was defined by an index
used by the Mexican government to target social programs. However, they were not the most marginalized
communities in the country. The exclusion of the poorest communities (targeted by a different program,
studied, for instance, by Cunha et al. (2017)) was justified by the fact that to comply with the Progresa
conditions, eligible households had to have access to certain public services and infrastructure, such as
schools and health centers. The communities included in the evaluation survey are small—the average
number of households in a locality is just over 50—and remote. Households living in these villages are poor:
on average, for instance, food accounts for nearly 70% of household budgets. However, within villages, the
level of poverty exhibits substantial variation. These differences are captured by a variety of indicators and
reflected in the fact that not every household within a village was eligible for Progresa: on average, about
78% of the households of the villages in the evaluation survey were. In addition to variation in poverty
within villages, our sample is also characterized by variation in the level of poverty across villages. This
heterogeneity is reflected, for instance, in the variability of the rate of eligible households across villages,
which is obviously related to differences in the distribution of consumption. Such heterogeneity should thus
account for differences in price schedules across villages. Furthermore, differences in the proportion of
eligible households across villages are likely to affect how the Progresa transfer has modified the distribution
of quantities consumed and, according to our model, the shape of a village price schedule. We will investigate
these relationships in our empirical analysis below.
   To perform the empirical exercise we propose, we develop a model that relates the shape of the price


                                                       6
schedule to the distribution of quantities in a given market. Since we specialize the model to focus on the
behavior of a single seller in our empirical analysis, ideally, one would like to consider a relatively isolated
market with one seller or a small number of them. Although the definition of a market as a locality would
be natural, using the locality as our definition of “market” would result in few observed transactions in
several cases, given the size of localities and the number of transactions we observe. Moreover, despite some
localities being quite isolated, from an administrative point of view, they all belong to a municipality and are
often connected in several ways. For instance, it is not unusual for some households to shop for certain items
in a locality within the municipality of residence but different from the locality where they live. For these
reasons, in the main text we focus primarily on villages defined as municipalities. However, we estimate
our model on both village markets defined as municipalities and on village markets defined as localities and
obtain fairly similar results across these two definitions of villages, as discussed in Section 4.
Evidence of Quantity Discounts. The model of nonlinear pricing we propose gives rise to quantity dis-
counts. As mentioned in the introduction, this type of discounts is common in several markets in developing
countries. Attanasio and Frayne (2006), for instance, estimate the supply schedule for several basic food
staples, including rice, carrots, and beans in Colombian villages, and document substantial discounts for
large volumes. Specifically, they find that the elasticity of the unit price of rice to the quantity bought is as
large as −0.11 in their preferred specification. They estimate even larger quantity discounts for other speci-
fications and for commodities such as carrots or beans. In our empirical exercise, we use the Mexican data
described above. To motivate the model we develop and estimate using these data, we start by documenting
the existence of discount patterns in Mexico similar to those observed in Colombia.

                                                 Table 1: Price Schedule
                                            Rice    Kidney Beans          Sugar     Tomatoes      Tortillas
                   Constant                1.858           2.426          1.795         2.256       2.080
                                         (0.007)         (0.008)        (0.006)       (0.010)     (0.046)
                   Ln(quantity)          −0.247          −0.145         −0.172        −0.320      −0.452
                                         (0.013)         (0.011)        (0.017)       (0.019)     (0.020)
                   Observations          62, 368         82, 024        91, 782      108, 345      38, 599
                   R2                      0.139           0.094          0.116         0.331       0.353
                  Note: wave fixed effects are included; standard errors are clustered at the locality level.


   For a sense of quantity discounts and their importance in our data, we relate observed prices to quanti-
ties purchased for several commodities in each village. Here we use the waves of October 1998, May and
November 1999, and November 2000 and 2003 from all localities. Table 1 contains estimates of this rela-
tionship between (real) log unit prices and log quantities for the most common commodities, namely, rice,
kidney beans, sugar, tomatoes, and tortillas. The different number of observations in each row reflects the
different number of purchases we observe in our sample. The elasticity of prices to quantities we observe is
largest (in absolute value) for tortillas (−0.45), tomatoes (−0.32), and rice (−0.25). However, it is also siz-
able for the other two commodities: −0.14 for kidney beans and −0.17 for sugar. For all these commodities,
this elasticity is statistically different from zero. The estimates we obtain do not vary appreciably when we

                                                              7
restrict attention to the somewhat smaller set of municipalities and localities part of our estimation sample,
discussed below. As explained in Section 4, the sample selection criteria we impose when estimating the
model entail only a small loss of villages.
   Some studies have argued that the dispersion in prices observed in a market for a same commodity might
reflect differences in quality. Deaton (1989), for instance, argues that this might be the case for rice in
Thailand. Here we focus on commodities for which the quality homogeneity assumption does not seem un-
reasonable in our context for two reasons. First, even in the case of rice, conversations with program officials
and others familiar with the reality of rural Mexico confirm that this is the case. Second, we do not consider
commodities such as meat, for which quality is likely to be heterogeneous. In any case, heterogeneity in the
quality of goods would likely give rise to an upward-sloping price schedule, contrary to what we observe; see
also Crawford et al. (2003). The evidence in Table 1 therefore seems to indicate the presence of important
quantity discounts for the commodities considered.
   For the rest of our empirical analysis, we focus on three commodities—rice, kidney beans, and sugar—
that conform to the assumptions we maintain in the theoretical model. Specifically, we consider commodities
that are of homogeneous quality, so as to minimize the possibility that price differences reflect any hetero-
geneity in this unmodeled dimension. We also focus on commodities that are commonly consumed and
purchased by the households in our sample. Of the commodities in Table 1, we exclude tortillas because
a large number of households buy corn or wheat to make them and because price differences are known to
reflect quality differentials. Tomatoes are also excluded because of potential quality differentials affecting
their prices that we cannot detect in our data. The commodities we choose are not only widely consumed but
also storable, so observed zero purchases do not reflect exclusion from the market but could simply be due to
the timing of the Progresa interview. Hence, the assumption of full market participation we formulate in our
empirical analysis is not implausible. Across localities, the median fraction of households consuming rice
in the week preceding the interview is 58%, while the corresponding fraction is 85% for kidney beans and
sugar. Virtually all of these households (97% for rice, 91% for kidney beans, and 98% for sugar) purchase
these commodities rather than producing them or receiving them as a gift or an in-kind payment.
   The model we present in the next section considers a seller facing a heterogeneous population of con-
sumers with any degree of market power, ranging from monopoly to oligopoly to no power (perfect com-
petition). In the empirical analysis, however, we specialize our model to consider the behavior of only one
seller in each market. This assumption is for consistency with the data, which show that markets defined
as either municipalities or localities are highly concentrated with very few stores. Specifically, in the 506
localities in our dataset, the median number of stores is 1 or 2 depending on the Progresa wave. As for
municipalities, the mean and median number of stores are higher, as some government stores and other very
heterogeneous types of sellers, such as periodic open air and itinerant street markets, might be present. These
sellers, however, can be considered as having a very different cost structure, and their possible presence in
the markets for the commodities we study can be interpreted as a degree of competition that is incorporated
into households’ outside options in our model. Moreover, even at the level of the municipality, the number of


                                                       8
grocery stores that might sell the goods we consider is very small: the median is zero and the mean is 0.68.
Hence, the supply of the goods we focus on is indeed highly concentrated in each market, so the restriction
to one seller per market in our empirical analysis is not a strong one.

3     Models of Price Discrimination
As just reviewed, for many commodities in rural Mexico, prices per unit decline with the quantity purchased.
A simple model consistent with this feature of the data is the standard model of price discrimination of
Maskin and Riley (1984), in which quantity discounts emerge when a seller screens consumers by their
marginal willingness to pay according to the quantities they purchase. This model, however, can be too
restrictive for the markets we study, since it assumes that consumers have the same reservation utilities and
abstracts from consumers’ budget or subsistence constraints. To capture the value of richer consumption
possibilities alternative to purchasing from a particular seller or in a particular market, we build on the model
of Jullien (2000), which assumes consumers differ not just in their taste for a good but also in their reservation
utility. Suitable interpretations of consumers’ reservation utility can then accommodate different settings of
interest.
    A particularly relevant case arises when consumers face subsistence constraints in consumption, which
give rise to a budget constraint on the expenditure on a seller’s good. As discussed in Che and Gale (2000),
models with this type of budget constraint are considered to be intractable in general. The optimal pricing
schedule is only known for special cases, when, for instance, utility is linear in consumption (see Che and
Gale (2000)) or the budget is identical across consumers, so that a seller does not have an incentive to
discriminate across all consumers (see Thomas (2002)). In what follows, we establish that a model with
heterogeneous budget constraints is equivalent to a model with heterogeneous reservation utilities under
simple conditions. This equivalence allows us to adapt and extend the results in Jullien (2000) to a model
with budget-constrained consumers and characterize nonlinear pricing in the presence of these constraints.
    The model we propose captures a variety of situations that are relevant to our application. First, con-
sumers in our data have access to a wide range of outside options: households in a village may purchase a
good from sellers in other villages or in government-regulated Diconsa stores; they may have the ability to
produce a good as an alternative to purchasing it; or they may receive a good from relatives, friends, or the
government as a transfer. As the desirability or feasibility of these alternative consumption possibilities may
differ across consumers, so does consumers’ reservation utility. Second, although we focus on the problem
of a single seller, by interpreting a consumer’s reservation utility as the utility obtained when purchasing
from other sellers, the model can account for varying degrees of seller market power and so different market
structures, ranging from monopoly to oligopoly to near perfect competition.4 Finally, as consumers typically
have preferences for multiple goods, we incorporate the possibility of consumers’ substitution across them
and allow subsistence constraints to affect the consumption of any good.
    4
      Near competition obtains when the reservation utility is arbitrarily close to first-best utility. The problem of a seller we con-
sider can be alternatively interpreted as the best-response problem of a price-discriminating oligopolist competing to exclusively
serve any given consumer in a village. We establish this result in the Supplementary Appendix.


                                                                  9
    As is common in the nonlinear pricing literature, our framework implicitly excludes the possibility of
collusion among consumers, for instance, through resale. Anecdotal evidence we obtained from program of-
ficers and surveyors indicates that resale does not occur in our context. A natural question is why consumers
do not form coalitions, buy in bulk, and resell quantities among themselves at linear prices. A possible an-
swer is that our context is that of small, isolated, and geographically dispersed communities in rural Mexico.
Thus, it might be difficult for consumers to engage in the type of agreements that would sustain resale.5

3.1     A Model with Heterogeneous Outside Options
Consider a market (village) in which consumers (households) and a seller exchange a quantity q ≥ 0 of a good
for a monetary transfer t. Consumers’ preferences depend on a taste attribute, θ, continuously distributed
with support [θ, θ], θ > 0, cumulative distribution function F (θ), and probability density function f (θ),
positive for θ ∈ (θ, θ). We refer to this attribute as marginal willingness to pay. We assume the seller knows
the distribution of θ but does not observe its value for a given consumer or, alternatively, prices contingent
on consumers’ characteristics are not legally permitted or enforceable. Thus, a seller must post a single price
schedule for all consumers, although it can entail different unit prices for different quantities.6
    Faced with a price schedule, a consumer decides whether to purchase and, if so, the quantity q to buy.
Upon trade, a consumer of type θ obtains utility v(θ, q) − t, with v(·, ·) positive and twice continuously
differentiable, vθ (θ, q) > 0, vq (θ, q) > 0, and vqq (θ, q) ≤ 0. We assume, as standard, that vθq (θ, q) > 0 for
q > 0 so that consumers can be ordered by their marginal utility from the good. Denote by c(·) the seller’s
cost function, which is weakly increasing and twice continuously differentiable, and by c(Q) the cost of
producing the total quantity of the good provided to the market, Q. For simplicity of exposition, here we
maintain that the cost function c(·) is additively separable across consumers; we relax this assumption in the
empirical analysis.7 We denote by s(θ, q) = v(θ, q) − c(q) the social surplus from quantity q and maintain
that sq (θ, ·)/vθq (θ, ·) decreases with q. This assumption ensures that the seller’s problem admits a unique
solution and that first-order conditions are necessary and sufficient to characterize it: it plays the same role
as the assumptions that s(θ, ·) is concave in q and vθ (θ, ·) is convex in q in the standard model. We define the
first-best quantity, qF B (θ), as the one that maximizes social surplus for a consumer of type θ.
    Let u(θ) be a consumer’s reservation utility when not purchasing from the seller, which is assumed
to be absolutely continuous and, unlike in the standard model, can vary across consumers. We normalize
the seller’s reservation profit to zero. A consumer of type θ participates when the consumer purchases a
single quantity with probability one—the restriction to deterministic contracts is without loss. We focus on
situations in which all consumers trade, so q = 0 is interpreted as the limit when the contracted quantity
    5
      Conceptually, such a situation can be translated into a simple assumption on the existence of imperfections in contracting
between consumers analogous to those between sellers and consumers usually maintained in models of nonlinear pricing. With
enforcement, coordination, or transaction costs, such as commuting costs, not even a coalition of all consumers could achieve
higher utility for any member than the utility a member obtains by trading with a price-discriminating seller. See Appendix A.
    6
      We rely on results from the mechanism design literature with private information. A standard result, the taxation principle,
is that an economy with observable types in which a seller is restricted to nonlinear prices, referred to as “tariffs,” is equivalent to
an economy with unobservable types and no restrictions on the space of contracts a seller can offer. See Segal and Tadelis (2005).
    7
      One instance of nonseparability occurs when the cost function is subadditive. Given the compact support of consumer types,
with a suitable lower bound on c0 (Q), we can ensure that the seller’s problem is concave even in this case.


                                                                  10
becomes small. Observe, however, that in the presence of consumer exclusion, the equilibrium contract for
types who participate would be the same as the one we characterize below.
    By the revelation principle, a contract between consumers and seller can be summarized by a menu
{t(θ), q(θ)} such that the best choice within the menu for a consumer of type θ is the quantity q(θ) for the
price t(θ); that is, the menu is incentive compatible. Let u(θ) = v(θ, q(θ)) − t(θ) denote the utility of
a consumer of type θ when purchasing from the seller under the incentive compatible menu {t(θ), q(θ)}.
The seller’s optimal menu maximizes expected profits subject to consumers’ incentive compatibility and
participation constraints, that is,
                                                                                           !
                                                             Z    θ
                     (IR problem)            max                      t(θ)f (θ)dθ − c(Q)       s.t.
                                           {t(θ),q(θ)}        θ

                                           (IC) v(θ, q(θ)) − t(θ) ≥ v(θ, q(θ0 )) − t(θ0 ) for any θ, θ0
                                           (IR) v(θ, q(θ)) − t(θ) ≥ u(θ) for any θ,

              Rθ                                                                                      Rθ
where Q =       θ
                    q(θ)f (θ)dθ and, using the additive separability of c(·), c(Q) =                  θ
                                                                                                           c(q(θ))f (θ)dθ. We refer to
this model in which the seller’s constraints are IC and IR as the IR model and define an allocation {u(θ), q(θ)}
to be implementable if it satisfies the IC and IR constraints. The IC constraint of a consumer of type θ is
satisfied if choosing q(θ) for the price t(θ) maximizes the left-hand side of the constraint. Taking first-order
conditions, this requires vq (θ, q(θ))q 0 (θ) = t0 (θ) or, equivalently, u0 (θ) = vθ (θ, q(θ)). Since vθq (θ, q) > 0, an
allocation is incentive compatible if, and only if, it is locally incentive compatible in that u0 (θ) = vθ (θ, q(θ)),
the schedule q(θ) is weakly increasing (a.e.), and the utility u(θ) is absolutely continuous. Since the functions
t(θ) and q(θ) of an incentive compatible menu are continuous and monotone, we can represent this menu as
a tariff or price schedule, T (q): the tariff pair (T (q), q) corresponds to the menu pair (t(θ), q(θ)) evaluated
at each θ such that q = q(θ). We use these menu and tariff interpretations interchangeably throughout.
    Crucial for the characterization of the seller’s optimal menu are the seller’s first-order condition

                                                                         γ(θ) − F (θ)
                                     vq (θ, q(θ)) − c0 (Q) =                          vθq (θ, q(θ))                                (1)
                                                                            f (θ)

for each type, and the complementary slackness condition on the IR constraints,
                                                 Z     θ
                                                           [u(θ) − u(θ)]dγ(θ) = 0.                                                 (2)
                                                   θ

                          Rθ
In (1) and (2), γ(θ) =      θ
                                dγ(x) is the cumulative multiplier associated with the IR constraints, which has the
properties of a cumulative distribution function, that is, it is nonnegative, weakly increasing, and γ(θ) = 1.
See the Supplementary Appendix for details.8 Jullien (2000) shows that under the assumptions of potential
   8
     The integral in the definition of γ(θ) is interpreted as accommodating not just discrete and continuous distributions but also
mixed discrete-continuous ones. That is, this formulation allows for the possibility that the IR constraints bind at isolated points.
See the Supplementary Appendix for details. It is understood that q(θ) is evaluated taking the left-limit at jump points.


                                                                        11
separation (PS), homogeneity (H), and full participation (FP), there exists a unique optimal solution to the
seller’s problem in which all consumers participate, characterized by the first-order conditions (1) and the
complementary slackness condition (2) with q(θ) weakly increasing.
       Assumption (PS) effectively ensures that the optimal q(θ) is weakly increasing. Formally, note that for
each type θ, the first-order condition in (1) defines the optimal quantity as a function of the primitives of the
economy and the cumulative multiplier γ(θ). It is convenient to define the function l(γ̃, θ) as the quantity that
satisfies (1) at θ when the actual cumulative multiplier γ(θ) is replaced by an arbitrary one, γ̃ ∈ [0, 1]. Note
that l(γ̃, θ) weakly decreases with γ̃. Assumption (PS) requires l(γ̃, θ) to weakly increase with θ for all γ̃ ∈
[0, 1], and thus guarantees that the seller has an incentive to discriminate across consumers.9 Assumption (H)
requires that there exist a quantity profile {q(θ)} such that the allocation with full participation {u(θ), q(θ)}
is implementable in that u0 (θ) = vθ (θ, q(θ)) and q(θ) is weakly increasing. This assumption guarantees that
the reservation quantity profile is incentive compatible so that the IC constraints can be satisfied when the IR
constraints bind. Assumption (FP) requires that all types participate. Sufficient conditions for (FP) are (H)
and s(θ, q(θ)) ≥ u(θ), which guarantees that the seller has an incentive to trade with all consumers.
       The solution to the seller’s problem is q(θ) = l(γ(θ), θ) with associated price t(θ) = v(θ, q(θ)) − u(θ),
where u(θ) is the utility reached by a consumer of type θ and equals u(θ) for consumer types whose IR
constraints bind. As mentioned, a consumer’s reservation utility, u(θ), can be equivalently interpreted as the
value of purchasing from another seller, producing the good at home, or receiving it as a transfer. By varying
the level of the reservation utility, the model can accommodate very different degrees of market power for a
seller, ranging from no market power to oligopoly and monopoly power. Specifically, when the reservation
utility equals the social surplus under first best for each type, that is, ū(θ) = v(θ, qF B (θ)) − c(qF B (θ)), the
solution to the seller’s problem implies γ(θ) = F (θ) for all consumers so that consumers purchase from the
seller first-best quantities, {qF B (θ)}, at first-best prices, {c(qF B (θ))}. When the reservation utility is lowered
from its maximal value under first best, profits correspondingly increase, allowing the model to capture any
degree of market power.10 This feature of the model provides an important dimension of flexibility over the
standard model for the measurement exercises in later sections.
       To build intuition for how the model works and differs from the standard model, it is useful to consider
the case when the degree of convexity of u(θ) is high, the highly convex case, and so the IR constraints
bind only for isolated types; see Jullien (2000) for details.11 Note that since q(θ) is continuous, γ(θ) can
have mass points, and thus the IR constraints can bind at isolated points, only at θ or θ. In particular, when
γ(θ) = 0 for θ < θ̄, the IR constraints bind only at θ. In contrast, when γ(θ) = 1 for all types, the IR
constraints bind only at θ and the model reduces to the standard model, in which the IR constraints simplify
   9
      See the proof of Proposition 1 for sufficient conditions on primitives for (PS) to be satisfied and Jullien (2000) for details.
  10
      Assumption (H) naturally holds in a model of seller competition with vertical differentiation. Under such interpretation of our
model, here we characterize the best-response problem of any such oligopolist. See the Supplementary Appendix.
   11
      The monotonicity of u(θ) is an immediate implication of assumption (H), since u0 (θ) = vθ (θ, q(θ)) and vθ (·, ·) > 0 by
assumption. Our analysis would equally apply to the case in which consumers dislike the seller’s good and can be ranked by their
distaste for it, with θ replaced by −θ, under analogous conditions. We model u(θ) as increasing with θ for consistency with the
fact that nearly all households in each village consume the goods we consider. The convexity of u(θ) is to prevent bunching and
is implied by the requirement of assumption (H) that q(θ) be weakly increasing.


                                                                12
to u(θ) ≥ u with u constant. When γ(θ) = γ ∈ (0, 1) for all θ ∈ [θ, θ), the IR constraints bind at both θ and
θ. In this case, F (θ) starts below γ, crosses γ at some type, θHC , and then lies strictly above it. Types below
θHC consume quantities below first best, whereas types above θHC consume quantities above first best.

3.2     A Model with Heterogeneous Budget Constraints
Suppose now that instead of having heterogeneous outside options, consumers face heterogeneous subsis-
tence constraints. These constraints limit the amount of resources a consumer can spend on a seller’s good
and formally give rise to a budget constraint for the good. We show that under simple conditions, this model
and the one of the previous subsection are equivalent in that they imply the same choice of price schedule by
a seller and, thus, the same participation and purchase decisions by consumers.
Setup. Suppose that consumers have quasilinear preferences over the seller’s good, q, and the numeraire, z,
which represents all other goods. A consumer is characterized by a preference attribute, θ, which, as before,
affects her valuation of q, and by a productivity attribute, w, which affects her overall budget or income,
Y (w).12 The consumer faces a subsistence constraint on the consumption of z of the form z ≥ z(θ, q),
which can be interpreted as capturing the notion that a certain number of calories are necessary for survival
and can be achieved by consuming the seller’s good and the numeraire. To see how, define the calorie
constraint C q (θ, q) + C z (θ)z ≥ C(θ), where C q (θ, q) and C z (θ)z are, respectively, the calories produced
by the consumption of q units of the seller’s good and z units of the numeraire for a consumer of type θ,
and C(θ) is the subsistence level of calories for such a consumer.13 Clearly, this calorie constraint can be
rewritten as z ≥ [C(θ) − C q (θ, q)]/C z (θ) ≡ z(θ, q).
    Let T (q) be the seller’s price schedule, where T (q) is the price of quantity q. Conditional on purchasing
from the seller, the consumer’s problem is

                              max{v(θ, q) + z} s.t. T (q) + z ≤ Y (w) and z ≥ z(θ, q).                                             (3)
                                q,z


Using the fact that the budget constraint holds with equality at an optimum and substituting z = Y (w)−T (q)
into the objective function and the constraint z ≥ z(θ, q) in (3), the problem in (3) can be restated as

                     max{v(θ, q) − T (q)} + Y (w) s.t. T (q) ≤ I(θ, q, w) ≡ Y (w) − z(θ, q),                                       (4)
                       q


where I(θ, q, w) is the maximal amount that the consumer can pay to purchase q units of the seller’s good
and meet her subsistence constraint.14 Note that the constraint in (4) is a budget constraint for the seller’s
good arising from the consumer’s subsistence constraint. We assume that I(θ, q, w) is absolutely continuous
   12
      We implicitly assume that utility is separable across a seller’s goods and the seller prices them independently. See Stole (2007)
for a discussion and a formalization of the several instances in which this assumption is appropriate.
   13
      This formulation of the calorie constraint generalizes C q q + C z z ≥ C, used, for instance, by Jensen and Miller (2008), where
C q and C z are the calories provided by one unit of q and one unit of z, and C is the subsistence intake.
   14
      Quasilinear preferences in q and z, and so in q and T , are standard in the literature. The more general formulation of
preferences as v(θ, q, T ) typically gives rise to a nonconvex constraint set for the seller that renders the characterization of the
optimal menu problematic and random tariffs desirable. The latter, however, are unrealistic in the context of our application.



                                                                 13
in θ, and twice continuously differentiable and weakly increasing in θ and q.
    Suppose that when consumers do not purchase from the seller, they can achieve the exogenous utility
level u, which is constant with θ as in the standard model. Then, the seller’s optimal menu solves
                                                                                        !
                                                           Z     θ
                    (BC problem)                max                  t(θ)f (θ)dθ − c(Q)      s.t.
                                             {t(θ),q(θ)}     θ

                                             (IC) v(θ, q(θ)) − t(θ) ≥ v(θ, q(θ0 )) − t(θ0 ) for any θ, θ0
                                             (IR’) v(θ, q(θ)) − t(θ) ≥ u for any θ
                                             (BC) t(θ) ≤ I(θ, q(θ), w) for any θ.

We refer to this model in which the seller’s constraints are IC, IR’, and BC as the BC model, and to an
allocation that satisfies these constraints as implementable. Although the model admits heterogeneity in both
θ and w among consumers, in this section, for expositional simplicity, we consider the case of constant w
and suppress the dependence of I(θ, q, w) and all other variables on w. We examine the implications of this
additional dimension of heterogeneity in Appendix A and consider the general case in the empirical analysis,
as explained in Section 4.1.
    We maintain the same potential separation (PS) and full participation (FP) assumptions as in the IR
model. In analogy to assumption (H), we assume there exists an incentive compatible menu {t(θ), q(θ)} that
induces each consumer to spend her entire budget for the good, that is,

                                                     0
               (BCH)        t(θ) = I(θ, q(θ)), t (θ) = vq (θ, q(θ))q 0 (θ), and q(θ) is weakly increasing.                            (5)

Importantly, under assumption (BCH), incentive compatibility can be satisfied when the budget constraint
t(θ) ≤ I(θ, q(θ)) binds. As in the IR model, this condition is key to ensuring that there exists an imple-
mentable menu that induces all consumers to participate.15
    Since income affects consumers’ purchase behavior in this model, changes in the distribution of income
across consumers, due, for instance, to income transfers, typically influence a seller’s price schedule. In the
IR model, instead, changes in income have no impact on the consumption of the seller’s good and, thus, on
the seller’s pricing decisions—unless a consumer’s reservation utility, ū(θ), is affected in some unspecified
way by a change in income. We explore these different implications of the BC and IR models below when
we assess the effect of the Progresa transfer on prices.
Equivalence Between Participation and Budget Constraints. The seller’s problem with constraints IC,
IR’, and BC has no known solution. Here we proceed to characterize a seller’s optimal menu indirectly by
establishing an equivalence between the BC problem and the IR problem. A natural approach, which leads
   15
      Sufficient conditions for full participation, and so the IR’ constraints, to be satisfied are v(θ, q(θ)) − I(θ, q(θ)) ≥ u and
I(θ, q(θ)) ≥ c(q(θ)) for each θ. Note first that (BCH) and I(θ, q(θ)) ≥ c(q(θ)) ensure that no type is excluded because of a
violation of the BC constraint: the seller is better off by offering q(θ) to type θ at price I(θ, q(θ)) for a profit of I(θ, q(θ))−c(q(θ))
than by excluding this consumer for a profit of zero. Observe next that v(θ, q(θ))−I(θ, q(θ)) ≥ u guarantees that the IR’ constraint
is satisfied when the BC constraint binds. Thus, all types participate. Under (FP), the IR’ constraints are effectively redundant.


                                                                       14
to a simple constructive argument, would be to define the budget for the seller’s good of a consumer of type
θ as I(θ, q(θ)) = v(θ, q(θ))−uIR (θ), where here uIR (θ) denotes the reservation utility of a consumer of type
θ in the IR problem. Since, by definition, t(θ) = v(θ, q(θ))−u(θ), it is immediate that in this case, the BC
constraint is equivalent to the IR constraint of the IR problem. Although this approach is intuitive since it
directly relates reservation utilities to budgets, it is unduly restrictive: it requires the schedules of reservation
utilities in the IR problem and budgets in the BC problem to agree for each type. For the two problems to
admit the same solution, instead, it is sufficient that reservation utilities and budgets, and the derivatives of
consumers’ utility function and the budget schedule with respect to quantity, agree just for types whose IR
constraints bind in the IR problem—as long as consumers have enough income to afford the IR allocation.16
    Formally, as shown in Appendix A, the BC problem can be conveniently restated as
           Z θ                                                                                !
                             F (θ)−Φ(θ)                 φ(θ) [I(θ, q(θ))−v(θ, q(θ))]
  max          v(θ, q(θ))+                vθ (θ, q(θ))+                               f (θ)dθ−c(Q) , (6)
  {q(θ)}    θ                    f (θ)                              f (θ)

                                                                                                                        Rθ
with q(θ) weakly increasing and u(θ) ≥ u. We term (6) the simple BC problem, where Φ(θ) =                                θ
                                                                                                                             φ(x)dx
is the cumulative multiplier, defined analogously to γ(θ), on the budget constraint expressed as I(θ, q(θ)) ≥
t(θ) = v(θ, q(θ)) − u(θ) and φ(θ) is its derivative. The first-order conditions of this problem are
                                                 
                                 0   Φ(θ) − F (θ)                   φ(θ)[vq (θ, q(θ)) − Iq (θ, q(θ))]
              vq (θ, q(θ)) − c (Q) =                vθq (θ, q(θ)) +                                                              (7)
                                        f (θ)                                     f (θ)

for each type, along with the complementary slackness condition
                                     Z    θ
                                              {I(θ, q(θ)) − [v(θ, q(θ)) − u(θ)]}dΦ(θ) = 0.                                       (8)
                                      θ


Result 1 in the proof of Proposition 1 states that an implementable allocation is optimal if, and only if, there
exists a cumulative multiplier function Φ(θ) such that conditions (7) and (8) are satisfied, with Φ(θ) = 1. Next
we establish the desired equivalence, denoting by {tIR (θ), qIR (θ)} the optimal menu in the IR problem.

Proposition 1 (Equivalence of Problems). Assume (PS), (BCH), and (FP). Suppose that the allocation that
solves the IR problem is affordable in the BC problem in that I(θ, qIR (θ)) ≥ v(θ, qIR (θ)) − uIR (θ), with
equality for types whose IR constraints bind, and uIR (θ) ≥ u. If Iq (θ, qIR (θ)) equals vq (θ, qIR (θ)) for types
whose IR constraints bind, then the solution to the BC problem coincides with that to the IR problem.

    For intuition, note that in the IR model, a seller in principle can induce a consumer to purchase by offering
a high enough quantity for a given price or a low enough price for a given quantity. The IR constraint,
however, implicitly places a restriction on the maximal price a seller can charge to a consumer, since the
requirement uIR (θ) ≥ uIR (θ) is equivalent to v(θ, qIR (θ)) − uIR (θ) ≥ tIR (θ), which effectively limits a
   16
      Note that if we replaced (IR’) with (IR), it would be easier to establish that the IR and BC problems are equivalent by showing
that (IR) implies (BC). We chose a formulation of the BC problem with participation constraints of the form (IR’) rather than (IR)
to highlight that the equivalence of interest holds more generally, even when participation constraints differ in the two problems.

                                                                 15
consumer’s expenditure on the seller’s good. Hence, in this precise sense, IR and BC constraints are related.
Proposition 1 follows by combining this intuition with the construction of a multiplier function on the BC
constraints such that the BC constraints bind in the BC problem if, and only if, the IR constraints bind in the
IR problem. When this is the case, by comparing (1) and (7), it is easy to see that the first-order conditions
of the two problems, and so the optimal quantity schedules, coincide if vq (θ, qIR (θ)) equals Iq (θ, qIR (θ)) for
consumers whose IR constraints bind. The first two conditions in the proposition guarantee not just that the
solution to the IR problem is feasible for the BC problem but also that utilities, and hence price schedules,
in the two problems coincide. This equivalence result extends to any BC problem in which preferences are
obtained from an affine transformation of those in the IR problem.

Corollary 1 (Preferences for Equivalence). Consider an IR problem with preferences given by v(θ, q)+z and
a BC problem with budget for the seller’s good given by I(θ, q). Then, under the conditions of Proposition
1, the solution to the new BC problem with preferences η0 (θ) + η1 (θ)[v(θ, q) + z], with η0 (θ) and η1 (θ)
increasing, and the solution to the IR problem also coincide.

   Proposition 1 and its corollary are important for several reasons. First, these results provide a simple
argument for how a model with heterogeneous budget constraints can be represented as a model with hetero-
geneous reservation utilities, and its solution characterized, even when the preferences in the two problems
do not coincide. Second, these results allow us to consider a number of cases of empirical and practical rele-
vance. For instance, we can examine how subsistence constraints affect prices, consumption, and consumers’
utilities. We can also evaluate the effect of policies, such as cash transfers, that directly affect consumers’
ability to pay and budgets. A natural question, then, is how stringent the assumptions of Proposition 1 are,
in particular (BCH), which we address next when v(θ, q) = θν(q), a specification of utility common in the
literature that we maintain in our empirical analysis.

Proposition 2 (Subsistence Functions for Equivalence). Let utility be v(θ, q) = θν(q) and the subsistence
level be z(θ, q) = −z 1 (θ)−z2 ν(q) with z 01 (θ) = ψ(log(θ −z2 )), ψ(·) positive and continuous, and θ > z2 > 0.
Then, (BCH) is satisfied, and Iq (θ, q) equals vq (θ, q) for types whose BC constraints bind.

   The conditions in Proposition 2 imply that assumption (BCH) holds for a large class of utility functions,
v(θ, q), and subsistence functions, z(θ, q), compatible with Proposition 1; see the proof of Proposition 2 for
examples. The assumption that z(θ, ·) decreases with q, which is equivalent to assuming that the calorie
intake from q, C(θ, ·), increases with q, is natural: the greater the amount of the seller’s good consumed, the
greater the calorie intake. The requirement that ψ(·) be positive, or, equivalently, that z(·, q) decreases with
θ, is to ensure that q(θ) is increasing. An intuition for why z(·, q) may decrease with θ in practice is that if
the same calorie intake can be reached through different combinations of food items, a consumer who values
the seller’s good more may require less of other goods to achieve it. See Lancaster (1966) on the distinction
between the caloric and taste attributes of goods, and Jensen and Miller (2008) on the relationship between
these attributes and subsistence constraints.


                                                         16
3.3        Nonlinear Pricing: Properties and Implications
By the equivalence just established between models with heterogeneous reservation utilities and heteroge-
neous budget constraints, from now on we refer to the IR model as the augmented model and interpret it as
covering both cases. We now examine the implications of the augmented model for prices, consumption,
and market participation, for consumer surplus and welfare under nonlinear and linear pricing, and for the
impact of policies, such as income transfers, that affect consumers’ ability to pay. We maintain assumptions
(PS), (H), and (FP), and, for simplicity, that v(θ, q) = θν(q) and c0 (Q) = c > 0, as common in the literature.
Our results can be extended to the case of nonseparable utility and increasing and convex cost functions.
Prices and Consumption. We start by providing sufficient conditions for quantity discounts to arise and
show that quantity discounts are consistent with consumption both below and above first best. Formally,
since q(θ) is increasing, we can define the inverse function θ(q) and derive the observed price schedule,
T (q) = t(θ(q)), as a function of quantity. Using θ0 (q) = 1/q 0 (θ), we can then rewrite the local incentive
compatibility condition, θν 0 (q(θ))q 0 (θ) = t0 (θ), as θν 0 (q(θ)) = T 0 (q(θ)) so that (1) becomes

                                            T 0 (q(θ)) − c   γ(θ) − F (θ)
                                                 0
                                                           =              .                                       (9)
                                               T (q(θ))         θf (θ)

The price schedule T (q) exhibits quantity discounts if T 00 (q) ≤ 0 or p0 (q) ≤ 0, where p(q) = T (q)/q is the
unit price of quantity q = q(θ); the two characterizations are equivalent when q(θ) = 0. Denote by εr (θ)
the elasticity of F (θ)/f (θ), which is the reciprocal of the reverse hazard of the distribution of types, with
respect to θ, and by A(q(θ)) ≡ −ν 00 (q(θ))/ν 0 (q(θ)) the coefficient of absolute risk aversion at q(θ).
                                                                                       
                                                                                1−F (θ)
Proposition 3 (Quantity Discounts). Assume ν 0 (·) > 0, ν 00 (·) < 0, ∂θ    ∂
                                                                                 f (θ)
                                                                                          ≤ 0, and q 0 (θ) > 0. If
εr (θ) ≥ 1 and u00 (θ) ≥ ν 0 (q(θ))/[θA(q(θ))] for each θ and θf (θ) ≥ 1, then T 00 (q) ≤ 0 for each q.

     Whereas the first three conditions in the proposition are standard—the third one is a common sufficient
condition for assumption (PS)—the remaining ones are novel. The condition q 0 (θ) > 0 is a technical assump-
tion to guarantee that T 00 (q) is bounded when IR constraints bind. The restriction εr (θ) ≥ 1 is equivalent
     ∂
to   ∂θ
          (F (θ)/f (θ)) ≥ F (θ)/f (θ) and thus strengthens the usual condition on the distribution of types for as-
                                                                                 ∂
sumption (PS) to hold in models with heterogeneous reservation utilities,        ∂θ
                                                                                      (F (θ)/f (θ)) ≥ 0. It guarantees
that the seller has an incentive to discriminate across consumers. The condition that u00 (θ) be large enough
ensures that consumers whose IR constraints bind are offered quantity discounts. Intuitively, convexity im-
plies that outside consumption opportunities are increasingly more valuable for consumers of higher types.
By offering higher quantities at lower marginal prices (T 00 (q) ≤ 0), the seller can profitably induce higher
types to distinguish themselves from lower types by purchasing more. Then, quantity discounts are optimal
for the seller. The condition θf (θ) ≥ 1 plays a similar role for types whose IR constraints do not bind.
     By comparing the first-order condition in (9) with the one for the first-best allocation, T 0 (q(θ)) = c, it is
immediate that the quantity provided to a consumer of type θ is below first best when γ(θ) > F (θ), whereas
it is above first best when γ(θ) < F (θ). Underprovision arises when the reservation utility is low for high

                                                          17
consumer types. In this case, a seller just needs to induce low types to purchase—if they do, high types
purchase too—and devise a menu to best extract surplus from the most profitable segment of demand, high
consumer types. Since high types anticipate this rent-extraction behavior by sellers, they have an incentive to
copy the behavior of lower types and purchase small quantities. But since higher types face a higher marginal
benefit from consuming the good, a seller can nonetheless separate them from lower types by decreasing the
offered quantities meant for lower types below the lower types’ first-best level of consumption. This way, a
seller makes the purchase of a small quantity by high-type consumers especially costly for them.
    Overprovision, instead, arises when the reservation utility is large for high consumer types. In this case, a
seller needs to induce high types to buy in the first place, and can do so while separating them from low types
by offering quantities meant for high types that are larger than first best at marginal prices below marginal
cost. This way, a seller can not only induce higher types to trade by purchasing these large quantities but also
distinguish them from lower types, who naturally prefer smaller quantities. Sorting occurs because lower
types would need to purchase much larger quantities than desirable to them, that is, quantities above the
first-best level of consumption of higher types, to mimic the behavior of higher types.17
Augmented vs. Standard Model. Relative to the standard model, the augmented model gives rise to
higher levels of consumption and, correspondingly, lower marginal prices. The reason is that if the cu-
mulative multiplier γ(θ) is different from one, which is its value in the standard model, it must be strictly
smaller than one, since it has the properties of a distribution function. But then the first-order condition in
(9) immediately implies that a seller has an incentive to provide higher quantities than under the standard
model, which the seller can induce consumers to buy only by charging lower marginal prices. Since higher
quantities may be offered for a higher tariff, the overall effect on consumers’ utility is ambiguous. When the
reservation utility in the augmented model is higher than in the standard model, though, consumer surplus is
clearly higher in the augmented model.18 Intuitively, the more attractive outside consumption opportunities
are, the more desirable the seller’s offered price and quantity must be to induce a consumer to purchase.

Proposition 4 (Augmented vs. Standard Models). Assume full participation under the standard model. The
augmented model implies higher consumption and lower marginal prices than the standard model for each
consumer type. If u(θ) ≥ u, where u is the reservation utility in the standard model, then the augmented
model also implies higher consumer surplus than the standard model for each consumer type.

Nonlinear vs. Linear Pricing. A natural question is whether consumers are better off under nonlinear
or linear pricing. We argue here that for nonlinear pricing to be preferred, it must typically lead to greater
market participation than under linear pricing. Indeed, when all consumers participate under both pricing
schemes and nonlinear pricing entails quantity discounts, consumers are better off under linear pricing.
Intuitively, linear pricing is preferred when the quantity provided under linear pricing is larger. Perhaps
   17
      Formally, incentive constraints are upward-binding for consumer types whose closest marginal type, namely, a type indifferent
between purchasing and not, is above them and downward-binding for types whose closest marginal type is below them, leading,
respectively, to consumption above and below first best. In the standard model, the only marginal type is the lowest one.
   18
      Whenever |γ(θ) − F (θ)| ≤ 1 − F (θ), the distortion to marginal surplus is smaller in our model than in the standard model.


                                                               18
more surprisingly, consumers prefer linear to nonlinear pricing even when the quantity provided under linear
pricing is smaller: in this case, a seller who can price discriminate asks for “too high” a price for the greater
quantity the seller is willing to provide. In terms of notation, in the linear (monopoly) problem, a seller
charges the unit price pm for any quantity and a consumer of type θ chooses the quantity q to maximize utility
θν(q)−pm q, has demand function qm (θ) = (ν 0 )−1 (pm /θ), and obtains utility um (θ) = θν(qm (θ))−pm qm (θ).

Proposition 5 (Nonlinear vs. Linear Pricing). Assume full participation under linear pricing. If p0 (q) ≤ 0 at
q = q(θ) and qm (θ) ≥ q(θ), or if T 00 (q) ≤ 0 at all q = q(θ), γ(θ) < 1, and q(θ) > qm (θ), then a consumer of
type θ is better off under linear than under nonlinear pricing.

    Naturally, a consumer who is excluded from the market under linear pricing but included under nonlinear
pricing prefers nonlinear pricing. The next result shows that consumers who have access to generous enough
outside consumption possibilities in that q(θ) > qF B (θ) can indeed be excluded under linear pricing and so
are better off under nonlinear pricing.19 Note that this situation cannot arise when γ(θ) = 1 for all types, as
is the case in the standard model, since q(θ) ≤ qF B (θ) for all types in this case.20

Proposition 6 (Nonlinear vs. Linear Pricing with Exclusion). Assume ν 00 (·) < 0. Let s(θ, q(θ)) ≥ u(θ) and
q(θ) > qF B (θ) for consumer types in the interval [θ0 , θ00 ]. If there exists θ̂ ∈ [θ0 , θ00 ] with um (θ̂) = u(θ̂),
then an interval of consumer types in [θ̂, θ00 ] are excluded under linear pricing but included under nonlinear
pricing and so are better off under nonlinear than under linear pricing.

    To understand the condition q(θ) > qF B (θ), note that with u0 (θ) = ν(q(θ)), as implied by assumption (H)
or (BCH), large values of q(θ) are associated with a rapidly increasing reservation utility profile: outside
consumption possibilities are relatively more attractive for consumers of higher types than of lower types.
Intuitively, to induce consumers with these generous outside consumption possibilities to participate, a seller
needs to offer a low enough marginal price. Since the marginal price is constant and equals the unit price
under linear pricing, such a low linear price would lower profits from all consumers for the benefit of in-
cluding only a few more. Hence, it would not be profitable to include such consumers under linear pricing;
see Example 1 in Appendix A for an illustration. Proposition 6 then highlights an efficiency dimension of
nonlinear pricing: whenever a seller can include different consumers at different prices, the seller may have
an incentive to serve those consumers who would demand unprofitably large quantities under linear pricing.
Income Transfers. The formalization of subsistence and budget constraints allows us to explore how in-
come transfers, such as those implemented by Progresa, affect sellers’ incentives to price discriminate, and
so prices and consumption, when individuals face subsistence constraints or, more generally, have a limited
ability to pay. As we show here, our model implies that income transfers increase consumption but can also
lead to an increase in prices, as sellers adjust their menus in response to consumers’ greater ability to pay.
   19
      The claim requires the existence of a type at risk of exclusion under linear pricing, whose utility equals u(θ) under linear
pricing. For instance, this occurs when a consumer’s reservation utility equals first-best utility. In this case, under linear pricing,
such a consumer is either included, so um (θ) = u(θ), or excluded, in which case again um (θ) = u(θ).
   20
      See Corollary 1 in Jullien (2000) for a proof that if q(θ) ≤ qF B (θ) for all types, then q(θ) ≤ qF B (θ) under assumptions (PS),
(H), or (BCH), and (FP).

                                                                 19
   Intuitively, when consumers are constrained by a budget for the seller’s good, changes in their income af-
fect prices by creating an incentive for a seller to extract more surplus. Suppose, for instance, that consumers
receive an income transfer that is independent of their characteristics, that is, τ (θ) = τ > 0. Such a transfer
naturally gives rise to a uniform increase in the price schedule. Why? Since the quantities offered before
the transfer are still incentive compatible after the transfer, a seller can offer the same quantities at higher
prices without affecting consumers’ behavior. The seller then maximizes profits by increasing the price of
each quantity by the amount of the transfer. As a result, prices uniformly increase by the amount τ .
   Consider now the more interesting case in which the transfer depends on consumers’ characteristics, and
so affects individual demands differentially. In the villages in our data, transfers depend on household income
in that only sufficiently poor households qualify for them and also depend on the number of children in a
household. Since poorer households tend to have more children, transfers are larger for poorer households
and so effectively progressive in income; see Attanasio et al. (2013). As poorer households also consume
less of normal goods, such as those we consider in our application, than richer ones, assuming a transfer such
that τ 0 (θ) ≤ 0 seems then in line with the data, given the one-to-one relationship between types and quantities
in our model.
   Note that a transfer τ (θ) ≥ 0 amounts to a decrease in the level of consumers’ utility when they spend their
entire budgets for the seller’s good, from θν(q(θ))−I(θ, q(θ)) to θν(q(θ))−I(θ, q(θ))−τ (θ), and, importantly,
to an increase in its slope in θ when τ 0 (θ) ≤ 0. Thus, a transfer makes outside consumption opportunities
less attractive overall but relatively more desirable to higher types than to lower ones. To induce higher types
to trade while preserving incentive compatibility, a seller must then offer all consumers higher quantities at
lower marginal prices. As a result, the marginal price of the same percentile of quantities, before and after the
transfer, decreases in response to the transfer. Yet, the price schedule increases for at least some consumers,
since the seller can charge higher prices without losing any consumers, as in the case of a uniform transfer.
Thus, the positive effect of the transfer on consumption is attenuated by the associated increase in prices.
   To formalize these intuitions, we denote by {q τ (θ)} the incentive compatible quantity profile when con-
sumers spend their entire budgets for the seller’s good after the transfer is introduced. For any quantity
q = q(θ) consumed before the transfer, we also define the quantity q̃τ (q) = qτ (θ) consumed after the transfer
that corresponds to the same percentile in the distribution of quantities after the transfer as the percentile in
the distribution of quantities before the transfer that q corresponds to. By definition, q̃τ (q) satisfies
                                               "Z                    #−1                        "Z                 #−1
                      Z   q̃τ (q)                   q̄τ                        Z   q                 q̄
                                    gτ (x)dx              gτ (x)dx         =           g(x)dx             g(x)dx         ,
                       qτ                       qτ                             q                 q


where q = q(θ) and q̃τ (q) = qτ (θ) are the quantities consumed before and after the transfer by type θ, and
g(q) and gτ (q) are, respectively, the probability density functions of quantities before and after the transfer.

Proposition 7 (Transfers). An income transfer τ (θ) > 0 with τ 0 (θ) ≤ 0 leads to a higher price schedule with
lower marginal prices for each percentile of the distribution of quantities before and after the transfer and to


                                                                      20
a first-order stochastic improvement in the distribution of quantities for: i) all consumer types, if the binding
pattern of the BC constraints is the same before and after the transfer; or ii) any interval of consumer types
with binding BC constraints either on the entire interval or only at its extremes before and after the transfer,
if the binding pattern of the BC constraints differ before and after the transfer.

    Since, by this result, larger quantities are offered at higher prices, the overall effect on the unit price
T (q)/q of the good is ambiguous, though. In general, however, the intensity of price discrimination, as mea-
sured by the size of quantity discounts, increases with the transfer regardless of its degree of progressivity,
except for the consumers of the largest quantities.

Corollary 2. If ν 000 (·) ≤ 0 and the transfer τ (θ) ≥ 0 leads to greater consumption for all consumers, then
there exist θmax ≤ θ and a corresponding percentile of the distribution of quantities before and after the
transfer, pmax , such that the transfer gives rise to greater price discrimination in that Tτ00 (q̃τ (q)) ≤ T 00 (q) for
each percentile of the distribution of quantities before and after the transfer up to pmax .

    Although the exact shape of unit prices depends on the distribution of types and quantities and on how this
latter distribution is affected by the transfer, asymmetric changes in unit prices for low and high quantities
occur naturally. An example is when ν(q) is a HARA function with decreasing absolute risk aversion and
types are uniformly distributed. In this case, unit prices increase at low quantities but decrease at high
quantities in response to an increase in income—provided utility is sufficiently convex in θ when the BC
constraints bind. See the Supplementary Appendix. Hence, the schedule of unit prices becomes steeper. We
explore the extent to which these implications of our model are borne out in the data in Section 5.4.
    Observe, finally, that an opposite logic applies to the case of in-kind transfers, when they lead to an
increase in the consumption floor z(θ, q). Specifically, by reversing the argument that establishes Proposition
7, it is possible to show that an in-kind transfer can lead to an increase in the consumption floor on other
goods, which reduces consumers’ budgets for the good priced nonlinearly and so gives rise to a decrease in
its price. In this case, in-kind transfers would have an opposite effect to that of cash transfers and generate a
decrease rather than an increase in prices. Consistently with this implication of our model but using Mexican
data different from ours, Cunha et al. (2017) indeed show that the price effects of in-kind transfers are
nonnegligible and negative in more remote and less competitive areas but are otherwise small. In these
cases, in-kind transfers may be preferable to cash transfers.

4     Identification and Estimation
In this section, we discuss the identification and estimation of the model’s primitives. The basic idea, which
builds on intuitions from Perrigne and Vuong (2010), is that the pricing behavior of a seller depends on the
property of the distribution of consumer types in a village. Since this distribution can be mapped into the
distribution of quantities, it can be recovered from the joint distribution of observed prices and quantities.
Although one can show that the parameters of the model can be identified and estimated semiparametrically,
here we derive estimators that use flexible parametric functions, partially to accommodate the sparsity of the

                                                          21
data in some of the villages. Omitted details and proofs are collected in Appendix B.

4.1     Identification
In a village market, the model’s primitives are the consumers’ utility function, v(θ, q), the cumulative distri-
bution function of consumers’ types or marginal willingness to pay, F (θ), its support [θ, θ], and the associated
probability density function, f (θ), the seller’s marginal cost at the total quantity provided of the good con-
sidered, c0 (Q), and the determinants of participation in the market: the reservation schedule u(θ) in the IR
model and the budget schedule I(θ, q, w) in the BC model. We consider the general version of the BC model
with heterogeneity in θ and w, both of which are assumed to be noncontractible. We allow for dependence
between θ and w so that, without loss of generality, we can interpret the budget schedule as a function of θ
only, with Υ(θ) ≡ I(θ, q(θ), ω(θ)); see the discussion of the two-dimensional case in Appendix A.21 Under
standard assumptions, we show that these primitives are identified in each village from data on consumers’
expenditures and quantity purchases, which provide information, respectively, about T (q) and q. Note that
u(θ) and Υ(θ) are only identified for households with binding IR and BC constraints, respectively.22 Key
properties of the model depend on the cumulative multiplier γ(θ), which we refer to simply as the multiplier.
    In establishing identification, we maintain that the sufficient condition s(θ, q(θ)) ≥ u(θ) for full partici-
pation holds: it states that a seller obtains nonnegative profits from each consumer’s type at the reservation
quantity, q(θ). This approach is justified by the fact that nearly all households in each village consume the
three goods we consider, namely, rice, kidney beans, and sugar, as discussed. We also adopt the normaliza-
tion θ = 1, since a scaling assumption on types is necessary for identification. Let G(q) denote the cumulative
distribution function of quantities in a village and g(q) the corresponding density function. Since G(q), g(q),
the price schedule T (q), and its derivatives are identifiable from information on quantities and prices, we
treat them as known in our identification arguments.
    Our arguments rely on the condition for local incentive compatibility of an optimal menu, T 0 (q) =
vq (θ, q), and a seller’s first-order condition for the choice of quantity. This latter condition provides the only
condition for the identification of a seller’s cost structure. By relying exclusively on information on quantities
and prices, we can only identify a seller’s marginal cost at the total quantity of a good provided in a village,
    Rθ
Q = θ q(θ)f (θ)dθ. Yet, based on this information alone, we can identify all primitives under the assumption
that v(θ, q) = θν(q), which we maintain from now on, up to the coefficient of absolute risk aversion.23 This
   21
      Note that consumers’ marginal willingness to pay and absolute ability to pay, captured here by θ and w, are highly correlated
in the data, as apparent from the observed strong relationship between consumption and income and the fact that the commodities
we consider are normal goods. Recall also that the budget I(θ, q(θ), ω(θ)) matters only for consumers whose budget constraints
bind, in which case it just equals T (q).
   22
      Any economy with reservation utility u(θ) or budget schedule Υ(θ) binding on the set Θ0 ⊆ Θ is observationally equivalent
to an economy with the same primitives but reservation utility u       e(θ) or budget schedule Υ(θ)
                                                                                               e    that agree, respectively, with u(θ)
                 0
and Υ(θ) on Θ and are appropriately adjusted for the remaining types.
   23
      Restrictions on the utility function are common in the auction and nonlinear pricing literature. Note that in auction models
with risk-averse bidders, even restricting the utility function to belong to well-known families of risk aversion is typically not
sufficient for identification; see Campo et al. (2011). Here we presume that the absolute risk aversion coefficient is known, but we
do not otherwise restrict consumers’ utility function or type distribution. When v(θ, q) is not multiplicatively separable in θ, then
γ(θ) is set-identified, but vq (θ, q) is still point-identified; see the Supplementary Appendix for this argument and a discussion of
related results in the nonlinear pricing and hedonic pricing literature.



                                                                 22
multiplicative specification of utility is ubiquitous in the theoretical and empirical literature on auctions and
nonlinear pricing for its tractability (see Guerre et al. (2000) and Perrigne and Vuong (2010)). Thus, we
consider it a natural benchmark.
Marginal Cost and Multipliers on Constraints. The relationship between θ and q implied by incentive
compatibility is central to the identification of the model. To see why, let q ≡ q(θ) and q ≡ q(θ) denote,
respectively, the smallest and largest observed quantities in a village. Since q 0 (θ) ≥ 0, it follows that G(q) =
F (θ): the cumulative distribution function of types is identified by that of quantities and g(q) = f (θ)/q 0 (θ).
Given this mapping between the distribution of types and quantities, a seller’s first-order condition can be
used to identify the marginal cost c0 (Q), the multiplier γ(θ(q)) on participation (or budget) constraints, and
so the set of consumers whose participation (or budget) constraints bind. Formally, rewrite (9) as

                                     g(q) c0 (Q)
                                                    
                                                  − 1 = G(q) − γ(θ(q)),                                      (10)
                                     ϕ(q) T 0 (q)

with ϕ(q) ≡ ∂ log(θ(q))/∂q = θ0 (q)/θ(q). We show next that both c0 (Q) and γ(θ(q)) are identified up to the
coefficient of absolute risk aversion. As a preliminary step, we show that c0 (Q) is identified up to the ratio
ϕ(q)/ϕ(q). To this purpose, note that, by taking derivatives of both sides of (10) and then integrating the
resulting expressions from q and q, it is easy to show that

                                         ϕ(q)           g(q) ϕ(q)     g(q)
                                                                          
                             0
                            c (Q) = g(q)      − g(q) /              −          ;
                                         ϕ(q)           T 0 (q) ϕ(q) T 0 (q)

see the proof of Proposition 8 in Appendix A for details. Hence, since g(q) and T 0 (q) are identified, c0 (Q)
is identified up to ϕ(q)/ϕ(q). To complete the argument, recall that A(q) = −ν 00 (q)/ν 0 (q) is the coefficient
of absolute risk aversion. Differentiating the local incentive compatibility condition T 0 (q) = θ(q)ν 0 (q) gives
θ0 (q)/θ(q) = T 00 (q)/T 0 (q) + A(q). Therefore, condition (10) also implies
                                                                                   −1
                                                   c0 (Q)           T 00 (q)
                                                              
                          γ(θ(q)) = G(q) + g(q) 1 − 0                        + A(q)    .                     (11)
                                                   T (q)            T 0 (q)

Then, the multiplier γ(θ(q)) is identified up to c0 (Q) and A(q), given that G(q), g(q), T 0 (q), and T 00 (q) are
identified. However, since ϕ(q)/ϕ(q) only depends on θ0 (q)/θ(q), which is known up to A(q), it follows
that c0 (Q) is identified if A(q) is known. Hence, γ(θ(q)) is identified just up to A(q). Equation (11) makes
it clear that the identification of c0 (Q) and the multiplier requires some knowledge of the shape of the utility
function. In estimation, we sidestep this issue by specifying γ(θ(q)) as a parametric yet flexible function of
q, which reduces the identification problem to the problem of identifying c0 (Q) and the parameters of this
function.
Proposition 8. In a village, the marginal cost of the total quantity provided, c0 (Q), and the schedule of
multipliers, γ(θ(q)), are identified up to the coefficient of absolute risk aversion. In particular, up to this
coefficient, γ(θ(q)) is identified from the cumulative distribution function of quantities, G(q), the associated

                                                       23
probability density function, g(q), and the marginal price schedules T 0 (q) and T 00 (q).

       There are special cases of interest in which identification is simpler. For instance, when the reservation
utility is highly convex, γ(θ(q)) = γ is constant on [θ, θ) so that γ equals G(q) only once between q and q.
In this case, c0 (Q) and this constant γ are identified just up to one scale normalization, namely, ϕ(q)/ϕ(q):
once c0 (Q) is identified, this constant γ is identified by the value of G(q) at the quantity at which T 0 (q) equals
c0 (Q) by (10). When the resulting γ equals one, our model reduces to the standard model.
Distribution of Consumer Types. We now show that the type support, θ(q), and the probability density
function of types, f (θ), are identified. Note that condition (10) can be rewritten as θ0 (q)/θ(q) = g(q)[T 0 (q)−
c0 (Q)]/{T 0 (q)[γ(θ(q))−G(q)]}, which can be used to express θ(q) as
                                                  q                                           q
                                                                                                   g(x)[T 0 (x) − c0 (Q)]
                                            Z                                            Z
                                                      ∂ log(θ(x))
            log(θ(q)) = log(θ(q)) +                               dx = log(θ(q)) +                                        dx,          (12)
                                              q           ∂x                              q       T 0 (x)[γ(θ(x)) − G(x)]

where the first equality in (12) follows by integrating ∂ log(θ(q))/∂q with respect to quantity.24 Once c0 (Q)
and γ(θ(q)) are identified, expression (12) implies that θ(q) is identified too up to θ(q), since it is a known
function of objects that are either identified or known, that is, q, q, g(q), T 0 (q), and G(q). Then, f (θ) is
identified from g(q) and the derivative θ0 (q), since f (θ) = g(q)/θ0 (q) by F (θ) = G(q).

Proposition 9. In a village, the support of consumers’ marginal willingness to pay, θ(q), is identified from
the cumulative distribution and the probability density functions of quantities, G(q) and g(q), the marginal
cost c0 (Q), the marginal price schedule, T 0 (q), and the schedule of multipliers, γ(θ(q)), up to a scale nor-
malization. The probability density function of consumers’ marginal willingness to pay, f (θ), is identified
from the probability density function of quantities, g(q), and the first derivative of θ(q).

Utility Function and Schedule of Reservation Utility. Here we show how ν 0 (q), ν(q), and u(θ) are iden-
tified. Note first that with knowledge of the coefficient of absolute risk aversion, base marginal utility ν 0 (q)
is identified up to a scale normalization. Here we show that this scale normalization is unnecessary to
identify ν 0 (q) if the marginal price schedule, T 0 (q), and the type support, θ(q), are identified. To this end,
observe that once θ(q) is identified, the incentive compatibility condition ν 0 (q) = T 0 (q)/θ(q) implies that
ν 0 (q) is identified from T 0 (q). Next, given ν 0 (q), we can recover ν(q) up to one point, say, q 0 = q(θ0 ), since
                  R q0                                        Rq
ν(q) = ν(q 0 )− q ν 0 (x)dx for q ≤ q 0 and ν(q) = ν(q 0 )+ q0 ν 0 (x)dx for q ≥ q 0 . With θ(q) and ν(q) identified,
u(θ) is identified for all consumers whose participation (or budget) constraints bind, since their utility is
u(θ) = θ(q)ν(q)−T (q).

Proposition 10. In a village, the base marginal utility function, ν 0 (q), is identified from the marginal price
schedule, T 0 (q), and the support of consumers’ marginal willingness to pay, θ(q). Hence, ν(q) is identified
  24
     The integrand in (12) is positive since g(q) > 0, T 0 (q) > 0, and T 0 (q) ≥ c0 (Q) if, and only if, γ(θ(q)) ≥ G(q) by (10). It is well-
defined when γ(θ(q)) = G(q) and T 0 (q) = c0 (Q) if the slope of γ(θ(q)) differs from g(q) at such quantities, which is the case under
our assumptions, as apparent from the seller’s first-order condition expressed as γ(θ(q)) = G(q)+f (θ(q))sq (θ(q), q)/vθq (θ(q), q).
To see where this slope condition on γ(θ(q)) comes from, denote by q s any quantity such that γ(θ(q)) = G(q) and T 0 (q) = c0 (Q),
and note limq→qs g(q)[T 0 (q) − c0 (Q)]/{T 0 (q)[γ(θ(q)) − G(q)]} = g(q s )T 00 (q s )/{T 0 (q s )[γ 0 (θ(q s ))θ0 (q s ) − g(q s )]}.

                                                                    24
up to a scale normalization. The reservation utility (or budget) function is identified for all consumers whose
participation (or budget) constraints bind.

4.2       Estimation
For each of the three goods considered, we estimate the model separately in each village in two steps. In the
first step, we parameterize the functions T (q), G(q), and γ(q)—this latter as a flexible cumulative distribution
function—and estimate them by maximum likelihood together with the model’s primitives c0 (Q), θ(q), and
ν 0 (q). Specifically, we use flexible parameterizations for T (q) and G(q), which, together with the seller’s
first-order condition, provide the estimating equations for the parameters of T (q), G(q), and γ(θ(q)), and
for c0 (Q). We estimate θ(q) and ν 0 (q) as known transformations of T 0 (q), G(q), γ(θ(q)), and c0 (Q) based on
equation (12) for θ(q) and the local incentive compatibility condition ν 0 (q) = T 0 (q)/θ(q) for ν 0 (q). In the
second step, we estimate f (θ) in each village from the estimated θ(q) via a kernel density estimator. Since
the rate of convergence of the parametric estimator of θ(q) is faster than that of the nonparametric estimator
of f (θ), the estimation of θ(q) in the first step does not affect this second step.25 This approach is appealing
not only for its simplicity but also for its consistency with the nature of our data, which would make a full
nonparametric approach problematic.
Price Schedule and Distribution of Quantities. For each of the three goods we consider, our data contain
information on the quantities purchased and the unit prices paid by each household in each village. Denote
by Nvj the number of consumers of good j in village v and by qvji the quantity of good j purchased by
household i in the village. We estimate the price schedule, {Tvj (q)}, of good j in village v as

                                        log[Tvj (qvji )] = tvj0 + tvj1 log(qvji ) + εpvji ,                                     (13)

where Tvj (qvji ) ≡ E[p(qvji )|qvji ]qvji , given the observed unit price p(qvji ) of quantity qvji , and εpvji is mea-
surement error in expenditure. We use the mean unit value of a quantity in each village as the unit price
of that quantity for consistency with our model: multiple unit values may correspond to a given quantity
in a village but our model implies that the price schedule is a function of quantity rather than a correspon-
dence. We also do so in order to minimize measurement error in unit values, due, for instance, to recall and
recording error—the assumption implicit in (13) is that unit values rather than quantities are contaminated
by error. We treat quantity as exogenous, since information on the quantity purchased and the price paid by
each household provides direct information on the price schedule of the seller and T (q) is a deterministic
                                 0
function of q in our model. Let Tvj (q) ≡ ∂E[Tvj (q)|q]/∂q.
       We parameterize the cumulative distribution function of the quantities of good j purchased in village v
  25
     We estimated the first-step system also by GMM, but convergence was problematic in many villages due to the sparseness of
the data. If f (θ) is interpreted as the probability mass function associated with the empirical G(q), the second step is unnecessary.




                                                                 25
as a logistic function with a quadratic index allowing for error in recorded purchase frequency, vji ,

                                                                                       2
                                                          exp{gvj0 + gvj1 qvji + gvj2 qvji + vji }
                                  Gvj (qvji ) =                                           2
                                                                                                      ,                               (14)
                                                        1 + exp{gvj0 + gvj1 qvji + gvj2 qvji + vji }

where {Gvj (qvji )} is the empirical cumulative distribution function of good j in village v. Note that vji
captures not only recall error but also the error resulting from the timing of the Progresa interview relative to
the timing of a household’s regular purchases, which may lead to understating or overstating the fraction of
households purchasing a particular quantity.
Marginal Cost and Multiplier Function. We rewrite the seller’s first-order condition in (10) to relate the
cumulative distribution function of quantities, G(q), to marginal cost, c0 (Q), and the multiplier, γ(θ(q)), as
                                                                         
                          1        1                            1        1
                G(q) =        −         x3 (q) + γ(θ(q)) =          −         x3 (q) + γ(θ(q)),                                       (15)
                       T 0 (q) c0 (Q)                        t1 p(q) c0 (Q)

where x3 (q) ≡ c0 (Q)g(q)θ(q)q 0 (θ) and the second equality in (15) follows from (13), which implies p(q) =
T 0 (q)/t1 by dropping subscripts. Denote the marginal cost of the total quantity of good j in village v by
c0vj (Qvj ). We specify the auxiliary function x3 (q) as a (positive) fractional polynomial with noninteger
                                              χ
powers, xvj3 (qvji ) = χvj0 + χvj1 qvjivj2 , to encompass a wide range of shapes. Given the limited granularity of
our data, estimating x3 (q) nonparametrically would be infeasible. Since the multiplier function γ(θ(q)) has
the properties of a cumulative distribution function, we specify it as a flexible logistic function of quantity,

                                                                                           2
                                                              exp{γvj0 + γvj1 qvji + γvj2 qvji }
                                         γvj (qvji ) =                                        2
                                                                                                   .                                  (16)
                                                            1 + exp{γvj0 + γvj1 qvji + γvj2 qvji }

We consider both a linear specification with γvj2 set to zero and a quadratic one, in which we estimate γvj2 .
In this latter case, expression (15) becomes

                                                                                                2
                                                                   exp{γvj0 + γvj1 qvji + γvj2 qvji }
                                        
                       1           1                     χvj2
    Gvj (qvji ) =            − 0           (χvj0 + χvj1 qvji ) +                                   2
                                                                                                        + εsvji
                  pvj (qvji ) cvj (Qvj )                         1 + exp{γvj0 + γvj1 qvji + γvj2 qvji }
                                                    χ                  χ
            χvj0             χvj0            χvj1 qvjivj2       χvj1 qvjivj2                                      2
                                                                                     exp{γvj0 + γvj1 qvji + γvj2 qvji }
    =−                 +                 −                  +                  +                                          + εsvji ,   (17)
         c0vj (Qvj )       pvj (qvji )       c0vj (Qvj )        pvj (qvji )                                          2
                                                                                   1 + exp{γvj0 + γvj1 qvji + γvj2 qvji }

with c0vj (Qvj ) ≡ c0vj (Qvj )/tvj1 , χvj0 ≡ χvj0 /tvj1 , and χvj1 ≡ χvj1 /tvj1 , and εsvji accounts for measurement
(or specification) error. Equation (17) provides the estimating equation for marginal cost and the multiplier
function. Note that the second line of (17) is the sum of a linear-in-parameters function (the first two terms),
                                                                                                                   2
a fractional polynomial (the third and fourth terms), and a function of e−qvji and e−qvji , whose parameters
are identified.26 We test whether the estimated parameters of {γvj (qvji )} in each village are individually and
  26
     From the fact that the multiplier is known at the smallest and largest quantities (from the density function of quantities) and
must equal G(q) at least at one interior quantity, at which marginal cost is identified by T 0 (q), we obtain four moment conditions
to identify the three parameters of γvj (·) as well as marginal cost in each village. Then, the identification of the parameters of
xvj3 (·) based on (17) follows by standard arguments. Note that the empirical G(·) is a step function, so limq↓q G(q) = G(qvj1 )


                                                                           26
jointly significant to infer the shape of the multiplier, and thus the binding pattern of the relevant constraints.
Specifically, if γvj1 and γvj2 are not significantly different from zero, we infer that the multiplier is constant,
and so, depending on its value, the relevant constraints bind only at θ or θ or at both types. Otherwise, if γvj1
and γvj2 are significantly different from zero, we determine the intervals of types whose constraints bind by
testing whether γvj (qvji+1 ) is significantly different from γvj (qvji ) at any qvji and qvji+1 . If not, we infer that
the derivative of the multiplier is zero over the corresponding interval of types, and so the constraints do not
bind.
Support of Consumer Types and Utility Function. Normalizing θ to 1, we specify consumers’ log
marginal willingness to pay in village v for good j by (12) as
                                                 0
                                         1 XNvj [Tvj  (qvji ) − c0vj (Qvj )]1{qvji ≤ q}
                                                                                          
                         log(θvj (q)) =             0
                                                                                            ,
                                        Nvj i=1   Tvj  (qvji )[γvj (qvji ) − Gvj (qvji )]

where Nvj is the number of consumers of good j in village v, Qvj is the total quantity purchased in village
    0
v, Tvj (qvji ) is computed from (13), and Gvj (qvji ) and γvj (qvji ) are specified in (14) and (16). Using local
incentive compatibility, ν 0 (q) = T 0 (q)/θ(q), and the forms of θ(q) and T 0 (q), we estimate ν 0 (q) as
                                                             0
                                                     1 XNvj [Tvj  (qvji ) − c0vj (Qvj )]1{qvji ≤ q}
                                                                                                      
                     0                  0
                log(νvj (q))   =   log(Tvj (q))   −             0
                                                                                                        .
                                                    Nvj i=1   Tvj  (qvji )[γvj (qvji ) − Gvj (qvji )]

Probability Density Function of Types. Given the estimated θvji = θvj (qvji ), we estimate the density of
                                                                                          PNvj θ
households’ marginal willingness to pay for good j in village v as fvj (θ) = (Nvj hθvj )−1 i=1 Kvj ((θ −
θvji )/hθvj ), with Epanechnikov kernel function Kvj
                                                  θ
                                                     (·) and bandwidth hθvj .

5       Empirical Results
In this section, we present the main results obtained by estimating the model on data from the Mexican
villages that were part of the survey collected for the evaluation of Progresa, as explained in Section 2.
We start by discussing the sample selection criteria used in estimation. We then present estimates of the
primitives of the model and discuss the fit of the model to the data. Since we consider many villages, we
represent graphically the point estimates of the objects of interest and report their associated t-statistics in
Appendix B. Next, we use the model to analyze the distortions implied by the price discrimination we
observe and evaluate the welfare implications of alternative pricing schemes. Finally, we derive a reduced
form of the first-order conditions for the optimality of sellers’ and consumers’ behavior that relates unit prices
to quantities and the hazard rate of the distribution of quantities in each village. We use this reduced form
to explain the effect of the Progresa transfers on prices, in particular on the intensity of price discrimination,
which we estimate by exploiting the experimental variation in the data induced by the introduction of the
Progresa transfer in a randomly selected subset of villages. Omitted details are collected in Appendix B.
and limq↑q = G(qvjNvj −1 ), whereas γvj (·) ranges from zero to one. Thus, we do not impose that G(·) equals the multiplier at any
quantity.


                                                               27
5.1     Sample Selection
We estimate the model for three commodities—rice, kidney beans, and sugar—which we chose for three
reasons, as explained in Section 2. First, they are commonly consumed, so that the full participation assump-
tion is likely to be valid, and we observe a large number of transactions for them. Second, they are normal
goods, whose consumption increases with income, so that assuming that households’ marginal willingness
to pay and absolute ability to pay are related, as we do in our BC model, is plausible. Third, they are goods
of homogeneous quality, so that the variation in prices across quantities we document is likely to reflect just
quantity discounts. We use five waves of the Progresa survey, adjusting the observed prices over time for
inflation. To minimize the impact of measurement error, we exclude extreme observations, both in terms
of quantity and, importantly, in terms of prices—we drop the top 5% of observations on (unit) prices and
quantities. We also exclude observations reported in incorrect units—say, liters rather than kilos. We focus
on villages with at least 75 observations on each of the goods of interest and with at least 50% of unit prices
declining with quantity. These restrictions imply the loss of very few observations: the original sample of
191 municipalities is reduced to 170 for rice, 176 for kidney beans, and 183 for sugar.
    While in this section a village is defined as a municipality, in Appendix B, we also present the estimates of
our model on villages defined as Mexican localities. Applying to this sample of localities the same selection
rules applied to the sample of municipalities restricts the original sample of 506 localities to 371 for rice,
396 for kidney beans, and 442 for sugar. The estimates of the model are very similar across villages defined
as municipalities and localities.27

5.2     Estimates
The core elements of our model in each village are the unit price schedule p(q), the cumulative distribution
function of quantities G(q), which is mapped in the cumulative distribution function of types F (θ), the
multiplier γ(θ(q)), the type support, θ(q), and consumers’ utility function, θ(q)ν(q). In this subsection, we
first present the estimates of these objects in each municipality and then illustrate the fit of the model to the
data. See Appendix B for the omitted t-statistics of these estimates and the Supplementary Appendix for the
estimates of the probability density function of consumer types.
Estimation Sample: Prices and Quantities. As discussed in Section 4.2, we estimate both a linear and a
quadratic version of the logistic index of the multiplier function in equation (16). For the linear specification
of the multiplier, we successfully estimate the model primitives for 134, 144, and 143 of the 170, 176, and
183 municipalities considered in the estimation sample for rice, kidney beans, and sugar, respectively. For
the quadratic specification, we obtained estimates for 142, 153, and 139 of these municipalities.28 For this
sample, in the top panels of Figure 1 we report the schedule of mean unit prices per quantity in each village,
   27
      Restricting attention to villages with at least 50% of unit prices declining with quantity accounts for a very small loss of
villages, namely, 3, 8, and 3 villages defined as municipalities, and 2, 31, and 13 villages defined as localities, respectively, for
rice, kidney beans, and sugar. This loss is primarily due to the irregularity of the price schedule in these excluded villages.
   28
      For the remaining villages defined as either municipalities or localities, we could not obtain estimates of the primitives due to
numerical issues—the estimation routine failed to achieve convergence—largely stemming from the sparsity of the data.



                                                                 28
computed as explained above, together with a fractional polynomial interpolating line, the solid line. In the
bottom panels of Figure 1, we plot the cumulative distribution function of quantities in each village. All
goods are measured in kilos. As apparent, in most villages the unit price of each good declines with quantity,
so unit prices are highest for the households who purchase the smallest quantities and decrease more rapidly
over the range of small quantities that most households purchase, as evident from comparing the top panels
and bottom panels. Thus, households are affected by the nonlinearity of prices, and most of them face
significant quantity discounts. For instance, the mean unit price of the smallest quantity of rice, 0.1 kilos, in
general is more than 5 pesos, whereas that of the largest quantity, 2 kilos, can be as low as 1 peso.

                                                                                                  Figure 1: Unit Prices and Cumulative Distribution Function of Quantities
                                                                                           Rice                                                                                                    Kidney Beans                                                                                    Sugar
                             15




                                                                                                                                                  15




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  8
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  6
                             10




                                                                                                                                                  10
             Unit Price




                                                                                                                                  Unit Price




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  Unit Price
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      4
                             5




                                                                                                                                                  5




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  2
                             0




                                                                                                                                                  0




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  0
                                                                0                .5          1            1.5         2                                                            0       1            2         3       4                                                        0       1                   2       3
                                                                                           Quantity                                                                                                   Quantity                                                                                     Quantity



                                                                                           Rice
                                                                                                                                                                                                   Kidney Beans                                                                                    Sugar
                1




                                                                                                                                                  1




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  1
 Cumulative Distribution Function
                              .8




                                                                                                                                  Cumulative Distribution Function




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  Cumulative Distribution Function
                                                                                                                                                               .8




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               .8
                     .6




                                                                                                                                                      .6




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      .6
          .4




                                                                                                                                           .4




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           .4
  .2




                                                                                                                                   .2




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   .2
                0




                                                                                                                                                  0




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  0




                                                   0                             .5          1            1.5             2                                                        0       1            2         3       4                                                        0       1                   2       3
                                                                                           Quantity                                                                                                   Quantity                                                                                     Quantity




                                                                                                      Figure 2: Estimated Multiplier on Participation (or Budget) Constraints
                                                                                               Rice                                                                                                Kidney Beans                                                                                     Sugar
                                                      1




                                                                                                                                                            1




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            1
                                    Multiplier on Participation Constraint




                                                                                                                                          Multiplier on Participation Constraint




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          Multiplier on Participation Constraint
                                                                    .8




                                                                                                                                                                          .8




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          .8
                                                           .6




                                                                                                                                                                 .6




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 .6
                                                 .4




                                                                                                                                                       .4




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       .4
                                      .2




                                                                                                                                            .2




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            .2
                                                      0




                                                                                                                                                            0




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            0




                                                                             0        .5        1               1.5           2                                                        0       1         2            3       4                                                        0       1                   2       3
                                                                                              Quantity                                                                                                 Quantity                                                                                     Quantity




Estimates of Multipliers. Figure 2 reports the estimated multipliers on the participation (or budget) con-
straints in each village for each good under the quadratic specification of the multiplier in equation (16); see
Appendix B for the linear specification. Note that, by construction, the estimated multiplier, γ(θ(q)), ranges
between 0 and 1 in each village for each good. We estimate that its mean across quantities and villages is
0.727 for rice with a standard deviation of 0.280, 0.713 for kidney beans with a standard deviation of 0.214,

                                                                                                                                                                                                     29
and 0.735 for sugar with a standard deviation of 0.227. For each good, the estimated multiplier is highly vari-
able across quantities and clearly smaller than one for several of them: the 25th, 50th, and 75th percentiles
of the distribution of γ(θ(q)) across quantities and villages are 0.481, 0.875, and 0.963 for rice, 0.500, 0.750,
and 0.899 for kidney beans, and 0.559, 0.810, and 0.919 for sugar. As discussed, the shape of the function
γ(θ(q)) discriminates across different instances of our model. In particular, the multiplier is estimated to be
constant, as in the highly convex case of our model, only in a handful of villages. Furthermore, from tests
of individual and joint significance of the parameters of γ(θ(q)), we reject the hypothesis that the standard
model applies (γ(θ(q)) = 1 at all q) in all villages at standard significance levels.
                           For an intuition about why most villages do not conform to the standard model or, more generally, to
the highly convex case of our model, recall that the seller’s first-order condition can be expressed as in (15).
For the highly convex case to apply, and therefore the multiplier to be constant, the term in brackets should
replicate the variability of G(q), since x3 (q) is constrained to be positive and estimated to be approximately
constant. Thus, G(q) and p(q) should be approximately inversely related. Since the unit prices p(q) in the
top panels of Figure 1 are decreasing and convex, G(q) should then be increasing and concave. As Figure 1
shows, however, the curvature of p(q) is most pronounced at small quantities, whereas the curvature of G(q),
which is initially convex, is most pronounced at intermediate quantities. This difference in the observed
shapes of p(q) and G(q) must then be accommodated by γ(θ(q)) varying across quantities, thus ruling out
both the standard model and the highly convex case of our model.

                                                                Figure 3: Estimated Distribution of Types
                                           Rice                                                           Kidney Beans                                                   Sugar
                                                                                200




                                                                                                                                               500
                1500




                                                                                                                                                   400
                                                                                   150
  Log Consumer Type




                                                                  Log Consumer Type




                                                                                                                                 Log Consumer Type
             1000




                                                                                                                                           300
                                                                         100




                                                                                                                                    200
  500




                                                                                50




                                                                                                                                               100
                0




                                                                                0




                                                                                                                                               0




                                  0   .5     1        1.5   2                                     0   1        2         3   4                                   0   1              2   3
                                           Quantity                                                          Quantity                                                    Quantity

                                           Rice                                                           Kidney Beans                                                   Sugar
                                                                                                                                               .15
                .8




                                                                                .8
  Predicted Reverse Hazard Rate




                                                                  Predicted Reverse Hazard Rate




                                                                                                                                 Predicted Reverse Hazard Rate
                           .6




                                                                                           .6




                                                                                                                                                      .1
                .4




                                                                                .4




                                                                                                                                       .05
     .2




                                                                     .2
                0




                                                                                0




                                                                                                                                               0




                                  0   .5     1        1.5   2                                     0   1        2         3   4                                   0   1              2   3
                                           Quantity                                                          Quantity                                                    Quantity




Estimates of Marginal Willingness to Pay. In the top panels of Figure 3, we plot our estimates of con-
sumers’ marginal willingness to pay as a function of quantity, θ(q), in each village for rice, kidney beans,
and sugar. In the bottom panels of the same figure, we display our estimates of the reverse hazard rate of
the distribution of consumer types in each village for each good as a function of quantity, f (θ(q))/F (θ(q)).
(For readability, we trimmed the top 5% of estimates.) From the upward-sloping profiles in the top pan-

                                                                                                             30
els of Figure 3, we see that in each village, consumers’ estimated marginal willingness to pay, θ, increases
with quantity, as consistent with the incentive compatibility condition of our model. Also apparent from the
bottom panels of the figure is that the estimated reverse hazard rate function, f (θ)/F (θ), decreases nearly
everywhere with θ and so with quantity, as is consistent with the monotone hazard rate condition sufficient
for our assumption (PS). Since none of these restrictions have been imposed in estimation, we interpret these
findings as validating our estimates of the type distribution. The t-statistics of these estimates reported in
Appendix B further imply that these functions are estimated fairly precisely.
                            We note that the estimates of the support of types imply a much greater dispersion in consumers’ marginal
willingness to pay than in quantities purchased; recall from (12) that the level of θ is identified up to a
normalization. Indeed, the bottom panels of Figure 1 show that most consumers purchase relatively small
quantities: nearly all consumers consume less than 1 kilo of rice and less than 2 kilos of kidney beans
and sugar per week. Instead, as the top panels of Figure 3 reveal, the support of types for each good is
several times wider than the support of quantities. The fact that consumers markedly differ in their marginal
willingness to pay for a good is important for the nonlinearity of observed prices, since it provides sellers
with a strong incentive to discriminate across consumers. In particular, there is scope for sellers to distinguish
consumers by their intensity of preference. We examine the extent to which sellers exert market power and
extract surplus through price discrimination in Section 5.3.1.

                                                             Figure 4: Estimated Base Marginal Utility
                                        Rice                                                  Kidney Beans                                             Sugar
                                                                        10




                                                                                                                                5
          8




                                                                        8




                                                                                                                                           4
Base Marginal Utility




                                                              Base Marginal Utility




                                                                                                                     Base Marginal Utility
                  6




                                                                           6




                                                                                                                                3
      4




                                                                  4




                                                                                                                        2
          2




                                                                        2




                                                                                                                                1
          0




                                                                        0




                                                                                                                                0




                        0         .5      1        1.5   2                            0   1        2         3   4                             0   1              2   3
                                        Quantity                                                 Quantity                                              Quantity




Estimates of Marginal Utility. In Figure 4, we plot the estimates of base marginal utility, ν 0 (q), at each
quantity in each village and for each good. Note that ν 0 (q) decreases with quantity in all villages, as con-
sistent with the model, even though no such monotonicity restriction has been imposed in estimation. Since
consumers’ marginal willingness to pay, θ(q), increases with quantity whereas their base marginal utility,
ν 0 (q), decreases with quantity, marginal utility, θ(q)ν 0 (q), decreases with q less rapidly than base marginal
utility. The fact that marginal utility is nonetheless downward sloping implies that at the margin, each good
is valued very differently at different levels of consumption. The large curvature in utility we estimate sug-
gests the potential for rich distributional implications of nonlinear pricing, especially compared to alternative
pricing schemes such as linear pricing, since different quantities are valued differently by consumers of any
given taste. We further explore these implications in Section 5.3.1, where we link the scope for price dis-
crimination, as captured by the distribution of consumers’ tastes and marginal utility, to the type (first or
second degree) of price discrimination that we infer sellers practice in our villages.


                                                                                                  31
5.2.1                                                        Model Fit
A key implication of our model is that the shape of the price schedule is determined by the cumulative
distribution function of quantities, G(q), and thus of consumers’ marginal willingness to pay, F (θ), the
associated probability density function, f (θ), and the multiplier on consumers’ participation (or budget)
constraints, γ(θ(q)), as implied by a seller’s first-order condition. Although the distribution of consumers’
marginal willingness to pay and the multiplier are unobserved, they are directly related to the observed
distributions of quantities and unit prices, as argued. Thus, one way to assess the fit of the model to the data
is to determine the extent to which our estimates of the marginal cost c0 (Q), the multiplier γ(θ(q)), and the
auxiliary function x3 (q) satisfy the relationship between the observed distribution of quantity, G(q), and unit
prices, p(q), implied by a seller’s first-order condition in (15) in each village for each quantity and good.

                                Figure 5: Model Fit within and across Villages for Linear and Quadratic Specification of Multiplier Function
                                                                                  Rice                                                                                   Kidney Beans                                                                                        Sugar
                                                   .5




                                                                                                                                                         .5
       Difference CDF of Quantities and Multiplier




                                                                                                             Difference CDF of Quantities and Multiplier




                                                                                                                                                                                                     Difference CDF of Quantities and Multiplier
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              .5
                                   0




                                                                                                                                         0




                                                                                                                                                                                                                 -.5            0
                   -.5




                                                                                                                         -.5




                                                                                                                                                                                                    -1
                              -1




                                                                                                                                   -1




                                                        -1             -.5                     0        .5                                                    -1   -.5                     0   .5                                                        -1         -.5                     0        .5
                                                                             Weighted Markup                                                                             Weighted Markup                                                                                  Weighted Markup

                                                                                 Rice                                                                                    Kidney Beans                                                                                        Sugar
                                                                                                                                                         .5
                                               1




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                1
   Difference CDF of Quantities and Multiplier




                                                                                                             Difference CDF of Quantities and Multiplier




                                                                                                                                                                                                    Difference CDF of Quantities and Multiplier
                                  .5




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   .5
                                                                                                                                         0
                      0




                                                                                                                                                                                                                       0
                                                                                                                         -.5
           -.5




                                                                                                                                                                                                            -.5
                                                                                                                                   -1
                         -1




                                                                                                                                                                                                                          -1




                                                        -1       -.5                0              .5   1                                                     -1   -.5                     0   .5                                                   -1        -.5                0              .5        1
                                                                             Weighted Markup                                                                             Weighted Markup                                                                                  Weighted Markup




                  To this purpose, we re-write equation (15) and plot in Figure 5 the estimated value of G(q) − γ(θ(q))
on the y-axis against the markup measure 1/T 0 (q) − 1/c0 (Q) weighted by the auxiliary function x3 (q), or
weighted markup for brevity, on the x-axis, for each quantity and good in each village. To compute this
markup measure, we use the fact that T 0 (q) = t1 p(q) by our specification of T (q) in (13), with t1 estimated
and p(q) observed. The closer the relationship between G(q)−γ(θ(q)) and the weighted markup to the 45-
degree line, the better the fit of the model to the data. In Figure 5, each dot represents the fit for a quantity
of a given good in a given village: the top panels correspond to the case in which the multiplier γ(θ(q)) is
specified as a logistic function with a linear index in quantity, and the bottom panels correspond to the case in
which the multiplier γ(θ(q)) is specified as a logistic function with a quadratic index in quantity. The model
fits the price and quantity data from each village remarkably well for each good. For instance, the R2 of a
linear regression line in each of the top panels is 0.953, 0.919, and 0.947 for rice, kidney beans, and sugar,
respectively, whereas in each of the bottom panels, it is 0.968, 0.899, and 0.936. The R2 for the bottom

                                                                                                                                                                             32
panels is lower partly because of the greater number of villages we successfully estimate in the quadratic
case, as discussed in Section 5.1. We omit the corresponding regression lines from the figure since they are
indistinguishable from the 45-degree lines.

5.3     Welfare Implications of the Estimated Model
5.3.1   Distortions Associated with Price Discrimination
As discussed, our model allows for varying degrees of market power among sellers. Sellers’ market power
can distort the allocation of a good relative to first best, thereby reducing the gains from trade. It also affects
the distribution of these gains between consumers and sellers. For instance, in the extreme case in which
a seller could charge personalized prices and perfectly price discriminate, the resulting allocation would be
efficient, but the seller would obtain all surplus. Alternatively, sellers could practice less efficient forms of
price discrimination, of the second- or third-degree type, leading to allocations that do not maximize social
surplus but in which larger surplus fractions accrue to consumers.
   Here we examine the size of the distortions induced by sellers’ market power in each village and their
distributional implications, as implied by our estimates, by comparing social surplus and quantities consumed
under observed nonlinear pricing and under first best. We interpret first best as a scenario in which free entry
in a market is possible, so sellers price at cost. Since only the marginal cost of the total quantity of a good
is identified in each village, for this exercise we assume the simplest possible (weakly convex) cost schedule
for each village, whereby marginal cost is constant at all quantities—and so equal to average cost—except at
the largest one, where it is given by our estimate of c0 (Q). Since a seller must break even at each quantity, we
further assume that the average cost of any quantity different from the largest one equals the lowest observed
unit price of these quantities. Hence, a seller’s profit is nonnegative at each such quantity.
   In the top panels of Figure 6, we graph the percentage gains in social surplus against (log) consumer
types, when moving from observed nonlinear pricing to the counterfactual first-best scenario in which unit
prices equal cost for each village, good, and quantity considered. We compute these gains as ∆SSf b =
[SSf b (θ)/SSnp (θ) − 1]100, where the subscript fb stands for first-best pricing and np for nonlinear pricing.
The dotted lines join social surplus across (log) consumer types in each village. Note that the loss in social
surplus implied by nonlinear pricing, across quantities and villages, ranges from about zero to over 100%
of the surplus under nonlinear pricing, is especially large for kidney beans, and is approximately U-shaped
over the interval where most types are. In particular, a sizable fraction of consumers of low to intermediate
quantities do not suffer large distortions. (In the figure, we have trimmed the top 2% of such changes for
readability, so the figure slightly underestimates actual losses from nonlinear pricing.)
   In the bottom panels of Figure 6, we plot the ratio qf b /qnp of first-best quantities, qf b , to observed quan-
tities, qnp , as a function of qnp . In most villages, the consumption of households with intermediate to large
valuations of a good is most compressed relative to first best: the ratio is maximal at intermediate to large
quantities. Interestingly, several consumers of the smallest quantities consume above first best; that is, the
ratio qf b /qnp is smaller than one for these households. Hence, sellers overall practice an inefficient form of


                                                        33
price discrimination, which, however, leads consumers of the smallest quantities to overconsume rather than,
as commonly argued, underconsume.
                                                                        Figure 6: Social Surplus and Quantities under Nonlinear Pricing vs. First-Best Pricing
                                                                                 Rice                                                                                                Kidney Beans                                                                                                       Sugar
  Social Surplus: Nonlinear to Competitive Pricing




                                                                                                                Social Surplus: Nonlinear to Competitive Pricing




                                                                                                                                                                                                                         Social Surplus: Nonlinear to Competitive Pricing
                                                     150




                                                                                                                                                                   150




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            150
                                                     125




                                                                                                                                                                   125




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            125
                                                     100




                                                                                                                                                                   100




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            100
                                                     75




                                                                                                                                                                   75




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            75
                                                     50




                                                                                                                                                                   50




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            50
                                                     25




                                                                                                                                                                   25




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            25
                                                     0




                                                                                                                                                                   0




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            0
                                                           0       10            20                  30    40                                                            0   10            20                  30   40                                                            0        10          20                    30       40
                                                                          Log Consumer Type                                                                                         Log Consumer Type                                                                                             Log Consumer Type

                                                                                 Rice                                                                                                Kidney Beans                                                                                                       Sugar
                                                                                                                                                                   50




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            50
                                                     60
  Quantity: Nonlinear to Competitive Pricing




                                                                                                                Quantity: Nonlinear to Competitive Pricing




                                                                                                                                                                                                                         Quantity: Nonlinear to Competitive Pricing
                                                                                                                                                                   40




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            40
                                                     40




                                                                                                                                                                   30




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            30
                                                                                                                                                                   20




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            20
                                                     20




                                                                                                                                                                   10




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            10
                                                     0




                                                                                                                                                                   0




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            0
                                                           0       .5               1                1.5   2                                                             0   1                2                3    4                                                             0   .5             1             1.5            2        2.5
                                                                        Nonlinear Pricing Quantity                                                                                Nonlinear Pricing Quantity                                                                                    Nonlinear Pricing Quantity




5.3.2                                                          Nonlinear vs. Linear Pricing
It has been argued that the ability of sellers to price discriminate through quantity discounts in developing
countries hurts poor consumers more than rich consumers. In particular, quantity discounts may limit the
access of the poorest households to basic goods and services, since these households tend to purchase the
smallest quantities and thereby face the highest unit prices; see Attanasio and Frayne (2006) for references.
Based on our model and estimates, we can examine which households are hurt (or benefit) more from the
price discrimination we observe relative to linear pricing, as well as the efficiency of nonlinear and linear
pricing, by comparing consumer and social surplus under nonlinear pricing and under the counterfactual
scenario that would emerge if sellers were constrained to price linearly, for instance, by regulation. Impor-
tantly, this exercise entails not just a comparison of the price and quantity combinations under the two pricing
schemes, but also of the size of the market served under each scheme. As formalized in Propositions 5 and
6, a seller who is prevented from discriminating may end up excluding some consumers under linear pricing.
We find that this is precisely the case for many villages in our sample. We can also compare nonlinear to
linear pricing in our model and in the standard model. Since the standard model is rejected in all villages, this
exercise helps to shed light on the nature of the bias that would arise if the standard model was incorrectly
presumed to apply.
Our Model. To compare the allocations observed under nonlinear pricing to those that would emerge coun-
terfactually under linear pricing, we need an estimate of consumers’ reservation utility to determine which
households participate under linear pricing. As discussed in Section 4.1, though, reservation utility is only
identified for consumer types whose participation (or budget) constraints bind.

                                                                                                                                                                                          34
                                                  In the absence of a point estimate, we proceed as follows. We set the reservation utility of the lowest type
equal to this type’s estimated utility, u(θ)=u(θ). For any other type, we set u(θ)=u(θ) if the change in the
estimated multiplier across the corresponding quantities is significantly different from zero (in which case we
infer that the relevant constraint binds at θ) or we set u(θ)=u(θ0 ) otherwise (in which case we infer that the
relevant constraint does not bind at θ), where θ0 is the largest estimated type smaller than θ whose constraint
binds. When we cannot reject that the multiplier is constant at all quantities, and so the relevant constraint
does not bind anywhere in the interior of the interval of types, we bound consumers’ reservation utility from
below and above. In particular, we bound reservation utility from below by setting u(θ)=u(θ) except for the
highest type, whose reservation utility we set at u(θ). We refer to this case as the low reservation utility case.
Alternatively, we bound reservation utility from above by setting u(θ)=u(θ) for each θ and refer to this case
as the high reservation utility case, in which reservation utility is the highest possible one consistent with our
model. See Appendix B for details.
                                                  Given these reservation utilities, we compute the percentage gains in consumer surplus, ∆CSlp = [CSlp (θ)-
/CSnp (θ) − 1]100, and social surplus, ∆SSlp = [SSlp (θ)/SSnp (θ) − 1]100, when switching from nonlinear
to linear pricing, where lp stands for linear pricing and np for nonlinear pricing. We then plot these gains (for
each of the assumed reservation utility schedules) against (log) consumers types. Here we consider the low
reservation utility case and discuss the high reservation utility case in Appendix B. In this latter case, results
are qualitatively and quantitatively similar, except that a high reservation utility implies lower linear prices
and so a somewhat higher consumer surplus under linear pricing than implied by the low reservation utility
case. In both cases, consumers of small to intermediate quantities largely benefit from nonlinear pricing, that
is, ∆CSlp < 0, especially purchasers of the smallest quantities, and so prefer nonlinear to linear pricing.

                                                             Figure 7: Nonlinear vs. Linear Pricing under Augmented Model (Low Reservation Utility)
                                                                       Rice                                                                                     Kidney Beans                                                                                      Sugar
                                                  100




                                                                                                                                                100




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              100
  Social Surplus: Nonlinear to Linear Pricing




                                                                                                Social Surplus: Nonlinear to Linear Pricing




                                                                                                                                                                                              Social Surplus: Nonlinear to Linear Pricing
                                                  50




                                                                                                                                                50




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              50
                                                  0




                                                                                                                                                0




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              0
                                                  -50




                                                                                                                                                -50




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              -50
                                                  -100




                                                                                                                                                -100




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              -100




                                                         0   10          20           30   40                                                          0   10          20           30   40                                                          0   10        20             30   40
                                                                  Log Consumer Type                                                                             Log Consumer Type                                                                             Log Consumer Type

                                                                       Rice                                                                                     Kidney Beans                                                                                      Sugar
                                                                                                                                                50




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              50
                                                  50
  Consumer Surplus: Nonlinear to Linear Pricing




                                                                                                Consumer Surplus: Nonlinear to Linear Pricing




                                                                                                                                                                                              Consumer Surplus: Nonlinear to Linear Pricing
                                                                                                                                                0




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              0
                                                  0




                                                                                                                                                -50




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              -50
                                                  -50
                                                  -100




                                                                                                                                                -100




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              -100




                                                         0   10          20           30   40                                                          0   10          20           30   40                                                          0   10        20             30   40
                                                                  Log Consumer Type                                                                             Log Consumer Type                                                                             Log Consumer Type




                                                  Consider then the low reservation utility case. In the top panels of Figure 7, we plot the social surplus


                                                                                                                                                                    35
gains from switching to linear pricing against (log) consumer types, and in the bottom panels, we plot the
corresponding consumer surplus gains. As the top panels of Figure 7 show, nonlinear pricing leads to greater
social surplus for most consumers with low to intermediate types, especially for rice and kidney beans.29
Also, as the bottom panels show, a large fraction of consumers of small quantities are better off under
nonlinear pricing, in particular for kidney beans—note the range of the y-axis is first negative then positive
in all panels. That is, for a sizable fraction of consumers who purchase small quantities under nonlinear
pricing, the greater consumption that nonlinear pricing gives rise to leads to higher levels of consumer and
social surplus. On the contrary, consumers of intermediate to large quantities are better off under linear
pricing—for them, consumer and social surplus are higher under linear pricing. Intuitively, under linear
pricing, sellers provide smaller quantities, thereby inducing consumers to purchase less, but also charge
lower prices. From the bottom panels of Figure 7, the benefit of lower prices indeed outweighs the utility loss
from lower consumption only for intermediate to high types who consume intermediate to large quantities:
their consumer surplus is higher under linear pricing.30 The reduced ability of sellers to exert market power
under linear pricing also implies a lower producer surplus from nearly all types than under nonlinear pricing.
    A critical reason why consumer and social surplus are higher for some consumer types under nonlinear
pricing is the higher degree of market participation that nonlinear pricing generates. In fact, since we ob-
serve quantity discounts, nonlinear pricing can increase consumer surplus only if linear pricing leads to the
exclusion of some consumers by Propositions 5 and 6. We can measure the degree of exclusion that linear
pricing induces by computing the fraction of consumers who would not participate in the market under linear
pricing. The fractions of excluded consumers below the 25th, between the 25th and the 75th, and above the
75th percentile of types across villages are 0.635, 0.340, and 0.021 for rice; 0.839, 0.626, and 0.007 for
kidney beans; and 0.802, 0.607, and 0.014 for sugar, respectively. Since nearly all consumers participate
under observed nonlinear pricing, it follows that a large fraction of consumers, mostly purchasers of small
quantities, would be excluded under linear pricing and thus benefit from nonlinear pricing.31
Standard Model. Nonlinear pricing has very different implications in the economy described by our model
relative to that described by the standard model of Maskin and Riley (1984). To stress this point, we consider
a scenario in which we counterfactually assume that the standard model applies to all villages. Formally, we
assume that u(θ) = u(θ) so that γ(θ) = 1 for all consumers and reestimate the model’s primitives under
this assumption in each village for each good. See Appendix B for the estimates of marginal cost, marginal
   29
      Social surplus is virtually unchanged across nonlinear and linear pricing for consumers who do not participate under linear
pricing, and thus experience utility u(θ), but participate and obtain utility close to u(θ) under nonlinear pricing. As apparent from
Figure 7, this latter group of consumers are either the smallest or the largest types.
   30
      Consumer surplus changes close to zero are those of types whose average price paid under nonlinear pricing is close to the
linear price. Changes of consumer surplus by −100% or so are experienced by consumers with low taste for a good who do not
participate under linear pricing. Their utility under linear pricing then equals their reservation utility, which is estimated at close
to zero in many villages. An analogous argument holds for social surplus changes by −100% or so.
   31
      The pattern of exclusion implied by linear pricing depends in general on the distribution of consumer types and the shape of
reservation utility. Intuitively, though, since higher types are more profitable than lower ones, a seller typically faces a stronger
incentive to exclude lower types than higher ones. Based on our estimates, high linear prices are optimal and lead consumers of
relatively small quantities to be excluded. The reason is that the large taste parameters we estimate for households who purchase
intermediate to large quantities imply that sellers can more than make up for excluding low types by charging high prices to the
remaining ones.



                                                                 36
willingness to pay, and base marginal utility, when the standard model is incorrectly assumed to apply. Given
these new estimated primitives, we then compute consumer and social surplus under the observed nonlinear
pricing allocation, under first best, and under linear pricing.
   We find that, contrary to our model, the standard model implies that the greatest distortions, relative to
first best, are suffered by the households who consume the smallest quantities and that these households
consume quantities much smaller than under first best. Relative to our model, the standard model not only
overestimates the loss in consumer and social surplus for consumers of small quantities, when moving from
nonlinear to linear pricing, but also overestimates the corresponding gains for consumers of intermediate to
large quantities. Indeed, by comparing the bottom panels of Figure 8 with those of Figure 7, it is apparent
that consumers with low to intermediate types tend to benefit more from nonlinear pricing under the standard
model than under our model whereas consumers with intermediate to high types tend to benefit more from
linear pricing under the standard model than under our model. The top panels of Figures 7 and 8 also show
that the standard model overestimates the loss in social surplus for consumers of small quantities, and the
gains in social surplus for consumers of large quantities, when moving to linear pricing.

                                                                                     Figure 8: Nonlinear vs. Linear Pricing under Standard Model
                                                                          Rice                                                                                    Kidney Beans                                                                                     Sugar
                                                                                                                                                   50




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                50
                                                      50
      Social Surplus: Nonlinear to Linear Pricing




                                                                                                   Social Surplus: Nonlinear to Linear Pricing




                                                                                                                                                                                                Social Surplus: Nonlinear to Linear Pricing
                                                                                                                                                   0




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                0
                                                      0




                                                                                                                                                   -50




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                -50
                                                      -50
                                                      -100




                                                                                                                                                   -100




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                -100




                                                             0   5                       10   15                                                          0   5         10            15   20                                                          0   5                  10   15
                                                                     Log Consumer Type                                                                            Log Consumer Type                                                                            Log Consumer Type

                                                                          Rice                                                                                    Kidney Beans                                                                                     Sugar
                                                      50




                                                                                                                                                   50




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                50
      Consumer Surplus: Nonlinear to Linear Pricing




                                                                                                   Consumer Surplus: Nonlinear to Linear Pricing




                                                                                                                                                                                                Consumer Surplus: Nonlinear to Linear Pricing
                                                      0




                                                                                                                                                   0




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                0
                                                      -50




                                                                                                                                                   -50




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                -50
                                                      -100




                                                                                                                                                   -100




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                -100




                                                             0   5                       10   15                                                          0   5         10            15   20                                                          0   5                  10   15
                                                                     Log Consumer Type                                                                            Log Consumer Type                                                                            Log Consumer Type




   To understand these findings, note that two countervailing forces are at play. On the one hand, the
standard model requires that [θν 0 (q(θ)) − c0 (Q)]/ν 0 (q(θ)) be equal to [1 − F (θ)]/f (θ), which decreases with
θ by assumption (PS), as discussed. Hence, the standard model necessarily implies greater consumption
distortions for lower consumer types than for higher ones relative to first best, contrary to what we estimate.
This monotonicity of consumption distortions, in turn, tends to make nonlinear pricing less desirable for
consumers of small quantities with low marginal willingness to pay but more desirable for consumers of large
quantities with intermediate to high marginal willingness to pay. On the other hand, since the reservation
utility profile is flat in the standard model, sellers have a greater ability to extract consumer surplus through
linear pricing under the standard model than under our model. Sellers may thus induce greater consumer


                                                                                                                                                                      37
exclusion under linear pricing than under our model, even among purchasers of large quantities. On balance,
this second force dominates in many villages for low consumer types: many more low and intermediate
consumer types are excluded under linear pricing according to the standard model than according to our
model, as apparent by comparing the bottom panels of Figures 7 and 8: much more mass is piled at −100%,
which signifies consumer exclusion, in the panels for the standard model than in those for our model.
Discussion. Even small deviations of γ(θ(q)) from one—its value in the standard model—which we esti-
mate for several quantities and villages, are associated with very different behavior on the part of sellers and
consumers. These deviations have important distributional implications and thus are key to evaluating alter-
native pricing mechanisms. In particular, assuming counterfactually that the standard model applies, when
it is rejected instead, can lead to incorrect inferences about the impact of nonlinear pricing and the relative
benefits of nonlinear and linear pricing.

5.4    The Effect of Income Transfers
As discussed in Section 3.3, the version of our model with budget-constrained consumers can be used to
evaluate the impact of a targeted transfer, such as the Progresa one, on consumption and prices. Here we do
so and find that the Progresa program had a significant impact on prices. Note that by Proposition 7, income
transfers not only encourage greater consumption but also induce sellers to modify their price schedules
in response to consumers’ greater ability to pay, typically by charging higher prices to some (if not all)
consumers. Indeed, it has been documented that food expenditure per adult equivalent has increased by
13% among eligible households as a result of Progresa; see, for instance, Angelucci and De Giorgi (2009).
A small literature has also examined the effect of Progresa on the prices of agricultural commodities. As
mentioned, however, Hodinott et al. (2000) and Angelucci and De Giorgi (2009) found no evidence that the
Progresa transfer has induced a systematic increase in the (average unit) price of basic staples.
   In this section, we assess the extent to which the Progresa transfer has affected prices, in particular, the
degree of price discrimination, and consumer surplus. Unlike the studies just mentioned that focus only on
the impact of transfers on average unit prices, we examine the impact of Progresa on their entire schedule.
We find that Progresa has had a significant effect on prices but that this effect cannot be detected without
accounting for the nonlinearity of unit prices. Moreover, we show that our model can account for the shift in
the price schedule induced by the program.
Transfers and Prices. We measure the impact of the Progresa transfer on prices based on a second-order
bivariate Taylor expansion in log(q) and [1 − G(q)]/g(q) of a seller’s first-order condition,
                                                                                              2
                                      1 − G(q)                1 − G(q)             2      1 − G(q)
  log[p(q)] ≈ β0 +β1 log(q)+β2                   +β3 log(q)              +β4 log(q) +β5               ,       (18)
                                        g(q)                    g(q)                        g(q)

derived at the end of Appendix A. In this expansion, the multiplier γ(θ(q)) is treated as a function of quantity.
This reduced form relates log unit prices, log[p(q)], to log quantities, log(q), and the inverse hazard rate of the
distribution of quantities, [1−G(q)]/g(q), in each village. Note that this latter term captures the importance

                                                        38
of the shape of the distribution of consumers’ marginal willingness to pay for prices, as consistent with our
model. Unit prices are related to the distribution of consumer preferences in a market, in particular to its
inverse hazard rate, and so to the distribution of quantities because of the one-to-one relationship between
consumer tastes and demand from F (θ) = G(q) and q = q(θ).
    To start, in the first column of Table 2, we estimate the effect of Progresa on the average prices of rice,
kidney beans, and sugar in the localities in our sample. Specifically, we regress observed unit prices on a
constant and an indicator of the program, the dummy variable “Treatment,” which equals one in (randomly)
treated villages; we include wave fixed effects and cluster standard errors at the village level. Consistently
with the existing literature on the price effects of Progresa, the Progresa transfer effectively has had no impact
on average unit prices: the estimated coefficient on the “Treatment” dummy for each good is small and not
significantly different from zero.
    Our model implies that the effect of an income transfer on unit prices, p(q) = T (q)/q, is ambiguous, even
when it may give rise to substantial changes in the overall price schedule, since households’ expenditure,
T (q), and consumption, q, may both increase. But Corollary 2 also implies that even no increase or a
modest increase in average unit prices after a transfer can be associated with a substantial change in the
price schedule, leading to a greater intensity of price discrimination overall, which we observe in our data.
Therefore, we next examine how the Progresa transfer has affected the magnitude of quantity discounts. To
this purpose, in the second column of Table 2, we report the results of a regression of log unit prices on
the “Treatment” dummy, log quantity, and an interaction between these two variables. Note that this is an
exercise analogous to that of Table 1, except that we allow the Progresa transfer to shift both the intercept
and the slope of the price schedule. For each commodity, we find that the coefficient on log quantity becomes
more negative, and significantly so for kidney beans and sugar, that is, the intensity of price discrimination
increases with the Progresa transfer. The effect of log quantity on log unit prices increases in absolute value
from −0.212 to −0.256 for rice, from −0.114 to −0.154 for kidney beans, and from −0.123 to −0.185 for
sugar.32
    We then assess the extent to which our model accounts for the observed nonlinearity of prices as well
as the change in the unit price schedule resulting from Progresa. To this end, we first estimate (18) and
next a version of it augmented to account for the impact of the Progresa transfer through the “Treatment”
dummy and the interaction between this dummy and log quantity. We report the results of this estimation
in columns 3 and 4 of Table 2. We stress that the inverse hazard rate of quantities, [1 − G(q)]/g(q), in both
regressions is computed for each village.33 This approach, therefore, allows for heterogeneous impacts of the
program across villages and, since the program obviously affected the inverse hazard function of quantities in
   32
      Although this regression captures the variability of unit prices both across quantities within a village and across villages,
the aggregation implicit in this exercise is valid. In particular, we could allow for village fixed effects to capture the unobserved
variability in marginal costs across villages. We notice that both village fixed effects and the coefficients on the inverse hazards
are identified, since we have several waves of data and the inverse hazards vary also across quantities. The results we obtain with
or without village fixed effects are very similar, though, consistently with the fact that marginal costs estimated at the locality level
do not display a large degree of variation across localities; see Appendix B.3.3. Effectively, the variation in the inverse hazards
captures most of the variation in price schedules. Therefore, we present here the results of the simpler estimation without fixed
effects and illustrate the fixed effect estimates in Appendix C.
   33
      Standard errors are computed by bootstrap to account for the fact that inverse hazard rates are estimated too.


                                                                  39
“treated” villages, could be interpreted as a mediation analysis of the effect of Progresa on the price schedule.
   In column 3, where we report the estimates of (18), we notice that both the inverse hazard rate, [1 −
G(q)]/g(q), and its interaction with log(q) are significant for each of the three commodities—strongly so for
rice and kidney beans. The quadratic inverse hazard rate is not significant for any commodity, whereas the
quadratic term in log(q) is significant for kidney beans and strongly so for sugar.
   In column 4, we report the estimates of the augmented version of equation (18) that accounts for the
Progresa transfer through the “Treatment” dummy and the interaction between this dummy and log(q). Im-
portantly, we see that the “Treatment” dummy is not significant and, unlike in column 2 for kidney beans
and sugar, does not significantly affect the impact of log(q) on log unit prices. We also notice that the point
estimates of the coefficient on log(q) interacted with the “Treatment” dummy are greatly reduced in abso-
lute value. These results thus indicate that our model is capable of explaining the shift in price schedules
documented in column 2. Specifically, a significant portion of the change in prices induced by the program
is accounted for by the change in the distribution of quantities consumed in each village, in particular in
the curvature of this distribution as captured by its inverse hazard rate, rather than by the direct effect of
the transfer on the intercept or slope of the price schedule. Indeed, unlike the “Treatment” dummy and its
interaction with log(q), the coefficients on log(q), [1 − G(q)]/g(q) and their interaction are all significant in
column 4 of Table 2.
Price Changes and Consumer Surplus. The reduced-form analysis just presented shows that our model
can explain the substantial shifts in price schedules induced by the Progresa transfer. This evidence and the
mediation analysis provided in Table 2 support the budget constraint interpretation of our model. In light of
this evidence, we can use our model, in which consumers’ preferences and subsistence or budget constraints
are explicitly formalized, to further assess the impact of Progresa on consumer surplus. Specifically, given
our estimates of consumer surplus in the localities of our sample, we can compute the elasticity of consumer
surplus to unit prices, which ranges across villages between −91.91% and −0.33% with a median (mean)
of −7.50% (−10.96%) for rice, between −89.04% and 0.00% with a median (mean) of −9.86% (−11.23%)
for kidney beans, and between −81.08% and 0.00% with a median (mean) of −8.51% (−10.14%) for sugar
in the low reservation utility case. The elasticity of consumer surplus to quantity consumed is much smaller,
ranging from 0.10% to 27.40% for rice, from 0.00% to 24.56% for kidney beans, and from 0.00% to 22.58%
for sugar. Hence, ignoring the price change associated with the Progresa transfer can substantially over-
state the increase in consumer surplus from the program: in some villages, the price increase almost erases
households’ gains from consuming any of the goods before the transfer took place.
Discussion. These results are important in assessing the impact of cash transfers, a common policy tool
in developing countries. Cash transfers may not affect, on average, unit prices in a market but may lead
to an overall increase in the intensity of price discrimination, as we observe in our data. Such a change in
prices has an impact not just on households that are beneficiaries of the program but also on non-eligible
households. Since all households are affected by the resulting price change, cash transfers may then have a
more limited beneficial effect than is commonly estimated, because of their partially positive direct effect on

                                                       40
                                                                                      Table 2: Effect of Cash Transfers on Prices
                                                    Rice Unit Values                                                 Kidney Beans Unit Values                                               Sugar Unit Values
                                   1              2               3                  4                1                2                3                   4                1            2               3             4
     Intercept                 1.947∗∗∗        1.868∗∗∗         1.864∗∗∗           1.869∗∗∗         2.375∗∗∗         2.420∗∗∗        2.421∗∗∗            2.423∗∗∗         1.743∗∗∗     1.775∗∗∗         1.777∗∗∗      1.769∗∗∗
                                (0.0105)       (0.0127)        (0.00711)           (0.0121)        (0.00940)        (0.00952)       (0.00767)           (0.00998)        (0.00403)    (0.00660)        (0.00448)     (0.00618)
     Treatment                 −0.00750        −0.0123                            −0.00663          −0.0142           0.00600                           −0.00494           0.00556     0.0265∗∗                         0.0120
                                (0.0112)       (0.0149)                            (0.0142)         (0.0117)         (0.0127)                             (0.0112)       (0.00485)    (0.00909)                      (0.00660)
     log(q)                                   −0.212∗∗∗       −0.181∗∗∗          −0.161∗∗∗                         −0.114∗∗∗       −0.172∗∗∗           −0.160∗∗∗                     −0.123∗∗∗        −0.182∗∗∗     −0.168∗∗∗
                                               (0.0175)         (0.0324)           (0.0413)                          (0.0109)         (0.0281)            (0.0294)                     (0.0183)         (0.0172)      (0.0220)
     1−G(q)
      g(q)
                                                             −0.0110∗∗           −0.0111∗∗                                       −0.00505∗∗∗          −0.00503∗∗∗                                    −0.00275∗      −0.00273∗
                                                               (0.00423)          (0.00422)                                         (0.00110)           (0.00110)                                      (0.00107)     (0.00107)
                 1−G(q)
     log(q) ×     g(q)
                                                             −0.00951∗           −0.00943∗                                         −0.00555∗           −0.00554∗                                     −0.00546∗      −0.00543∗
                                                               (0.00469)          (0.00469)                                         (0.00219)           (0.00219)                                      (0.00219)     (0.00218)
     log(q) × Treatment                        −0.0441                             −0.0270                          −0.0399∗                              −0.0152                     −0.0617∗                        −0.0173
                                               (0.0255)                            (0.0228)                          (0.0191)                             (0.0136)                     (0.0271)                       (0.0188)




41
     log(q)2                                                      0.0458             0.0457                                            0.0526∗             0.0523∗                                     0.0813∗∗∗    0.0810∗∗∗
                                                                (0.0398)           (0.0395)                                           (0.0251)            (0.0250)                                      (0.0174)      (0.0173)
     h         i
         1−G(q) 2
          g(q)
                                                                0.0000243        0.0000261                                           0.00000484         0.00000473                                 −0.0000173      −0.0000171
                                                              (0.0000469)      (0.0000470)                                          (0.0000213)        (0.0000212)                                 (0.0000242)     (0.0000242)
     1999-March                0.0500∗∗∗       0.0356∗∗∗        0.0355∗∗∗        0.0362∗∗∗       −0.0827∗∗∗       −0.0872∗∗∗        −0.0867∗∗∗         −0.0865∗∗∗         0.00888      0.0118∗         0.0115∗         0.0117∗
                               (0.00858)       (0.00757)        (0.00788)        (0.00777)         (0.00785)        (0.00743)          (0.00744)          (0.00743)     (0.00551)    (0.00528)       (0.00518)       (0.00516)
     1999-Nov                  0.0501∗∗∗       0.0355∗∗∗        0.0357∗∗∗        0.0362∗∗∗        −0.115∗∗∗        −0.114∗∗∗          −0.111∗∗∗          −0.111∗∗∗      0.0549∗∗∗    0.0583∗∗∗       0.0592∗∗∗       0.0594∗∗∗
                               (0.00772)       (0.00744)        (0.00749)        (0.00739)         (0.00734)        (0.00722)          (0.00719)          (0.00720)     (0.00463)    (0.00439)       (0.00429)       (0.00427)
     2000-Nov                  0.0302∗∗∗        0.0213∗∗        0.0229∗∗∗         0.0217∗∗        −0.196∗∗∗        −0.203∗∗∗          −0.205∗∗∗          −0.201∗∗∗      0.0307∗∗∗    0.0283∗∗∗       0.0330∗∗∗       0.0303∗∗∗
                               (0.00793)       (0.00679)        (0.00662)        (0.00767)          (0.0122)         (0.0115)           (0.0109)           (0.0114)     (0.00581)    (0.00567)       (0.00518)       (0.00565)
     2003                       −0.0146          0.00932          0.00536          0.00504          −0.0207        −0.0316∗∗        −0.0348∗∗∗           −0.0307∗∗       0.170∗∗∗     0.174∗∗∗        0.172∗∗∗        0.169∗∗∗
                                (0.0101)       (0.00996)        (0.00924)        (0.00954)          (0.0110)         (0.0101)          (0.00894)           (0.0101)     (0.00724)    (0.00693)       (0.00611)       (0.00654)
     R2 adj.                     0.00608           0.140            0.165            0.166            0.0442           0.0946              0.130              0.130        0.0468        0.118           0.201           0.201
     Observations                 62, 368         62, 368          62, 368          62, 368           82, 024          82, 024            82, 024            82, 024       91, 782      91, 782         91, 782         91, 782
         Note: the superscript ∗ stands for p < 0.05, the superscript ∗∗ for p < 0.01, and the superscript ∗∗∗ for p < 0.001. Standard errors are clustered at the locality level.
eligible households and their negative indirect effect on non-eligible ones.34

6         Conclusion
We propose a model of nonlinear pricing in which consumers differ in their tastes for goods, face hetero-
geneous subsistence constraints leading to heterogeneous budget constraints for a seller’s good, and have
access to different outside options to participating in a market. Incorporating budget constraints is an impor-
tant advance in this literature, since it makes the model relevant for several contexts of practical relevance.
The model we propose also encompasses a wide variety of market structures, ranging from pure monopoly
to competition. In all these settings, the implications of nonlinear pricing for consumer, producer, and social
surplus are fundamentally different from those arising from standard models of nonlinear pricing, in which
outside options are identical across consumers and consumers are assumed unconstrained in their purchase
decisions. In particular, quantity discounts for large volumes can be associated with consumption above first
best at low volumes.
         We prove that this more general model is identified under common assumptions from information on
prices and quantities purchased. We derive estimators of the model’s primitives that can be readily imple-
mented using a variety of publicly available data sets. We use the publicly available data on the evaluation
of a large and celebrated conditional cash transfer program, Progresa, to estimate the model, which fits the
data extremely well. Our empirical results have important implications for the relative desirability of non-
linear and linear pricing. In particular, we find that most consumers of small to intermediate quantities,
typically the poorest ones, benefit from nonlinear pricing, despite the fact that sellers price discriminate
through distortionary quantity discounts. We also find that nonlinear pricing leads to a greater degree of
market participation, especially for consumers of the smallest quantities, which is all the more critical for the
marginalized villages in our data in which the consumption of several households is at levels of subsistence.
         Crucially, though, we show that by increasing consumers’ ability to pay, cash transfers provide sellers
with the opportunity to extract more surplus through nonlinear pricing. Thus, cash transfers in general lead
to an increase in the intensity of price discrimination, as we document in the case of Progresa. Indeed,
our paper is one of the first to uncover important shifts in the price schedule in the villages included in the
Progresa evaluation sample. Specifically, we find that cash transfers implemented by Progresa have had a
significant impact on prices in our villages, unlike what is commonly found in the literature. Furthermore,
we show that our model can explain the observed shifts in price schedules.
         This result is all the more relevant since cash transfers have become an increasingly popular policy tool in
Latin America and many other developing countries. A few studies have analyzed the effect of transfers on
the price of commodities and the consensus so far seems to have been that Progresa did not have appreciable
effects on local prices. We prove that if we look beyond average prices, this conclusion is unwarranted.
When the dependence of unit prices on quantity is taken into account, the price effect is substantial, in
particular, the program is associated with an increase in the degree of price discrimination. Such a change
    34
         This argument, though, neglects the positive spillovers on non-eligible households found by Angelucci and De Giorgi (2009).


                                                                  42
in the equilibrium price schedule has had an impact not just on households beneficiaries of the program but
also on non-eligible households, since all households have been affected by the overall price change. Cash
transfers can then be less beneficial than typically inferred.
   Overall, our estimation results thus suggest the importance of accounting for heterogeneity in consumers’
preferences, constraints, and consumption opportunities when assessing the impact of nonlinear pricing.

References
ANGELUCCI, M., and G. DE GIORGI (2009): “Indirect Effects of an Aid Program: How Do Cash Transfers
Affect Ineligibles’ Consumption?,” American Economic Review, 99(1), 486-508.
ATTANASIO, O., V. DI MARO, V. LECHENE, and D. PHILLIPS (2013): “Welfare Consequences of Food
Prices Increases: Evidence from Rural Mexico,” Journal of Development Economics, 104(C), 136-151.
ATTANASIO, O., and C. FRAYNE (2006): “Do the Poor Pay More?,” mimeo.
ATTANASIO, O., AND E. PASTORINO (2010): “Nonlinear Pricing of Food in Village Economies: the
Case of Mexico,” mimeo.
BONTEMPS, C., and D. MARTIMORT (2014): Identification and Estimation of Incentive Contracts under
Asymmetric Information: An Application to the French Water Sector,” mimeo.
CAMPO, S., E. GUERRE, I. PERRIGNE, and Q. VUONG (2011): “Semiparametric Estimation of First-
Price Auctions with Risk-Averse Bidders,” Review of Economic Studies, 78(1), 112-147.
CHE, Y.-K., and I. GALE (2000): “The Optimal Mechanism for Selling to a Budget-Constrained Buyer,”
Journal of Economic Theory, 92(2), 198-233.
CRAWFORD, G.S., and M. SHUM (2007): “Monopoly Quality Degradation and Regulation in Cable Tele-
vision,” Journal of Law and Economics, 50(1), 181-209.
CRAWFORD, I., F. LAISNEY, and I. PRESTON (2003): ”Estimation of Household Demand Systems with
Theoretically Compatible Engel Curves and Unit Value Specifications,” Journal of Econometrics, 114(2),
221-241.
CUNHA, J., G. DE GIORGI, and S. JAYACHANDRAN (2017): “The Price Effects of Cash Versus In-Kind
Transfers,” mimeo.
DEATON, A., (1989): “Rice Prices and Income Distribution in Thailand: A Non-parametric Analysis,”
Economic Journal, 99(395), 1-37.
EKELAND, I., J.J. HECKMAN, and L. NESHEIM (2004): “Identification and Estimation of Hedonic Mod-
els,” Journal of Political Economy, 112(S1), S60-S109.
FABRICANT, S.J., C.W. KAMARA, and A. MILLS (1999): “Why the Poor Pay More: Household Curative
Expenditures in Rural Sierra Leone,” International Journal of Health Planning and Management, 14(3),
179-199; erratum in International Journal of Health Planning and Management, 14(4), 339-340.
GUERRE, E., I. PERRIGNE, and Q. VUONG (2000): “Optimal Nonparametric Estimation of First-Price
Auctions,” Econometrica, 68(3), 525-574.
HECKMAN, J.J., R.L. MATZKIN, and L. NESHEIM (2010): “Nonparametric Identification and Estimation
of Nonadditive Hedonic Models,” Econometrica, 78(5), 1569-1591.
HODDINOTT, J., E. SKOUFIAS, and R. WASHBURN (2000): “The Impact of Progresa on Consumption:
A Final Report,” International Food Policy Research Institute, available at https://www.ifpri.org/publication/-
impact-progresa-consumption.
JENSEN, R.T., and N.H. MILLER (2008): “Giffen Behavior and Subsistence Consumption,” American
Economic Review, 98(4), 1553-1577.
JULLIEN, B. (2000): “Participation Constraints in Adverse Selection Models,” Journal of Economic Theory,
93(1), 1-47.


                                                       43
KAHN, M.E., and F.A. WOLAK (2014): “Using Information to Improve the Effectiveness of Nonlinear
Pricing: Evidence from a Field Experiment,” mimeo.
LANCASTER, K.J. (1966): “A New Approach to Consumer Theory,” Journal of Political Economy, 74(2),
132-157.
LIGON, E., J.P. THOMAS, and T. WORRALL (2002): “Informal Insurance Arrangements with Limited
Commitment: Theory and Evidence from Village Economies,” Review of Economic Studies, 69(1), 209-244.
LUO, Y., I. PERRIGNE, and Q. VUONG (2010): “Structural Analysis of Nonlinear Pricing,” mimeo.
MASKIN, E., and J. RILEY (1984): “Monopoly with Incomplete Information,” RAND Journal of Eco-
nomics, 15(2), 171-196.
MCINTOSH, A.C. (2003): “The Poor Pay More for Their Water,” Habitat Debate, 9(3), available at http://-
www.unhabitat.org/hd/hdv9n3/12.asp.
MIRAVETE, E., and L.H. RÖLLER (2004): “Competitive Nonlinear Pricing in Duopoly Equilibrium: The
Early U.S. Cellular Telephone Industry,” mimeo.
PANNARUNOTHAI, S., and A. MILLS (1997): “The Poor Pay More: Health-Related Inequality in Thai-
land,” Social Science and Medicine, 44(12), 1781-1790.
PERRIGNE, I., and Q. VUONG (2010): “Nonlinear Pricing in Yellow Pages,” mimeo.
SEGAL, I., and S. TADELIS (2005): “Lectures in Contract Theory,” mimeo.
STOLE, L.A. (2007): “Price Discrimination and Competition,” in: Handbook of Industrial Organization,
Vol. 3, M. Armstrong and R. Porter (eds.), Elsevier.
THOMAS, L. (2002): “Non-linear Pricing with Budget Constraint,” Economics Letters, 75(2), 257-263.
WOLAK, F.A. (2014): “Designing Minimum-Risk Nonlinear Price Schedules for Water Utilities,” mimeo.




                                                  44
A      Model: Omitted Proofs and Details
Cumulative Multiplier in the Highly Convex Case: We derive here an expression that defines the multiplier in the
highly convex case in terms of primitives. For simplicity, we consider the case in which v(θ, q) = θν(q) and c0 (q) = c;
the argument extends naturally to the more general case. Recall that in the highly convex case, the cumulative multiplier
γ(θ) is equal to a constant, γ, at all points θ ∈ [θ,θ). Here we solve for γ in the interesting case in which 0 < γ < 1 for
[θ,θ). In the remaining cases, the multiplier is trivial: γ(θ) = 1 for all θ ∈ [θ,θ] and γ(θ) = 0 for all θ ∈ [θ,θ). First,
observe that (1) implies that
                                           ν 0 (q(θ)) = cf (θ)/[θf (θ) + F (θ) − γ],                                  (19)
so q(θ) = (ν 0 )−1 (cf (θ)/[θf (θ) + F (θ) − γ]). Recall that u(θ) = u(θ) and u(θ) = u(θ) when 0 < γ < 1. Hence,
u(θ) − u(θ) = u(θ) − u(θ) so γ is implicitly defined by
                                   Z   θ               Z   θ                 Z   θ                                         
                                            0                                                0 −1              cf (x)
             u(θ) − u(θ) =                 u (x)dx =           ν(q(x))dx =           ν (ν )                                       dx,
                                   θ                   θ                     θ                          xf (x) + F (x) − γ

where the first equality follows from u(θ) − u(θ) = u(θ) − u(θ) and the fundamental theorem of calculus, and the
second equality from the local incentive compatibility condition u0 (θ) = ν(q(θ)).
Proof of Proposition 1: Before proving Proposition 1, we first derive the simple BC problem and then establish that
the first-order and complementary slackness conditions of the simple BC problem in (6) are necessary and sufficient
to characterize an optimal menu. The proof of this result requires that assumptions analogous to those of potential
separation, homogeneity, and full participation in the IR model hold in the BC model. We have discussed assumption
(BCH) in the text and assumption (FP) in footnote (15), so we discuss here only assumption (FP). As in the IR model,
the potential separation assumption in the BC model requires l(Φ, θ) to be a weakly increasing function of θ for all
Φ ∈ [0, 1], for which sufficient conditions are
                                                                                   
                             ∂    sq (θ, q)           d F (θ)              d 1 − F (θ)
                                              ≥ 0 and             ≥0≥                     .                     (20)
                            ∂θ vθq (θ, q)             dθ f (θ)            dθ      f (θ)

As explained in Jullien (2000), the first inequality in (20) implies that the conflict between rent extraction and efficiency
is not too severe so that the marginal benefit of increasing the slope of the utility profile is weakly increasing with
the type. When this occurs, a seller tends to desire convex quantity profiles, which implies that the monotonicity
condition for q(θ) for incentive compatibility is easier to satisfy. The second and third inequalities in (20) amount to a
simple strengthening of the monotone hazard rate condition ubiquitous in the mechanism design literature: as the type
increases, the relative weight of types above θ compared with below θ decreases, and the seller becomes progressively
more concerned about the “informational rents” left below θ.
    To derive the simple BC problem in (6), we proceed in analogy with the derivation of the simple IR problem in the
Supplementary Appendix. First, we rewrite the BC constraint as

                                                 I(θ, q(θ)) ≥ t(θ) = v(θ, q(θ)) − u(θ),                                                 (21)

since u(θ) = v(θ, q(θ)) − t(θ). We presume u is low enough and then show that under the conditions of Proposition
1, (IR’) is indeed redundant. The BC problem can be expressed in Lagrangian-type form as
                                                                                                       !
                         Z     θ                               Z                         θ
              max              [v(θ, q(θ))−c(q(θ))−u(θ)]f (θ)dθ +                        {I(θ, q(θ))−[v(θ, q(θ))−u(θ)]}dΦ(θ)            (22)
         {u(θ)},{q(θ)}∈Q
                       b   θ                                                         θ


                                                           s.t. u0 (θ) = vθ (θ, q(θ)),                                                  (23)
where Q
      b is the set of weakly increasing functions q(θ), and Φ(θ) is the cumulative Lagrange multiplier on the budget




                                                                       45
constraints expressed as in (21). Next, note that
          Z       θ                                               Z    θ                     Z    θ                                                                 Z       θ   Z              θ          
                                                                                                                                                                                                        0
                      u(θ)f (θ)dθ = u(θ)                                   f (θ)dθ +                  [u(θ) − u(θ)]f (θ)dθ = u(θ) +                                                                 u (x)dx f (θ)dθ.
              θ                                                    θ                          θ                                                                      θ                      θ

Using the local incentive compatibility condition u0 (θ) = vθ (θ, q(θ)) and integrating by parts thus gives
              Z    θ                                                   Z       θ   Z   θ                                                                        Z        θ                                               θ
                       u(θ)f (θ)dθ = u(θ) +                                                 vθ (x, q(x))dx f (θ)dθ = u(θ) +                                                     vθ (x, q(x))dx F (θ)
               θ                                                           θ        θ                                                                                   θ                                                    θ

                                               Z   θ                                                               Z   θ                                  Z   θ
                                           −           vθ (θ, q(θ))F (θ)dθ = u(θ) +                                        vθ (θ, q(θ))dθ −                       vθ (θ, q(θ))F (θ)dθ.                                            (24)
                                               θ                                                                   θ                                      θ

Similarly,
     Z    θ                                                                                 Z       θ                                               θ
              u(θ)dΦ(θ) = u(θ)[Φ(θ) − Φ(θ)] +                                                            vθ (x, q(x))dx Φ(θ)
      θ                                                                                          θ                                                    θ
                      Z       θ                                                                                                       Z       θ                                 Z       θ
              −                   vθ (θ, q(θ))Φ(θ)dθ = u(θ)[Φ(θ) − Φ(θ)] + Φ(θ)                                                                   vθ (θ, q(θ))dθ −                          vθ (θ, q(θ))Φ(θ)dθ.                   (25)
                       θ                                                                                                                  θ                                         θ

Substituting (24) and (25) into the objective function in (22) yields
                               Z      θ                                                                                    Z    θ
                                          [v(θ, q(θ)) − c(q(θ)) − u(θ)] f (θ)dθ +                                                   {I(θ, q(θ)) − [v(θ, q(θ)) − u(θ)]}dΦ(θ)
                                  θ                                                                                         θ

                   Z       θ                                                                 Z       θ                                                                                              Z       θ
          =                    [v(θ, q(θ)) − c(q(θ))]f (θ)dθ +                                           [I(θ, q(θ)) − v(θ, q(θ))]dΦ(θ) − u(θ) −                                                                vθ (θ, q (θ))dθ
                       θ                                                                         θ                                                                                                   θ
                      Z       θ                                                                                                       Z       θ                                 Z       θ
              +                   F (θ)vθ (θ, q(θ))dθ + u(θ)[Φ(θ) − Φ(θ)] + Φ(θ)                                                                  vθ (θ, q(θ))dθ −                          Φ(θ)vθ (θ, q(θ))dθ,
                          θ                                                                                                            θ                                        θ

which, by collecting terms, can be simplified to further obtain
                                       θ                                                                       θ                              
                                                                                                                       F (θ) − Φ(θ) + Φ(θ) − 1
                                  Z                                                                      Z
                                           [v(θ, q(θ)) − c(q(θ))]f (θ)dθ +                                                                       vθ (θ, q(θ))f (θ)dθ
                                   θ                                                                       θ                    f (θ)

                                                             θ
                                                                 φ(θ)[I(θ, q(θ)) − v(θ, q(θ))]
                                                       Z
                                                   +                                           f (θ)dθ + u(θ)[Φ(θ) − Φ(θ) − 1].
                                                         θ                   f (θ)
By collecting terms one more time and dropping irrelevant constants, this expression reduces to that in (6). The
following result is the analogue of Result 4 in the Supplementary Appendix.

Result 1. Under (PS), (BCH), and (FP), the implementable allocation {u(θ), q(θ)} solves the simple BC problem if,
and only if, there exists a cumulative multiplier function Φ(θ) on [θ, θ] such that the first-order conditions (7) and the
complementary slackness condition (8) are satisfied. Moreover, q(θ) is continuous.

    We now turn to proving Proposition 1. Consider a solution to the IR problem. We claim that under sufficient
conditions, it is also a solution to the BC problem. For notational simplicity, in the following we suppress the subscript
IR from uIR (θ), qIR (θ), tIR (θ), and uIR (θ). To start, by Result 4 in the Supplementary Appendix, an implementable
allocation {u(θ), q(θ)} solves the IR problem if, and only if, there exists a cumulative multiplier function γ(θ) with




                                                                                                                       46
the properties of a cumulative distribution function such that the first-order conditions

                                                                      γ(θ) − F (θ)
                                   vq (θ, q(θ)) − c0 (q(θ)) =                      vθq (θ, q(θ))                       (26)
                                                                         f (θ)

for each type and the complementary slackness condition
                                                    Z    θ
                                                             [u(θ) − u(θ)] dγ(θ) = 0                                   (27)
                                                     θ

hold, together with u(θ) ≥ u(θ). By Result 1 above, the allocation that solves the IR problem solves the BC problem
if, and only if, there exists a cumulative multiplier function Φ(θ) such that the first-order conditions
                                                         
                        0         Φ(θ) − F (θ) + 1 − Φ(θ)                   φ(θ) [vq (θ, q(θ)) − Iq (θ, q(θ))]
        vq (θ, q(θ)) − c (q(θ)) =                           vθq (θ, q(θ)) +                                            (28)
                                           f (θ)                                           f (θ)

for each type and the complementary slackness condition
                                       Z   θ
                                               [I(θ, q(θ)) − v(θ, q(θ)) + u(θ)] dΦ(θ) = 0                              (29)
                                       θ

hold, together with t(θ) ≤ I(θ, q(θ)) and u(θ) ≥ u. Note that for Φ(θ) to be a legitimate cumulative multiplier, it must
be nonnegative and weakly increasing with θ. Let Φ(θ) = α + γ(θ) be the cumulative multiplier in the BC problem.
Clearly, Φ(θ) = α + γ(θ) for any constant α is a legitimate cumulative multiplier. Also, with Φ(θ) = α + γ(θ), the
multiplier dγ(θ) on the IR constraint of type θ is zero or strictly positive if, and only if, the multiplier dΦ(θ) on the BC
constraint of type θ is zero or strictly positive.
     The rest of the proof proceeds in three steps. In the first step, we show that at the IR allocation, the complementary
slackness condition of the BC problem, (29), holds and the IR allocation satisfies t(θ) ≤ I(θ, q(θ)) and u(θ) ≥ u. In the
second step, we argue that the first-order conditions of the BC problem in (28) are identical to those of the IR problem
in (26). In the third step, we show that consumers reach the same utility in the two problems.
     Step 1: Verify Complementary Slackness Condition in BC Problem, t(θ) ≤ I(θ, q(θ)), and u(θ) ≥ u. We now claim
that at the IR allocation, the complementary slackness condition in the BC problem, (29), holds and the IR allocation
satisfies t(θ) ≤ I(θ, q(θ)). To this purpose, recall that I(θ, q(θ)) ≥ v(θ, q(θ))−u(θ), I(θ, q(θ)) = v(θ, q(θ))−u(θ),
and u(θ) ≥ u by assumption. Note that when the IR constraints bind so that dγ(θ) = dΦ(θ) > 0, then q(θ) = q(θ)
and v(θ, q(θ)) − t(θ) = u(θ) or, equivalently, t(θ) = v(θ, q(θ)) − u(θ). Since, by assumption, v(θ, q(θ)) − u(θ) =
I(θ, q(θ)) for types whose IR constraints bind, it follows that t(θ) = I(θ, q(θ)). When, instead, the IR constraints
do not bind so that dγ(θ) = dΦ(θ) = 0, then v(θ, q(θ)) − t(θ) ≥ u(θ) or, equivalently, t(θ) ≤ v(θ, q(θ)) − u(θ).
Since, by assumption, v(θ, q(θ)) − u(θ) ≤ I(θ, q(θ)) for consumers whose IR constraints do not bind, it follows that
t(θ) ≤ I(θ, q(θ)). Hence, if condition (27) holds for the IR problem, then condition (29) holds for the BC problem.
Also, t(θ) ≤ I(θ, q(θ)) is satisfied, and u(θ) ≥ u with strict inequality for any θ > θ, since u(θ) ≥ u(θ), u(θ) is strictly
increasing, and, by assumption, u(θ) ≥ u.
     Step 2: Verify First-Order Conditions of IR Problem Identical to Those of BC Problem. We now show that given
the cumulative multiplier Φ(θ), the quantity profile that solves the IR problem satisfies the first-order conditions of the
BC problem, namely (28). First, note that

                                Φ(θ) + 1 − Φ(θ) = α + γ(θ) + 1 − [α + γ(θ)] = γ(θ),                                    (30)

where the first equality follows from Φ(θ) = α + γ(θ) and the second equality holds since γ(θ) = 1; see the Supple-
mentary Appendix for a proof of this latter result. Second, observe that, by assumption, Iq (θ, q(θ)) equals vq (θ, q(θ))
when the IR constraints bind. Thus, for each θ, either φ(θ) = 0 or, if not, Iq (θ, q(θ)) = vq (θ, q(θ)). Hence, the second
term on the right side of (28) equals zero for each θ. These two observations imply that the first-order conditions of the
BC problem in (28) are identical to those of the IR problem in (26).
    Step 3: Same Utility in IR and BC Problems. The requirement that I(θ, q(θ)) = v(θ, q(θ)) − u(θ) for types whose


                                                                     47
IR constraints bind in the IR problem ensures that the utility achieved by each consumer is identical in the IR and BC
problems. Specifically, let θ0 be such type. Then, for any type θ higher than θ0 , in the IR problem we have
                                         Z   θ                                                      Z   θ
                                 0                                     0    0           0   0
                 u(θ) = u(θ ) +                  vθ (x, q(x))dx = v(θ , q(θ )) − I(θ , q(θ )) +             vθ (x, q(x))dx,   (31)
                                         θ0                                                         θ0

since u0 (θ) = vθ (x, q(x)) by local incentive compatibility, and u(θ0 ) = u(θ0 ) = v(θ0 , q(θ0 )) − I(θ0 , q(θ0 )) by assump-
tion. The utility in (31) equals the utility that the consumer achieves in the solution to the BC problem, given that the
BC constraints bind in the BC problem if, and only if, the IR constraints bind in the IR problem and the optimal quan-
tity profiles in the two problems coincide, as argued in Step 2. An analogous argument holds for any type lower than
θ0 . Hence, consumers’ utility schedules coincide in the two problems. Lastly, u(θ) ≥ u since u(θ) ≥ u by assumption
so that full participation is satisfied in both problems.
     Thus, the solutions to the IR and BC problems are the same. By an argument similar to the one in the proof of
Result 1 in the Supplementary Appendix, it is also possible to show that Φ(θ) = 1.
Proof of Proposition 2: Recall that I(θ, q) = Y − z(θ, q), where

                            z(θ, q) = −z 1 (θ) − z2 ν(q), z 01 (θ) = ψ(log(θ − z2 )), and θ > z2 > 0.                         (32)

Let ψ(·) be a positive continuous function. To show that (BCH) is satisfied under these assumptions, we proceed by
                                                                                                                    0
showing that it is possible to construct a menu {t(θ), q(θ)} such that t(θ) = I(θ, q(θ)) = Y − z(θ, q(θ)), t (θ) =
θν 0 (q(θ))q 0 (θ), and q(θ) is weakly increasing. Since this third condition can be restated as θ(q) is weakly increasing,
it is possible to define the function T (q) such that T (q) = t(θ(q)). Thus, the first requirement of (BCH) amounts
                                                                                              0       0
to T (q) = I(θ(q), q) = Y − z(θ(q), q), whereas the second requirement amounts to t (θ(q))θ (q) = θ(q)ν 0 (q) or,
                   0
equivalently, T (q) = θ(q)ν 0 (q), with q = q(θ) ∈ [q(θ), q(θ)]. Then, rather than establishing that we can construct
                                                                             0
an increasing function q(θ) that satisfies t(θ) = Y − z(θ, q(θ)) and t (θ) = θν 0 (q(θ))q 0 (θ) under (32), we show,
equivalently, that we can construct an increasing function θ(q) that satisfies
                                                           
                                                               T (q) = Y − z(θ(q), q)
                                                                 0                                                            (33)
                                                               T (q) = θ(q)ν 0 (q)

under (32). Now, using (32) it follows that the derivative of the first expression in (33) with respect to q is
                             0                         0                                        0
                            T (q) = z 01 (θ(q))θ (q) + z2 ν 0 (q) = ψ(log[θ(q) − z2 ])θ (q) + z2 ν 0 (q).

By equating the right sides of this last expression and of the second expression in (33), we obtain
                                     0                                                                        0
            ψ(log[θ(q) − z2 ])θ (q) + z2 ν 0 (q) = θ(q)ν 0 (q) ⇔ ν 0 (q) = ψ(log[θ(q) − z2 ])θ (q)/[θ(q) − z2 ].              (34)

By integrating both sides of (34) from q(θ) to q ≤ q(θ) and using θ = θ(q(θ)), it follows that

                                     ν(q) − ν(q(θ)) = Ψ(log[θ(q) − z2 ]) − Ψ(log(θ − z2 )),                                   (35)

where Ψ(·), the integral of ψ(·), is weakly increasing since ψ(·) is positive. Simple manipulations yield

                                 θ(q) = z2 + exp{(Ψ)−1 (ν(q) − ν(q(θ)) + Ψ(log(θ − z2 )))},

with q(θ) determined by the last equality in (34) evaluated at q = q(θ). Note that θ(q) is an increasing function
of q, since (Ψ)−1 (·) and ν(·) are increasing functions. So, q(θ) is an increasing function of θ. Moreover, T (q) =
Y + z 1 (θ(q)) + z2 ν(q), which implies
                        0                          0
                      T (q) = z 01 (θ(q))θ (q) + z2 ν 0 (q) = ν 0 (q)[θ(q) − z2 ] + z2 ν 0 (q) = θ(q)ν 0 (q),

where the second equality follows from (34). So the three requirements of (BCH) are satisfied, and indeed T 0 (q) =
θ(q)ν 0 (q) for types whose BC constraints bind. For example, it is easy to show that if z(θ, q) = z0 − z1 (θ − z2 )λ −

                                                                       48
z2 ν(q), λ ≥ 2, z1 , z2 > 0, and θ > z2 , then
                                                                                i
                             −1                λz1 h
                q(θ) = (ν)        ν(q(θ)) +         (θ − z2 )λ−1
                                                                  − (θ − z2 )λ−1
                                                                                    , q 0 (θ) > 0, and
                                              λ−1
                                                                                    λ
                                                     λ−1    λ−1                       λ−1
                T (q) = Y (w) − z0 + z1 (θ − z2 )        +         [ν(q) − ν(q(θ))]         + z2 ν(q).
                                                              λz1

The Two-Dimensional Case: Suppose that the parameter w differs across consumers so that the budget schedule is
I(θ, q, w) = Y (w) − z(θ, q). The analysis of this case differs from that of the case of constant w depending on whether
the seller can discriminate across consumers based on w (Case 1) or, rather, only based on a menu of prices at most
contingent on q (Case 2).
Case 1: Contractible Income Characteristic. Suppose that the seller can segment consumers across submarkets indexed
by w and offer nonlinear prices in each submarket w so as to screen consumers based on θ. For ease of exposition,
suppose that there are only two levels of w, say, wL and wH , with Y (wH ) > Y (wL ). In any such submarket w, the
seller’s problem is as stated in the BC problem with income Y (w) and budget schedule I(θ, q, w). For the correspond-
ing simple BC problem, the necessary and sufficient conditions for an optimal solution are given by the analogue of
Result 1 under the same maintained assumptions: the implementable allocation {u(θ, w), q(θ, w)} solves the simple
BC problem if, and only if, there exists a cumulative multiplier function Φ(θ, w) such that the first-order conditions in
(28) and the complementary slackness condition in (29) apply with I(θ, q, w) = Y (w) − z(θ, q). Our next result shows
how this menu varies across submarkets. For this, let

            t(θ, wH ) = t(θ, wL ) + Y (wH ) − Y (wL ), q(θ, wH ) = q(θ, wL ), and Φ(θ, wH ) = Φ(θ, wL ).            (36)

Result 2. If {u(θ, wL ), q(θ, wL )} with associated cumulative multipliers {Φ(θ, wL )} solves the simple BC problem in
submarket wL , then {u(θ, wH ), q(θ, wH )} with associated cumulative multipliers {Φ(θ, wH )} satisfying (36) solves
the simple BC problem in submarket wH .

    This result states that type (θ, wH ) in the submarket with the higher income level is offered the same quantity
as type (θ, wL ) in the submarket with the lower income level, that is, q(θ, wH ) = q(θ, wL ). Moreover, the bind-
ing patterns of the multipliers in the two submarkets are identical in that the cumulative multiplier binds for type
(θ, wH ) in submarket wH if, and only if, it binds for type (θ, wL ) in submarket wL . The only difference is that type
(θ, wH ) in submarket wH pays Y (wH ) − Y (wL ) more for the same quantity purchased by type (θ, wL ) in submar-
ket wL . The idea is straightforward. In the submarket with income Y (wL ), a consumer with taste θ chooses the
pair (t(θ, wL ), q(θ, wL )) leading to the consumption of z(θ, wL ) = Y (wL ) − t(θ, wL ) units of the numeraire good.
The consumption bundle (q(θ, wL ), z(θ, wL )) must jointly provide enough calories so that the consumer meets the
constraint z(θ, wL ) ≥ z(θ, q(θ, wL )). Suppose that this constraint binds for a consumer with taste θ, that is,

                                   z(θ, wL ) = z(θ, q(θ, wL )) = Y (wL ) − t(θ, wL ).                               (37)

In submarket wH , at (t(θ, wL ), q(θ, wL )) the budget constraint is slack for a consumer with taste θ since Y (wH ) >
Y (wL ). Clearly, in submarket wH , it is feasible for the seller to offer the same quantity as in submarket wL , that
is, q(θ, wH ) = q(θ, wL ), since q(θ, wL ) is implementable in submarket wH too, and simply increase the price by
Y (wH ) − Y (wL ). In the proof of Result 2, we show that doing so is in general optimal for the seller.
Proof of Result 2: Let {u(θ, wL ), q(θ, wL )} and the cumulative multipliers {Φ(θ, wL )} solve the simple BC problem in
submarket wL . By Result 1, we know that these schedules satisfy the first-order conditions (28) and the complementary
slackness condition (29) with t(θ), q(θ), Φ(θ), φ(θ), and I(θ, q) replaced by t(θ, wL ), q(θ, wL ), Φ(θ, wL ), φ(θ, wL ),
and I(θ, q, wL ). It is immediate that the allocations and multipliers given in (36) solve the corresponding first-order
and complementary slackness conditions for submarket wH . To see why, note that since Iq (θ, q, w) = −z q (θ, q) is
independent of w (conditional on q), the first-order conditions in the two submarkets are identical under (36). Consider
next the complementary slackness condition. Since this condition holds in submarket wL , for any θ whose budget




                                                           49
constraint for the seller’s good binds and so φ(θ, wL ) is positive, we have

                               t(θ, wL ) = I(θ, q(θ, wL ), wL ) ≡ Y (wL ) − z(θ, q(θ, wL )).                              (38)

But then for this same θ in submarket wH under (36), the multiplier φ(θ, wH ) is also positive, since

          t(θ, wH ) = t(θ, wL ) + Y (wH ) − Y (wL ) = Y (wH ) − z(θ, q(θ, wL )) = Y (wH ) − z(θ, q(θ, wH )),

where the first and third equalities follow from (36), and the second equality from (38). Hence, the conjectured
solution satisfies the first-order conditions and complementary slackness condition for submarket wH . So, by Result 1,
this conjectured solution solves the simple BC problem for submarket wH .
Case 2: Noncontractible Income Characteristic. Suppose now that the seller cannot segment consumers across sub-
markets. That is, the seller must offer the same price schedule to all consumers regardless of their w (and θ). This
environment is equivalent to one in which the seller observes neither w nor θ. Assume that w and θ are sufficiently
positively dependent that w can be expressed as a nonlinear monotone function of θ, namely, w = ω(θ) with ω 0 (θ) > 0.
Then, substituting w = ω(θ) into I(θ, q, w) = Y (w) − z(θ, q) gives

                                            I(θ, q, ω(θ)) = Y (ω(θ)) − z(θ, q).                                           (39)

Under (39), the analogues of Proposition 1 and Result 1 apply. To see that the analogue of Proposition 2 also holds,
let Y (ω(θ)) = Y + y(ω(θ)) without loss. Then, the analogous result holds with v(θ, q) = θν(q), z(θ, q) = −z 1 (θ) −
z2 ν(q), and y 0 (ω(θ))ω 0 (θ) + z 01 (θ) = ψ(log(θ − z2 )) for θ > z2 > 0.
Proof of Proposition 3: Recall that T 0 (q(θ)) = θν 0 (q(θ)) > 0 by local incentive compatibility, and A(q) = −ν 00 (q)/ν 0 (q).
Differentiating T 0 (q) = θ(q)ν 0 (q) yields
                                                                 0
                                                                 θ (q) ν 00 (q)
                                                                                                            
              00        0      0             00            0                          0         1
            T (q) = θ (q)ν (q) + θ(q)ν (q) = θ(q)ν (q)                 + 0        = T (q)               − A(q) .         (40)
                                                                  θ(q)   ν (q)              θ(q)q 0 (θ)

By using T 0 (q) = θ(q)ν 0 (q), the first-order condition (9) can be expressed as {θ − [γ(θ) − F (θ)]/f (θ)}ν 0 (q(θ)) − c = 0.
Applying the implicit function theorem to this condition, we obtain
                                             h                  i                      h                  i
                                         ∂         γ(θ)−F (θ)         0 (q(θ))      ∂          γ(θ)−F (θ)
                                         ∂θ    θ −     f (θ)       ν                ∂θ   θ −      f (θ)
                            q 0 (θ) = − h                     i                =h                  i         .
                                            θ − γ(θ)−F
                                                    f (θ)
                                                          (θ)
                                                                ν 00 (q(θ))       θ −  γ(θ)−F (θ)
                                                                                           f (θ)     A(q(θ))

Note that θ > [γ(θ) − F (θ)]/f (θ), since the seller’s first-order condition can also be expressed as {θ − [γ(θ) −
F (θ)]/f (θ)} = c/ν 0 (q(θ)) and both c and ν 0 (q(θ)) are strictly positive by assumption. Also, q 0 (θ) > 0 by assumption
(PS); see Jullien (2000). Using (40) and the fact that T 0 (q), A(q) > 0, we can equivalently express T 00 (q) ≤ 0 as
                                                                   
                                      θ − γ(θ)−F (θ)                              θ − γ(θ)−F   (θ)
                     0                              f (θ)                                  f (θ)
                   T (q(θ))A(q(θ))          h                 i −1 ≤0⇔               h               i ≤ 1.            (41)
                                      θ ∂ θ − γ(θ)−F (θ)                      θ ∂
                                                                                      θ − γ(θ)−F (θ)
                                         ∂θ            f (θ)                      ∂θ          f (θ)

We establish the desired result by showing that (41) holds.
    Consider first any interval of consumer types whose IR constraints bind. By construction, any such type θ consumes
q(θ) and achieves utility u(θ). The homogeneity assumption implies ν(q(θ)) − u0 (θ) = 0, which in turn yields

                                                            −u00 (θ)      u00 (θ)
                                              q 0 (θ) = −              =
                                                            ν 0 (q(θ))   ν 0 (q(θ))

by applying the implicit function theorem, with q 0 (θ) > 0 by assumption, and so by (40)

                          ν 0 (q)               [ν 0 (q)]2
                                                                                0                 
                  00                     00                       00       0     ν (q)
                T (q) = 0         + θ(q)ν (q) = 00         + θ(q)ν (q) = ν (q)           − θ(q)A(q) .
                           q (θ)                 u (θ)                           u00 (θ)


                                                                50
Since ν 0 (q) > 0 by assumption, it follows T 00 (q) ≤ 0 if, and only if, ν 0 (q) ≤ θ(q)A(q)u00 (θ), which holds by assumption.
    Consider now any interval of consumer types whose IR constraints do not bind, in which case γ(θ) = γ for all
types in such an interval. When γ = 1, it follows that
                                              h               i
                                           ∂          1−F (θ)
                                           ∂θ   θ  −   f (θ)               1            ν 0 (q(θ))
                              q 0 (θ) = h                         ≥                =                ,                      (42)
                                                                                      −θν 00 (q(θ))
                                                       i
                                         θ − 1−F (θ) A(q(θ))         θA(q(θ))
                                                      f (θ)

where the inequality in the above follows from the assumption that [1 − F (θ)]/f (θ) decreases with θ. Condition (42)
implies 1/q 0 (θ) ≤ −θ(q)ν 00 (q)/ν 0 (q), which combined with (40) yields

                                   ν 0 (q)                       −θ(q)ν 00 (q)
                                                                              
                          00                       00     0
                        T (q) = 0          + θ(q)ν (q) ≤ ν (q)                   + θ(q)ν 00 (q) = 0.
                                   q (θ)                            ν 0 (q)

When, instead, γ ∈ [0, 1), the last inequality in (41) becomes
                                                         
        θf (θ) − γ + F (θ)       ∂          γ       F (θ)
                             ≤        θ−         +          ⇔ θf 2 (θ) ≥ −[γ − F (θ)]f (θ) − [γ − F (θ)]θf 0 (θ).                        (43)
               θf (θ)            ∂θ       f (θ)     f (θ)

We prove that (43) holds by considering two further cases.
   Case 1: γ ≥ F (θ). In this case, [γ − F (θ)]f (θ) ≥ 0 so that a sufficient condition for (43) is

                                                       f 2 (θ) ≥ −[γ − F (θ)]f 0 (θ).                                                    (44)

If f 0 (θ) ≥ 0, then it is immediate that the displayed inequality is satisfied. Suppose now that f 0 (θ) < 0. Since

                                         −f 2 (θ) − [1 − F (θ)] f 0 (θ)
                                  
                    ∂ 1 − F (θ)
                                      =                                 ≤ 0 ⇔ f 2 (θ) ≥ − [1 − F (θ)] f 0 (θ)
                   ∂θ        f (θ)                  f 2 (θ)

by assumption and −[1 − F (θ)]f 0 (θ) > −[γ − F (θ)]f 0 (θ) with γ < 1 and f 0 (θ) < 0, it follows that (44) and so (43)
are satisfied.
    Case 2: γ < F (θ). In this case, we can rewrite (43) as

                                                                                                                        f 0 (θ)
              θf 2 (θ) ≥ [F (θ) − γ]f (θ) + [F (θ) − γ]θf 0 (θ) ⇔ θf (θ) ≥ F (θ) − γ + [F (θ) − γ]θ                             .        (45)
                                                                                                                        f (θ)

When f 0 (θ) ≤ 0, a sufficient condition for the last displayed inequality to hold is f (θ) ≥ F (θ) − γ, which is satisfied
whenever θf (θ) ≥ 1 since F (θ) − γ ≤ 1. But since θf (θ) ≥ 1 holds by assumption, it follows that (43) is satisfied.
When, instead, f 0 (θ) > 0, a sufficient condition for (45) is

                                                              f 0 (θ)             F (θ)f (θ)
                            θf (θ) ≥ F (θ) + F (θ)θ                   ⇔ f 2 (θ) ≥            + F (θ)f 0 (θ)
                                                              f (θ)                   θ

or, equivalently,

                                               f 2 (θ)F (θ)                                          f 2 (θ) − F (θ)f 0 (θ)
                                                                                            
         2              0   f (θ) F (θ)f (θ)                  ∂                      F (θ)                                    F (θ)
       f (θ) − F (θ)f (θ) ≥                  =              ⇔                                    =            2
                                                                                                                            ≥        ,
                            f (θ)     θ           θf (θ)      ∂θ                     f (θ)                   f (θ)            θf (θ)
                                                     h       i−1
                                             F (θ)
which can be restated as εr (θ) =   ∂
                                    ∂θ       f (θ)    θ Ff (θ)
                                                           (θ)
                                                                   ≥ 1, which is satisfied by assumption.
Proof of Proposition 4. Let the allocation in the standard nonlinear pricing model be {us (θ), qs (θ)}. A seller’s
first-order conditions in the standard model and the augmented model can be written, respectively, as

                                        c        1 − F (θ)           c       γ(θ) − F (θ)
                             1−                =           and 1 − 0       =              .                                              (46)
                                  T 0 (qs (θ))     θf (θ)         T (q(θ))      θf (θ)


                                                                      51
Recall that in the standard model, the IR constraints bind only for the lowest type so that us (θ) = u. Since γ(θ) ≤ 1,
it follows that
                                      [1 − F (θ)]/θf (θ) ≥ [γ(θ) − F (θ)]/θf (θ)
with strict inequality if γ(θ) < 1. Using (46) and local incentive compatibility then yields

                                       T 0 (q(θ)) = θν 0 (q(θ)) ≤ T 0 (qs (θ)) = θν 0 (qs (θ)).                                              (47)

Thus, T 0 (q(θ)) ≤ T 0 (qs (θ)) with strict inequality if γ(θ) < 1, which further implies that q(θ) ≥ qs (θ) since ν 0 (·) is
decreasing by assumption. This latter result, in turn, yields that
                   Z   θ                      Z    θ                          Z   θ                            Z   θ
                            0
   u(θ) = u(θ) +           u (x)dx = u(θ) +            ν(q(x))dx ≥ us (θ) +           ν(qs (x))dx = us (θ) +           u0s (x)dx = us (θ),   (48)
                   θ                           θ                              θ                                θ

where the second and third equalities in (48) follow from local incentive compatibility in both the standard and the
augmented model in that u0 (θ) = ν(q(θ)) and u0s (θ) = ν(qs (θ)). The inequality in (48) follows because u(θ) ≥ u(θ),
u(θ) ≥ u by assumption, us (θ) = u since the IR constraint binds at θ in the standard model, q(θ) ≥ qs (θ) as just
argued, and ν(·) is strictly increasing.
Proof of Proposition 5: We divide the proofs into two parts, Case a) and Case b). In both parts, we rely on the
assumption of full participation under nonlinear and linear pricing.
     Case a). We start by showing that if the price schedule exhibits quantity discounts in that p0 (q) ≤ 0 at q = q(θ)
and if qm (θ) ≥ q(θ), then the utility of a consumer of type θ is higher under linear than under nonlinear pricing, that
is, um (θ) ≥ u(θ). By contradiction, assume that p0 (q) ≤ 0 at q = q(θ) and qm (θ) ≥ q(θ) but

                            u(θ) = θν(q(θ)) − T (q(θ)) > um (θ) = θν(qm (θ)) − θν 0 (qm (θ))qm (θ),                                          (49)

where in (49) we have used the fact that pm = θν 0 (qm (θ)) under linear pricing by consumer optimality. Given that
qm (θ) maximizes the consumer’s utility under linear pricing, it follows that

                θν(q(θ)) − T (q(θ)) > θν(qm (θ)) − θν 0 (qm (θ))qm (θ) ≥ θν(q(θ)) − θν 0 (qm (θ))q(θ),                                       (50)

which implies θν(q(θ)) − T (q(θ)) > θν(q(θ)) − θν 0 (qm (θ))q(θ) or, equivalently,

                                              θν 0 (qm (θ)) > T (q(θ))/q(θ) = p(q(θ)).                                                       (51)

Note that the first inequality in (50) restates (49), whereas the second inequality follows from the fact that any quantity
demanded that is different from qm (θ), including q(θ), implies a lower utility for the consumer at the linear price pm .
Next, by the assumption of the case, p0 (q) = [T 0 (q) − T (q)/q]/q ≤ 0 or, equivalently,

                                                         T 0 (q(θ)) ≤ T (q(θ))/q(θ).                                                         (52)

This inequality, together with (51) and the incentive compatibility condition T 0 (q(θ)) = θν 0 (q(θ)), implies

                                     θν 0 (q(θ)) = T 0 (q(θ)) ≤ T (q(θ))/q(θ) < θν 0 (qm (θ)),                                               (53)

and so θν 0 (qm (θ)) > θν 0 (q(θ)), which is a contradiction since qm (θ) ≥ q(θ) by assumption and ν 0 (·) is decreasing.
Hence, um (θ) ≥ u(θ).
    Case b). We now show that if the price schedule exhibits quantity discounts in that T 00 (q) ≤ 0 for all q = q(θ),
γ(θ) < 1, and q(θ) > qm (θ), then the utility of a consumer of type θ is higher under linear pricing than under nonlinear
pricing. Consider one such type, say, θ̂. By way of contradiction, suppose that u(θ̂) > um (θ̂). We will show that if
this assumption holds, then we contradict the assumption that all types participate under linear pricing. That is, if
u(θ̂) > um (θ̂), then there exists a type θ2 > θ̂ whose participation constraint binds under nonlinear pricing, that is,
u(θ2 ) = ū(θ2 ), but is violated under linear pricing, that is, um (θ2 ) < u(θ2 ). Hence, type θ2 is excluded under linear
pricing. Note that a consumer θ2 > θ̂ with u(θ2 ) = ū(θ2 ) must exist if γ(θ̂) < 1.


                                                                     52
    To reach the desired contradiction, rewrite u(θ̂) > um (θ̂) as

                                  u(θ2 ) − [u(θ2 ) − u(θ̂)] > um (θ2 ) − [um (θ2 ) − um (θ̂)],                                                 (54)

which can be equivalently expressed as
                                                Z         θ2                                                Z     θ2
                                                                0
                                     u(θ2 ) −                  u (x)dx > um (θ2 ) −                                    u0m (x)dx.              (55)
                                                     θ̂                                                      θ̂

Condition (55), in turn, is equivalent to
                                                                              Z         θ2
                                      u(θ2 ) − um (θ2 ) >                                    [ν(q(x)) − ν(qm (x))] dx                          (56)
                                                                                   θ̂

by using u(θ2 ) = u(θ2 ) since the IR constraint binds at θ2 under nonlinear pricing by construction, by exploiting
incentive compatibility under nonlinear and linear pricing, namely, u0 (θ) = ν(q(θ)) and u0m (θ) = ν(qm (θ)) for all
types, and by rearranging terms.
    We now argue that the right side of (56) is positive, which establishes the desired contradiction. To see that the
right side of (56) is positive, note first that for all θ ≥ θ̂,

                   pm = θν 0 (qm (θ)) = θ̂ν 0 (qm (θ̂)) ≥ θ̂ν 0 (q(θ̂)) = T 0 (q(θ̂)) ≥ T 0 (q(θ)) = θν 0 (q(θ)),                              (57)

where the first two equalities follow from a consumer’s first-order condition under linear pricing, which, of course,
holds for each θ, the first inequality follows from q(θ̂) > qm (θ̂) by the assumption of the case and the fact that ν 0 (·)
is decreasing, the third and fourth equalities follow from local incentive compatibility under nonlinear pricing, and
the second inequality holds for any θ ≥ θ̂ since T 00 (q) ≤ 0 at all q = q(θ) by assumption. Hence, (57) implies
θν 0 (qm (θ)) ≥ θν 0 (q(θ)) for all θ ≥ θ̂, and so q(θ) ≥ qm (θ) for all θ ≥ θ̂, given that ν 0 (·) is decreasing. But since ν(·)
is increasing, then the right side of (56) is positive when q(θ) ≥ qm (θ) for all θ ≥ θ̂, which implies u(θ2 ) > um (θ2 ).
Then, θ2 does not participate under linear pricing, which is a contradiction.
Proof of Proposition 6: To start, note that s(θ, q(θ)) ≥ u(θ) for consumers with types θ ∈ [θ0 , θ00 ] implies that the
seller makes nonnegative profits from each such consumer type under nonlinear pricing and these types participate by
the argument in the proof of Proposition 1. To establish the desired claim, we need to show that there exists a subinterval
of types in [θ0 , θ00 ] who do not participate under linear pricing. To this purpose, suppose, by way of contradiction, that
all consumer types in [θ0 , θ00 ] participate under linear pricing. We prove that if this assumption holds, then the seller
makes negative profits under linear pricing. To prove this result, let θ̂ be a type in [θ0 , θ00 ] with um (θ̂) = u(θ̂) by
assumption. Observe that for any type θ in [θ̂, θ00 ] who participates under linear pricing, it must be um (θ) ≥ u(θ),
which can be expanded as
                                                               Z     θ                                                Z      θ
                               um (θ) = um (θ̂) +                         u0m (x)dx            = um (θ̂) +                       ν(qm (x))dx
                                                                θ̂                                                      θ̂
                                                                   Z      θ                                       Z     θ
                                                                               0
                                 ≥ u(θ) = u(θ̂) +                             u (x)dx = u(θ̂) +                              ν(q(x))dx,        (58)
                                                                     θ̂                                            θ̂
where the second equality in (58) uses the fact that u0m (θ) = ν(qm (θ)) by the consumer’s first-order condition under
linear pricing, θν 0 (qm (θ)) = pm , and the last equality uses the homogeneity assumption that u0 (θ) = ν(q(θ)). Since
um (θ̂) = u(θ̂) by assumption, (58) implies
                                              Z      θ                                         Z     θ
                                                          ν(qm (x))dx ≥                                  ν(q(x))dx.                            (59)
                                                θ̂                                              θ̂

With ν(·) positive and increasing, (59) implies that there exists a subinterval of [θ̂, θ] with positive measure, say, [θ3 , θ4 ],
such that qm (θ) ≥ q(θ) for all θ ∈ [θ3 , θ4 ]. Since q(θ) > qF B (θ) by assumption for consumers with types in [θ0 , θ00 ]
and qm (θ) ≥ q(θ) for all θ ∈ [θ3 , θ4 ], it follows that qm (θ) > qF B (θ) for consumers with types in [θ3 , θ4 ]. Combining


                                                                                         53
qm (θ) > qF B (θ) with the fact that ν 0 (·) is strictly decreasing gives

                                           pm = θν 0 (qm (θ)) < θν 0 (qF B (θ)) = c,                                    (60)

for θ ∈ [θ3 , θ4 ], where the first equality follows from the first-order condition for qm (θ) and the second equality
follows from the definition of the first-best quantity for type θ, qF B (θ). But pm < c implied by (60) contradicts seller
optimality: the seller can always raise pm and earn at least zero profits.
Proof of Proposition 7: To prove this result, we exploit the equivalence between the BC and IR models. In particular,
we map the change in income due to the transfer in the BC model into a corresponding change in reservation utility in
the IR model. For simplicity of exposition only, we use the simple version of the equivalence between the IR and BC
models by defining u(θ) as
                                                 I(θ, q) = θν(q) − u(θ).                                             (61)
Consider a consumer of type θ receiving a transfer τ (θ) with τ 0 (θ) ≤ 0. Hence, the consumer’s budget for the seller’s
good is I(θ, q) + τ (θ) after the transfer, and the analogue of condition (61) for the equivalence between the two models
under the new budget schedule is
                                              I(θ, q) + τ (θ) = θν(q) − u(θ, τ ),                                    (62)
where u(θ, τ ) is the new reservation utility associated with τ (θ). Subtracting (62) from (61) gives

                                                   u(θ, τ ) = u(θ) − τ (θ).                                             (63)

Hence, in the proof we need only show that replacing the original IR constraint u(θ) ≥ u(θ), where u(θ) is defined in
(61), with the new constraint
                                                  u(θ) ≥ u(θ, τ ),                                               (64)
where u(θ, τ ) is defined in (63), leads to an increase in the amount purchased of the seller’s good, a decrease in marginal
prices, and an increase in the total price for each quantity.
     To develop some intuition, note that a consumer of type θ spends t(θ) to purchase q(θ) and the rest of her income
to purchase z = Y − t(θ) ≥ z(θ, q(θ)) before the transfer is introduced, so her budget constraint for the seller’s
good is t(θ) ≤ Y − z(θ, q(θ)). If this consumer receives a transfer of τ (θ), then the seller can ask for a higher
price, since the consumer’s ability to pay has increased, that is, her new budget constraint for the seller’s good is
t(θ) ≤ Y + τ (θ) − z(θ, q(θ)). When we translate this consumer’s new budget constraint for the seller’s good back to
a participation constraint using (62), we see from (63) that the transfer amounts to a decrease in the reservation utility
by the amount of the transfer, which reflects the fact that the seller can now charge a higher price while still satisfying
the consumer’s participation constraint.
     We now proceed to the formal argument. Let {tτ (θ), qτ (θ)} denote the equilibrium menu with participation con-
straints (64) and {t(θ), q(θ)} denote the original menu in the absence of the transfer with participation constraints
u(θ) ≥ u(θ). The proof involves several steps. The first step establishes that the new reservation quantity, q τ (θ), is
greater than the original one, q(θ), type by type in that

                                                    q τ (θ) ≥ q(θ) for all θ.                                           (65)

This result follows immediately from the fact that q τ (θ) and q(θ) satisfy assumption (BCH) in that u0 (θ, τ ) = ν(q τ (θ))
and u0 (θ) = ν(q(θ)), which, using (63), implies that

                                 ν(q τ (θ)) = u0 (θ, τ ) = u0 (θ) − τ 0 (θ) ≥ u0 (θ) = ν(q(θ)),                         (66)

since τ 0 (θ) ≤ 0. As ν(·) increases with q, (66) implies q τ (θ) ≥ q(θ), as desired. We show next that for each type

                                          qτ (θ) ≥ q(θ) and Tτ0 (qτ (θ)) ≤ T 0 (q(θ)).                                  (67)

     In Part I, we establish (66) when the set of types whose IR constraints bind is the same before and after the transfer
is introduced. In Part II, we establish (66) in the general case.


                                                               54
      Part I: Suppose that the set of types whose IR constraints bind is the same before and after the transfer is introduced.
Since the multiplier can bind at isolated points only at θ or θ, we can partition [θ, θ] into intervals in which the IR
constraints bind for each type in the interval (Case 1) and into intervals in which they bind at either or both of the
extremes of any such interval but nowhere in the interior of it (Case 2). Given this partition, intervals of Case 2 are
either interior, in which case the IR constraints bind at both extremes, or they have θ or θ as extrema, in which case the
IR constraints may or may not bind at θ and θ.
      Case 1: Consider first an interval in which the IR constraints bind for each type. Then, q τ (θ) ≥ q(θ) for all
θ’s in this interval by (65), and so qτ (θ) = q τ (θ) ≥ q(θ) = q(θ) for all θ and, using local incentive compatibility,
Tτ0 (qτ (θ)) = θν 0 (qτ (θ)) ≤ θν 0 (q(θ)) = T 0 (q(θ)) since ν 0 (·) is decreasing, as desired.
      Case 2: Consider now an interval in which the IR constraints bind only at either or both of the extremes. Consider
first this latter case in which the IR constraints bind at both extremes of the interval (one of which may be θ or θ or
they both may be θ and θ). Denote such an interval by [θ0 , θ00 ]. By construction, the IR constraints only bind at θ0 and
θ00 , so the cumulative multiplier γτ (θ) = γτ ∈ (0, 1) is constant on (θ0 , θ00 ). Note that
            Z   θ00                                                                      Z      θ00                 Z    θ00
                      u0 (x, τ )dx = u(θ00 , τ ) − u(θ0 , τ ) = uτ (θ00 ) − uτ (θ0 ) =                u0τ (x)dx =              ν(qτ (x))dx
              θ0                                                                               θ0                       θ0
                       Z   θ00                                                      Z    θ00                  Z   θ00
                   ≥             u0 (x)dx = u(θ00 ) − u(θ0 ) = u(θ00 ) − u(θ0 ) =              u0 (x)dx =               ν(q(x))dx.           (68)
                         θ0                                                         θ0                         θ0
Consider the first line in (68). The second equality holds since the IR constraints of types θ0 and θ00 bind before and
after the transfer by the assumption of the case, and the fourth equality follows from local incentive compatibility.
Consider now the second line in (68). The inequality holds because u0 (θ, τ ) ≥ u0 (θ) for each type, as established, and
the equalities hold by the same argument that proves that the corresponding equalities in the first line hold. Equation
(68) then implies that
                                         Z θ00               Z θ00
                                               ν(qτ (x))dx ≥       ν(q(x))dx.                                        (69)
                                                    θ0                    θ0
Since ν(·) is positive and increasing, (69) implies that l(γτ , θ) = qτ (θ) ≥ q(θ) = l(γ, θ) for a set of types in [θ0 , θ00 ]
with positive measure—recall the definition of l(·, ·) from assumption (PS). Since, as argued, l(·, θ) decreases with γ,
the fact that qτ (θ) ≥ q(θ) yields that γτ ≤ γ on this subset of [θ0 , θ00 ]. But given that the multiplier is constant in the
interior of [θ0 , θ00 ] by construction, it must be that γτ ≤ γ on the entire interval (θ0 , θ00 ). Therefore, qτ (θ) ≥ q(θ) for all
types in (θ0 , θ00 ). By local incentive compatibility, then, Tτ0 (qτ (θ)) = θν 0 (qτ (θ)) ≤ θν 0 (q(θ)) = T 0 (q(θ)) for all types
in (θ0 , θ00 ) since ν 0 (·) is decreasing. Finally, qτ (θ) ≥ q(θ) and Tτ0 (qτ (θ)) ≤ T 0 (q(θ)) for θ0 and θ00 follow immediately
from (65), given that the IR constraints bind for θ0 and θ00 by the assumption of the case, and so qτ (θ) = q τ (θ) and
q(θ) = q(θ).
     Consider next the case in which the IR constraints bind only at one of the extremes of the interval. As argued,
these last intervals to consider are of the form [θ, θ000 ], where the IR constraints bind only at θ000 , and [θ0000 , θ], where
the IR constraints bind only at θ0000 . But then γτ = 0 for all types in [θ, θ000 ) and γτ = 1 for all types in [θ0000 , θ].
Since the binding pattern of the IR constraints is the same before and after the transfer, it must be that γ = γτ , and so
qτ (θ) = q(θ) and Tτ0 (qτ (θ)) = T 0 (q(θ)) for all types in [θ, θ000 ) and [θ0000 , θ]. (A similar argument holds when γτ = 0
or γτ = 1 for all types.) For θ000 , the same argument as the one leading to (65) applies, and so qτ (θ) ≥ q(θ) and
Tτ0 (qτ (θ)) ≤ T 0 (q(θ)).
     Under both Case 1 and Case 2, given that F (θ) = G(q) = Gτ (qτ ) and qτ (θ) ≥ q(θ) for each type, it follows
that the distribution of quantities after the transfer is introduced first-order stochastically dominates the one before the
transfer is introduced. Since, as argued, the transfer amounts to a reduction in consumers’ reservation utilities in that
u(θ, τ ) ≤ u(θ), the menu {t(θ), q(θ)} is still implementable, so profits must weakly increase. Moreover, the offered
quantity (weakly) increases for each type, and so the cost of producing each type’s quantity is higher after the transfer.
Hence, T (q(θ)) must (weakly) increase for each type.
     Part II: Consider now the more general case in which the binding pattern of the IR constraints is not the same before
and after the transfer. Pick an interval of consumer types whose IR constraints bind before and after the transfer. Then,
the same argument as that leading to (65) proves the desired result. Consider now an interval of consumer types with


                                                                     55
binding IR constraints only at the extremes of such an interval before and after the transfer. Then, the same argument
as that leading to (68) and (69) and the discussion following them establish the desired claim.
Proof of Corollary 2: Recall that T 0 (q) = θ(q)ν 0 (q) and Tτ0 (qτ ) = θτ (qτ )ν 0 (qτ ) by local incentive compatibility before
and after the transfer, and that q = q(θ) and qτ = q̃τ (q) = qτ (θ). Differentiating these local incentive compatibility
conditions gives
                                    1                                                           1
                Tτ00 (qτ (θ)) =             ν 0 (qτ (θ)) + θν 00 (qτ (θ)) and T 00 (q(θ)) =             ν 0 (q(θ)) + θν 00 (q(θ)).   (70)
                                  qτ0 (θ)                                                     q 0 (θ)

Now, F (θ) = Gτ (qτ (θ)) and F (θ) = G(q(θ)), respectively, imply that 1/qτ0 (θ) = gτ (qτ )/f (θ) and 1/q 0 (θ) =
g(q)/f (θ). Then, q 0 (θ) ≤ qτ0 (θ) if, and only if, gτ (qτ ) ≤ g(q), since

                                            1         gτ (qτ )     1    g(q)
                                                  =            ≤ 0    =       ⇔ gτ (qτ ) ≤ g(q).
                                        qτ0 (θ)        f (θ)    q (θ)   f (θ)

Suppose that qτ (θ) ≥ q(θ) for each consumer type. Thus, Gτ (qτ ) ≤ G(q). Since Gτ (·) first-order stochastically
dominates G(·), it follows that gτ (qτ ) ≤ g(q) up to a certain type θmax ≤ θ. Hence, q 0 (θ) ≤ qτ0 (θ) for any θ ≤ θmax .
Also, qτ (θ) ≥ q(θ), by assumption, for all types implies that ν 0 (qτ (θ)) ≤ ν 0 (q(θ)) if ν 00 (·) ≤ 0, which is a maintained
assumption, and ν 00 (qτ (θ)) ≤ ν 00 (q(θ)) if ν 000 (·) ≤ 0, which holds by assumption. Thus, by inspecting (70) it is
immediate that Tτ00 (q̃τ (q)) ≤ T 00 (q) for all θ ≤ θmax or, equivalently, for all percentiles of quantities up to the percentile
pmax corresponding to the quantity q(θmax ) before the transfer and to the quantity qτ (θmax ) after the transfer, as
desired.
No Resale: We interpret the fact that it may be difficult for consumers to engage in the type of contracts that would
sustain resale as capturing imperfections in contracting among consumers analogous to those we maintain among
sellers. The argument is simple. When consumers’ characteristics are observable but not contractible to consumers
too, the problem that a coalition of consumers would face at the resale stage is a constrained version of the one that
the seller faces. In particular, the coalition’s problem of maximizing consumers’ utility in excess of the utility each
type achieves by purchasing from the seller, that is, s(θ, q(θ)) − u(θ), would be identical to the seller’s problem given
that s(θ, q(θ)) − u(θ) = t(θ) − c(q(θ)), except for the additional constraint of linear pricing, if only linear prices
were enforceable by the coalition. If enforcement or transaction costs, due, for instance, to commuting across villages,
were of the order of s(θ, q(θ)) − u(θ) or higher for each type θ, then the coalition could not achieve higher utility for
any member than the utility each member obtains by trading with the seller. See Ligon et al. (2002) for evidence on
contracting imperfections in developing countries.
Example 1 (Nonlinear vs. Linear Pricing): Suppose the base utility function, ν(q), is a three-parameter HARA
function with ν(q) = (1 − d)[aq/(1 − d) + b]d /d, a > 0, aq/(1 − d) + b > 0, and 0 < d < 1. Denote by us (θ) the
utility of a type θ consumer under the standard model. With a uniform type distribution on [θ, θ], u(θ) = 0, a = c = 1,
b = 0, and d = 1/2, it follows us (θ) ≥ um (θ) if, and only if, (2θ − θ)2 − (2θ − θ)2 ≥ θ2 . When θ = 1 and θ = 2,
this expression reduces to 3θ2 − 8θ + 4 ≥ 0, a polynomial with roots θ = 2/3 and θ = 2. Thus, um (θ) ≥ us (θ)
for all consumer types. Consider now the highly convex case of the augmented model with γ = 1/2. In this case,
u(θ) ≥ um (θ) if, and only if, 3θ2 −6θ +2 ≥ 0. So, u(θ) ≥ um (θ) for θ ≥ 1.58. Also, all such types demand quantities
above first best. Thus, not only u(θ) ≥ us (θ), as implied by Proposition 4, but also more than half of the consumers
prefer nonlinear to linear pricing under the augmented model, whereas all consumers prefer linear to nonlinear pricing
under the standard model.
Proof of Proposition 8: Rewrite the seller’s first-order condition as

       1        1    [F (θ) − γ(θ)]      1    [G(q) − γ(θ(q))]θ0 (q)     1    [G(q) − γ(θ(q))]ϕ(q)
      0
           =  0
                   +   0
                                    =  0
                                            +     0
                                                                     = 0    +                                                        (71)
     T (q)   c (Q)    c (Q)θf (θ)     c (Q)      c (Q)g(q)θ(q)        c (Q)        c0 (Q)g(q)

with ϕ(q) ≡ ∂ log(θ(q))/∂q = θ0 (q)/θ(q) or, equivalently,

                                       g(q) c0 (Q)
                                                        
                                                     − 1 = G(q) − ψ(q),
                                       ϕ(q) T 0 (q)


                                                                      56
where ψ(q) ≡ γ(θ(q)). By taking derivatives of each side of this expression, we obtain

                                 ∂{g(q)c0 (Q)/[ϕ(q)T 0 (q)]} ∂[g(q)/ϕ(q)]
                                                            −             = g(q) − ψ 0 (q).
                                            ∂q                    ∂q
Integrating these expressions from q to q gives
                 q
                     ∂{g(x)c0 (Q)/[ϕ(x)T 0 (x)]}                q                             q                  q
            Z                                           Z                                Z                   Z
                                                                    ∂[g(x)/ϕ(x)]
                                                 dx −                            dx =             g(x)dx −           ψ 0 (x)dx = 0,
             q                  ∂x                          q            ∂x               q                  q

                                                     Rq                     Rq
where the last equality follows from the fact that      q       g(x)dx =    q    ψ 0 (x)dx = 1, so that

                                        g(q)c0 (Q)   g(q)c0 (Q)   g(q)   g(q)
                                               0
                                                   −        0
                                                                −      +      = 0,
                                        ϕ(q)T (q) ϕ(q)T (q) ϕ(q) ϕ(q)

which implies
                                                                         g(q) ϕ(q)
                                                                                  
                                    0                  ϕ(q)     g(q)
                                   c (Q) = g(q) − g(q)       /         −               .
                                                       ϕ(q)     T 0 (q) T 0 (q) ϕ(q)
Since g(q) and T 0 (q) are identified, it follows that c0 (Q) is identified up to ϕ(q)/ϕ(q). The rest of the proposition is
proved in the main text.
Derivation of Reduced Form in (18): The seller’s first-order condition can be rewritten as

       T 0 (q) − c0 (Q)                       θ0 (q) γ(θ(q)) − G(q)         c0 (Q)       θ0 (q) G(q) γ(θ(q))
                                                                                                              
                          γ(θ) − F (θ)
                        =                 =                              ⇔ 0       =1+                −            ,
             T 0 (q)          θf (θ)          θ(q)         g(q)             T (q)        θ(q) g(q)         g(q)

by using F (θ) = G(q), f (θ) = g(q)q 0 (θ), and θ(q)q 0 (θ) = θ(q)/θ0 (q). Further manipulation yields
               0                                                       !
                            θ0 (q) G(q) γ(θ(q))                               θ0 (q) γ(θ(q)) − 1 1 − G(q)
                                                                                                       
                c (Q)                                             p(q)
          log             ≈               −              ⇔ log c0 (Q) ≈                         +
                T 0 (q)     θ(q) g(q)          g(q)                           θ(q)       g(q)         g(q)
                                                                   t1
                                0
                                           θ0 (q) 1 − γ(θ(q))         θ0 (q) 1 − G(q)
                                                                                   
                                 c (Q)
          ⇔ log[p(q)] ≈ log              −                        +                      ,                                            (72)
                                   t1       θ(q)        g(q)          θ(q)        g(q)

using the fact that T 0 (q) = t1 p(q) given our log-linear specification for T (q). Note that [1 − G(q)]/g(q) is the inverse
of the hazard rate of the distribution quantities. Letting γ(θ(q)) = ψ(q), (72) becomes
                                      0                      "                #
                                                 θ0 (elog(q) ) 1 − ψ(elog(q) )     θ0 (elog(q) ) 1 − G(q)
                                                                                                        
                                      c (Q)
                  log[p(q)] ≈ log             −                                  +                          .
                                         t1      θ(elog(q) )     g(elog(q) )       θ(elog(q) )     g(q)

We can interpret the right side of this expression as a function of log(q) and [1 − G(q)/g(q)], which we term
f (log(q), [1 − G(q)]/g(q)). A second-order Taylor expansion of f (·) in a neighborhood of (log(q), [1−G(q)/g(q)]) =
(a, b) gives
                                                                             
                                                                 1 − G(q)
      log[p(q)] ≈ f (a, b) + f1 (a, b)(log(q) − a) + f2 (a, b)             −b
                                                                   g(q)
               (                                                                                         2 )
             1                         2                             1 − G(q)                    1 − G(q)
          +     f11 (a, b)[log(q) − a] + 2f12 (a, b)[log(q) − a]              − b + f22 (a, b)            −b     ,
             2                                                         g(q)                        g(q)




                                                                       57
and so
                                                                         a2           b2
                         log[p(q)] ≈ f (a, b) − af1 (a, b) − bf2 (a, b) + f11 (a, b) + f22 (a, b) + abf12 (a, b)
                                     |                                   2{z          2                        }
                                                                                               β0
                                                                                                                                                                
                                                                                                                       1 − G(q)
                            + [f1 (a, b) − af11 (a, b) − bf12 (a, b)] log(q) + [f2 (a, b) − af12 (a, b) − bf22 (a, b)]
                              |                 {z                  }          |                 {z                  }   g(q)
                                                   β1                                                                  β2

                                                                                            1 − G(q) 2
                                                                                                 
                                                1 − G(q)   1                2  1
                            + f12 (a, b) log(q)          + f11 (a, b) log(q) + f22 (a, b)              ,
                              | {z }              g(q)    |2 {z }             |2 {z }         g(q)
                                  β3
                                                                                       β4                        β5

which can be equivalently expressed as

                                                                                                                      1 − G(q) 2
                                                                                                                         
                                                              1 − G(q)                 1 − G(q)
        log[p(q)] ≈ β0 + β1 log(q) + β2                                  + β3 log(q)              + β4 log(q)2 + β5              .
                                                                g(q)                     g(q)                           g(q)

B                    Appendix
B.1                      Omitted Estimation Results
We present here estimation results omitted from the main text for brevity.
Marginal Cost Estimates. Figure 9 reports the estimated marginal cost at the total quantity provided of each
good in each estimated village according to our quadratic specification of the multiplier function; we truncated the top
5% of the estimates for readability. The estimates for the linear specification are very similar; see Section B.3. The
mean of the estimated marginal cost across villages defined as municipalities is 6.342 pesos for rice with a standard
deviation of 4.120, 10.839 pesos for kidney beans with a standard deviation of 20.647, and 9.834 pesos for sugar with
a standard deviation of 7.837. Although estimated marginal cost varies noticeably across villages for each good, its
range is similar for rice and sugar, from close to 0 pesos to about 15 pesos, and its mean comparable across kidney
beans and sugar. Villages are very dispersed and isolated, so some variability in estimated marginal cost across villages
is to be expected.

                                                                   Figure 9: Estimated Marginal Cost
                                    Rice                                                    Kidney Beans                                         Sugar
          15




                                                                       30




                                                                                                                              20
                                                                                                                              15
                10




                                                                              20
    Marginal Cost




                                                                  Marginal Cost




                                                                                                                        Marginal Cost
                                                                                                                             10
                                                                10
          5




                                                                                                                              5
          0




                                                                       0




                                                                                                                              0




                     0       50     100      150        200                        0   50       100        150   200                    0   50    100      150       200
                                   Village                                                     Village                                           Village




Predicted Multiplier Schedule. We perform significance tests on the parameters of the multiplier function γ(θ(q))
in each village and for each good so as to determine whether the multiplier is ever constant and construct the predicted
multiplier for each quantity accordingly. We illustrate our procedure only in the quadratic case, since the linear case is
a special case of it. Consider village v and good j. First, we test whether the three parameters, γvj0 , γvj1 , and γvj2 ,
are individually significant. If they are, then we use all of them to construct the predicted γ(θ(q)). If only γvj0 is
significant, then we set all other parameters to zero and next test whether the implied multiplier is equal to 0 or 1. If we
reject these hypotheses, then we keep the original value of γvj0 ; otherwise, we set the multiplier to 0 or 1 depending on
the outcome of the test. If only γvj1 is significant, then we set all other parameters to zero. If only γvj2 is significant,
then we set all other parameters to zero. If only γvj0 and γvj1 are significant, then we set γvj2 to zero. If only γvj0


                                                                                               58
and γvj2 are significant, then we set γvj1 to zero. If only γvj1 and γvj2 are significant, then we set γvj0 to zero. If no
parameter is significant, then we set all of them to zero so that γ(θ(q)) equals 0.5 at all quantities.
Statistics on Estimates. Tables 3 to 5 report selected percentiles of the distribution of the t-statistics of the es-
timates of c0 (Q), γ(θ(q)), θ(q), ν 0 (q), and f (θ) across villages. These statistics are meant to illustrate the overall
precision of our estimates. We then calculate selected percentiles of the distribution across village-level quantities of
the t-statistics of the estimates of γ(θ(q)), θ(q), ν 0 (q), and f (θ) for each village. Tables 6 to 8 report the quartiles of
the distribution of these selected percentiles across villages. These statistics are meant to show the variability across
villages of the precision of the estimates of γ(θ(q)), θ(q), ν 0 (q), and f (θ) at the different quantities consumed of a
good in a village. As apparent from these tables, the model’s primitives as well as the multiplier γ(θ(q)) are fairly
precisely estimated in most villages and for most quantities.

                       Table 3: Percentiles of t-Statistics across Quantities and Villages for Rice
                p1      p5     p10    p25                    p50           p75         p90         p95         p99
  c0 (Q)     0.029   0.465   1.569  5.737                 13.606        24.958      46.042      57.108     123.646
  γ(θ(q))    1.177   3.891   6.062 22.413                112.474   1.653 × 103 3.781 × 104 3.630 × 105 7.131 × 107
  θ(q)       0.045   0.113   0.363  0.967                  2.735         7.174      22.840      46.671     138.463
  ν 0 (q) −109.942 −26.071 −13.560 −3.979                −0.980        −0.008       10.468      32.654     189.972
  f (θ)      1.118   1.118   1.118  3.665                  9.671        15.163      24.950      29.262      50.702




                  Table 4: Percentiles of t-Statistics across Quantities and Villages for Kidney Beans
                      p1     p5    p10    p25     p50     p75         p90         p95         p99
   c0 (Q)          0.015  0.047  0.165  2.363   7.364  15.099      26.034      35.793      60.875
   γ(θ(q))         2.585  5.642 10.147 31.358 156.134 492.064 3.603 × 103 2.231 × 104 1.627 × 105
                     −18
   θ(q)    9.029 × 10     0.135  0.519  1.458   3.513   7.078      11.241      15.223      23.309
   ν 0 (q)       −15.049 −9.306 −7.152 −3.434 −1.202    0.615      13.109      30.124      80.267
   f (θ)           1.118  1.118  1.581  5.244  11.565  18.473      24.239      27.613      36.652




                       Table 5: Percentiles of t-Statistics across Quantities and Villages for Sugar
                   p1      p5    p10    p25     p50     p75         p90         p95         p99
      c0 (Q)    0.004   0.012  0.081  3.668  11.742  30.069      72.451     129.396     274.517
      γ(θ(q))   1.166   4.322  8.200 32.756 170.466 575.413 3.650 × 103 1.795 × 104 1.749 × 106
      θ(q)      0.002   0.225  0.414  1.127   2.683   5.862      12.785      18.854      49.134
      ν 0 (q) −28.371 −12.893 −8.537 −4.123 −1.345 −0.326         2.810       9.445      51.105
      f (θ)     1.118   1.118  1.118  6.800  12.942  18.874      24.520      27.407      35.777




                                                             59
        Table 6: Between-Village Quartiles of Percentiles of t-Statistics across Village Quantities for Rice
                     p1      p5     p10     p25     p50         p75         p90         p95         p99
γ(θ(q)) p25       0.940   2.901   4.969   8.183  23.735     114.980 3.114 × 103 2.894 × 104 6.335 × 105
         p50      1.502  10.257  15.798 32.789   84.607     635.232 9.581 × 103 1.922 × 105 1.776 × 106
         p75      8.125  24.850  44.102 125.823 397.046 3.300 × 103 7.418 × 104 2.370 × 106 2.194 × 108
 θ(q)    p25      0.024   0.087   0.281   0.704   1.725       4.215      14.759      38.274      66.776
         p50      0.082   0.155   0.495   1.171   2.541       6.509      18.461      58.424      99.308
         p75      0.148   0.543   0.833   1.805   4.076       9.827      28.787      77.431     119.838
 ν 0 (q) p25   −109.942 −49.192 −22.981 −6.238 −2.203       −0.848      −0.243      −0.125        1.199
         p50    −83.125 −33.848 −13.560 −3.826 −0.928       −0.101        1.537       4.799      63.914
         p75    −28.180 −16.361 −5.874 −1.777 −0.092          3.762      24.882      65.786     188.850
 f (θ)   p25      1.118   1.118   1.118   2.168   4.330       9.093      15.330      28.657      50.279
         p50      2.739   5.000   6.120   8.281  11.307      15.163      27.161      31.031      50.727
         p75      5.123   6.703   7.583   9.269  12.500      17.746      27.166      31.055      50.727




   Table 7: Between-Village Quartiles of Percentiles of t-Statistics across Village Quantities for Kidney Beans
                    p1      p5         p10       p25     p50             p75         p90         p95         p99
γ(θ(q)) p25      2.222   4.049       8.732    12.704  34.369         112.622     231.876     295.473     908.156
         p50     4.337  12.143      21.240    41.340 107.275         231.221     436.778     626.987 3.432 × 103
         p75    20.332  65.232     115.150   172.986 411.486     1.300 × 103 2.838 × 103 6.372 × 103 4.907 × 104
 θ(q)    p25     0.001   0.120       0.384     0.927   2.628           5.160       8.517      10.301      15.412
         p50     0.024   0.271       0.576     1.458   3.547           6.453       9.597      13.718      21.626
         p75     0.024   0.438       0.907     2.165   4.421           8.372      13.787      17.482      24.552
 ν 0 (q) p25   −15.421 −12.178     −9.057    −5.783 −2.612           −1.101      −0.306      −0.047        2.284
         p50   −10.922 −7.841      −5.372    −2.967 −1.324           −0.185        1.481       2.389      35.157
         p75    −7.341 −4.222      −3.387    −1.170    0.429           5.723      11.765      21.521      66.214
 f (θ)   p25     1.118   1.581       1.809     3.162   5.477           9.417      13.509      16.508      31.605
         p50     4.183   6.349       7.804    10.094  15.026          20.520      27.060      32.365      36.646
         p75     7.045   8.657       9.421    12.298  16.771          21.700      27.458      32.365      36.663




       Table 8: Between-Village Quartiles of Percentiles of t-Statistics across Village Quantities for Sugar
                         p1     p5     p10            p25     p50     p75               p90         p95         p99
γ(θ(q)) p25           1.248  2.004   5.879         12.244  44.027 191.167           424.775 2.054 × 103 6.874 × 105
         p50          3.344 12.293  20.236         38.504 119.964 289.418           888.764 6.885 × 103 7.345 × 105
         p75         14.400 31.077  39.699        124.092 345.134 886.617       3.359 × 103 6.000 × 104 2.943 × 106
 θ(q)    p25   7.700 × 10−9  0.144   0.281          0.906   2.001   3.989             8.619      10.142      22.735
         p50          0.082  0.303   0.797          1.109   2.721   6.396            11.350      16.743      31.355
         p75          0.111  0.402   0.978          1.869   3.790   8.155            17.517      25.216     113.818
 ν 0 (q) p25       −95.314 −16.733 −12.057        −6.204 −2.784 −1.144              −0.564      −0.326      −0.094
         p50       −21.357 −9.803 −7.400          −3.830 −1.654 −0.730              −0.208        0.014       0.810
         p75       −11.786 −5.866 −4.410          −1.864 −0.635     0.474             3.811       8.184      70.169
 f (θ)   p25          1.118  1.118   1.350          3.873   6.982  10.062            13.229      19.170      23.372
         p50          3.741  7.746   9.152         12.349  15.652  20.767            25.125      26.972      34.424
         p75          6.801  8.056   9.485         13.038  17.045  22.220            27.407      32.215      36.552




                                                        60
B.2      Details on Counterfactuals
In computing counterfactuals for each good and village, we exclude observations for which any of the objects of
interest in a village, that is, either the model’s primitives, c0 (Q), ν 0 (q), and θ(q), or objects used in their estimation,
G(q), g(q), T (q), T 0 (q), and γ(θ(q)), were not successfully estimated. We also drop observations for which we
estimate an implausibly large increase in θ(q), that is, whenever θ(qi ) for quantity qi is more than 1, 000 times larger
than its values for the previous quantity, θ(qi−1 ). If this is the case, then we drop such a quantity observation and all
subsequent observations in the village considered. In terms of notation, we denote by θbi = θ(q      b i ) the estimated type
consuming quantity qi and by f the estimate of the object f . For simplicity, we focus here on a particular good and
                                   b
village so that the associated subscripts are omitted.
Base Utility Function. For the first quantity in each village, we set
                                                (
                                                    qi νb0 (q1 ), if q1 νb0 (q1 ) − T (q1 )/θ(q
                                                                                            b 1) ≥ 0
                                    νb(q1 ) =                                                        .
                                                    T (q1 )/θ(q1 ), otherwise
                                                               b

This approach guarantees that base utility at the lowest quantity is nonnegative. For the remaining quantities, we
compute base utility using a standard Riemann sum approximation as
                                                                   Xi−1
                                        νb(qi ) = q1 νb0 (q1 ) +             (qj+1 − qj )νb0 (qj+1 ).
                                                                       j=1

Given νb(qi ) evaluated at the observed quantities {qi }, we compute νb(q) at any other quantity q as the predicted value
from a regression of νb(qi ) on log(qi ), that is, νb(q) = βb0 + βb1 log(q).
Reservation Utility. Recall that γb(θbi ) = γb(θbi (qi )) is estimated as a function of quantity and weakly increases with
θbi . We set u(θb1 ) = CS
                       dnp (θb1 ), where CS
                                          dnp (θb1 ) is the estimated consumer surplus of type θb1 under nonlinear pricing.
For the remaining consumer types, we consider two cases:
     Case 1: When γ  b(θbi ) ≥ γb(θbi−1 ), we test whether γ  b(θbi ) is statistically different from γ  b(θbi−1 ). To do so, we use a
critical value of the Student’s t-distribution for a 1% confidence level. If γ         b(θi ) is statistically different from γ
                                                                                         b                                     b(θbi−1 ),
then we set u(θbi ) = CS
                      dnp (θbi ). If, instead, γ
                                               b(θbi ) is not statistically different from γ  b(θbi−1 ), then we set u(θbi ) = u(θbi−1 ).
     Case 2: When γ   b(θi ) is constant for each type, that is, γ
                        b                                              b ( θi ) = γ
                                                                           b      b(θi−1 ) for each θbi−1 and θbi , we consider two
                                                                                     b
possibilities, referred to in the main text as the low reservation utility case and the high reservation utility case. In
the low reservation utility case, we set u(θbi ) = CSdnp (θb1 ) except for the highest type, u(θbN ), for which we set
u(θbN ) = CSdnp (θbN ), where qN is the largest quantity purchased in a village. In the high reservation utility case, we
set u(θbi ) = CS
              dnp (θbi ) for each θbi .
First-Best Counterfactual. When comparing consumer, producer, and social surplus under nonlinear and first-
best pricing, we start by computing the quantities demanded under first best. To this purpose, we define a grid qpc =
(q1 , . . . , qmax ) of 10,000 equidistant points for candidate quantities. Given that the first-best price ppc equals the
marginal cost, each type θbi solves the problem maxq∈qpc [θbi νb(q) − ppc q]. Then, the quantity demanded by type θbi at
price ppc is
                                                
                                                                      q (θbi )) − ppc qe(θbi ) ≥ u(θbi )
                                                  qe(θbi ), if θbi νb(e
                                   qpc (θbi ) =                                                          ,
                                                  0, otherwise

with u(θbi ) is determined as just explained. Then, consumer surplus is
                                            N
                                            X −1
                                  CS
                                  dpc =             r(θbi ) max{θbi νb(qpc (θbi )) − ppc qpc (θbi ), u(θbi )},
                                             i=1

where r(θbi ) is the proportion of type θbi in the village, computed as r(θb1 ) = G(q1 ) and r(θbi+1 ) = G(qi+1 ) − G(qi ) for
i = 1, . . . , N − 1, and N is the number of consumers in the village. In plotting results, we only consider types with
dnp (θbi ) ≥ 0 and SS
CS                      c pc (θbi ) > CS
                                      dnp (θbi ) + P
                                                   d S np (θbi ), that is, with nonnegative consumer surplus under nonlinear
pricing and positive social surplus under first best; we consider this latter condition as a regularity condition. We trim

                                                                      61
observations of quantities corresponding to types in the top 2% of the type distribution in a village for the readability
of the graphs in the main text.
Linear Pricing Counterfactual. When comparing consumer, producer, and social surplus under nonlinear and
linear pricing, we compute a seller’s linear price, individual demand, and aggregate demand as follows. Let Θ          e be the
set of estimated types θbi = θ(q         dnp (θbi ) ≥ 0 and SS
                             b i ) with CS                  c pc (θbi ) > CS
                                                                          dnp (θbi ) + P
                                                                                       d S np (θbi ), that is, with nonnegative
consumer surplus under nonlinear pricing and positive social surplus under first best; as mentioned, we consider this
latter condition as a regularity condition. We compute the price p∗m that maximizes profits under linear pricing as

                                                        max[(pm − c)Q(pm )],                                              (73)
                                                         pm

where Q(pm ) is aggregate demand, computed as described next. To solve for pm , we set a grid of 10,000 equidistant
points, p = (pm1 , . . . , pmP ), and for each θbi we compute the schedule

                                  q((pm1 , . . . , pmP ), θbi ) = (q(pm1 , θbi ), . . . , q(pmP , θbi )).

To do so, given a grid q = (q1 , . . . , qmax ) of 10,000 equidistant points for candidate quantities demanded, we determine
the quantity chosen by type θbi for each possible price pmp by solving q̃(pmp , θbi ) = arg maxq∈q [θbi νb(q) − pmp q]. Then,
the quantity demanded by type θbi at price pmp is
                                        
                                                                      q (pmp , θbi )) − pmp qe(pmp , θbi ) ≥ u(θbi )
                                            qe(pmp , θbi ), if θbi νb(e
                      q(pmp , θbi ) =                                                                                ,
                                            0, otherwise

with u(θbi ) determined as explained above. Aggregate demand for each price pmp is
                                                      X
                                            Q(pmp ) =     r(θbi )q(pmp , θbi ),
                                                                θbi ∈Θ
                                                                     e


where r(θb1 ) = G(q1 ) and r(θbi+1 ) = G(qi+1 ) − G(qi ) for i = 1, . . . , N − 1, and N is the number of consumers in the
village. We then solve for the price p∗m such that (pm − c)Q(pm ) is maximal. We calculate consumer surplus as
                                       X
                            CS
                            dlp =          r(θbi ) max{θbi νb(q(p∗m , θbi )) − p∗m q(p∗m , θbi ), u(θbi )}.
                                        θbi ∈Θ
                                             e


We compute producer surplus as P    d S lp = (p∗m − c)Q(p∗m ). In plotting results, we exclude observations in the top 2%
of the type distribution in a village for the readability of the graphs in the main text.
Nonlinear vs. Linear Pricing: High Reservation Utility. We present in Figure 10 the results of the linear
pricing counterfactual in the high reservation utility case. As in the case of low reservation utility, social surplus at
low quantities is higher, and most consumers of the lowest quantities are better off under nonlinear pricing, than under
linear pricing. As in the case of low reservation utility, social surplus as well as consumers surplus are lower under
nonlinear pricing for consumers of intermediate to large quantities. Intuitively, the key difference between the low and
high reservation utility case is the level of the linear price that a seller can charge without inducing any consumer type
to drop out of the market. In the low reservation utility case, a seller can charge any given consumer type a much
higher price than in the high reservation utility case before that type prefers not to participate. Lower linear prices
in the high reservation utility case, compared to the low reservation utility case, benefit consumers with low and high
marginal willingness to pay. For some low consumer types, in particular, the combination of high reservation utility
and sellers’ lower ability to extract surplus under linear pricing implies higher levels of utility under linear pricing
than under nonlinear pricing, and so a reversal of preferences between nonlinear and linear pricing relative to the low
reservation utility case. Nonetheless, consumers who do not participate in the market under linear pricing are still
mostly those with low to intermediate types, as in the low reservation utility case. These consumers prefer nonlinear to
linear pricing.



                                                                    62
                                                                 Figure 10: Nonlinear vs. Linear Pricing under Augmented Model (High Reservation Utility)
                                                                             Rice                                                                                     Kidney Beans                                                                                      Sugar
                                                      100




                                                                                                                                                      100




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    100
      Social Surplus: Nonlinear to Linear Pricing




                                                                                                      Social Surplus: Nonlinear to Linear Pricing




                                                                                                                                                                                                    Social Surplus: Nonlinear to Linear Pricing
                                                      50




                                                                                                                                                      50




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    50
                                                      0




                                                                                                                                                      0




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    0
                                                      -50




                                                                                                                                                      -50




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    -50
                                                      -100




                                                                                                                                                      -100




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    -100
                                                             0     10          20           30   40                                                          0   10          20           30   40                                                          0   10        20             30   40
                                                                        Log Consumer Type                                                                             Log Consumer Type                                                                             Log Consumer Type

                                                                             Rice                                                                                     Kidney Beans                                                                                      Sugar
                                                      150




                                                                                                                                                      150




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    150
      Consumer Surplus: Nonlinear to Linear Pricing




                                                                                                      Consumer Surplus: Nonlinear to Linear Pricing




                                                                                                                                                                                                    Consumer Surplus: Nonlinear to Linear Pricing
                                                      100




                                                                                                                                                      100




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    100
                                                      50




                                                                                                                                                      50




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    50
                                                      0




                                                                                                                                                      0




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    0
                                                      -50




                                                                                                                                                      -50




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    -50
                                                      -100




                                                                                                                                                      -100




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    -100
                                                             0     10          20           30   40                                                          0   10          20           30   40                                                          0   10        20             30   40
                                                                        Log Consumer Type                                                                             Log Consumer Type                                                                             Log Consumer Type




B.3                                                          Robustness Exercises
We assess here the robustness of our empirical findings to specific functional forms and modeling assumptions. We do
so by first reestimating the model under a more restrictive specification of the multiplier function, which is assumed
now to be a logistic function of quantity with a linear index. We find that the estimates based on this more restricted
specification of our model are similar to the ones based on the more general specification discussed in the main text,
both qualitatively and quantitatively. We then reestimate the model under the assumption that it reduces to the standard
model of Maskin and Riley (1984), that is, by imposing that the multiplier function equals one for each type (quantity)
in each village. The estimates implied by the standard model differ from those implied by our model in two main
dimensions: the range of the support of consumer types is less wide, and base marginal utility is less convex, according
to the standard model than according to our model. As discussed in the main text, though, we reject the standard model
in all villages. Finally, we estimate the model’s primitives on villages defined at the level of the Mexican locality
rather than the Mexican municipality. The estimates we obtain are similar for these two definitions of villages. In
the following figures and tables, we refer to the linear (respectively, quadratic) specification of the multiplier function
as either the “Linear Specification” (respectively, “Quadratic Specification”) or, for brevity, “Linear” (respectively,
“Quadratic”). Similar, we refer to kidney beans at times as “Beans” for brevity.
B.3.1                                                        Linear Specification
In Figures 11-14, we plot the estimates of marginal cost, c0 (Q), the multiplier on participation (or budget) constraints,
γ(θ(q)), the distribution of types, as captured by its support, θ(q), and its reverse hazard rate, f (θ)/F (θ), and the base
marginal utility function, ν 0 (q), for the version of our model in which γ(θ(q)) is specified as a logistic function of
quantity with a linear index, that is, when we set γvj2 = 0 for each village v and good j. As is apparent from these
figure, all estimates are fairly similar to those reported in the main text, which are obtained under a logistic specification
of the multiplier with a quadratic index. As mentioned in the main text, we focus there on the quadratic specification
due to the greater number of villages for which we could estimate all primitives, as discussed in Section 5. As before,
we drop the top 5% of estimates for readability in the plots of the estimated marginal costs.




                                                                                                                                                                          63
                                                                        Figure 11: Estimated Marginal Cost (Linear Specification)
                                                     Rice                                                                            Kidney Beans                                                                     Sugar
                  15




                                                                                                                                                                                  25
                                                                                                     30




                                                                                                                                                                                  20
            10




                                                                                                 20
Marginal Cost




                                                                                     Marginal Cost




                                                                                                                                                                Marginal Cost
                                                                                                                                                                 10       15
                                                                                   10
                  5




                                                                                                                                                                                  5
                  0




                                                                                                     0




                                                                                                                                                                                  0
                                         0     50     100         150        200                                            0   50       100        150   200                                            0   50        100           150   200
                                                     Village                                                                            Village                                                                       Village




                                             Figure 12: Estimated Multiplier on Participation (or Budget) Constraints (Linear Specification)
                                                     Rice                                                                            Kidney Beans                                                                     Sugar
                  1




                                                                                                     1




                                                                                                                                                                                  1
Multiplier on Participation Constraint




                                                                                   Multiplier on Participation Constraint




                                                                                                                                                                Multiplier on Participation Constraint
                                .8




                                                                                                                   .8




                                                                                                                                                                                                .8
                       .6




                                                                                                          .6




                                                                                                                                                                                       .6
             .4




                                                                                                .4




                                                                                                                                                                             .4
  .2




                                                                                     .2




                                                                                                                                                                  .2
                  0




                                                                                                     0




                                                                                                                                                                                  0
                                         0     .5      1          1.5         2                                             0   1         2         3     4                                              0        1              2         3
                                                     Quantity                                                                           Quantity                                                                      Quantity




                                                                Figure 13: Estimated Distribution of Types (Linear Specification)
                                                     Rice                                                                            Kidney Beans                                                                     Sugar
                                                                                                     400
                  2000




                                                                                                                                                                                  800
                                                                                                       300
               1500




                                                                                                                                                                               600
Log Consumer Type




                                                                                      Log Consumer Type




                                                                                                                                                                Log Consumer Type
                                                                                             200
      1000




                                                                                                                                                                      400
                                                                                   100
                  500




                                                                                                                                                                                  200
                  0




                                                                                                     0




                                                                                                                                                                                  0




                                         0     .5      1          1.5         2                                             0   1         2         3     4                                              0        1              2         3
                                                     Quantity                                                                           Quantity                                                                      Quantity

                                                     Rice                                                                            Kidney Beans                                                                     Sugar
                  .3




                                                                                                     .4




                                                                                                                                                                                  .2
Predicted Reverse Hazard Rate




                                                                                   Predicted Reverse Hazard Rate




                                                                                                                                                                Predicted Reverse Hazard Rate
                                                                                                            .3




                                                                                                                                                                                      .15
                     .2




                                                                                                 .2




                                                                                                                                                                             .1
       .1




                                                                                                                                                                  .05
                                                                                      .1
                  0




                                                                                                     0




                                                                                                                                                                                  0




                                         0     .5      1          1.5         2                                             0   1         2         3     4                                              0        1              2         3
                                                     Quantity                                                                           Quantity                                                                      Quantity




                                                                Figure 14: Estimated Base Marginal Utility (Linear Specification)
                                                     Rice                                                                            Kidney Beans                                                                     Sugar
                                                                                                     10
                  8




                                                                                                                                                                                  5
                                                                                                     8




                                                                                                                                                                                  4
                      6
Base Marginal Utility




                                                                                   Base Marginal Utility




                                                                                                                                                                Base Marginal Utility
                                                                                                6




                                                                                                                                                                            3
        4




                                                                                       4




                                                                                                                                                                    2
                  2




                                                                                                     2




                                                                                                                                                                                  1
                  0




                                                                                                     0




                                                                                                                                                                                  0




                                         0     .5      1          1.5         2                                             0   1         2         3     4                                              0        1              2         3
                                                     Quantity                                                                           Quantity                                                                      Quantity




                                                                                                                                        64
 Table 9: Percentiles of t-Statistics across Quantities and Villages for Rice (Linear Specification)
             p1      p5    p10    p25     p50      p75       p90       p95       p99
c0 (Q)    0.026   0.179  0.795  6.767  13.553   24.958    42.519    59.439   155.314
γ(θ(q))   1.076   6.195 11.401 39.296 244.326 3934.064 8.7 × 104 6.1 × 105 3.0 × 107
θ(q)      0.022   0.075  0.265  0.812   2.131    5.621    13.109    22.586    65.943
ν 0 (q) −48.777 −15.717 −8.711 −3.493 −1.096   −0.197      2.632     9.333   120.315
f (θ)     1.118   1.118  1.118  3.354   9.874   15.154    22.444    28.657    50.489




Table 10: Percentiles of t-Statistics across Quantities and Villages for Beans (Linear Specification)
              p1     p5    p10    p25                p50       p75        p90        p95         p99
  0
 c (Q)     0.005  0.053  0.826  3.018              8.307    18.076     41.567     55.740      86.208
 γ(θ(q))   2.838  7.235 13.672 41.614            157.055   561.841   2144.465   5528.561   7.0 × 104
 θ(q)      0.000  0.153  0.338  0.980              2.584     5.454     10.271     13.884      21.219
 ν 0 (q) −17.063 −9.213 −6.082 −3.085            −1.277    −0.207       3.197     10.292      41.422
 f (θ)     1.118  1.118  1.581  5.244             11.854    19.007     25.922     30.166      36.742




Table 11: Percentiles of t-Statistics across Quantities and Villages for Sugar (Linear Specification)
             p1      p5     p10    p25     p50     p75      p90       p95       p99
c0 (Q)    0.036   0.282   2.382  5.921  17.718  42.050   68.605   105.833   147.383
γ(θ(q))   1.223   4.624   9.748 36.081 134.470 557.324 3948.123 2.1 × 104 5.9 × 105
θ(q)      0.015   0.155   0.345  1.322   4.044   8.708   16.235    23.071    62.843
ν 0 (q) −38.690 −15.960 −10.907 −5.386 −1.955 −0.416      0.744     7.616    45.952
f (θ)     1.118   1.118   1.581  6.661  12.966  18.941   26.292    31.682    63.498




                                                 65
Table 12: Between-Village Quartiles of Percentiles of t-Statistics across Village Quantities for Rice (Linear)
                     p1      p5     p10     p25      p50      p75       p90       p95       p99
γ(θ(q)) p25       0.610   3.486   6.944  14.628   51.198  142.166 1911.203 7074.768 1.8 × 105
        p50       1.433  11.990  17.459  47.653  244.704  683.711 1.2 × 104 7.3 × 104 3.7 × 105
        p75      17.025  42.254  65.914 333.436 1287.829 5931.734 9.4 × 104 1.0 × 106 1.3 × 108
θ(q)    p25       0.007   0.058   0.137   0.480    1.321    3.313     7.843    12.961    27.037
        p50       0.008   0.080   0.269   0.975    1.856    4.823    10.258    15.960    43.551
        p75       0.118   0.303   0.735   1.567    3.209    7.611    19.342    34.844    76.220
ν 0 (q) p25     −72.804 −20.151 −13.900 −5.614   −1.888   −0.883    −0.273    −0.117    −0.025
        p50     −39.347 −14.474 −6.112 −2.895    −1.067   −0.295    −0.024      0.564   111.678
        p75     −20.170 −8.431 −5.135 −1.763     −0.339     1.235     6.809    16.707   268.915
f (θ)   p25       1.118   1.118   1.118   1.936    3.708    7.415    13.387    26.830    31.145
        p50       5.000   5.809   6.778   8.588   12.196   16.657    27.177    28.657    50.236
        p75       5.590   7.104   8.062   9.638   13.145   17.248    27.178    29.118    50.506




Table 13: Between-Village Quartiles of Percentiles of t-Statistics across Village Quantities for Beans (Linear)
                      p1     p5     p10     p25     p50      p75      p90      p95       p99
  γ(θ(q)) p25      2.367  6.248   8.921  16.583  42.546  136.932  190.165  296.813   937.786
          p50     13.283 28.548  39.386  58.733 119.021  278.601  422.660  615.719 9411.721
          p75     48.148 79.329 136.522 246.220 526.747 1038.497 2927.352 5545.967 9.2 × 104
  θ(q)    p25      0.000  0.135   0.254   0.642   1.596    3.182    6.343   12.835    16.059
          p50      0.000  0.158   0.402   1.072   2.744    5.465    8.930   13.431    18.247
          p75      0.000  0.443   0.894   1.813   3.948    6.954   11.479   17.412    21.527
  ν 0 (q) p25    −17.318 −9.501 −7.744 −4.866 −2.612     −1.241   −0.614   −0.422    −0.010
          p50    −10.875 −6.196 −4.865 −2.601 −1.313     −0.365   −0.010     0.419     9.995
          p75    −10.453 −4.424 −2.919 −1.603 −0.464       1.225    5.346   11.147    39.453
  f (θ)   p25      1.118  1.581   1.809   3.162   5.208    8.761   12.247   16.508    33.015
          p50      3.859  7.416   8.441  10.548  15.012   20.520   27.613   33.015    37.450
          p75      7.583  9.014  10.061  12.748  17.212   21.689   27.613   33.015    37.450




Table 14: Between-Village Quartiles of Percentiles of t-Statistics across Village Quantities for Sugar (Linear)
                     p1      p5     p10     p25     p50      p75      p90       p95       p99
 γ(θ(q)) p25      0.770   2.208   6.424  15.417  40.989  148.159  415.754   977.245 1.4 × 105
         p50      1.492  12.801  25.517  51.241 101.134  305.741 1783.323 5404.830 1.3 × 106
         p75      5.522  49.506  80.162 138.920 335.900 1076.368 8781.182 1.9 × 104 1.5 × 107
 θ(q)    p25      0.015   0.090   0.231   0.710   2.441    6.748   10.523    11.369    21.648
         p50      0.015   0.190   0.429   1.573   4.178    7.736   14.294    18.344    28.485
         p75      0.018   0.333   0.729   2.533   6.565   10.463   20.306    28.347    62.843
 ν 0 (q) p25    −38.690 −21.273 −13.930 −8.272 −4.572    −1.676   −0.573    −0.198    −0.018
         p50    −20.469 −10.970 −8.153 −4.534 −2.247     −0.953   −0.242    −0.084      0.488
         p75    −11.598 −6.389 −4.141 −2.189 −0.759      −0.076     2.067    11.057    62.436
 f (θ)   p25      1.118   1.118   1.118   4.127   7.349   10.782   15.969    24.564    63.433
         p50      5.509   6.519   7.983  11.883  15.906   21.125   26.972    36.573    63.498
         p75      6.124   8.367   9.287  13.178  17.401   24.005   27.605    37.006    63.498




                                                      66
B.3.2                                  Standard Model
In Figures 15-17, we plot the estimates of marginal cost, c0 (Q), the distribution of types, as captured by its support,
θ(q), and its reverse hazard rate, f (θ)/F (θ), and the base marginal utility function, ν 0 (q), when we set γ(θ(q)) equal
to one for all quantities in all villages, as in the standard model of Maskin and Riley (1984). For brevity, we use the
abbreviation “SM” to refer to the standard model. As mentioned, the range of the support of consumer types is less
wide, and base marginal utility is less convex, according to the standard model than according to our model.

                                                                       Figure 15: Estimated Marginal Cost (SM)
                                               Rice                                                               Kidney Beans                                                            Sugar




                                                                                       20




                                                                                                                                                           15
                 10
                 8




                                                                                       15




                                                                                                                                                         10
   Marginal Cost




                                                                         Marginal Cost




                                                                                                                                             Marginal Cost
             6




                                                                              10
    4




                                                                                                                                                           5
                                                                                       5
                 2
                 0




                                                                                       0




                                                                                                                                                           0
                                   0      50    100       150    200                                     0   50       100        150   200                                   0   50        100           150   200
                                               Village                                                               Village                                                              Village




                                                                Figure 16: Estimated Distribution of Types (SM)
                                               Rice                                                               Kidney Beans                                                            Sugar
                 500




                                                                                       40




                                                                                                                                                           60
                     400




                                                                                           30
   Log Consumer Type




                                                                         Log Consumer Type




                                                                                                                                             Log Consumer Type
                                                                                                                                                           40
             300




                                                                                20
      200




                                                                                                                                              20
                                                                                       10
                 100
                 0




                                                                                       0




                                                                                                                                                           0



                                   0      .5     1        1.5    2                                       0   1         2         3     4                                     0        1              2         3
                                               Quantity                                                              Quantity                                                             Quantity

                                               Rice                                                               Kidney Beans                                                            Sugar
                 40




                                                                                       20




                                                                                                                                                           15
   Predicted Reverse Hazard Rate




                                                                         Predicted Reverse Hazard Rate




                                                                                                                                             Predicted Reverse Hazard Rate
                           30




                                                                                                 15




                                                                                                                                                                 10
                20




                                                                                      10




                                                                                                                                                    5
      10




                                                                            5
                 0




                                                                                       0




                                                                                                                                                           0




                                   0      .5     1        1.5    2                                       0   1         2         3     4                                     0        1              2         3
                                               Quantity                                                              Quantity                                                             Quantity




                                                                Figure 17: Estimated Base Marginal Utility (SM)
                                               Rice                                                               Kidney Beans                                                            Sugar
                 10




                                                                                                                                                           6
                                                                                       10
                 8




                                                                                       8
   Base Marginal Utility




                                                                         Base Marginal Utility




                                                                                                                                             Base Marginal Utility
                                                                                                                                                             4
                6




                                                                                     6
       4




                                                                             4




                                                                                                                                              2
                 2




                                                                                       2
                 0




                                                                                       0




                                                                                                                                                           0




                                   0      .5     1        1.5    2                                       0   1         2         3     4                                     0        1              2         3
                                               Quantity                                                              Quantity                                                             Quantity




                                                                                                                     67
         Table 15: Percentiles of t-Statistics across Quantities and Villages for Rice (SM)
              p1      p5     p10    p25     p50      p75       p90       p95       p99
c0 (Q)     0.029   0.465   1.569  5.737  13.606   24.958    46.042    57.108   123.646
γ(θ(q))    1.177   3.891   6.062 22.413 112.474 1652.991 3.8 × 104 3.6 × 105 7.1 × 107
θ(q)       0.045   0.113   0.363  0.967   2.735    7.174    22.840    46.671   138.463
ν 0 (q) −109.942 −26.071 −13.560 −3.979 −0.980   −0.008     10.468    32.654   189.972
f (θ)      1.118   1.118   1.118  3.665   9.671   15.163    24.950    29.262    50.702




        Table 16: Percentiles of t-Statistics across Quantities and Villages for Beans (SM)
               p1     p5    p10    p25              p50       p75        p90         p95       p99
  0
  c (Q)     0.015  0.047  0.165  2.363            7.364    15.099     26.034      35.793    60.875
  γ(θ(q))   2.585  5.642 10.147 31.358          156.134   492.064   3603.320   2.2 × 104 1.6 × 105
  θ(q)      0.000  0.135  0.519  1.458            3.513     7.078     11.241      15.223    23.309
  ν 0 (q) −15.049 −9.306 −7.152 −3.434          −1.202      0.615     13.109      30.124    80.267
  f (θ)     1.118  1.118  1.581  5.244           11.565    18.473     24.239      27.613    36.652




        Table 17: Percentiles of t-Statistics across Quantities and Villages for Sugar (SM)
              p1      p5    p10    p25              p50       p75        p90         p95       p99
 c0 (Q)    0.004   0.012  0.081  3.668           11.742    30.069     72.451     129.396   274.517
 γ(θ(q))   1.166   4.322  8.200 32.756          170.466   575.413   3649.744   1.8 × 104 1.7 × 106
 θ(q)      0.002   0.225  0.414  1.127            2.683     5.862     12.785      18.854    49.134
 ν 0 (q) −28.371 −12.893 −8.537 −4.123          −1.345    −0.326       2.810       9.445    51.105
 f (θ)     1.118   1.118  1.118  6.800           12.942    18.874     24.520      27.407    35.777




                                                68
 Table 18: Between-Village Quartiles of Percentiles of t-Statistics across Village Quantities for Rice (SM)
                     p1      p5     p10           p25        p50        p75       p90       p95       p99
γ(θ(q)) p25       0.940   2.901   4.969         8.183     23.735    114.980 3113.801 2.9 × 104 6.3 × 105
        p50       1.502  10.257  15.798        32.789     84.607    635.232 9581.298 1.9 × 105 1.8 × 106
        p75       8.125  24.850  44.102       125.823    397.046   3299.666 7.4 × 104 2.4 × 106 2.2 × 108
θ(q)    p25       0.024   0.087   0.281         0.704      1.725      4.215    14.759    38.274    66.776
        p50       0.082   0.155   0.495         1.171      2.541      6.509    18.461    58.424    99.308
        p75       0.148   0.543   0.833         1.805      4.076      9.827    28.787    77.431   119.838
ν 0 (q) p25    −109.942 −49.192 −22.981       −6.238     −2.203     −0.848    −0.243    −0.125      1.199
        p50     −83.125 −33.848 −13.560       −3.826     −0.928     −0.101      1.537     4.799    63.914
        p75     −28.180 −16.361 −5.874        −1.777     −0.092       3.762    24.882    65.786   188.850
f (θ)   p25       1.118   1.118   1.118         2.168      4.330      9.093    15.330    28.657    50.279
        p50       2.739   5.000   6.120         8.281     11.307     15.163    27.161    31.031    50.727
        p75       5.123   6.703   7.583         9.269     12.500     17.746    27.166    31.055    50.727




Table 19: Between-Village Quartiles of Percentiles of t-Statistics across Village Quantities for Beans (SM)
                     p1      p5         p10       p25     p50           p75        p90        p95         p99
 γ(θ(q)) p25      2.222   4.049       8.732    12.704  34.369       112.622    231.876    295.473     908.156
         p50      4.337  12.143      21.240    41.340 107.275       231.221    436.778    626.987   3431.720
         p75     20.332  65.232     115.150   172.986 411.486      1299.782   2837.624   6372.247   4.9 × 104
 θ(q)    p25      0.001   0.120       0.384     0.927   2.628         5.160      8.517     10.301      15.412
         p50      0.024   0.271       0.576     1.458   3.547         6.453      9.597     13.718      21.626
         p75      0.024   0.438       0.907     2.165   4.421         8.372     13.787     17.482      24.552
 ν 0 (q) p25    −15.421 −12.178     −9.057    −5.783 −2.612         −1.101     −0.306     −0.047        2.284
         p50    −10.922 −7.841      −5.372    −2.967 −1.324         −0.185       1.481      2.389      35.157
         p75     −7.341 −4.222      −3.387    −1.170    0.429         5.723     11.765     21.521      66.214
 f (θ)   p25      1.118   1.581       1.809     3.162   5.477         9.417     13.509     16.508      31.605
         p50      4.183   6.349       7.804    10.094  15.026        20.520     27.060     32.365      36.646
         p75      7.045   8.657       9.421    12.298  16.771        21.700     27.458     32.365      36.663




Table 20: Between-Village Quartiles of Percentiles of t-Statistics across Village Quantities for Sugar (SM)
                     p1      p5     p10           p25     p50     p75              p90         p95       p99
 γ(θ(q)) p25      1.248   2.004   5.879        12.244  44.027 191.167          424.775   2054.426 6.9 × 105
         p50      3.344  12.293  20.236        38.504 119.964 289.418          888.764   6884.952 7.3 × 105
         p75     14.400  31.077  39.699       124.092 345.134 886.617         3358.916   6.0 × 104 2.9 × 106
 θ(q)    p25      0.000   0.144   0.281         0.906   2.001   3.989            8.619      10.142    22.735
         p50      0.082   0.303   0.797         1.109   2.721   6.396           11.350      16.743    31.355
         p75      0.111   0.402   0.978         1.869   3.790   8.155           17.517      25.216   113.818
 ν 0 (q) p25    −95.314 −16.733 −12.057       −6.204 −2.784 −1.144             −0.564      −0.326    −0.094
         p50    −21.357 −9.803 −7.400         −3.830 −1.654 −0.730             −0.208        0.014     0.810
         p75    −11.786 −5.866 −4.410         −1.864 −0.635     0.474            3.811       8.184    70.169
 f (θ)   p25      1.118   1.118   1.350         3.873   6.982  10.062           13.229      19.170    23.372
         p50      3.741   7.746   9.152        12.349  15.652  20.767           25.125      26.972    34.424
         p75      6.801   8.056   9.485        13.038  17.045  22.220           27.407      32.215    36.552




                                                    69
B.3.3                                      Estimates Based on Villages Defined as Mexican Localities
So far we have mostly focused on data and estimates from villages defined at the level of the Mexican municipality.
For a comparison, here we report statistics from the Progresa sample of Mexican localities as well as estimates of the
model’s primitives and the cumulative multiplier obtained when villages are defined at the level of the Mexican locality.
Note that the unit price schedules and the empirical cumulative distribution function of quantities for each good are
very similar across villages defined as localities and defined as municipalities, as apparent by comparing Figure 18 to
Figure 1. We successfully estimate the model’s primitives on 326, 333, and 316 of the villages defined as localities
for the linear specification of the index of the multiplier function and on 341, 342, and 351 of these villages for the
quadratic specification of the index of the multiplier function for rice, kidney beans, and sugar, respectively.
     As apparent from Figures 19-23, compared to the analogous ones for villages defined as municipalities, estimation
results are similar across the two definitions of villages except for three main differences. First, marginal cost estimates
obtained from villages defined as localities are much less dispersed across villages than those obtained from villages
defined as municipalities. Second, the support of consumer types is less wide when villages are defined as localities than
when they are defined as municipalities. Third, the base marginal utility function for sugar is flatter for some villages,
when villages are defined as localities than when they are defined as municipalities. Also, estimates do not differ much
across the linear and quadratic specifications of the multiplier function when villages are defined as localities, as is
the case for villages defined as municipalities. Counterfactual results about the impact of nonlinear pricing relative to
first-best and linear pricing based on estimates from villages defined as localities are very similar to those from villages
defined as municipalities, and are therefore omitted for brevity. See the Supplementary Appendix for the estimates of
the probability density function of consumer types and for the t-statistics of the model’s estimates.

                                               Figure 18: Unit Prices and Cumulative Distribution Function of Quantities from Localities
                                                     Rice                                                            Kidney Beans                                                      Sugar
                   15




                                                                                         15




                                                                                                                                                           8
                                                                                                                                                           6
                   10




                                                                                         10
    Unit Price




                                                                          Unit Price




                                                                                                                                            Unit Price
                                                                                                                                            4
                   5




                                                                                         5




                                                                                                                                                           2
                   0




                                                                                         0




                                       0       .5      1        1.5   2                                      0   1        2         3   4                                      0   1              2   3
                                                     Quantity                                                           Quantity                                                       Quantity



                                                      Rice                                                           Kidney Beans                                                      Sugar
                   1




                                                                                         1




                                                                                                                                                           1
    Cumulative Distribution Function




                                                                          Cumulative Distribution Function




                                                                                                                                            Cumulative Distribution Function
                                 .8




                                                                                                       .8




                                                                                                                                                                         .8
                        .6




                                                                                              .6




                                                                                                                                                                .6
             .4




                                                                                   .4




                                                                                                                                                     .4
     .2




                                                                           .2




                                                                                                                                             .2
                   0




                                                                                         0




                                                                                                                                                           0




                                       0       .5      1        1.5   2                                      0   1        2         3   4                                      0   1              2   3
                                                     Quantity                                                           Quantity                                                       Quantity



                                                                                                                          -


C                                      The Effect of Income Transfers
In Table B.3, we report the results of an exercise analogous to that discussed in Section 5.4, except that we now allow
for fixed effects in all regressions to capture the variability of marginal cost across localities—we also repeat Table 2
in the top panel for ease of comparison. As noted in Section 5.4, results obtained when fixed effects are included are
quite similar to those obtained when fixed effects are omitted. This finding is consistent with the relatively small range
of variation of estimated marginal cost across localities for each good; see Figure 19.




                                                                                                                        70
                                                                                 Figure 19: Estimated Marginal Cost (Linear and Quadratic)
                                                                Rice                                                                                   Kidney Beans                                                                                        Sugar
                    10




                                                                                                                  10




                                                                                                                                                                                                                10
                    8




                                                                                                                  8




                                                                                                                                                                                                                8
  Marginal Cost




                                                                                                Marginal Cost




                                                                                                                                                                                              Marginal Cost
           6




                                                                                                         6




                                                                                                                                                                                                       6
  4




                                                                                                4




                                                                                                                                                                                              4
                    2




                                                                                                                  2




                                                                                                                                                                                                                2
                    0




                                                                                                                  0




                                                                                                                                                                                                                0
                                           0   100        200              300      400   500                                            0   100       200              300       400   500                                            0   100       200              300       400   500
                                                                Village                                                                                      Village                                                                                       Village

                                                                 Rice                                                                                  Kidney Beans                                                                                        Sugar
                     10




                                                                                                                  10




                                                                                                                                                                                                                10
                     8




                                                                                                                  8




                                                                                                                                                                                                                8
  Marginal Cost




                                                                                                Marginal Cost




                                                                                                                                                                                              Marginal Cost
           6




                                                                                                         6




                                                                                                                                                                                                       6
  4




                                                                                                4




                                                                                                                                                                                              4
                     2




                                                                                                                  2




                                                                                                                                                                                                                2
                     0




                                                                                                                  0




                                                                                                                                                                                                                0
                                           0   100        200              300      400   500                                            0   100       200              300       400   500                                            0   100       200              300       400   500
                                                                Village                                                                                      Village                                                                                       Village




Figure 20: Estimated Multiplier on Participation (or Budget) Constraints from Localities (Linear and Quadratic)
                                                                Rice                                                                                   Kidney Beans                                                                                        Sugar
                    1




                                                                                                                  1




                                                                                                                                                                                                                1
  Multiplier on Participation Constraint




                                                                                                Multiplier on Participation Constraint




                                                                                                                                                                                              Multiplier on Participation Constraint
                                  .8




                                                                                                                                .8




                                                                                                                                                                                                                              .8
                         .6




                                                                                                                       .6




                                                                                                                                                                                                                     .6
               .4




                                                                                                             .4




                                                                                                                                                                                                           .4
    .2




                                                                                                  .2




                                                                                                                                                                                                .2
                    0




                                                                                                                  0




                                                                                                                                                                                                                0




                                           0         .5           1               1.5      2                                             0         1           2              3          4                                             0         1                          2          3
                                                                Quantity                                                                                     Quantity                                                                                      Quantity

                                                                 Rice                                                                                  Kidney Beans                                                                                        Sugar
                     1




                                                                                                                  1




                                                                                                                                                                                                                1
  Multiplier on Participation Constraint




                                                                                                Multiplier on Participation Constraint




                                                                                                                                                                                              Multiplier on Participation Constraint
                                  .8




                                                                                                                                .8




                                                                                                                                                                                                                              .8
                         .6




                                                                                                                       .6




                                                                                                                                                                                                                     .6
               .4




                                                                                                             .4




                                                                                                                                                                                                           .4
    .2




                                                                                                  .2




                                                                                                                                                                                                .2
                     0




                                                                                                                  0




                                                                                                                                                                                                                0




                                           0         .5           1               1.5      2                                             0         1           2              3          4                                             0         1                          2          3
                                                                Quantity                                                                                     Quantity                                                                                      Quantity




                                                                                                                                                       71
                                                     Figure 21: Estimated Distribution of Types from Localities (Linear)
                                         Rice                                                                Kidney Beans                                                   Sugar
              400




                                                                                   80




                                                                                                                                                  40
                    300




                                                                                       60




                                                                                                                                                      30
   Log Consumer Type




                                                                     Log Consumer Type




                                                                                                                                    Log Consumer Type
          200




                                                                            40




                                                                                                                                           20
100




                                                                                   20




                                                                                                                                                  10
              0




                                                                                   0




                                                                                                                                                  0
                                0   .5     1            1.5     2                                    0   1        2         3   4                                   0   1              2   3
                                         Quantity                                                               Quantity                                                    Quantity

                                         Rice                                                                Kidney Beans                                                   Sugar
              4




                                                                                                                                                  50
                                                                                   6
Predicted Reverse Hazard Rate




                                                                     Predicted Reverse Hazard Rate




                                                                                                                                    Predicted Reverse Hazard Rate
                                                                                                                                                             40
                         3




                                                                                        4




                                                                                                                                                     30
              2




                                                                                                                                             20
                                                                           2
   1




                                                                                                                                    10
              0




                                                                                   0




                                                                                                                                                  0
                                0   .5     1            1.5     2                                    0   1        2         3   4                                   0   1              2   3
                                         Quantity                                                               Quantity                                                    Quantity




                                                    Figure 22: Estimated Distribution of Types from Localities (Quadratic)
                                         Rice                                                                Kidney Beans                                                   Sugar
                                                                                                                                                  200
              500




                                                                                   50
                  400




                                                                                                                                                     150
                                                                                       40
Log Consumer Type




                                                                     Log Consumer Type




                                                                                                                                    Log Consumer Type
          300




                                                                               30




                                                                                                                                           100
  200




                                                                        20




                                                                                                                                                  50
              100




                                                                                   10
              0




                                                                                   0




                                                                                                                                                  0




                                0   .5     1            1.5     2                                    0   1        2         3   4                                   0   1              2   3
                                         Quantity                                                               Quantity                                                    Quantity

                                         Rice                                                                Kidney Beans                                                   Sugar
              5




                                                                                   8




                                                                                                                                                  30
Predicted Reverse Hazard Rate




                                                                     Predicted Reverse Hazard Rate




                                                                                                                                    Predicted Reverse Hazard Rate
                           4




                                                                                              6




                                                                                                                                                        20
                   3




                                                                                   4
          2




                                                                                                                                          10
                                                                        2
 1            0




                                                                                   0




                                                                                                                                                  0




                                0   .5     1            1.5     2                                    0   1        2         3   4                                   0   1              2   3
                                         Quantity                                                               Quantity                                                    Quantity




                                                                                                                72
                                   Figure 23: Estimated Base Marginal Utility from Localities (Linear and Quadratic)
                                     Rice                                                 Kidney Beans                                           Sugar
                                                                    10
           8




                                                                                                                           6
                                                                    8
                      6
Base Marginal Utility




                                                          Base Marginal Utility




                                                                                                                 Base Marginal Utility
                                                                                                                                 4
                                                                      6
        4




                                                              4




                                                                                                                  2
           2




                                                                    2
           0




                                                                    0




                                                                                                                           0
                          0   .5       1        1.5   2                           0   1        2         3   4                           0   1              2   3
                                     Quantity                                                Quantity                                            Quantity

                                      Rice                                                Kidney Beans                                           Sugar
                                                                    10
           8




                                                                                                                           6
                                                                    8
                      6
Base Marginal Utility




                                                          Base Marginal Utility




                                                                                                                 Base Marginal Utility
                                                                                                                                 4
                                                                      6
        4




                                                              4




                                                                                                                  2
           2




                                                                    2
           0




                                                                    0




                                                                                                                           0




                          0   .5       1        1.5   2                           0   1        2         3   4                           0   1              2   3
                                     Quantity                                                Quantity                                            Quantity




                                                                                             73
                                                                                     Table B.3: Effect of Cash Transfers on Prices
                                                      Rice Unit Values                                                 Kidney Beans Unit Values                                               Sugar Unit Values
                                     1              2               3                 4                 1                2                3                  4                1             2               3             4
         Intercept               1.947∗∗∗        1.868∗∗∗         1.864∗∗∗          1.869∗∗∗          2.375∗∗∗         2.420∗∗∗        2.421∗∗∗           2.423∗∗∗         1.743∗∗∗      1.775∗∗∗         1.777∗∗∗      1.769∗∗∗
                                  (0.0105)       (0.0127)        (0.00711)          (0.0121)         (0.00940)        (0.00952)       (0.00767)          (0.00998)        (0.00403)     (0.00660)        (0.00448)     (0.00618)
         Treatment               −0.00750        −0.0123                           −0.00663           −0.0142           0.00600                          −0.00494           0.00556      0.0265∗∗                         0.0120
                                  (0.0112)       (0.0149)                           (0.0142)          (0.0117)         (0.0127)                            (0.0112)       (0.00485)     (0.00909)                      (0.00660)
         log(q)                                 −0.212∗∗∗       −0.181∗∗∗         −0.161∗∗∗                          −0.114∗∗∗       −0.172∗∗∗          −0.160∗∗∗                      −0.123∗∗∗        −0.182∗∗∗     −0.168∗∗∗
                                                 (0.0175)         (0.0324)          (0.0413)                           (0.0109)         (0.0281)           (0.0294)                      (0.0183)         (0.0172)      (0.0220)
         1−G(q)
          g(q)
                                                               −0.0110∗∗          −0.0111∗∗                                        −0.00505∗∗∗         −0.00503∗∗∗                                     −0.00275∗      −0.00273∗
                                                                 (0.00423)         (0.00422)                                          (0.00110)          (0.00110)                                       (0.00107)     (0.00107)
                     1−G(q)
         log(q) ×     g(q)
                                                               −0.00951∗          −0.00943∗                                          −0.00555∗          −0.00554∗                                      −0.00546∗      −0.00543∗
                                                                 (0.00469)         (0.00469)                                          (0.00219)          (0.00219)                                       (0.00219)     (0.00218)
         log(q) × Treatment                      −0.0441                            −0.0270                           −0.0399∗                             −0.0152                      −0.0617∗                        −0.0173
                                                 (0.0255)                           (0.0228)                           (0.0191)                            (0.0136)                      (0.0271)                       (0.0188)
         log(q)2                                                    0.0458            0.0457                                             0.0526∗            0.0523∗                                      0.0813∗∗∗    0.0810∗∗∗
                                                                  (0.0398)          (0.0395)                                            (0.0251)           (0.0250)                                       (0.0174)      (0.0173)
         h         i
             1−G(q) 2
              g(q)
                                                                  0.0000243        0.0000261                                           0.00000484         0.00000473                                 −0.0000173      −0.0000171
                                                                (0.0000469)      (0.0000470)                                          (0.0000213)        (0.0000212)                                 (0.0000242)     (0.0000242)
         1999-March              0.0500∗∗∗      0.0356∗∗∗         0.0355∗∗∗        0.0362∗∗∗      −0.0827∗∗∗        −0.0872∗∗∗        −0.0867∗∗∗         −0.0865∗∗∗         0.00888       0.0118∗        0.0115∗         0.0117∗
                                 (0.00858)      (0.00757)         (0.00788)        (0.00777)        (0.00785)         (0.00743)          (0.00744)          (0.00743)     (0.00551)     (0.00528)      (0.00518)       (0.00516)
         1999-Nov                0.0501∗∗∗      0.0355∗∗∗         0.0357∗∗∗        0.0362∗∗∗       −0.115∗∗∗         −0.114∗∗∗          −0.111∗∗∗          −0.111∗∗∗      0.0549∗∗∗     0.0583∗∗∗      0.0592∗∗∗       0.0594∗∗∗
                                 (0.00772)      (0.00744)         (0.00749)        (0.00739)        (0.00734)         (0.00722)          (0.00719)          (0.00720)     (0.00463)     (0.00439)      (0.00429)       (0.00427)
         2000-Nov                0.0302∗∗∗       0.0213∗∗         0.0229∗∗∗         0.0217∗∗       −0.196∗∗∗         −0.203∗∗∗          −0.205∗∗∗          −0.201∗∗∗      0.0307∗∗∗     0.0283∗∗∗      0.0330∗∗∗       0.0303∗∗∗
                                 (0.00793)      (0.00679)         (0.00662)        (0.00767)         (0.0122)          (0.0115)           (0.0109)           (0.0114)     (0.00581)     (0.00567)      (0.00518)       (0.00565)
         2003                     −0.0146         0.00932           0.00536          0.00504         −0.0207         −0.0316∗∗        −0.0348∗∗∗           −0.0307∗∗       0.170∗∗∗      0.174∗∗∗       0.172∗∗∗        0.169∗∗∗
                                  (0.0101)      (0.00996)         (0.00924)        (0.00954)         (0.0110)          (0.0101)          (0.00894)           (0.0101)     (0.00724)     (0.00693)      (0.00611)       (0.00654)
         Fixed Effects                    N              N                 N                N                N                 N                  N                  N             N             N              N               N
         R2 adj.                   0.00608          0.140             0.165            0.166           0.0442            0.0946              0.130              0.130        0.0468         0.118          0.201           0.201
         Observations               62, 368        62, 368           62, 368          62, 368          82, 024           82, 024            82, 024            82, 024       91, 782       91, 782        91, 782         91, 782




74
                                                    Rice Unit Values                                                Kidney Beans Unit Values                                                  Sugar Unit Values
                                   1              2               3                  4                1                2               3                    4                 1             2               3              4
     Intercept                  1.949∗∗∗       1.873∗∗∗         1.856∗∗∗           1.875∗∗∗         2.378∗∗∗        2.422∗∗∗        2.422∗∗∗             2.424∗∗∗          1.747∗∗∗      1.778∗∗∗         1.760∗∗∗      1.754∗∗∗
                                (0.0123)       (0.0140)        (0.00754)           (0.0132)         (0.0117)         (0.0114)      (0.00769)              (0.0113)        (0.00591)     (0.00819)        (0.00403)     (0.00685)
     Treatment                  −0.0136        −0.0342                             −0.0272          −0.0101           0.00653                           −0.00467         −0.000814         0.0221                         0.00795
                                (0.0153)       (0.0176)                            (0.0165)         (0.0157)         (0.0161)                             (0.0146)        (0.00848)      (0.0122)                      (0.00972)
     log(q)                                   −0.221∗∗∗       −0.203∗∗∗          −0.176∗∗∗                         −0.109∗∗∗      −0.167∗∗∗            −0.156∗∗∗                       −0.121∗∗∗        −0.184∗∗∗     −0.171∗∗∗
                                               (0.0189)         (0.0322)           (0.0418)                          (0.0107)        (0.0282)             (0.0298)                       (0.0191)        (0.00906)       (0.0175)
     1−G(q)
      g(q)
                                                             −0.0128∗∗           −0.0129∗∗                                      −0.00465∗∗∗           −0.00464∗∗∗                                      0.00606∗∗∗     0.00604∗∗∗
                                                               (0.00435)          (0.00433)                                        (0.00111)            (0.00110)                                        (0.00136)     (0.00137)
                   1−G(q)
     log(q) ×       g(q)
                                                             −0.00947∗           −0.00938∗                                        −0.00533∗            −0.00532∗                                     −0.00687∗∗∗     −0.00683∗∗∗
                                                               (0.00464)          (0.00465)                                        (0.00220)            (0.00219)                                        (0.00147)     (0.00148)
     log(q) × Treatment                        −0.0512                             −0.0354                          −0.0418∗                              −0.0148                       −0.0670∗                         −0.0168
                                               (0.0262)                            (0.0233)                          (0.0192)                             (0.0137)                       (0.0284)                        (0.0189)
     log(q)2                                                      0.0435             0.0433                                           0.0547∗              0.0543∗                                        0.120∗∗∗      0.120∗∗∗
                                                                (0.0393)           (0.0390)                                          (0.0253)             (0.0252)                                       (0.00935)     (0.00934)
     h         i
         1−G(q) 2
          g(q)
                                                                0.0000476        0.0000492                                           0.00000545         0.00000550                                    0.00000451       0.00000443
                                                              (0.0000477)      (0.0000480)                                          (0.0000216)        (0.0000215)                                   (0.0000111)      (0.0000110)
     1999-March                0.0515∗∗∗       0.0400∗∗∗        0.0390∗∗∗        0.0400∗∗∗       −0.0882∗∗∗       −0.0920∗∗∗        −0.0915∗∗∗         −0.0912∗∗∗            0.0105     0.0136∗∗          0.0131∗          0.0132∗
                               (0.00847)       (0.00750)        (0.00783)        (0.00771)         (0.00779)        (0.00742)          (0.00742)          (0.00741)      (0.00543)     (0.00518)        (0.00516)        (0.00516)
     1999-Nov                  0.0539∗∗∗       0.0416∗∗∗        0.0414∗∗∗        0.0420∗∗∗        −0.119∗∗∗        −0.117∗∗∗          −0.114∗∗∗          −0.114∗∗∗       0.0545∗∗∗     0.0592∗∗∗       0.0585∗∗∗        0.0586∗∗∗
                               (0.00763)       (0.00737)        (0.00754)        (0.00742)         (0.00735)        (0.00721)          (0.00722)          (0.00721)      (0.00462)     (0.00448)        (0.00444)        (0.00444)
     2000-Nov                  0.0336∗∗∗       0.0310∗∗∗        0.0249∗∗∗        0.0305∗∗∗        −0.204∗∗∗        −0.208∗∗∗          −0.210∗∗∗          −0.206∗∗∗       0.0342∗∗∗     0.0321∗∗∗       0.0338∗∗∗        0.0325∗∗∗
                               (0.00925)       (0.00840)        (0.00688)        (0.00849)          (0.0129)         (0.0123)           (0.0110)           (0.0123)      (0.00663)     (0.00650)        (0.00526)        (0.00650)
     2003                      −0.00921          0.0219∗           0.0112           0.0177         −0.0298∗       −0.0379∗∗∗        −0.0414∗∗∗         −0.0374∗∗∗         0.173∗∗∗      0.177∗∗∗         0.171∗∗∗         0.169∗∗∗
                                (0.0102)        (0.0101)        (0.00921)        (0.00981)          (0.0117)         (0.0110)          (0.00900)           (0.0110)      (0.00772)     (0.00747)        (0.00614)        (0.00708)
     Fixed Effects                      Y               Y                Y                Y                 Y                Y                  Y                  Y              Y             Y                Y                Y
     R2 adj.                      0.0061          0.1394           0.1651           0.1651            0.0442           0.0946             0.1298             0.1301         0.0468        0.1179           0.2012           0.2013
     Observations                 62, 368         62, 368          62, 368          62, 368           82, 024          82, 024            82, 024            82, 024        91, 782       91, 782          91, 782          91, 782
         Note: the superscript ∗ stands for p < 0.05, the superscript ∗∗ for p < 0.01, and the superscript ∗∗∗ for p < 0.001. Standard errors are clustered at the locality level.
