NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

ARE PRICES TOO STICKY?

Laurence Ball

David Romer

Working Paper No. 2171.

NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
February 1987

We are grateful for many helpful suggestions from Stanley Fischer,
Sanford Grossman, Lawrence Katz, N. Gregory Mankiw, Arie Melriik,
George Sofianos, Lawrence Summers, and participants in workshops at
Michigan, Princeton, and Queen's. The research reported here is
part of the NBER's research program in Economic Fluctuations. Any
opinions expressed are those of the authors and not those of the
National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER Working Paper #2171
February 1987

Are Prices Too Sticky?

ABSTRACT
This paper shows that small costs of changing nominal prices can lead to

rigidities that cause highly inefficient fluctuations in real variables. As
a result, aggregate demand stabilization can be very desirable even though
the frictions that cause fluctuations in aggregate demand to have real

effects are slight. Inefficient price rigidity arises because rigidity has a

negative externality: rigidity in one firm's price increases the variability
of real aggregate demand, which hurts all firms. The externality can be
arbitrarily large relative to the private costs of rigidity.

Laurence Ball
Department of Economics
Graduate School of Business Administration
New York University

New York, N.Y. 10006

David Romer
Department of Economics
Princeton University
Princeton, N.J. 08544

I. INTRODUCTION

According to Keynesian macroeconomics, nominal wages and prices are

rigid. As a result, shocks to nominal aggregate demand cause large
fluctuations in real variables such as employment and output. These
fluctuations cause large welfare losses, and so stabilization of aggregate
demand Is highly desirable.

This view of the business cycle is often perceived as unsatisfactory

because of the difficulty of explaining nominal rigidities. Microeconomics
teaches us that nominal magnitudes are irrelevant to economic actors. Thus
the only apparent impediments to flexibility of nominal prices are the costs
of adjusting them-—the costs of printing new menus, replacing price tags, and

so on. These "menu" costs usually seem trivial compared to the welfare
losses that Keynesians attribute to the business cycle. They are therefore
generally viewed as not providing a basis for Keynesian theories.

This paper establishes that this view is not correct. We show that even
very small costs of changing nominal prices can lead to rigidities that cause

highly inefficient fluctuations in real variables. As a result, aggregate
demand stabilization can be very desirable even though the frictions that
cause fluctuations in aggregate demand to have real effects are slight.
To establish these results, we compare the gains to a firm from greater

flexibility of its own price to the gains to society. The social gains are
greater because price flexibility has a positive externality. The
externality is Keynesian: increased flexibility of a firm's nominal price

1

reduces the variability of real aggregate demand, which benefits all firms.
The externality leads firms facing menu costs to choose excessive price
stickiness, which in turn leads to excessively large economic fluctuations.
Most important, we show that the reduction in average welfare that results
from these fluctuations may be arbitrarily large relative to the private

losses from rigidities. This implies that arbitrarily small menu costs can
make nominal rigidities privately optimal even though the rigidities lead to
large social losses.
Previous research has not addressed the issue of this paper.

Investigations of the macroeconomic effects of menu costs (Manklw, 1985;
Akerlof and Yellen, 1985; Blanchard and Kiyotaki, 1985) have established the

following. In an imperfectly competitive economy, the prices and quantities
that are optimal for price setters are socially sub-optimal--specifically,

prices are too high and output is too low. Therefore, starting from a
private optimum, non—adjustment of prices to a nominal shock causes second

order private losses but first order changes In social welfare. This implies
that second order menu costs can lead firms to choose sticky prices even

though the resulting fluctuations in welfare are first order. Crucially, the
sign of the welfare effect of a nominal shock when prices are sticky depends

on the sign of the shock. A negative shock, such as a fall in the money
supply, causes welfare losses--prices are stuck too high, and so output is

reduced. On the other hand, a positive shock causes welfare gains--output
rises above the privately optimal level, and therefore is closer to the
socially optimal level.

Since the welfare effects of rigidities are positive for some shocks and
negative for others, the sign and magnitude of the effects on average welfare

are not obvious. That is, it Is not clear from previous work whether the

2

economic fluctuations that result from menu costs are undesirable. As a
result, It is also not clear whether, as Keynesians assert, It is desirable

to reduce these fluctuations by stabilizing aggregate demand. In fact, we
show that the first order effects of rigidities on welfare average to zero.
Thus the first order/second order distinction that Is central to previous

work is irrelevant to the Issue that we study. Our conclusion that small
menu costs can lead to highly undesirable economic fluctuations depends on
the relative sizes of private and social losses that are both second order.1'2

The remainder of the paper consists of four sections. Section II
presents a macroeconomic model of a monopolistically competitive economy.

The model Is similar to the one In Blanchard and Klyotakl. For simplicity,
we assume that the economy consists of yeoman farmers who use their own labor

to produce goods that they sell. Thus we suppress the labor market and focus
on rigidities In output prices.

Sections III and IV compare the private and social costs of sticky

prices. Section IV considers the natural case In which each farmer sets a
price for his product and then, after a shock to aggregate demand, has the

option of paying a menu cost and adjusting the price. This case Is
complicated, and so we start with a simpler one In Section III. In the
simpler model, individuals must decide ex ante whether to pay the menu cost.
In other words, a firm can either pay the menu cost, in which case It can
costlessly adjust its price after the shock, or it can refuse to pay the menu
cost, in which case it cannot change Its price regardless of the size of the

shock. Making the extent of price flexibility a zero-one variable simplifies
the analysis considerably while still allowing us to investigate the private
and social benefits of price flexibility.
In Section III, we calculate the ratio of the welfare losses from rigid

3

prices to the size of the menu cost necessary to make rigidity an

equilibrium. The ratio can be arbitrarily large. There is, however, a
negative aspect of our results: the ratio is large only for a narrow range
of parameter values. Therefore, while our simple model shows that small menu
costs can in principle lead to large welfare losses, the welfare effects of

menu costs in actual economies remain an open issue. Section IV establishes
that the results of Section III carry over to the case in which firms choose
whether to pay the menu cost after observing the nominal shock.
Finally, Section V compares our results wIth those in related papers,
sketches extensions of our analysis, and offers conclusions.

4

II. THE MODEL

The economy consists of N producer-consumers, or "yeoman farmers."
Each farmer uses his own labor to produce a differentiated product, then
sells the product and uses the proceeds to purchase the products of all

other farmers. Farmers take each others' prices as given.

Farmer l's utility function is

— C1L1
IC

—c
1_i

u

—

I

zD

1'

where
N
—

1.

(c-1)/c

j=1
and where:
L1
C1

is farmer i's labor supply;
is an Index of farmer l's consumption;

C1 Is farmer i's consumption of the product of farmer j ;
z

is a small positive constant (the "menu cost");

D1

is a dummy variable equal to one If farmer I changes
his nominal price;

£

is

y

measures the extent of increasing marginal disutility of

the elasticity of substitution between any two goods
(c > 1) ;

labor (y > 1)
(1) implies that farmers are risk neutral in consumption; we relax this

assumption below. The coefficient on LI in (1) Is chosen for convenience.

5

We assume that N is large, so that the contribution of good I to farmer
l's utility is negligible. Finally, farmer l's production function Is

i

S nipl y

(3)

V1 =

L1

where V1 is farmer l's output.3
The utility function determines the demand for farmer l's product
relative to aggregate consumption; specifically, one can show

(4)

=

[Ic

where P1 is the price of good I and
N
(5)

C =
j=1
11(1—c)

N
(6)

p =

E

j=1

C is average consumption and P is the price Index for the consumption

basket: Individual j must spend P to obtain one unit of C . Farmer
i's consumption is determined by his real revenues:
(7)

C1 =

(See Blanchard and Kiyotaki for a derivation of (4) -

(7).)

Substituting

(3), (4), and (7) into (1) yields farmer l's utility as a function of
aggregate consumption and his relative price:4
1-c
(8)

Ui =

—yc

— £ —1

-

C1[_-]

zD1

To make nominal disturbances possible, we add a money market to

6

the model. Specifically, we assume that money demand is given by the

quantity equation, Md =

Pc .5 Letting M denote the money stock,

the money market equilibrium condition is thus

=C.

(9)

Substituting (9) into (8) yields farmer i's utility as a function of
aggregate real money and his relative price:

,

(10)

(i—C)

U1 =

-

—C

c

zD1

Differentiation of (10) shows that farmer i's utility-maximizing
price neglecting menu costs is

*

Pi

(11)

It

=

=

[.J

yc!1

,

Symmetric equilibrium occurs when P1 = P .

implies

Together with (1) — (11), this

that the equilibrium prices and quantities in the absence of menu

costsare Pi=M,Ci=i,and Y1=1 forall i.
It proves convenient to rewrite the expression for utilIty, (10),

as follows. Note that (ii) implies

(12)

—

= .[MJIt

Substituting (12) into (10) gives farmer i's utility as a function of real
balances, the ratio of his price to his utility-maximizing price, and the menu
cost:

7

M y(1-x)1 i

u.

(1-c)

= [.J

-

- 1
Ye

i
[—j

(13)
1M

Vt,

"ii

— zD1

wJ

In what follows, we use (13) as our expression for utility.

8

- zD
]

III. THE PRIVATE AND SOCIAL COSTS OF
NOMINAL PRICE RIGIDITY

We now introduce nominal disturbances by assuming that H is random.

All farmers know the distribution of M
In Section IV we assume that each individual sets his nominal price

before M is realized and that he can change his price after observing M
by paying the menu cost. In this section, we simplify the analysis by

assuming that farmers must decide whether to pay the menu cost before M is
realized. If a farmer does not pay the menu cost, he cannot change his
nominal price ex post regardless of the realization of M ; if he pays the

menu cost, he can always change his price after he observes M •6 Thus, each
farmer has only two choices about the extent of nominal price flexibility:
perfect flexibility or complete rigidity.

Our analysis proceeds in several steps. Part A determines the
equilibrium price level when prices are sticky--that is, when they are set

before M is known. Part B derives the condition for price stickiness to be
an equilibrium. Stickiness is an equilibrium if, given that all other
farmers choose stickiness, the menu cost is greater than the expected cost to

farmer I of not adjusting his price. Part B finds this "private cost" of
price rigidity. Part C derives the "social cost" of rigidity——the difference

between farmer i's expected utility when all farmers choose flexibility and
his expected utility when all choose rigidity. The social cost is greater
than the private cost because rigidity has a negative externality: greater

9

fluctuations in real aggregate demand. Part D shows that the ratio of the
social cost to the private cost can be arbitrarily large. Thus small menu
costs can cause rigidity to be an equilibrium even though flexibility would
greatly improve welfare, and aggregate demand stabilization can be highly

desirable. Part E discusses these results and describes how the ratio of
social to private costs depends on the parameters of the model.
In both Sections III and IV we employ Taylor approximations, considering

only terms in the mean and variance of M .

For convenience, we normalize

the mean of M to be one. Throughout, algebraic details are relegated to
the Appendix.

A. The Price Level When Prices Are Sticky

We first derive the equilibrium price level when prices are sticky, P0

The problem facing farmer I

M
utility, E[V{ ,

Is to choose his price to maximize expected

, taking

P0 as fixed. The first order condition is

0 P1
P

*

2tP '

0

—

P1 P

where subscripts of V denote partial derivatives. Equation (12) gives

in terms of H/P0 and P1/P0 .
P1 = P0

.

Substituting

A symmetric equilibrium requires

these expressions into (14) implies that the

equilibrium price level is given by

(15)

] [—J
]=0
0
E [v2 0[ ' [_1
0

10

Taking a second order Taylor approximation of (15) around M/P0 = 1
(the equilibrium in the absence of menu costs) and using the fact that
E[M] = 1

,

we find

1

(16)

(see the Appendix for details).

Equation (16) implies P0 > 1

and since E[M] = 1

the

,

Since aggregate output equals M/P

.

mean level of output when prices are sticky is

less than one, its level when prices are flexible. Farmers do not set
P0 = E[M]

(that is, certainty equivalence does not hold) because utility

is not quadratic.7 The effect of stickiness on mean output is not important
for our results; they depend instead on the effect on the variance of output

described below.8

B. When Is Price Stickiness an Equilibrium?

To see when sticky prices are an equilibrium, we compare farmer

l's expected utility if he pays the menu cost with his expected utility

if he does not, given that all other farmers do not. If farmer I
does not pay the menu cost, then

= 0

= P0

.

as given by

,

(16), since farmer I sets his price ex ante along with all other farmers.

From (11), P. =

P0

implies P/P =

(M/P)

.

Substituting

this into (13)

shows that farmer i's expected utility If he does not pay the menu cost Is

E[V[_ [_}X}]

If farmer

I pays the menu cost, then D1 = 1

.

Since farmer

I adjusts his price ex post, he sets P1 equal to his utility—maximizing

11

price for every realization of M .

Is still P0 , because farmer I

Thus

P1/P

1 .

The price level

Is a small part of the economy and the other

farmers do not pay the menu cost. Farmer Us expected utility is thus

E[V[, i}] P0

Stickiness Is an equilibrium if farmer i's expected utility is lower
when he pays the menu cost than when he does not. This is the case If

(17)

<

E[V[— 1]] —

E[V[_[—)

i]

loss
The left—hand side of (17) is the "private cost" of stickiness——the

to farmer I from his inability to set P1 equal to P1 ex post.
Stickiness Is an equilibrium If this private cost is less than the menu
cost.

As shown In the Appendix, expanding the formula for the private

cost around M/P0 = 1

18
/

'"'

leads to

(-1)(y-1)2 2
2EIE-c+1] aM

Since the private cost depends on a ,

stickiness

Is an equilibrium

If the menu cost is sufficiently large compared to the variance of money.

C. The Social Costs of Sticky Prices

This section computes the "social cost" of sticky prices——the

difference between V(.) when all farmers pay the menu cost and when none
pay the menu cost--and compares It with the private cost. If no
farmer pays the menu cost, then, as shown in Section B, expected utility

12

Is E[V[_,{.i_-J

JJ

.

If all farmers pay the menu cost, then M/P = 1

= 1 VI for all realizations of M .
V(1,1) .

V(.)

and

is therefore simply

The social cost of sticky prices——the amount that expected

utility is reduced because prices do not adjust——is thus

(19)

V(1,1) —

E[V[.__[M_JJ]
Comparison of (17) and (19) shows that the private and social costs

of price stickiness differ. The social cost, (19), can be written as the
sum of two terms:

(20)

V(1,1) —

E[V[!_ {HEJ]
—

= [E[v[.1._,1J]

+ V(1,1)

—

E[V[

L, [!Lj7t }I]

E[V[—,
0

1)]

The first term is the private cost of stickiness (see (17)). The second

is the °externa1ity from stickiness. This externality Is the gain to a
farmer from stabilization of real money, and hence real aggregate demand.
Price flexibility stabilizes real money, but each farmer Ignores this

public benefit when deciding whether to pay the menu cost. The social
cost of rigidity is the sum of the private cost and the externality.

The private cost is given by (18). The externality can be approximated
as (see Appendix)

13

(21)

2
yc—c+l
2c[yc — £ + 1]

EX(y,c)

2

°M

Like the private cost, the externality is proportional to

—-

that

is,

It is second order. The first order gains and losses from fluctuations
In real money average to zero.

0. Comparing the Private and Social Costs

Combining (18) and (21), the ratio of the social cost of price
stickiness to the private cost is

( 22

)

R (y,c) ——

PC(y,)

EX(y,c)
PC(y,c)

(y

—c

+

+ 1)2

c(c—1) (_1)2

cy+1-e

—

To interpret R ,

cy-t

recall

that rigidity is an equilibrium as long as the

private cost does not exceed z .

Thus the largest possible social cost of

farmers' choice of rigidity is Rz .
aggregate demand ——

=0

——

En

eliminates

addition, note that stabilization of
the losses from rigidity (both

the private cost and the externality are proportional to

).

Thus

Rz

is also the maximum possible welfare gain from stabilizing demand.9

Expression (22) is greater than one. Thus the social cost of price

rigidity Is greater than the private cost. More important, as either e

or y approaches one, R approaches infinity. The ratio of the social

14

cost to the private cost can be arbitrarily large. As a result, Rz can

be large even if z is very small. A small menu cost can lead to
rigidities that cause large reductions in average welfare, and aggregate
demand stabilization can be highly beneficial.'0

E. Discussion

We summarize our analysis as follows. A farmer's expected
utility depends on two factors: how close on average his relative price is to

the utility—maximizing level (P1/P) , and the distribution
of real aggregate demand (M/P) .

In

deciding whether to pay the menu

cost each farmer takes the distribution of aggregate demand as given
and considers only the gains from charging the utility-maximizing price.
He ignores the fact that flexibility of his price helps to stabilize

aggregate demand, which benefits all farmers. Thus the externality from

price rigidity is Keynesian. Our results show that the externality can
be large compared to the private cost of rigidity.11
We now describe how the parameters of the model affect the ratio of the

social to the private costs of rigidity. Differentiation of (22)

shows that R is decreasing In c , the elasticity of demand for an
individual farmer's output. The source of this result is twofold. First,

when product demand is highly elastic the consequences of setting P. not
equal to

In c .

are large; thus the private cost of rigidity is increasing

Second, the more competitive are product markets, the less relevant

is aggregate demand to an individual seller; thus the externality is

decreasing in c .

As

c approaches infinity--that is, as the product market

15

approaches perfect competition—-the externality converges

to zero while the

R approaches one. As c

private cost remains strictly positive, and so

approaches one, the private cost approaches zero, and so R approaches
infinity.

Differentiation of (22) shows that y affects R ambiguously.

This

occurs because a large value of y —-that is, quickly increasing marginal
disutility of labor-—implies that both the private cost of rigidity and

the externality are large (aPC(c,y)Iay > 0

,

aEX(c,y)/ay > 0)

Both

.

departures of a farmer's price from P. (the private cost) and
fluctuations in aggregate demand (the externality) increase fluctuations

In output. When y is large, these fluctuations are very costly.

Thus

a change in parameters that makes fluctuations more undesirable does not
necessarily increase the losses caused by small menu costs.

The

reason is that such a change may make farmers more likely to pay the menu
cost.

Although aR(c,y)Iay is ambiguous, urn R(c,y) =
y-4

.

As

y

*

one
approaches one, z approaches zero-—that is, P1/P approaches
for all values of M/P .

It

follows that if other farmers' prices are sticky,

a given farmer has little incentive to change his price regardless

of the realization of M ; hence the private cost of non—adjustment
approaches zero. The externality remains strictly positive, and so the
ratio of social to private costs approaches infinity.'2
A slight modification of the model allows us to investigate the effects

of risk aversion in consumption. Modify the utility function, (1), to be

(23)

where

Ui =

C

—

£1

LI -

zDi

is one minus the coefficient of relative risk aversion (c <

16

1)

With this change, one can show that the ratio of the social to the private
cost of rigidity is

(24)

- (-1)c2

R(c,y,ct)

c(c-1) (y—c*)

(see the Appendix). Perhaps surprisingly, öR(c,y,c)/aa is ambiguous.
Thus risk aversion in consumption does not strengthen the argument that the

fluctuations resulting from menu costs are undesirable. The explanation
for this result is similar to the explanation for the role of y :

risk

aversion increases both the private cost of rigidity and the externality.
Risk aversion implies that fluctuations in real aggregate demand are very

costly to a farmer. But it also means that the farmer is very eager to
adjust his relative price to minimize the effects of the fluctuations
on his consumption.13

There is one important negative aspect of our results: while the ratio
of social to private costs of rigidity is unbounded, it is large only for a

narrow range of parameters. To see this, suppose that farmers are risk

neutral in consumption and that c = 5

marginal cost) and y = 5

(which implies price 25% above

(equivalent to an intertemporal labor supply

elasticity of 1/4). For these plausible parameters, R = 1.4 —-the social
costs of rigid prices are not much larger than the private costs. As noted

above, values of c or y close to one are necessary for R to be large.
However, even c = 2

(a markup of 100%) and y = 2

(a labor supply

elasticity of 1) produce an R of only 4.5. For these parameters, the
welfare losses from the business cycle are only four and a half times the

cost of printing new menus for all farmers. R is large only if

is very close to one. For example, c = 2

17

,

y = 1.1

implies R = 72

or

y

Thus we have demonstrated that price rigidity has externalities and

that, in principle, they can be very large. In our model, however, the
externalities are not large for reasonable parameter values. The model is
very simple--aside from the menu cost, our only departure from Wairaslan

general equilibrium theory Is the assumption of monopolistic competition. An
open and important research question is whether realistic modifications of

our model can produce a formula for R that is large for plausible
parameters.

A natural possibility to consider would be the introduction of

imperfections In the labor market. In our model, R is affected by how
quickly the marginal disutility of labor Increases, which is equivalent to a

labor supply elasticity. Empirical evidence suggests that labor supply is

not very elastic——that Is, that y Is not close to one——and this Implies
that the private costs of rigidity are large for plausible values of £

.

If

the labor market does not clear (as In efficiency wage models, for example)

then labor supply may be unimportant to firms; thus a large y might not
imply large private costs of rigidity of firms' prices.

18

IV. THE CASE OF EX POST DECISIONS
CONCERNING WHETHER TO PAY THE MENU COST

This section considers the case in which Individuals can wait until
they observe the money supply before deciding whether to pay the menu cost.
We first solve for the range of shocks over which non—adjustment is an

equilibrium. Then we solve for the social costs of non-adjustment over this
range. As in Section III, we find that arbitrarily small menu costs can lead
to rigidities that cause large welfare losses.

We simplify the analysis by placing restrictions on the distribution

of M .

We

assume that the distribution is continuous, symmetric around one,

increasing for M < 1

,

and decreasing for M > 1 •14 As in Section III, we

consider only symmetric equilibria, and we use second order approximations
throughout.

The first step is to solve for the price that farmers set before

they observe the money supply. This price is relevant only if the money
supply falls in the range over which farmers do not adjust prices ex post.
Let

be the variance of M conditional on M lying in this range

and assume that the conditional mean of M is one (this assumption is
justified below). By the reasoning in Section III.A, the price that
farmers set ex ante is given by

(25)

19

We next determine the range of shocks over which price stickiness

Is an equilibrium. For a given M , we compare farmer l's utility if
he pays the menu cost and If he does not, assuming that other farmers

do not. By reasoning similar to that of Section III.B, farmer i's
utility if he pays the menu cost is V[M/P0,1] — z

does not pay is V[M/P0 ,[MIPO]X) .

.

His

utility if he

Thus farmer I pays the menu

cost for values of M such that

(26)

ViM/P0

,

—

1

V

<z

,

0

As shown In the Appendix,

(27)

—

v[i

v[_ ii

(1)(1)2

(M_1)2

{M]_x]

Since the private cost of non—adjustment is proportional to

farmer

(M-1)2

,

i chooses not to pay the menu cost for realizations of

M in a range centered at one. (Since the distribution

symmetric around 1 ,

this

of M is

justifies the assumption made above

concerning the conditional mean of M .)

Let the range be (1-x,1+x)

The endpoints are the values of M at which farmer

I

is indifferent

about paying the menu cost. Thus x is defined by
2

(28)

(29)

(c—1)(y—l) x2 —
2[yc—c+1)

x =

/2tc—e11)Z

J

(c—i)

(y—1)

Now we determine the social cost of equilibrium stickiness. That is, we

compare E[V(.)) if all prices are perfectly flexible to E[V(.)) if

prices adjust only when M is outside of (1—x,i+x) .

20

If

M falls outside

(1—x,1+x) ,

the difference in V(.) is zero. If M falls within

(1-x,1+x) ,

the

(30)

V(1,1) —

difference is

v[.M ,[.JJ

Given these results about the loss for each realization of M

the

,

social

cost is

M=1+x

(31)

1V(1,1)

1

10

M=1—x
where

Ii

—

Ui

-x

Jif(M)dH
i

f(.) is the density function for M. The social cost can be

approximated by
[F(1+x) -

(32)

F(1—x)][1]

where F(,) is the cumulative distribution function of M (see the
Appendix).

Combining (28) and (32) shows that the ratio of the social cost of
price rigidity to the menu cost that causes it is

_ [F(1+x)

(33)

—

F(1-x)]

R

is the expected value of (M—1)2

where R is again given by (22).
conditional on (M—1)2 < x2

,

and so /x2 lies between 0 and 1. It depends

on the distribution of M and on (29), which determines x .
uniform distribution with endpoints outside of (1+x,1—x) ,
=

1/3.

)

F(1+x)

-

F(1-x)

(If

H has a

then

also lies between 0 and 1 and depends

For any c

on the distribution of M and on x .

21

and

y ,

(/x2)[F(1+x) — F(1-x)]

can be arbitrarily close to one. Since R

can be arbitrarily large, it follows that the ratio in (33) can be

arbitrarily large. Thus, the finding of the previous section
that small nominal frictions can cause large reductions In average
welfare carries over to the case in which farmers decide ex post whether to
pay the menu cost.
In general, the effects of the parameters on the ratio of the losses

from rigidity to z are more complicated than in Section III because the
parameters affect all three terms In (33). We omit further discussion of
this issue.

22

V. DISCUSSION AND CONCLUSIONS

A. Comparison to Previous Literature

Previous work has established that small menu costs can lead to

rigidities that cause large fluctuations in welfare. Spec1fcally, in the
presence of menu costs, positive shocks to nominal aggregate demand can cause

large welfare gains and negative shocks can cause large losses. This paper
establishes that rigidities due to menu costs can lead to large reductions in

average welfare. Keynesians believe not only that welfare fluctuates greatly
over the business cycle, but also that it would be highly desirable to reduce
the magnitude of fluctuations, for example by stabilizing nominal aggregate

demand. Thus our result is crucial to the role of small menu cost models in
the micro foundations of Keynesian macroeconomics.

The source of our results is very different from the source of previous

menu cost results. The externalities identified by previous authors arise
because the privately optimal level of output is lower than the socially

optimal level in a monopolistically competitive economy. This divergence
between equilibrium and optimal output means that non-adjustment of prices to
a nominal shock causes second order private losses but first order social

losses (or gains). In contrast, price rigidity has externalities in our
model because it increases fluctuations in real aggregate demand, which hurts

all individuals. The externality is second order, but it may be much larger
than the private cost of price rigidity.
We illustrate the difference between the source of our results and the

23

source of previous results by considering the effects of a government subsidy
to production that raises equilibrium output to the optimal level.

Specifically, suppose that farmer I receives

for each unit

of his output that he sells, with the subsidy financed by lump sum taxes.
In this situation equilibrium output in the absence of shocks is
l/(y-l)
(34)

i =

which iS first best. With thIs modificatIon of the model, the welfare
results of previous menu cost papers no longer hold-—since equilibrium
output is optimal, both private and social losses from non-adjustment

to a shock are second order. In contrast, the argument of this paper
is essentially unchanged. Analysis along the lines of Parts A—D of Section

III,

using approximations around

M = ____
£

1/(y-1)

*

and P1/P1 = 1

shows that in the presence of the subsidy the ratio of the social to the
private costs of price stickiness is

(35)

R*(y,c) yCE 1

R*(y,c) can be arbitrarily large. Thus our result that small frictions can
cause large reductions in average welfare does not depend on the fact that
equilibrium output is too low under monopolistic competition.
While our results are very different from the ones in previous menu
cost models, they are similar in some respects to Ball's (1986a) results

about externalities from the length of labor contracts. Ball shows that an
Increase in the length of a firm's contract contributes to slow adjustment of

the wage level, and hence of the price level, to monetary shocks. This leads
to larger fluctuations in real aggregate demand, which hurts all firms. This

24

is similar to the externality from price rigidity in the current paper.15

Our analysis differs from Ball's in two important respects. First, and
most important, Ball addresses only the issue of whether there are
externalities from rigidity while we consider the size of the externalities.
Second, In Ball's model, wage rigidity has a positive externality that has no
analogue In the current paper-—an improvement In the forecastability of the

future price level, which helps all firms. The net effect of the positive
and negative externalities Is ambiguous.16
The difference between our results and Ball's arises from the
fol lowing. In our model, the externality is a firm's loss from the rigidity
of other firms' prices conditional on flexibility of Its own price (that is,

conditional on P1 =

P

; see equation (20)). In Ball, a firm sets its wages

In a long—term contract. Thus the externalities from other firms' contract
lengths are the externalities conditional on the firm's own wage being

rigid. This creates the positive externalities from rigidity that do not
exist in the current model; Intuitively, a firm may dislike flexibility in
other firms' wages if it Is unable to adjust its own wage in response to
changes in theirs.

B. Extensions

This section sketches two extensions of our model. First, we consider
costs of adjusting output. In actual economies these appear to be large
compared to menu costs, and they Increase firms' incentives to stabilize

output by adjusting prices. We modify equation (1) as follows:

II

—l
—

— ---- L1 —
£

I

0

—
I

GY
'
I

25

—

/

'

where G(•) is the cost of changing output from one, its level in the
absence of shocks; we assume G(O) = G'(O) = 0
Using the production function, V1 =
(37)

U =
I

C

—
I

-- V1
yc

I

— G(Y —
I

1)

— zO

Lj

,

and G"(.) > 0

(36) can be rewritten as

I

Thus adding costs of adjusting quantities means adding G(•) to the
utility loss from producing output V1 .

This

implies that the change is

equivalent to raising the degree of Increasing marginal disutility of
labor (y) or introducing diminishing returns In production.

It would

therefore not affect our central results. In particular,
there would be no new externality from rigidity in quantities.

Indeed, it is

likely that adding costs of changing output would have an ambiguous effect on

the ratio of social to private costs of price rigidity. Like a high value of

y or strong risk aversion In consumption, large costs of quantity adjustment
would raise both the numerator and the denominator of R
Our second extension Is adding the Mundell effect. The externality from
nominal rigidities in our model Is Increased fluctuations in real aggregate

demand. Recent work by DeLong and Summers (1986a, b) shows, however, that
marginal Increases In rigidity may reduce these fluctuations because they
reduce the variance of expected inflation.
Letting aggregate demand depend on expected inflation would not change

our central results. Each farmer ignores his effects on expected inflation
(as well as the externality that we emphasize), and so the equilibrium degree

of rigidity would be unaffected. In addition, while the externality from a
marginal change In rigidity would be ambiguous, the effect of full
flexibility would not——even with the Mundell effect, it would raise welfare
by eliminating all fluctuations arising from nominal shocks.

26

Thus the

welfare effects of the menu costs that prevent full flexibility would still

be unambiguously negative and possibly large. Our central policy result
would also be unchanged. The welfare losses from rigidity would still
be increasing in the variance of nominal money and zero for

= 0

,

and so stabilization of nominal demand would still be desirable.

On the other hand, at least one implication of our model might

change if we added a Mundell effect. We find that the loss from equilibrium

rigidity is increasing in z —-for example, in Section III, the maximum

loss is Rz .

Thus a marginal reduction in z (for example through a subsidy

to price changes) and the resulting decrease in rigidity would reduce the

loss. The Mundell effect might reverse this result for some values of z

C. Conclusions

Keynesians argue that rigidities in nominal wages and prices lead to

large fluctuations In real variables in response to nominal shocks. These
fluctuations cause large welfare losses, and so it is highly desirable to

reduce them—-for example, by stabilizing aggregate demand. These Ideas are
generally viewed as having weak microeconomic foundations, because the costs

of adjusting wages and prices usually appear small. This paper shows that
this reasoning is not valid. Price rigidity has a negative externality:
rigidity in a firm's price increases fluctuations in real aggregate demand,

which hurts all firms. This externality can be very large. Therefore, very
small costs of changing prices can lead firms to choose rigidity even though
the resulting economic fluctuations cause large welfare losses.
Our results do not, however, provide a complete defense of the

traditional Keynesian view. In our model, the externality from price

27

rigidity is large only over a narrow and implausible range of parameter
values.

Thus we show that the externality can be large in principle, but

not that it is large in practice. Future research should investigate whether
realistic modifications of our model, such as the introduction of additional
imperfections, imply that the externalities from rigidity are large for
reasonable parameter values.

28

APPENDIX

Derivation of (16). Taking a second-order approximation of (15) around

M/P0 = 1

and simplifying the result yields

+ [3÷1)v22

(Al) _V22E{_ -

-

+

2V212

j2]

where all partial derivatives are evaluated at (1,1) .
the fact that V2(l,l) =

for all M/P .

(Al)

V21(l,l)

Using E[M] =

1

=

V211(1,l)

= 0

1]]

and

=

(Al)

=

incorporates

because v2[

,iJ

[E[ - l])2 +

Var

= 0

-

can be rewritten as

(A2) _v22{0_

ij

+

-

[3t+lV22

2V212

(A2) defines 1/P0 as a function of

+

=0

v222] [- 112
.

Implicit

differentiation

gives
(3it+l)V22 —

1

=

(A3)

1

2V212
2V
22

+

0

where we neglect terms In (a)2 .
derivatives of V(.) ,

substituting

+

,tV222

2

aM,

Computing the appropriate partial
into (A3), and simplifying yields (16).

Derivation of (18). Expanding the formula for the private cost

around M/P0 = 1

yields

29

PC

(A4)

i]]

-

V22

2

where partial derivatives are again evaluated at (1,1) .

line incorporates the fact that V2(1,1) = V12(1,1) = 0

The first

and the second

line the fact that (using (A3))

(A5)

—

]2]

=

=

[E[!i_

—

i]]2 +

—

Var[!i_.11

aM

[1
2

Substituting

where we again neglect terms in (a)2 .

the expression for

V22(1,1) into (A4) yields (18).

Derivation of (21). Expanding the expression for the externality

around H/P0 = 1 yIelds

EX

-

-V1E[- iJ

i121

(A6)
=

(3x+1)V22 — 2V212 + xV222
V1

2V22

30

2
aM

-

1

2

V

haM

•

The first line uses V12(1,1) = 0

and the second uses (A3) and (A5).

Substituting the appropriate partial derivatives yields (21).

Derivation of (24). Replace (1) with (23). By reasoning similar
to that of Section II, one can derive the following generalizations of (11)
and (13):

*
p
___i_
— 1!1
P
IPJ

(A7)

-

M

(Ai)

—
'

"1
—
=

_____

r.M.1(1—')

I
With these redefinitions of

]. 1P1(1—c)c
[ [—J

—

£1

—

i

1P4—yc 1

—J

j — zD.

I

and V(.) , the expressions for the private

cost and the externality given by (A4) and (A6) remain valid. Substituting

the new

and the partial derivatives of the new V(.) Into (A4) and (A6)

yields

(A9)

PC(t,y,a) 2yc—cI)cc

(AlO)

EX(c,y,cz) 2[yE-(-1)] aM

(24) follows from (A9) and (AlO).

Derivation of (27). By reasoning similar to that used to derive (A4),

(All) v[—,iJ —

v[—, [._J]

— . v[— — iJ2
——

Substituting

V(M—l)2.

the expression for V22(l,l) yields (27).

31

Derivation of (32). Using approximations similar to (A4) and (A6),
1+x
(A12)

5
M=1-x

[v(i,i)

—

v[—, [.—]J]

f(M)dM

1+x

5
M=1-x

=

[— v1[—

[F(1+x)

—

ii

—

..[v11

—

—

+

2v22J [.—— 1J2]f(M)dM

1—x<M<1+x

F(1_x))[_ViE[_-

—

]

i-x<M<i+x

[F(1+x) — F(1—x))

[

— V1

p0
ii

(31-i-1)V22—2V212-i-xV222

2V22

— 1

-2-(V11+c2V22)]

Substituting the appropriate partial derivatives yields (32).

32

_1121

NOTES

1. Mankiw claims to establish that "sticky prices can be both
privately efficient and socially Inefficient. . . . To the extent that policy
can stabilize aggregate demand, It can mitigate the social loss due to
suboptimal adjustment [of prices]. Small menu costs can cause large welfare
losses." In fact, Mankiw shows that stickiness arising from menu costs can
cause large welfare losses when demand falls and large welfare gains when
demand rises. In other words, after a positive shock price flexibility can
be privately efficient but socially Inefficient. Mankiw does not ask how
menu costs or demand stabilization affect average welfare.
2. Our result Is closer in spirit to the result of Ball (1986a) that
externalities from nominal wage rigidity may cause the equilibrium length of
labor contracts to exceed the socially optimal length. We discuss the
relation between our model and Ball's In the conclusion. Schultze (1985),
Weitzman (1985, 1986), and Taylor (1985) suggest Informally that nominal
rigidities have negative externalities.
3. The model would be essentially unchanged if we assumed Instead that
the marginal disutility of labor is constant and that production has
diminishing returns.
4. If a farmer's price is rigid and aggregate demand rises by a large
amount, the farmer may wish to ration purchasers of his product. (8) ignores
this possibility. However, because the farmer does not wish to ration after
a small shock (since price exceeds marginal cost before the shock), and
because the analysis below employs Taylor approximations around the no—shock
equilibrium, our results would not change If we modified (8) to account for
rationing.
5. Our results would not change if, following Blanchard and Klyotaki,
we made real balances an argument of the utility function rather than
specifying money demand directly. Our approach is simpler.
6. In this version of the model, the "menu cost" could be Interpreted
as an "indexing cost" -— a cost of making price a function of M
7. This deviation from certainty equivalence Is similar to the effect
of non-quadratic utility In models of optimal consumption and saving (see
Zeldes, 1986). Kuran (1985) presents another model in which nominal rigidity
affects mean output because utility Is not quadratic.

8. Our qualitative results would not change if we simply imposed
P0 = 1 . Alternatively, If production Is subsidized so that the no—shock
level of output is first best (an experiment discussed in Section V), the
welfare effects of changes in mean output disappear by the envelope theorem
but our main results are unaffected.

33

It is straightforward to modify the model by adding a velocity
9.
disturbance to money demand. In this case, Rz is the maximum possible gain
from using monetary policy to offset velocity shocks.

10. An alternative way of deriving R is to begin by writing utility

as a function of P1/P and M/P rather than PjIP'4 and M/P (see equation
zD. Analysis parallel to that of Sections A—D
(10)): Ui = W(M/P,Pi/P)
then yields

(22') R

111222
Wi2

where all partial derivatives are evaluated at (1,1) . Substituting
the appropriate derivatives of (10) into (22') gives (22). (22') holds
generally; it does not depend on the specifics in (10). Thus it Is possible
to use (22') to compute the ratio of the social to the private cost of
stickiness for different utility functions and for different assumptions
about the structure of the economy.
11. The result that the private and social costs of price rigidity
differ is a specific Instance of Greenwald and Stiglitz's (1986) fInding that
pecuniary externalities can lead to Pareto Inefficiency if a distortion
exists. The distortion in the model is imperfect competition.
12. While we emphasize the effect of rigidity on the variance of real
money In our discussion of the effects of the parameters, some details of
those effects depend on how rigidity influences the mean of real money (see
Section lILA). In particular, if we Ignore the effect on the mean (for
example by imposing P0 = 1) , then aR(t,y)IaE remains negative but

urn R(c,y) equals y/(y—l) rather than Infinity. In addition, while
It is still the case that urn R(c,y) =

, the

explanation is slightly

different: both the pr1vat cost and the externality approach zero as y
approaches one, but the private cost approaches zero more quickly.
13. When farmers are risk averse, R can be less than one--there can
be a positive externality from price stickiness. This possibility arises
because with risk aversion P0 may be less than one, and so stickiness may
raise the mean of output (see Section III.A). For some parameter values, the
gains from higher mean output outweigh the losses from greater variance of
output.
14. Allowing peculiarities in the distribution of M would complicate
the analysis considerably. For example, suppose that the money stock could
take on only two values, Ma and Mb , each with probability one-half. Then
there may be two equilibria, one in which farmers set their prices equal to
Ma and pay the menu cost if M = Mb and one in which they do the reverse.
15. A firm's choice of whether to index its wage to the aggregate price
level also has a similar externality (Ball, 1986b).

34

16. The roles of the parameters are also different in the two models.
For example, a large labor supply elasticity makes it likely that rigidity
has a positive externality in Ball's model; in the current paper, elastic
labor supply ( y close to one) implies a large negative externality.

35

REFERENCES
Akerlof, George A., and Yellen, Janet L., "A Near—Rational Model of the
Business Cycle, with Wage and Price Inertia," Quarterly Journal of
Economics 100 (Supplement, 1985): 823-838.
Ball, Laurence M., "Externalities from Contract Length," mimeo, New York
University Graduate School of Business Administration, August 1986.
(1986a)

"Is Equilibrium Indexation Efficient?", mlmeo, New York
University Graduate School of Business Administration, October 1986.
(1986b)

________

Blanchard, Olivier J., and Kiyotaki, Nobuhiro, "Monopolistic Competition,
Aggregate Demand Externalities, and Real Effects of Nominal Money,"
National Bureau of Economic Research Working Paper No. 1770, December
1985.

DeLong, J. Bradford, and Summers, Lawrence H., "The Changing Cyclical
Variability of Economic Activity in the United States," in Robert
J. Gordon, ed., The American Business Cycle: Continuity and Change
(Chicago: University of Chicago Press, 1986), pp. 679-719. (1986a)

_______ and ________, "Is Increased Price Flexibility Stabilizing?",
American Economic Review 76 (December 1986): 1031—44. (1986b)
Greenwald, Bruce G., and Stiglitz, Joseph E., "Externalities in Economies
with Imperfect Information and Incomplete Markets," Quarterly Journal
of Economics 101 (May 1986): 229-264.
Kuran, Timur, "Price Adjustment Costs, Anticipated Inflation, and Output,"
Quarterly Journal of Economics 101 (May 1986): 407—418.

Mankiw, N. Gregory, "Small Menu Costs and Large Business Cycles: A
Macroeconomic Model of Monopoly," Quarterly Journal of Economics
100 (May 1985): 529—537.
Schultze, Charles L., "Microeconomic Efficiency and Nominal Wage Stickiness,"
American Economic Review 75 (March 1985): 1—15.
Taylor, John B., "Externalities Associated with Nominal Price and
Wage Rigidities," mimeo, Stanford University, September 1985.
Weitzman, Martin L., "The Simple Macroeconomics of Profit Sharing,"
American Economic Review 75 (December 1985): 937—953.
Weitzman, Martin L., "Macroeconomic Implications of Profit Sharing,"
NBER Macroeconomics Annual 1 (1986): 291-335.
Zeldes, Stephen P., "Optimal Consumption with Stochastic Income:
Deviations from Certainty Equivalence," Rodney L. White Center for
Financial Research Working Paper No. 20-86, University of Pennsylvania,
August 1986.

36

