                              NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




           CENTRAL BANK CREDIBILITY BEFORE AND AFTER THE CRISIS

                                       Michael D. Bordo
                                        Pierre L. Siklos

                                      Working Paper 21710
                              http://www.nber.org/papers/w21710


                     NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                              1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                Cambridge, MA 02138
                                   November 2015




Part of the research for this paper was done while the second author was a National Fellow at the
Hoover Institution and a Visiting Scholar at the University of Tasmania. An appendix to the
paper is available on request. An earlier version of this paper was presented at the XVIII Annual
Inflation Targeting seminar, Banco Central do Brasil, Rio de Janeiro (May 2016). Comments by
José Renato Haas Ornelas are gratefully acknowledged. The views expressed herein are those of
the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic
Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.

© 2015 by Michael D. Bordo and Pierre L. Siklos. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not
to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit,
including © notice, is given to the source.
Central bank Credibility Before and After the Crisis
Michael D. Bordo and Pierre L. Siklos
NBER Working Paper No. 21710
November 2015, Revised July 2016
JEL No. C31,E31,E58

                                         ABSTRACT

A new measure of credibility is constructed as a function of the differential between observed
inflation and some estimate of the inflation rate that the central bank targets. The target is
assumed to be met flexibly. Credibility is calculated for a large group of both advanced and
emerging countries from 1980 to 2014. Financial crises reduce central bank credibility and
central banks with strong institutional feaures tend to do better when hit by a shock of the
magnitude of the 2007-2008 financial crisis. The VIX, adopting an inflation target and central
bank transparency, are the most reliable determinants of credibility. Similarly, real economic
growth has a significant influence on central bank credibility even in inflation targeting
economies.


Michael D. Bordo
Department of Economics
Rutgers University
New Jersey Hall
75 Hamilton Street
New Brunswick, NJ 08901
and NBER
bordo@econ.rutgers.edu

Pierre L. Siklos
Wilfrid Laurier University
75 University Ave
Waterloo, ON, CANADA, N2L 3C5
psiklos@wlu.ca
              Q: How consequential is the difference between promising 2 percent and delivering
              1 percent? (Appelbaum)

              A: I think it’s very consequential in terms of central bank credibility. If you say I’m
              going to hit a 2 percent inflation target and you’re unable to do it, that’s very
              consequential in terms of confidence in the central bank and your ability to meet
              your commitments. (Bullard)

              Appelbaum (2016)



1. Introduction

In the past two decades the credibility of central banks has been high, at least until the global
financial crisis (GFC) of 2007-2008. An important contributor to achieving credibility has been
the introduction of inflation targeting by many countries.1 In other words, institutional
considerations play a potentially crucial role in defining credibility. However, as Blinder (2000)
points out, the profession has a difficult time measuring it. His approach relies on a survey of
central banks. Since then economic theory effectively amounts to stating that credibility is
something of the nature ‘we know it when we see it’ (Cukierman 1986) but is crucially
dependent on the relationship between observed and expected inflation that is also part and
parcel of the Phillips curve and the Taylor rule approach to understanding monetary policy.

Many of the policies implemented in 2007 and 2008 moved central banks away from their
traditional role of protecting deposit taking institutions and the payments mechanism (Bordo
2014). For example, the US Federal Reserve (Fed), Bank of England (BOE), and others began
adopting credit policy that targets certain segments of the financial system. These responses
are usually viewed as a form of fiscal policy (Goodfriend 2012).

In response to the crisis many central banks have also elevated the objective of financial
stability to the same level of importance as macro stability. This is based on arguments that the

1
  Regressions in Bordo and Siklos (2016) show that key determinants of credibility include the policy regime
followed (especially the gold standard), central bank independence from the fiscal authorities and financial crises.
Since the 1980s credibility has been enhanced by adhering to inflation targeting (IT) which is associated with better
communication and transparency.

                                                                                                                   2
credit cycle leads to significant imbalances involving credit and asset price booms, which can
burst leading to serious recessions. Some have argued that central banks should also use their
monetary policy tools to prevent credit and asset booms from getting out of control. This
strategy creates problems for the use of the central bank’s single instrument of monetary
policy, the policy rate, in meeting multiple objectives.

The question of the much awaited exit strategy toward the restoration of normal monetary
policy also has crucial implications for central bank credibility. Central banks with large balance
sheets are exposed to credit risk when short–term rates rise and worry about the implications
of conventional tightening (Cochrane 2014). Equally problematic is that a return to an interest
rate as the principal policy instrument must be accompanied by an explanation of the role
policy rate changes will play alongside macro-prudential tools. Indeed, some central banks
backtracked on earlier policy rate increases, or delayed planned rate rises, triggered in part by
inflating asset prices (viz., housing) because of the implications of raising interest rates when
the real economy is weak (e.g., Swedish Riksbank, Reserve Bank of Australia (RBA)).

In this paper we construct a new measure of credibility. It is a function of the differential
between observed inflation and some estimate of the inflation rate that the central bank
targets. The target is assumed to be met flexibly in a manner to be described more fully below.
For inflation targeting (IT) economies the implied target is either the numerical announced
objective or is tied to it in view of the fact that such objectives are to be flexibly attained over
some horizon or is subject to a pre-specified target range.

We then ask empirically what determines movements in credibility based on a set of economic,
institutional and financial variables, as well as accounting for endogeneity. We investigate the
drivers of credibility for a large group of both advanced and emerging countries over the period
1980 to 2014. The approach we take is different from, but complementary to, our earlier work
where we constructed measures of credibility for a smaller panel of advanced countries over a
120 year time span. We also consider how the crisis of 2007-2008 as well as other economic
and financial determinants affected credibility.



                                                                                                  3
An unbalanced panel consisting of inflation expectations data for up to 86 countries from
Consensus Economics is used. 2 The samples range from the late 1980s to the present for
advanced economies and several emerging market economies while the data begin in the mid-
2000s for the remaining set of emerging market economies examined. We examine the
relationships of interest across a variety of country groups (e.g., G7, Inflation targeting
economies, emerging market economies). The principal advantage of our strategy is that it
brings a much larger set of economies to bear on the data to investigate what drives central
bank credibility. Indeed, one of our objectives is to find cross-country common factors or
determinants of credibility.

To ease the interpretation and implications of our results the sources of changes in credibility
are organized into groups of variables that represent real (e.g., output growth), financial (e.g.,
the VIX or non-performing loans, incidence of financial crises), and institutional (e.g., inflation
targets, central bank transparency) determinants for the proposed central bank credibility
proxy. Real variables are included to ascertain whether central banks do respond to real
economic conditions and not simply to inflation performance alone. The financial variables are
included because central banks have devoted much more attention to this objective, especially
since the global financial crisis of 2007-9, by possibly downgrading their inflation goals.
Institutional variables are important because central bankers are fond of underscoring the
importance of inflation objectives as well as the transparency required to sustain these.3

We find that financial crises reduce central bank credibility but not for all central banks. Central
banks with strong institutional determinants tend to do better when hit by a financial crisis of
the magnitude of 2007-2008. Asset prices are found to have a detrimental impact on credibility
in the Asia-Pacific but not among G7 economies where financial asset price volatility as

2
  In Bordo and Siklos (2015), owing to the absence of market-based measures of inflationary expectations, our
credibility indicator was derived from a reduced form expression based on a small structural model.
3
  That said, an important limitation of these institutional variables, important as they are, is that they change very
slowly and the requisite data are available either at the annual or even decanal sampling frequencies. Moreover,
even at the annual frequency, data for all the economies in our dataset are not available. A case in point is an
indicator of central bank transparency (CBI; e.g., see Eijffinger and Geraats (2006) Dincer and Eichengreen 2014).
Furthermore, the sample for the bulk of the economies in this study where CBI night well have played an
important role is short enough such that there is insufficient variation in existing CBI indicators to render them
empirically useful.

                                                                                                                    4
measured by the VIX is a more important culprit. Differences across central banks in various
parts of the world are what stand out in our empirical findings. Other than perhaps the VIX, the
adoption of an inflation target, or the degree of central bank transparency, it is difficult to find
widespread common determinants of credibility.

Section 2 discusses the data used. Section 3 discusses the empirical methodology. Section 4
presents the stylized facts and econometric results and section 5 presents our conclusions.

2. Data

Current year and one year ahead CPI inflation and real GDP growth from Consensus economics
for up to 86 economies are used in the empirical analysis below. Since the usual time horizon
for monetary policy is around two years the combination of inflation forecasts over such a time
horizon approaches that which captures the response to these decisions. The number of
economies sampled falls to 61 when observed real GDP growth are added in the empirical
analysis. 4

The availability of data for other potential covariates also affects the number of cross-sections
that can be examined at one time (see below). Data for the various determinants of credibility
considered are generally available since the early 1990s for advanced economies, notably the
G7 economies, while forecasts for the remaining economies begin from the mid-1990s to 2005.
Typically, the smallest samples are for emerging or developing economies relying on the
International Monetary Fund’s (IMF) definition. The sample ends in April 2014 when monthly
Consensus data are used while for some explanatory variables (viz., institutional proxies) the
data are available until the end of 2013 or the first quarter of 2014. The raw forecast data are
monthly which are subsequently converted into quarterly data (via arithmetic averaging) in
order to conduct an econometric analysis of the determinants of central bank credibility. 5




4
  In some cases the data were not available from the IMF’s International Financial Statistics; in a few other cases
the available samples were so short that it did not seem practical to collect the available data.
5
  For several emerging or developing economies the data were initially published on a bi-monthly basis. Eventually,
the data were published monthly. Bi-monthly data were converted into monthly data via interpolation using the
Catmull-Rom spline algorithm.

                                                                                                                 5
A salient feature of the raw Consensus data is that they are published as fixed horizon forecasts.
That is, published figures represent forecasts of inflation or real GDP growth in the current or
following calendar year as opposed to the fixed event forecasts that economists generally have
in mind when thinking about expectations (i.e., one year ahead forecast published at time t).
Typically, the conversion of one type of forecast into another involves estimating a linear
combination of current and next year fixed horizon forecasts to mimic the preferred fixed event
forecasts.6 Hence, while these forecasts cover two calendar years for the purposes of their
interpretation we refer to them as one year ahead forecasts.

Monthly forecasts for inflation and real GDP growth are combined with monthly data for
observed changes in a Consumer Price Index (CPI). In contrast, observed real GDP growth data
are generally available only at the quarterly frequency. Data were obtained from the IMF’s
International Financial Statistics (IFS; October 2014 CD_ROM version as well as the online
version; http://www.elibrary.imf.org/ ). 7 A few series, such as interest rates (long-term, short-
term, and policy rates, where applicable), and exchange rates were also collected from the
same source. Long-term interest rate data were collected for 33 economies, while short-term
yields were obtained for 39 economies. The former are typically government bonds that mature
in 10 years or more while the latter represent three-month government instruments (e.g.,
Treasury bills). These were used to generate a term spread, namely the difference between
long-term and short-term yields.

For 50 economies the Bank for International Settlements (BIS; www.bis.org) provides real
exchange rate and credit data. While exchange rates in advanced economies float against each
other, emerging markets often actively manage their exchange rates (e.g., Reinhart and Rogoff




6
  See Siklos (2013), and references therein, for discussion. If monthly inflation is denoted by π the transformation
is as follows: π mFH,t = [(13 − m) / 12]π tFE + [(m − 1) / 12]π mFE,t +1 where π mFE,t ,π mFH,t are, respectively, fixed event (FE) and
fixed horizon (FH) forecasts, at time t, in month m. The same transformation is used to create fixed horizon real
GDP growth forecasts.
7
  Observed inflation data are also generally available at the monthly frequency. Australia and New Zealand are two
notable exceptions since they publish only quarterly data.

                                                                                                                                     6
2004). Clearly, real exchange rates, via parity type conditions, impact both observed and
expected inflation performance and are likely to be a determinant of central bank credibility. 8

To conserve space we group economies. Recent events, for example, have highlighted the
divide between inflation and non-inflation targeting economies on the one hand and emerging
markets economies versus advanced economies on the other. We follow the definitions used in
the IMF’s World Economic Outlook (http://www.imf.org/external/ns/cs.aspx?id=29) database.
Nevertheless, we also created additional country groupings partly to evaluate the robustness of
our results. In addition to the G7, EU, Eurozone, and Advanced economies, we also consider the
G4 (U.S., Eurozone, Japan, U.K.), inflation targeting (IT) economies, economies in the Asia-
Pacific region, and a group of “other” economies that did not fit any of the other classifications
listed. IT economies are further sub-divided according to whether the countries in question
belong to the Advanced or emerging market classifications.

We also include the BIS’s credit indicators. Credit and housing prices have been assigned pride
of place by the BIS and others as culprits in the GFC of 2007-2008. Indeed, Borio et.al. (2015)
find that asset price deflations as opposed to goods price deflations, are economically more
damaging. Similarly, the BIS has argued that asset price bubbles are more likely when monetary
policy is too loose (e.g., see BIS 2015). Therefore, asset price movements have the potential to
influence central bank credibility. Data are available for 40 economies at the quarterly
frequency. The data represent nominal and real credit measures for private non-financial
sector,                  household,                   and                 non-financial             corporations
(https://www.bis.org/statistics/credtopriv.htm?m=6%7C326). We also consider the rate of
changes in equity prices where the latter are aggregated in index form. Monthly data were
obtained         from      the     IMF      and      the     St.    Louis     Federal     Reserve   data   base
(http://research.slouis.org/fred2/; FRED).

Proxies for the potential impact of financial stability are obtained from the World Bank’s
Development              Indicators         (http://data.worldbank.org/data-catalog/world-development-
indicators). We posit that financial system stability can be summarized by the percent of non-

8
    A positive change in the real exchange rate is defined as a real appreciation.

                                                                                                              7
performing loans to GDP, the capital-asset ratio 9, domestic credit to GDP, and an estimate of
the risk premium on lending. All of these variables have been mentioned in the recent literature
on the determinants of financial stability or have been emphasized by policy makers (e.g.,
central banks) as early warning type signals of financial stability (e.g., see Borio 2014, Vredin
2015, and references therein). 10 Another proxy for financial stability, available at a much higher
sampling frequency, is the VIX index. This represents the implied volatility in the S&P500 and is
often seen as a portent of financial stability since it represents the markets’ near term
expectation of future stock market volatility. As Adrian et. al. (2014) point out “…a dramatic
decline in capital ratios in the years leading up to the financial crisis as perceived risk – often
measured by the VIX or credit spreads – fell to low levels.” They go on to emphasize the
importance of the VIX as an indicator of the procyclicality of the financial cycle. The data are
from FRED. Another source of institutional change is the World Bank’s Worldwide Governance
Indicators. 11 Indicators of the rule of law, voice and accountability and political stability
indicators were also considered as potential institutional determinants of central bank
credibility. 12




9
  It was pointed out to us that not all central banks supervise the financial system. Hence, it is unclear why the
capital-asset ratio should be considered a determinant of central bank credibility. This variable is a proxy for
financial stability and even if the central bank does not directly supervise the banking system almost all central
banks are expected (whether explicitly or not) to ensure financial system stability.
10
   Only a small number of central banks relative to the size of our data set have created indexes of financial stress
or stability by combining a large number of related factors.
11
   http://info.worldbank.org/governance/wgi/index.aspx#home. Voice and accountability is defined as “capturing
perceptions of the extent to which a country's citizens are able to participate in selecting their government, as well
as freedom of expression, freedom of association, and a free media.” Rule of law represents “…perceptions of the
extent to which agents have confidence in and abide by the rules of society, and in particular the quality of
contract enforcement, property rights, the police, and the courts, as well as the likelihood of crime and violence.”
Political stability captures “perceptions of the likelihood that the government will be destabilized or overthrown by
unconstitutional or violent means, including politically‐motivated violence and terrorism.” See Kaufmann, Kraay,
and Mastuzzi (2010. pg. 4).
12
     We also considered Heritage Foundation’s index of economic freedom or fiscal freedom
(http://www.heritage.org/). Economic freedom is based on a grouping of 10 quantitative and qualitative factors
that include the rule of law, property rights, regulatory efficiency and trade openness. A more complete definition
is available at http://www.heritage.org/index/about. Fiscal freedom is an aggregation of three indicators, namely
the top marginal tax rate on individual income, the top marginal tax rate on corporate income, and the total tax
burden as a percent of GDP. More details are available at http://www.heritage.org/index/fiscal-freedom. The
conclusions discussed below were largely unaffected when data from this source was included. Hence, their use is
not discussed further.

                                                                                                                    8
As explained below our methodology includes, where feasible, ‘gaps’ in both inflation and real
GDP. This acknowledges that the starting point for our estimates is the traditional quadratic
loss function with inflation and output as its determinants.13 Essentially, two different
strategies were adopted in the estimation. First, we computed 2-year and 5-year moving
averages of observed and forecasted inflation or real GDP growth. Alternatively, one-sided HP
filters for the series were fitted. We return to this issue below when discussing our
methodology in more detail.

Because real GDP and price level data were not available for a sufficiently long span of data
much beyond the advanced economies the filters were applied to the rate of change data. This
is somewhat non-standard. As a result, a very high smoothing parameter (100,000) was applied
to ensure that sensible estimates of the gap are generated. Alternatively, in the case of real
GDP, we also used the change in real GDP growth. The latter can be likened to a ‘speed limit’
indicator of monetary policy. 14

Finally, we consider the impact of the adoption of inflation targeting and changing central bank
transparency. An annual index of central bank transparency since 1998, originally developed by
Dincer and Eichengreen (2007, 2014), and updated by Siklos (2011, 2016), is used. 15 Not
surprisingly, the rise of central bank transparency parallels the adoption of inflation targets. 16




13
   It was pointed out to us that exchange rate management is also likely part of the several central bank loss
functions. Clarida (2001), and Collins and Siklos (2004), for example, demonstrate empirically and via simulation
exercises that the traditional loss function is not significantly improved by the explicit addition of a real exchange
rate objective. Nevertheless, as noted above, the real exchange rate is included as a separate determinant of
credibility.
14
   Our conclusions were unaffected when we compare our gap estimates with ones, where available, generated
from growth rate data. The one-sided filters were estimated twice holding either the first or last observation end-
points fixed. In the case of estimates of the output gap we also examined the mean of the two one-sided
estimates. The concern here is over the well-known end-point problem with traditional estimates that rely on an
HP filter.
15
   Central bank transparency data (up to 2011; data up to 2013 will be released shortly) are available from the
Central Bank Communication Network http://www.central-bank-communication.net). The index aggregates 15
attributes which are then sub-divided into five broad categories. They are: political transparency, which measures
how open the central bank is about its policy objectives; economic transparency, an indicator of the type of
information used in the conduct of monetary policy; procedural transparency, which provides information about
how monetary policy decisions are made; policy transparency, a measure of the content and how promptly
decisions are made public by the central bank; and, finally, operational transparency, which summarizes how the

                                                                                                                    9
Potential determinants of central bank credibility are expressed as a percent of GDP, as indexes
or dummy variables (e.g., adoption of inflation targeting, central bank transparency,
governance), or in rate of change form (credit variables, real exchange rates, asset prices). 17

3. Methodology

Our analysis proceeds in two steps. First, we compute two separate estimates of credibility. As
noted in the introduction most central banks have a responsibility to control inflation.
Accountability, at least in legislative terms, may be stricter for some than for others (e.g., in IT
central banks versus others). Hence, it is natural to think of central bank credibility, broadly
speaking, as a function of the differential between observed inflation and some estimate of the
inflation rate that the central bank targets. Even when a numerical objective is available it is
often expressed in the form of a range and there is usually sufficient flexibility in the mandate
of the central bank to miss the target range over some horizon that is at least two years, or
longer. It is the essence of flexible inflation targeting which suggests that a useful indicator of
credibility should not penalize a central bank the same way for missing the stated (or implicitly
stated) target each and every period as opposed to exceeding or undershooting its target
range. While it is more difficult to make the same case for non-IT central banks there is also
likely to be some tolerance for missing an estimate of some implicit inflation objective.

Next, we must decide on the penalty a central bank incurs to its credibility when the inflation
objective is missed. A straightforward assumption, in common with the literature on central
bank objective functions, is to assume that the loss of credibility rises non-linearly the further
away observed inflation is from target. A definition that meets this criterion is provided below.




central bank evaluates its own performance. Note also that central bank transparency and independence are not
unrelated as Dincer and Eichengreen (2014) have pointed out.
16
   The rise in transparency is not, however, solely associated with the formal adoption of numerical targets since
the U.S., Federal Reserve, the European Central Bank (ECB), and the Swiss National Bank (SNB) are not, ordinarily,
included among the group of inflation targeting economies even though they are considered to be central banks
where inflation control is part of their remit.
17
   In some of the estimated specifications we also include dummies for the GFC and the Asian Financial Crisis (AFC).
The former is dated 2007Q1-2009Q4; the latter is set at one for the period 1997Q1-1998Q4.

                                                                                                                 10
Note that the foregoing considerations do not relegate output (or the exchange rate) to
irrelevance. As pointed out above, both the extant empirical and theoretical literatures
recognize that flexibility around any inflation objective matters precisely because central banks
also care about other indicators of economic performance. Moreover, any departure from an
inflation goal need not automatically translate into an immediate loss of credibility.

Ideally, as in Bordo and Siklos (2015), we would estimate the central bank’s inflation objective
based on a model where the central bank is aware that the neutral or equilibrium real interest
rate can change over time, as well as the other variables that define the state of the economy,
as summarized by a monetary policy rule such as the oft-used Taylor rule. 18 In a large cross-
section data set of the kind used here such an approach is impractical because of data
limitations. Instead, we assume that a central bank’s implicit inflation target is influenced by its
forecasts over a two year horizon. Since we are unable to rely on central bank forecasts instead
we use Consensus forecasts as a proxy. 19

It is also conceivable, of course, that the central bank’s inflation target has a backward-looking
component.20 In this case the monetary authority’s inflation objective is also influenced by
current and past inflation performance.21 In this case a moving average, or some other method
that smooths past inflation (e.g., an H-P filter applied to inflation), such that it is in line with the
target that the central bank has in mind acts as a proxy for an inflation target. This view is also
consistent with the notion that inflation expectations display history dependence (e.g.,
Woodford 2003).


18
   In Bordo and Siklos (2016) the rule can be a Taylor rule, a money growth rule, or an exchange rate rule. The
choice of rules depends on the policy regime actually in place. Otherwise, they are counterfactuals. In an appendix
we present purely for illustrative purposes, central bank inflation targets estimated in Bordo and Siklos (2016) for
10 advanced economies since the early 1990s. Note that the model generated inflation objectives that the authors
generated are based on annual, not monthly, data and over a much longer sample that the one examined below.
19
   Several advanced economies only began to publish their own (or their staff’s) forecasts for inflation and real GDP
growth in the early to mid-2000s. Indeed, many still report Consensus style forecasts when discussing the inflation
outlook.
20
   In most IT economies the target is often unchanged possibly after a gradual reduction of the target in the early
years of such a regime. Hence, even in IT economies, there can be a backward0looking element to the target.
21
    Since the calculations include contemporaneous inflation, a small forward-looking element remains in the
estimates of the monetary authority’s inflation objective. There is usually a lag in the publication of current month
or quarter inflation rates.

                                                                                                                  11
Our first, and preferred, definition of central bank credibility is written as follows:

                 CREDt = (πtf +1 − π*t ), if π*t − 1 ≤ πet +1 ≤ π*t + 1
                                                                                               (1)
                 CREDt = (πtf +1 − π*t )2 ,if π*t − 1 > πet +1 > π*t + 1




where πet+1 is expected inflation for the year ahead which is proxied by π tf+1 , namely the one

year ahead fixed horizon inflation forecast, as previously defined, and                    is the proxy for the

time-varying inflation objective or target. 22 Equation (1) defines credibility (CRED) in terms of a
forward-looking measure and makes clear that the penalty for missing the target is greater
when expectations are outside the ±1% interval than when forecasts miss the target inside the
target range. A smaller penalty is assessed when the gap between the inflation target and
expectations allows small deviations from an IT to have an inconsequential impact on
credibility. After all, inflation cannot be controlled perfectly. Hence, a typical inflation control
regime will make allowances for missing a target by specifying a target range for inflation. For
completeness we also consider the case when the loss of credibility is zero so long as

 πet +1 − π*t ≤ 1 but our conclusions are unchanged. These results are not discussed further.


As noted above most, though not all, inflation targeting regimes with an explicit numerical
objective specify a ± 1% range of indifference.23 We assume, even if the central bank is not
required to adhere to a numerically agreed to and publicly announced inflation target, that the
monetary authority has a mandate to control inflation. Squaring deviations from an inflation
target is natural under the circumstances and follows from assuming a quadratic form for losses
in central bank objective functions. Indeed, depending on the persistence properties of inflation




22
     Note that   is not the mean inflation rate but an inflation objective as defined above. Hence, the second part
of equation (1) is not the variance or a measure of inflation volatility.
23
   For example, examining economies that adopted inflation targeting finds that only South Africa and Thailand
specify target ranges that are slightly larger than the ± 1% presumed in our calculations.

                                                                                                                12
forecasts inside the range the central bank’s credibility may not be negatively impacted at all.
However, persistent deviations within the range would result in a loss of credibility. 24

Alternatively, we also generate a version of equation (1) by replacing the one year ahead
inflation forecast, π tf+1 with a smoothed inflation rates based on observed data. In this case

expected inflation is extrapolated from past inflation performance. This implies a backward-
looking credibility indicator written as follows:

           CRED't = (πt − π*t ), if π*t − 1 ≤ πt ≤ π*t + 1
                                                                                               (2)
           CRED't = (πt − π*t )2 ,if π*t − 1 > πt > π*t + 1

where πt is a moving average (2 to 5 years) of past inflation.

Equation (2) says that credibility is determined by how far inflation outturns are from what the
central bank, in principle, believes is the medium-term inflation objective. The backward-
looking nature of the credibility indicator is somewhat less desirable especially since most
central banks have been at pains to underscore the importance of the forward-looking nature
of monetary policy. Nevertheless, our conclusions are largely unaffected whether πft +1 or πt are

used. Hence, virtually all results discussed in the next section are shown assuming that a central
bank’s inflation objective is based on Consensus forecasts i.e., equation (1)). We also normalize
estimates of (1) and (2) to facilitate cross-economy comparisons.

A few additional remarks about our measure of credibility are in order. First, in IT economies
the inflation target is announced ahead of time. Hence, credibility can be assessed in relation to
a publicly announced value for π*t . In non-IT economies it is likely that there are more informal

expressions for the likely inflation target.25 Yet, financial markets (i.e., bond and currency
markets) as well as households will form a view of the central bank’s objective.




24
   The relevance of this point is highlighted in recent discussions, mainly in some advanced economies, that
inflation rates have been persistently below (or some years ago, persistently above) some inflation objective.
25
   An example is when a central bank provides some information about the outlook or discusses the outlook as
seen by other stakeholders (e.g., financial markets, professional forecasters).

                                                                                                           13
Having defined an indicator of central bank credibility we then ask what are its determinants
over time. Letting i refer to a group of economies, we consider three potential sets of economic
determinants. They are: economic, financial, and institutional. Therefore, we write

                                                                                                                   (3)

where CRED is the indicator of central bank credibility for country i at time t, defined in
equation (1), 26 ECON is a vector of macroeconomic factors, FIN represents financial stability
determinants of credibility, and INST is a vector institutional determinants. ECON includes real
GDP growth (or the output gap), and the real exchange rate. 27 For FIN several candidates were
considered, as previously explained. Variables include the term spread, the rate of change in
housing prices, the growth of private sector credit, equity returns, and indicators of non-
performing loans, credit risk, capital adequacy, and risk premium on loans. We use the World
Bank indicators when other FIN data were unavailable. We also include the VIX which, as
argued above, is considered to be an important indicator of financial system stability. 28 Finally,
INST is captured by indicators of the rule of law, voice and accountability, and political stability
from the World Bank’s governance indicators. We also separately control, where appropriate,
for whether the economies in question adopted formal inflation targets and the level of central
bank transparency.

In estimating the regression implied by equation (3) we also consider the possibility that some
of the right hand side variables are endogenous. Given the variety of sampling frequencies in
the raw data, equation (3) is estimated via two stage least squares with fixed effects where
relevant. 29 Potentially, there is considerable heterogeneity across the many central banks in our
data set. It may be misleading then to focus solely on the mean responses to the various

26
   Or (2) but the results discussed below focus almost exclusively on the version of CRED defined in (1).
27
   We also considered oil prices (i.e., rate of change in either the Texas or Brent crude oil prices) but this variable
was usually statistically insignificant. Hence, it is not discussed further.
28
   It is true that the VIX includes an unobservable risk premium. An alternative, such as the volatility in some
domestic financial asset price indicator (e.g., a stock market index) is equally plausible. However, resort to the VIX
is ubiquitous in the literature. Hence, we retain this variable as a proxy for financial stability.
29
   That is, we test whether the fixed effects are redundant or not. Owing to the limitations of the data a single lag
of the right hand side variables serve as instruments. A panel version of the Stock-Yogo (2005) suggests that the
chosen strategy is satisfactory.

                                                                                                                    14
determinants of central bank credibility considered. Therefore, we supplement estimates with
quantile regressions (e.g., see Koenker 2005, Canay 2011) in a panel setting. Specifically, we
provide estimates for the median central bank together with estimates for the two tails of the
distribution of central bank credibility, that is, the least and most credible central banks (i.e.,
the tails of the distribution of central bank credibility estimates defined as the top and bottom
10% of the distribution). In this case equation (3) is rewritten as follows:

                          CRED
                            = it (τ) f(ECONit (τ),FINit (τ),INSTit (τ)) + Fε−1 (τ)               (4)


where Fε−1 denotes the common distribution function of the errors, τ are the quantiles, and all

other terms have previously been defined.

To conserve space we focus attention on the search for common determinants of central bank
credibility by grouping economies as previously discussed. It is not always immediately clear
what the signs of the right hand side variables in (3) and (4) ought to be. However, in view of
the received evidence about the role of inflation targeting, INST ought to be play an especially
important role. In particular, stronger institutions ought to improve credibility. Next, given the
widespread acceptance of the role of inflation and economic activity in influencing the stance
of monetary policy one also expects ECON to be significant since a central bank can generate
credibility by using the instrument(s) at its disposal to guide inflation and its expectation toward
the stated objective. Central banks that are seen as responding to real economic conditions
appropriately should also be more credible. Whether a concern for financial stability raises or
reduces credibility is an empirical question since extant theory is divided on the question and
the emerging literature on the role and uses of macroprudential policies is far away from
reaching a consensus.

4. Stylized Facts and Econometric Results
(a) Stylized Facts

We begin with some stylized facts. Figure 1 plots observed and (median) inflation forecasts for
inflation targeting regimes, depending on whether the economies in question are members of


                                                                                                 15
the group of advanced economies, the Eurozone, 30 or the remaining economies in the dataset.
The data shown are monthly. Differences in the samples shown reflect data limitations.

Examining the record of advanced IT economies and the Eurozone we observe that inflation
forecasts tend to be less volatile than movements in the observed inflation rates. In addition,
periods when Consensus forecasts deviate from observed inflation can and do persist for long
periods of time. This is also the case for all economies shown. It is interesting that, during the
2008-2009 financial crisis, Consensus forecasts temporarily underestimate by a sizeable margin
observed inflation in both advanced IT economies as well as in the Eurozone. The sharp
downturn in inflation in advanced IT economies post-GFC presumably reflects the anticipated
impact of the Great Recession. The effect is equally noticeable in the Eurozone. Between 2009
and early 2014, forecasts of inflation were, more often than not, overly pessimistic (i.e., the
median forecast exceeds inflation outturns) in advanced IT economies while the opposite
seems to be true much of the time in the Eurozone. Clearly, these features of the data also help
explain why central banks continued to loosen policies. Equally important, observations such as
these suggest some possible interdependence between inflation and output growth forecasts
though it is likely time-varying. 31

Turning to the other economies considered that also target inflation, median inflation has fallen
steadily over time with the exception of a temporary spike during the GFC. Moreover, by the
early 2000s, the gap between observed and forecasts of inflation begins to resemble that seen
in advanced economies. In contrast, economies that neither target inflation nor are part of any
of the other country groupings considered, experience not only more volatile inflation but
median inflation rates do not appear to have changed as much as they have elsewhere in the
world. 32


30
   Eurozone data is only used since the European Central Bank came into existence in 1998. All inflation forecasts
and determinants of ECB credibility are also examined based on variables whose coverage only consists of the
Eurozone (membership varies over time). See www.ecb.europa.eu/ecb/euro/intro/html/map.en.html.
31
   In an earlier draft we also discussed real GDP growth (observed and forecasted) performance in the various
country groupings examined. It is worth noting that forecasts in the Advanced economies are persistently
downgraded relative to forecasts in the last years of the Great Moderation.
32
   One possibility is that pass-through effects from commodity prices are relatively lower in emerging market
economies that target inflation than in the other economies group shown in Figure 1 (e.g., see Mihaljek and Klau

                                                                                                               16
Figure 2 illustrates a potentially important feature of the data that helps us better understand
the relationship between inflation forecasts and observed inflation performance across
countries and regions of the world. The top portion of the Figure shows, for the group of
advanced economies in the sample, the range of inflation rates and forecasts from the highest
forecasted inflation rates to lowest inflation rate forecasts. When inflation rates are relatively
low they are not only relatively less volatile but considerably easier to forecast. Notice
however, that the worst performing economies in the advanced world exhibit not only highly
variable inflation rates but forecasts are generally too optimistic compared to outcomes. The
bottom plot in Figure 2, however, considers the inflationary experience in the Asia-Pacific
region. Clearly, this part of the world is not immune to volatility or to the presence of persistent
and, occasionally large, deviations of forecasts from observed inflation, at least until after the
financial crisis of 2007-9 when forecast errors begin to diminish or evaporate.

Next, we turn to some estimates of central bank credibility. To facilitate comparability across
countries or regions the credibility indicators are given by equation (1). Essentially, credibility
may be interpreted as percent deviations from the central bank’s presumed inflation objective.
Figure 3 is sub-divided into two separate samples, 1995 to 2004 and 2005-2014. Note that a
credibility loss implies that the indicator derived from equation (1) rises and vice-versa.
Therefore, credibility is lower the higher is the value shown on the vertical axis.

Central banks in Advanced economies are generally always more credible than monetary
authorities in other parts of the world as seen by the scaling of the vertical axis. Notice also that
emerging markets that eventually adopt inflation targets (IT EME) beginning in the early 2000s,
display large gains in credibility. Indeed, by the mid-2000s (bottom portion of Figure 3),
credibility levels in emerging market economies that target inflation are not visibly different
from those seen in more advanced economies or for that matter the Eurozone. The BRICS
economies, as well as economies not otherwise classified (Other), frequently experience
credibility losses. During financial crises, as shown by the shaded areas, most central banks
outside the Advanced group of economies suffer credibility losses whether or not they were

2008, Bussière and Peltonen 2008). In addition, the share of volatile prices (i.e., food and energy) in the CPI of the
other economies is likely considerably higher than in the remaining economies considered in this study.

                                                                                                                   17
directly implicated in the crisis. In contrast, during the GFC, temporary credibility losses were
experienced on a global scale but recovered quickly.

In Figure 4a, the credibility record of advanced and Eurozone economies is shown in a different
light. Here we illustrate the range of the credibility indicator from the highest to the lowest
performers for a variety of country groups. The plots reveal credibility losses, as captured by
the widening gap between best and worst performers, around both the AFC and GFC in
Advanced economies while other economies are hardly affected. The data also suggest that
there were indications of sizeable credibility losses during the second half of 2007 when there
were early signs that a financial crisis on a global scale was imminent. 33 The figures also make
clear that once lost, central bank credibility takes time to recover. Finally, and equally
importantly, there exists a wide range in credibility losses across central banks even among the
advanced group of economies. In the case of the Eurozone our indicator reveals a loss of
credibility soon after the European Central Bank is created in 1998 and an even larger loss as
the sovereign debt crisis of 2009 erupts.

Figure 4b reveals stark differences in credibility between emerging market economies that
adopted inflation targeting relative to the remaining economies in the sample (Other). Among
the IT EMEs, there is a remarkable convergence in credibility between the best and worst
performers across the region beginning in the mid-2000s. After hard won improvements in
credibility emerging market economies generally not directly implicated in the global crisis do
not subsequently experience any noticeable credibility losses. In contrast, central banks in the
other economies category suffer large credibility losses during the financial crisis and again in
2012 and 2013, possibly because of the knock on effects of the appreciation of the U.S. dollar. It
is conceivable that the adoption of inflation targeting is able to explain the differences shown.

Although the stylized facts give a general idea of the evolution of central bank credibility
around the world it may be useful to consider a few counry-specific examples since the sample
of countries considered in this paper is very large. Therefore, Figure 5 plots the evolution of


33
  Recall that there were sharp increases in commodity prices beginning in 2007 and into 2008 which clearly spilled
over into credibility losses.

                                                                                                               18
credibility in four selected economies. Both credibility indicators (i.e., equations (1) and (2))
defined above are shown.

The Fed’s credibility (top left) temporarily suffers a large drop during the financial crisis of 2007-
2009 before recovering once the worst of the GFC has passed. However, the loss is somewhat
more persistent when observed (i.e., based on equation (2)) as opposed to a forecast-based
measure of inflation (equation (1)) are used. Interestingly, there is another sudden and fairly
large loss of credibility in early 2013 that is quickly reversed especially when the forward-
looking credibility measure is used. This takes place in the aftermath of even more quantitative
easing in the last quarter of 2012, soon followed by the introduction of forward guidance linked
to underlying economic conditions. These developments appear to have boosted Fed
credibility.

The Swiss experience (top right) shows quite clearly large and persistent credibility losses
during the second half of the 1990s but relatively more so when the measure based on
observed inflation is used. The situation is only reversed once the Swiss National Bank adopts
inflation control measures and targets a forecast of inflation beginning in 2000. The adoption of
an inflation control objective seems to have led to a noticeable improvement in credibility and
both credibility proxies essentially give the same result. The financial crisis, followed by the
Eurozone sovereign debt crisis, also leads to a steady loss of credibility. Credibility only
improves when the SNB puts a ceiling on the Swiss franc exchange rate in 2011 (since
abandoned in January 2015; not shown in the Figure). Nevertheless, the SNB is still not seen as
credible as it was during the early days of inflation forecast targeting.

The Hong Kong Monetary Authority’s experience (bottom left) is dominated by large negative
credibility shocks during the Asian Financial Crisis of 1997-1998. 34 However, credibility losses
are generally larger when observed inflation is used to construct the indicator. In relative terms,
the impact of the latest financial crisis is barely noticeable. It is also interesting to note that

34
   The HKMA, of course, operates a pegged exchange rate regime. Therefore, it largely imparts US inflation
throughout the sample. Nevertheless, the credibility of such a regime also rests on the inflationary consequences
of the regime choice. After all, pass-through effects and other factors still create scope for an inflation differential
vis-à-vis the US.

                                                                                                                      19
persistent divergences prevail between observed and expectations-based credibility of the
HKMA throughout the 2000s. Recall that this is the period when the Fed was gradually
tightening monetary policy. Given the Hong Kong dollar peg this was deflationary for Hong Kong
as seen from the observed inflation-based credibility measure. However, expectations of
inflation remain sticky so that the forward-looking credibility indicator shows a rise during this
period.

Finally, Argentina’s record (bottom right) is a good illustration of the sensitivity, especially of
the forward-looking credibility indicator, to a change in perceptions about the monetary regime
in place. It is clear that the central bank begins to lose credibility in 2013 when it became
increasingly clear that published inflation data were deemed untrustworthy. Similarly,
abandoning the currency board arrangement in 2002, produces a sharp and persistent
credibility loss that last several years.

(b) Econometric Results

Results are presented in Tables 1 and 2. They are based on the standardized version of the
credibility proxy (i.e., equation (1)) defined above. Hence, the estimated coefficients have an
elasticity-type interpretation. We began by examining the time series properties of the CRED
proxy. All tests, in a panel setting, soundly reject the null hypothesis of a unit root in the data.35
Hence, the dependent variable in equations (3) and (4) is specified in levels. The panels are
unbalanced and the number of available cross-sections can change when we separately
estimate pre and post crisis samples. 36 We experimented with several variants of equation (3)
to determine whether or not our conclusions would be affected since the number of available
determinants of credibility varies across groups of countries and over time. Not surprisingly, the
availability of data problem is a more serious problem for emerging markets and the remaining


35
   Based on the Im, Pesaran and Shin (2003) panel unit root test, as well as the panel versions of the conventional
ADF, and Phillips-Perron (PP) unit root tests.
36
   As a robustness check we also estimated the relationships shown below for the full sample allowing for an
“exogenous” break due to the GFC and the AFC. Again the main conclusions discussed below are unaffected. An
alternative we did not implement is to rely on idiosyncratic dating for the global financial crisis (e.g., see
Hashimoto, Ito and Dominguez 2012) as opposed to assuming that the GFC’s duration is the same for every
country.

                                                                                                                20
economies (i.e., other economies) in the data set. We believe, however, that the estimates
presented below are representative and reasonably robust.

The results in Table 1 are estimated over two distinct samples. The “pre-crisis” sample consists
of available data until 2006Q4. The crisis and post-crisis sample, labeled ‘post-crisis’, begins in
2007Q1 and ends in 2013Q4 or 2014Q1, again depending on data availability. 37 All estimates
rely on quarterly data. In Table 2, estimates for the median, maximum and minimum credibility
cases are for equation (4) for the full sample only with dummy variables for the GFC and AFC.
This is done to conserve space but also to provide separate evidence of the potential statistical
impact of these two major financial crises on central bank credibility.

Our discussion begins with Table 1. We find there is considerable variety in the drivers of
central bank credibility in the five regions shown. Generally, higher real GDP growth is seen as
improving central bank credibility, particularly in the post-crisis sample. Other than perhaps the
VIX (see below) real GDP growth post-crisis comes closest to being a common factor affecting
central bank credibility across the globe. Interestingly, credibility improvements are relatively
smaller in the G7, Advanced, and IT EME economies in the post-crisis sample. The difference,
however, is only statistically significant for the G7 group. Conceivably, the economies most
directly impacted by the financial crisis might well have generated even larger credibility gains
had they been seen as more responsive to output conditions. We return to this question below.
In the Asia-Pacific, the response of credibility to real GDP growth is significantly higher after
2006 than in the earlier sample.

Changes in the real exchange rate produce a variety of credibility responses across the various
regions examined. In the G7, Advanced and Asia-Pacific economies post-crisis, a real
appreciation signals increased credibility likely because this is consistent with lower expected
inflation. It is interesting to note that, pre-crisis, real exchange rate depreciations raise central
bank credibility in the Asia-Pacific region. This is likely to be a reflection of the lingering effects
of the Asian Financial Crisis of 1997-1998. Similarly, a real depreciation raises credibility post


37
  We also generated estimates for the 2007Q1-2010Q4 sample (i.e., a ‘pure’ crisis sample) but these paralleled the
results for the crisis/post-crisis sample shown in Table 1.

                                                                                                               21
2006 in emerging market economies with numerical inflation targets. Real depreciations were
perhaps seen as a device to counter exchange rate pressure from the extraordinary loosening
of monetary policy among the G7 economies. 38

The VIX consistently explains mean variations in credibility with the exception of advanced
economies and IT EME economies. An increase in the VIX reduces credibility in the pre-crisis
sample while the opposite is true after 2006. It is possible that pre-crisis stock market volatility
was also associated with inflation volatility as has been extensively documented (e.g., Schwert
1989, Engle and Rangel 2008). However, the crisis and its aftermath raised the profile of
financial stability in central banks. This led to a concerted reduction in policy rates, and interest
rates more generally, especially throughout much of the advanced world and was associated
with lower inflation rates (e.g., see Figure 1). This could explain why the sign on the VIX variable
is reversed.

Housing price inflation and credit growth are now variables often associated with financial
stability concerns (e.g., BIS 2015). Housing prices do not affect central bank credibility in the G7
economies. In the Asia-Pacific region rising housing prices appear to raise credibility pre-crisis
but the sign is reversed post-crisis. The post-crisis response in the Asia-pacific region (this
includes Australia and New Zealand) likely reflects a potential link between goods price and
asset price inflation. Recall that credibility is measured in terms of goods price inflation.
Housing price inflation is also seen as improving credibility in the Advanced economies.39 It is
unclear why rising housing prices might raise credibility outside the G7 pre-crisis unless this was
seen as reflecting a shift way from demand for goods and services and, therefore, less inflation
pressure. Unfortunately, the data do not permit the precise identification of the channels
through which these types of effects take place. Nevertheless, the results underscore a link
between credibility and asset price inflation.

Turning to credit growth, there is an interesting contrast between the G7 and the Asia-Pacific
economies after 2006. In the Post-crisis period, rising credit growth in the Asia-Pacific reduces

38
 There was insufficient data to include a real exchange rate variable in the group of other economies considered.
39
  Part of our findings might be due to the fact that we do not weight the economies by size or some other
weighting scheme. Estimates using cross-section weights, however, did not change the conclusions.

                                                                                                              22
central bank credibility while the opposite holds for the G7. We should keep in mind, as pointed
out above, that G7 economies faced inflation rates that were below target and these were also
the economies most directly affected by the GFC. Economies in the Asia-Pacific did not face the
same challenge not even in the aftermath of the AFC. If credit growth in the G7 is interpreted as
a reflection of policy makers’ attempt to reflate their economies then the result shown is to be
expected.

In the G7, a rise in long-term rates relative to short rates (i.e., a rise in the term spread), often a
signal of higher future real growth, raises central bank credibility. 40 It is also worth noting that
the parameter estimate is several times smaller in the pre-crisis period (and the difference is
statistically significant). If the prospect of higher future inflation occurs, particularly when
current inflation is well below target levels, a credibility boost from a steeper yield curve is to
be expected. Next, the data indicate that central bank credibility is negatively related to stock
market performance. We do know, however, that stock market returns and monetary policy
inflation are related to each other, at least in advanced economies (e.g., see Bohl, Siklos, and
Werner 2007, and Bohl, Siklos and Sondermann 2008, and references therein). There is only
one exception to the above result, namely the post-crisis sample for the G7 economies. Since it
was pointed out earlier that inflation fell to very low levels it is plausible that spillovers from
equity to goods market inflation were severed.

As is clear from Table 1 we have fewer covariates available for the full set of emerging market
economies or economies not otherwise classified (Other). Nevertheless, there is some evidence
that rising non-performing (bank) loans reduce credibility pre-crisis in the group of Other
economies. Instead, it is plausible that rising capital adequacy requirements, another financial
stability indicator and a focus of regulators after the GFC, takes the place of the NPL variable.
Hence, higher bank capital-asset ratios contribute to enhancing central bank credibility. Since
we have insufficient data on central bank transparency for this group of economies voice and
accountability acts as a substitute. Pre-crisis greater voice is seen as improving credibility but
the effect disappears post-crisis.


40
     There were too few observations to include a comparable series in the other cross-sections considered.

                                                                                                              23
The most prominent institutional variable considered is the adoption of inflation targets and
the concomitant rise in central bank transparency. 41 Inflation targets have no impact on central
bank credibility in the G7 but generate significant improvements in credibility in the Asia-Pacific
region. It is likely that by the time the sample begins in 1995, inflation targeting had matured in
Canada and in the UK, the only two G7 economies where numerical inflation targets were
already in place for a few years. Turning to central bank transparency this is seen as improving
credibility in Advanced economies in both samples. Indeed, the improvements in credibility are
significantly larger in the post-2006 sample. Elsewhere, such as in emerging market economies
that adopted inflation targeting there is no separate effect from greater central bank
transparency.

In Table 2 we turn to estimates at the median and tails of the distribution of our forward-
looking indicator of credibility (standardized, as previously defined). In this fashion we are able
to examine how the median, best (i.e., min value of CRED), and least credible central banks
respond to various determinants of central bank credibility. To conserve space we only report
results for G7 and Asia-Pacific economies where we have a full complement of asset price
data.42 Also, only full sample estimates are shown although we add dummies for the GFC and
AFC.

The results are striking for they highlight the potential pitfalls of focusing solely on the mean
responses of central banks shown in Table 1 as well as the differences in the determinants of
central bank credibility between the relatively homogeneous G7 and the more diverse Asia-
Pacific economies. Overall, the median central banks in the region respond quite differently to
the various determinants considered at least when compared to central banks that are at the
most or least credible range of the credibility distribution. It is interesting that the median and
most credible central banks in the G7 lose credibility when financial markets are more volatile

41
    As mentioned previously, the adoption of inflation targeting (and its duration) seems roughly inversely
proportional to the rise in central bank transparency. Indeed, when we replace an inflation targeting dummy with
the overall indicator of central bank transparency we obtain comparable results. We do not pursue the possibility
that the adoption of inflation targets and the rise of central bank transparency may interact with each other (or
with some of the other right hand side variables, for that matter).
42
   In the previous version of this paper results for the Advanced group of economies were shown but the G7 has
the advantage of being a more homogeneous group.

                                                                                                              24
(i.e., the VIX rises) while obtaining a credibility boost from greater transparency. Median G7
central banks also experience a credibility gain from a higher term spread. Otherwise, median
central banks in this group respond to the VIX (a lower value gives a credibility boost) and
transparency (more transparency provides a credibility boost). The GFC does not appear to
have affected the credibility of any of the three types of central banks examined other than for
the median Asia-Pacific central banks perhaps because inflation did not experience a surge in
spite of the quantitative easing and looser fiscal policy. A real appreciation and rising housing
prices provide a credibility boost to the most credible G7 central banks in the distribution. In
contrast, rising equity prices and faster credit growth diminishes central bank credibility among
the best performing G7 central banks. Instead, the effect of credit growth on credibility easily
dwarfs the offsetting impact from exchange rate and housing price developments. 43

Median and least credible central banks in the Asia-Pacific region share the same response to
the VIX as their counterparts in the advanced economies. Otherwise, what is salient are the
differences in what the central bank types in each group respond to. For example, only the VIX
is able to explain a small portion of variation in central bank credibility among the least credible
monetary authorities in the region. In contrast, a mix of real, financial and institutional factors
explains credibility among the median and most credible central banks in the Asia-Pacific.
Interestingly, while the most credible Asia-Pacific central banks gain credibility because they
respond to output, only the least credible G7 central banks enjoy a similar credibility
improvement. It should be kept in mind, as previously pointed out, that differences between
most and least credible central banks in the G7 are relatively narrower than is found for the
Asia-Pacific economies. 44 Unlike the G7, rising housing prices are detrimental to the credibility
of the best performing Asia-Pacific central banks while higher credit growth reduces credibility
for the median central banks in this group. Also worth highlighting is the finding that greater
central bank transparency improves credibility significantly more among the least credible
central banks in the G7 than in either their median or most credible counterparts. Overall, most


43
  These conclusions are based on Wald tests (not shown).
44
  A separate list of the most and least credible central banks on an annual basis is relegated to an appendix (not
shown).

                                                                                                               25
striking are the differences across central bank types. 45 Other than perhaps the VIX, inflation
targeting, and central bank transparency, there is no single common determinant of credibility
across country groups or over time. It is also interesting that the AFC did not result in credibility
losses. Of course, this does not mean that individual central banks in the region were
unaffected. It is quite possible that the diversity of the economies in this region contributes to
this finding.

5. Conclusions

This paper has generated credibility indicators for up to 80 economies since the early 1990s.
Our indicators are instructive for several reasons. First, they indicate that financial crises can
lead to a credibility loss but not for all central banks or at all times. When central banks perform
well in terms of credibility they respond to economic, financial and institutional determinants
differently from the median and least credible central banks. It is apparent that central banks
do respond to asset prices and financial stability indicators more generally. Financial stability,
partly captured by the VIX, generally reduces central bank credibility when it is larger, that is,
when equity returns are more volatile. The bottom line, however, is that when it comes to the
relationship between financial stability and central bank credibility the data suggest that
caution is in order for those who would argue that monetary authorities should take on broader
responsibilities for the financial performance of economies. After all, as the opening quote
makes clear, credibility is indelibly associated with inflation performance.

Institutional factors, such as the adoption of inflation targeting or greater central bank
transparency, are significant determinants of central bank credibility. In a similar vein, real
economic growth has a significant influence on central bank credibility even in inflation
targeting economies. This puts paid the notion that responding to real economic factors is
necessarily detrimental to central bank credibility.

To be sure the results so far can only be characterized as tentative. Beyond a fairly small group
of advanced economies the range of quantifiable candidate determinants of central bank

45
  Indeed, regressions suggest that the relative homogeneity of the G7 translates into more explanatory power.
See Table 2.

                                                                                                          26
credibility is small. Indeed, the challenges of constructing a comprehensive dataset, allowing us
to answer the question about how central banks ought to respond to financial conditions, are
substantial. Moreover, we have not examined more complex (i.e., non-linear) ways of asking
how credibility and its economic and financial determinants are related or whether the link
between asset price movements and credibility is asymmetric. For example, asset price declines
may be more likely to impact credibility than asset price inflation especially if the public is more
attentive to one than the other. Also, as we have seen, the GFC led to temporary credibility
losses that were quickly reversed. Indeed, the various regressions clearly suggest that the
handling of the GFC did not lead to a permanent credibility loss. Therefore, regressions of the
kind shown here should be supplemented with narratives from individual economies or groups
of economies that are closely related to each other. Finally, there may well be other forms of
standardization of our indicators of central bank credibility that might provide different insights
into its most robust determinants.

Several other issues also need addressing. In particular, even if there is consensus that
credibility should be measured according to some inflation metric, incorporating more explicitly
a real component, may yield additional insights about what drives credibility. Nevertheless,
because of differences across regions, over time, and according to the performance of central
banks, there remains what could be characterized as anomalies in how economic and financial
factors influence credibility. This is likely a further reflection of the difficulty of marshaling clear
evidence for diverse sets of economies. On the other hand, the results also suggest that central
banks are ultimately far more diverse than the myth of the monetary authority driven only by
inflation performance relative to a singular inflation objective. If credibility is what central
banks and the public care about then we clearly have a lot more to learn on a global scale about
some of its common features.




                                                                                                     27
                                           References

Adrian, T., D. Covitz, and N. Liang (2014), “Financial Stability Monitoring”, Federal Reserve Bank
of New York Staff Report 601, June.

Appelbaum, B. (2016), “Outspoken Fed Official Frets About Following Japan’s Path”, New York
Times, 5 May.

Ball, L. and N. Sheridan (2005) “Does Inflation Targeting Matter?” in B. Bernanke and M.
Woodford (Eds), The Inflation Targeting Debate (Chicago: University of Chicago Press), pp. 249-
76.

Bernanke, B., and M. Woodford (eds) The Inflation Targeting Debate, NBER Studies in Income
and Wealth. Chicago: University of Chicago Press.

Bank for International Settlements (2015), 85th Annual Report (BIS: Basel, Switzerland).

Blinder, A. (2000), “Central bank Credibility: Why Do We Care? How Do We Build It?”American
Economic Review 90 (December): 1421-1431.

Bohl, M., P. Siklos, and D. Sondermann (2008), “European Stock Markets and ECB’s Monetary
Policy Surprises”, International Finance 11 (Summer): 117-130.

Bohl, M., P. Siklos, and T. Werner (2007), “Do Central Banks React to the Stock Market? The
Case of the Bundesbank”, Journal of Banking and Finance 31 (March): 719-733.

Bordo, M.D. (2014) “ Rules for a Lender of Last Resort” in Journal of Economic Dynamics and
Control. Special Issue : Frameworks for Central Banking in the Next Century: A Special Issue on
the Occasion of the Centennial of the Founding of the Federal Reserve (guest editors: Michael D.
Bordo, William Dupour and John B. Taylor), pp 126-125.

Bordo, M.D. and P.L. Siklos (2016) “Central Bank Credibility and Reputation: An Historical
Exploration”, NBER Working Paper 20824, January, forthcoming in Central Banks at a
Crossroads: Lessons from History (M.D. Bordo, Øyvind Eitrheim, and M. Flandreau, Editors
(Cambrige: Cambridge University Press).

Bordo, M.D., and P.L. Siklos (2014), “Central Bank Credibility, Reputation and Inflation Targeting
in Historical Perspective”, NBER working paper 20693, November.

Borio, C., M. Enden, A. Filardo, and B. Hofmann (2015), “The Costs if Deflation: A Historical
Perspective”, BIS Quarterly Review, March: 31-54.

Borio, C. (2014), “The International Monetary and Financial System: Its Achilles Heel and What
to do About it”, BIS working paper 456, August.

Canay, I. (2011), “A Simple Approach to Quantile Regression for Panel Data”, The Econometrics
Journal 14: 368-86.


                                                                                                28
Carney, M. (2013), “After the Fall”, Eric J. Hanson Memorial Lecture, University of Alberta, 1
May, available from www.bankofcanada.ca.

Clarida, R. (2001), “The Empirics of Monetary Policy Rules in Open Economies”, International
Journal of Finance and Economics 6 (October): 315-23.

Cochrane, J. (2014) “ Monetary Policy with Interest on Reserves” in Journal of Economic
Dynamics and Control. Special Issue: Frameworks for Central Banking in the Next Century: A
Special Issue on the Occasion of the Centennial of the Founding of the Federal Reserve. (Guest
editors: Michael D. Bordo, William Dupour and John B. Taylor).

Collins, S., and P. Siklos (2004), “Optimal Rules and Inflation Targeting: Are Australia, Canada,
and New Zealand Different from the US?”, Open Economies Review 15 (October): 347-62.

Dincer, N., and B. Eichengreen (2014), “Central Bank Transparency and Independence: Updates
and New Measures”, International Journal of Central Banking (March): 189-253.

Dincer, N., and B. Eichengreen (2007), “Central Bank Transparency: Where, Why, and with
What Effects?, NBER working paper 13003, March.

Eijfinger, S., and P. Geraats (2006), “How Transparent Are Central Bank?”, European Journal of
Political Economy 22 (March): 1-21.

Engle, R.F. and J. Rangel (2005), “The Spline-GARCH Model for Low Frequency Volatility and its
Macroeconomic Causes”, Review of Financial Studies 21 (3): 1187-1222.

Geraats. P. (2014), “Monetary Policy Transparency”, in J. Foessbaeck and L. Oxelheim (Eds),
Oxford Handbook of Institutional and Economic Transparency (Oxford: Oxford University Press),
pp. 68-97.

Gillitzer, C., and J. Simon (2015), “Inflation Targeting: A Victim of Its Own Success”, International
Journal of Central Banking, September: 259-287.

Marvin Goodfriend ( 2012) “ The Elusive Promise of Central Banking” Monetary and Economic
Studies vol. 30, pp 39-54.

Hashimoto, Y., T. Ito, and K. Dominguez (2012), “International Reserves and the Global Financial
Crisis,” with, Journal of International Economics 88 (2): 388-406.

Im, K.S., M.H. Pesaran, and Y. Shin (2003), “Testing for unit roots in heterogeneous panels”,
Journal of Econometrics 115: 53–74.

Kaufmann, D., A. Kraay, and M. Mastruzzi (2010), “The Worldwide Governance Indicators:
Methodology and Analytical Issues”, Policy Research working paper 5430, September.

Koenker, R. (2005), Quantile Regression (Cambridge, UK: Cambridge University Press).




                                                                                                  29
Poloz, S. (2014), “The Legacy of the Financial Crisis: What We Know, and What We Don’t Know”,
speech      to    the    Canadian      Council     of    Public  and    Private  Partnerships,
http://www.bankofcanada.ca/2014/11/legacy-financial-crisis/.

Reinhart, C., and K. Rogoff (2004), “The Modern History of Exchange Rate Arrangements: A
Reinterpretation”, Quarterly Journal of Economics 119 (1): 1-48.

Schwert, G.W. (1989), “Why Does Stock market Volatility Change Over Time?”, Journal of
Finance 44, 1115-1153.

Siklos, P.L. (2016), Central Banks Into the Breach (New York: Oxford University Press,
forthcoming).

Siklos, P.L. (2014), “Communications Challenges for Multi-Tasking Central Banks: Evidence and
Implications”, International Finance 17 (Spring): 77-98.

Siklos, P.L. (2014a), “Has Monetary Policy Changed? How the Crisis Has Shifted the Ground
Under Central Banks”, unpublished working paper, Wilfrid Laurier University.

Siklos, P. (2013), “Sources of Disagreement in Inflation Forecasts: An International Empirical
Investigation”, Journal of International Economics 90 (May): 218-231.

Siklos, P. (2011), “Central Bank Transparency: Another Look”, Applied Economics Letters 18 (10):
929-33.

Stock, J., and M. Yogo (2005), “Testing for Weak Instruments in Linear IV Regression”, In:
Andrews DWK Identification and Inference for Econometric Models. New York: Cambridge
University Press; 2005. pp. 80-108.

Vredin, A. (2015), “Inflation Targeting and Financial Stability: Providing Policy Makers with
Relevant Information”, BIS working paper 503, July.

Woodford, M. (2003), Interest and Prices: Foundations of a Theory of Monetary Policy
(Princeton, N.J.: Princeton University Press).




                                                                                                 30
Figure 1 Fixed Horizon CPI Inflation Forecasts Across Various Regions of the World
                                Advanced IT economies                                                             Other IT economies
            8%                                                              10%

            7%                                                              9%

            6%                                                              8%

            5%                                                              7%

            4%                                                              6%

            3%                                                              5%

            2%                                                              4%

            1%                                                              3%

            0%                                                              2%
                 1989
                 1990
                 1991
                 1992
                 1993
                 1994
                 1995
                 1996
                 1997
                 1998
                 1999
                 2000
                 2001
                 2002
                 2003
                 2004
                 2005
                 2006
                 2007
                 2008
                 2009
                 2010
                 2011
                 2012
                 2013
                 2014




                                                                                  02


                                                                                        03


                                                                                              04


                                                                                                    05


                                                                                                            06


                                                                                                                   07


                                                                                                                            08


                                                                                                                                     09


                                                                                                                                          10


                                                                                                                                                    11


                                                                                                                                                          12


                                                                                                                                                                   13

                                                                                                                                                                        14
                                                                                  20


                                                                                        20


                                                                                              20


                                                                                                    20


                                                                                                           20


                                                                                                                  20


                                                                                                                           20


                                                                                                                                 20


                                                                                                                                          20


                                                                                                                                                20


                                                                                                                                                         20


                                                                                                                                                               20

                                                                                                                                                                        20
                            Median forecast          median CPI inflation                                Median forecast         Median CPI inflation
                                          Eurozone                                                                     Other economies
            7%                                                              14%

            6%
                                                                            12%
            5%
                                                                            10%
            4%

            3%                                                              8%

            2%
                                                                            6%
            1%
                                                                            4%
            0%

           -1%                                                              2%
                 1989
                 1990
                 1991
                 1992
                 1993
                 1994
                 1995
                 1996
                 1997
                 1998
                 1999
                 2000
                 2001
                 2002
                 2003
                 2004
                 2005
                 2006
                 2007
                 2008
                 2009
                 2010
                 2011
                 2012
                 2013
                 2014




                                                                                   02


                                                                                         03


                                                                                               04


                                                                                                     05


                                                                                                              06


                                                                                                                       07


                                                                                                                                08


                                                                                                                                       09


                                                                                                                                               10


                                                                                                                                                         11


                                                                                                                                                               12


                                                                                                                                                                        13
                                                                                  20


                                                                                        20


                                                                                              20


                                                                                                    20


                                                                                                             20


                                                                                                                    20


                                                                                                                            20


                                                                                                                                     20


                                                                                                                                               20


                                                                                                                                                     20


                                                                                                                                                              20


                                                                                                                                                                    20
                            Median forecast          median CPI inflation                                Median forecast         Median CPI inflation




Note: See the text for the definition and sources. An Appendix lists the economies included in each regional grouping. Data are
monthly.

                                                                                                                                                                             31
Figure 2 Range of Fixed Event CPI Inflation Forecasts in Select Regions of the World

                                            Advanced economies

         30%

         25%

         20%

         15%

         10%

          5%

          0%

          -5%

         -10%
                1989
                1990
                1991
                1992
                1993
                1994
                1995
                1996
                1997

                                              2000
                                              2001
                                              2002
                                              2003
                                              2004
                                              2005
                                              2006
                                              2007
                                              2008
                                              2009
                                              2010
                                              2011
                                              2012
                                              2013
                                              2014
                                     MIN forecasts              MAX forecasts
                                     MIN CPI inflation          MAX CPI inflation

                                              Asia-Pacific economies
         20%


         16%


         12%


          8%


          4%


          0%


          -4%
                2005   2006   2007     2008     2009     2010     2011    2012      2013   2014


                                     MAX forecasts              MIN forecasts
                                     MAX CPI inflation          MIN CPI inflation

Note: MAX refers to the most pessimistic (highest) inflation forecast or outturn; MIN the most
optimistic (lowest) forecast or outturn. See text for sources and definitions. Data are monthly.


                                                                                                  32
Figure 3 Estimates of Credibility Based on Forward-Looking Indicator, 1995-2004 & 2005-2014
                                                                    5                                                                                                                                         1.2


                                                                                                                                                                                                              1.0




                                                                                                                                                                         Credibility measure (standardized)
                                                                    4
                              Credibility measure (standardized)
                                                                                                                                                                                                              0.8
                                                                    3
                                                                                                                                                                                                              0.6

                                                                    2
                                                                                                                                                                                                              0.4


                                                                    1
                                                                                                                                                                                                              0.2


                                                                    0                                                                                                                                         0.0
                                                                         1995   1996   1997    1998    1999      2000        2001    2002    2003   2004                                                            2005   2006   2007      2008   2009    2010     2011      2012    2013   2014


                                                                                         G7               G4                        IT advanced                                                                                   G7                G4                IT advanced
                                                                                         Eurozone         Advanced                                                                                                                Eurozone          Advanced



                                                                   3.0                                                                                                                                        2.4


                                                                   2.5                                                                                                                                        2.0




                                                                                                                                                           Credibility measure (standardized)
          Credibility meaure (standardized)




                                                                   2.0                                                                                                                                        1.6


                                                                   1.5                                                                                                                                        1.2


                                                                   1.0                                                                                                                                        0.8


                                                                   0.5                                                                                                                                        0.4


                                                                   0.0                                                                                                                                        0.0
                                                                         1995   1996   1997    1998    1999      2000        2001    2002    2003   2004                                                            2005   2006   2007      2008   2009    2010     2011       2012   2013   2014

                                                                                              IT EME          Asia-Pacific           BRICS                                                                                               IT EME      Asia-Pacific          BRICS
                                                                                              Other                                                                                                                                      Other



Note: Based on equation (1). For the economies included in each regional grouping, see the Appendix. Data are monthly. The shaded
areas (1997-1998 and 2008-2009) represent the Asian and global financial crises.



                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    33
Figure 4a Range of Credibility Estimates in Select Regions




     Note: Credibility estimates are based on the forward-looking indicator of credibility
(equation(1)).

                                                                                             34
Figure 4b Range of Credibility Estimates in Select Regions




Note: The area represents the distance between the smallest and the largest values for the credibility indicator as
defined in equation (1). A smaller value indicates higher credibility; a larger value means less central bank
credibility. An Appendix provides the country group definitions. Note that a large value in 2013Q4 is excluded
because it would distort the Figure. (Venezuela’s credibility indicator is 80.15). Estimates of credibility are based on
the square root of equation (1).Also, see notes to Figure 4a.




                                                                                                                     35
Figure 5 Select Estimates of Central Bank Credibility




Note: Estimates of central bank credibility based on the square root of estimates of equations (1) and (2). Data are monthly.


                                                                                                                          36
Table 1 Determinants of Central Bank Credibility: Panel Estimates, Quarterly Data

                                                             Dependent Variable: Credibility (equation (1))

                        G7 Economies
                                                    Advanced Economies             Asia-Pacific Economies                   IT EME                   OTHER Economies

                  Pre-crisis      Post-Crisis     Pre-crisis      Post-Crisis     Pre-crisis      Post-Crisis     Pre-crisis      Post-Crisis     Pre-crisis      Post-Crisis
                   1995Q1-         2007Q1-         1999Q1-         2007Q1-         1995Q2-         2007Q1-         2001Q1-         2007Q1-         2003Q1-         2007Q1-
                   2006Q4          2013Q4          2006Q4          2013Q4          2006Q4          2013Q4          2006Q4          2013Q4          2006Q4          2013Q4
                  Coefficient     Coefficient     Coefficient     Coefficient     Coefficient     Coefficient     Coefficient     Coefficient     Coefficient     Coefficient
  Variable          t-statistic     t-statistic     t-statistic     t-statistic     t-statistic     t-statistic     t-statistic     t-statistic     t-statistic    t-statistic
                     (p-value)       (p-value)       (p-value)       (p-value)       (p-value)       (p-value)       (p-value)       (p-value)       (p-value)      (p-value)

                          0.284           0.872           1.915           2.935           0.153           2.200           4.975           1.798          -23.36          3.543
   Constant               2.821           9.535           4.168           6.846          04520            6.879           3.082           2.764           -4.20          5.775
                        (0.005)         (0.000)         (0.000)         (0.000)         (0.674)         (0.000)         (0.002)         (0.006)         (0.004)        (0.000)


                         -0.061          -0.033          -0.063          -0.054          -0.043          -0.226          -0.436          -0.008          -0.068         -0.064
Real GDP Growth          -2.271          -2.918          -2.037          -6.831          -1.327          -4.415          -2.785          -0.843          -0.229         -3.548
                        (0.024)         (0.004)         (0.214)         (0.000)         (0.186)         (0.000)         (0.006)         (0.400)         (0.821)        (0.001)


                         -0.007          -0.018          -0.002          -0.014           0.033          -0.054           0.001           0.008
 Real Exchange
                         -1.812          -2.071          -0.260          -4.961           2.998          -4.270           0.106           2.022
   Rate (Δln)
                        (0.071)         (0.035)         (0.795)         (0.000)         (0.003)         (0.000)         (0.916)         (0.044)


                          0.026          -0.005           0.010           0.003           0.068          -0.032           0.007           0.005           0.405         -0.062
      VIX                 5.124          -1.742           1.461           1.011           4.354          -2.448           0.133           1.352           3.615         -3.454
                        (0.000)         (0.083)         (0.145)         (0.312)         (0.000)         (0.015)         (0.894)         (0.177)         (0.002)        (0.001)


                         -0.006           0.001          -0.024          -0.011          -0.043           0.039
 Housing Price
                         -1.609           0.090          -3.396          -2.468          -4.306           3.006
   Growth
                        (0.109)         (0.929)         (0.001)         (0.014)         (0.000)         (0.003)

                         -0.039          -0.080
  Term spread            -1.692          -4.244
                        (0.091)         (0.000)
                         -0.007          -0.038                                                           0.048
 Private Credit
                         -1.010          -5.573                                        *                  3.210
    Growth
                          0.314         (0.000)                                                         (0.002)


                                                                                                                                                                        37
                          0.009          0.002         0.009           0.006          0.008          0.015
  Equity Price
                          4.808          1.274         2.375           6.477          1.614          2.426
    Growth
                        (0.000)        (0.204)       (0.018)         (0.000)        (0.108)        (0.016)

                         -0.018         -0.053                                       -0.504         -0.708
   Inflation
                         -0.708         -0.976                                       -3.097         -3.873
   Targeting
                        (0.480)        (0.330)                                      (0.002)        (0.000)

                                                      -0.127          -0.217                                       -0.049         -0.028
 Central Bank
                                                      -3.771          -5.542                                       -1.588         -0.528
 Transparency
                                                     (0.000)         (0.000)                                      (0.577)        (0.598)

                                                                                                                   -0.104         -0.095
Capital Adequacy                                                                                                   -1.425         -2.539
                                                                                                                  (0.156)        (0.012)
                                                                                                                                                  0.786          0.014
Non-performing                                                                                                                                    8.681          0.649
    loans                                                                                                                                       (0.000)        (0.517)

                                                                                                                                               -23.072          -0.075
    Voice &
                                                                                                                                                 -2.534         -0.046
 Accountability
                                                                                                                                                (0.019)        (0.963)
  Summary
  Statistics

     Adj. R2              0.23           0.22           0.55           0.56           0.21           0.06           0.62           0.24           0.85           0.12


 Cross-sections              7              7             23             29              8             12             13             14              8               8


   F (p-value)      19.27(0.00)    10.57(0.00)   27.41 (0.00)    32.46(0.00)    14.08(0.00)    11.83(0.00)    31.70(0.00)     7.54(0.00)    27.10(0.00)     8.04(0.00)

Note: Estimates are based on two-stage least squares with White cross-section standard errors. Instruments include one lag of each independent variable and
the constant. Blanks indicate either that the data were unavailable, or there were too few available observations to include the variable. It was necessary to
exclude some economies because of insufficient data. No exclusions for the G7 economies or Advanced economies (post-crisis).Pre-crisis Advanced economies
excluded are: CZ, SL, V, DK, GR, PT. No exclusions for the Asia-Pacific region post-crisis. Pre-crisis CN, ID, IN, and PH are excluded. In the IT-EME group GT and
RS omitted in both samples. In the OTHER group AR, BO, BY, CR, EC, EG, PY, and UA are included in the pre-crisis panel; CR, GE, HR, and MK are added in the
post-crisis sample. Other economies (see appendix) are omitted as there was usually insufficient or no data beyond the governance variables. The appendix
provides the country names. All post-crisis samples are: 2007Q1-2013Q4. Pre-crisis samples are: 1995Q2-2006Q4 (G7); 1999Q1-2006Q4 (Advanced); 1995Q2-
2006Q4 (Asia-Pacific); 2001Q1-2006Q4 (IT-EME); 2003Q1-2006Q4 (Other economies). * Too many cross-sections were lost when this variable is added.

                                                                                                                                                               38
Table 2 Determinants of Central Bank Credibility: Panel Quantile Estimates, Quarterly Data

                                              Dependent Variable: Credibility (equation (1))

                                         G7: 1990Q1-2013Q4                                 Asia-Pacific Economies: 1990Q4-2013Q4

                         Median                Min                 Max                Median               Min                Max

                          Coefficient          Coefficient          Coefficient         Coefficient        Coefficient        Coefficient
     Variable              t-statistic          t-statistic          t-statistic         t-statistic        t-statistic        t-statistic
                           (p-value)            (p-value)            (p-value)           (p-value)          (p-value)          (p-value)
                                0.799                0.342                1.468               0.797              0.476              0.201
                                8.271                7.133                4.895               4.919              2.782              4.680
    Constant
                              (0.000)              (0.000)              (0.000)             (0.000)            (0.007)            (0.000)

                               -0.013               -0.011               -0.057                 -0.020          -0.053                0.001
                               -0.921               -1.316               -3.621                 -0.946          -2.755                0.285
 Real GDP Growth
                              (0.360)              (0.192)              (0.000)                (0.347)         (0.007)              (0.776)

                               -0.008               -0.004                0.021                 -0.005           0.004               -0.005
Real Exchange Rate             -1.076               -1.797                2.767                 -0.387           1.149               -0.543
       (Δln)                  (0.285)              (0.076)              (0.007)                (0.700)         (0.253)              (0.589)

                                0.005                0.004                0.002                  0.017           0.008                0.003
                                2.049                2.278                0.382                  3.746           1.093                1.659
       VIX
                              (0.044)              (0.025)              (0.703)                (0.000)         (0.277)              (0.101)

                               -0.001               -0.004               -0.007                 -0.006           0.032               -0.000
  Housing Price                -0.159               -1.975               -1.845                 -0.606           3.250               -0.142
    Growth                    (0.874)              (0.052)              (0.068)                (0.546)         (0.002)              (0.867)




                                                                                                                                       39
                                  0.044             -0.019              0.026
                                  1.889             -1.547              0.608
    Term Spread
                                (0.062)            (0.126)            (0.545)

                                  0.001              0.031              0.024             -0.056               0.002              -0.004
    Private Credit                0.061              4.124              1.350             -2.155               0.252              -1.490
       Growth                   (0.951)            (0.000)            (0.181)            (0.034)             (0.802)             (0.140)

                                  0.002              0.002              0.007
                                  1.537              2.260              3.549
Equity Price Growth
                                (0.128)            (0.026)            (0.001)

                                 -0.040             -0.035             -0.059             -0.005              -0.066              -0.007
    Central Bank                 -7.103             -8.296             -3.580              0.480              -2.192              -0.896
    Transparency                (0.005)            (0.000)              (0.01)           (0.632)             (0.031)             (0.373)

                                                     0.006                                -0.283              -0.118              -0.038
                                 -0.071                                -0.146
                                                     0.124                                -2.610              -0.673              -0.901
Global Financial Crisis          -1.776                                -1.095
                                                   (0.902)                               (0.011)             (0.503)             (0.370)
                                (0.243)                               (0.277)
                                                                                           0.046              -0.250               0.076
Asian Financial Crisis                                                                     0.348              -1.051               1.303
                                                                                         (0.729)             (0.296)             (0.196)

       Adj. R2                    0.48                0.51               0.33               0.18               0.31                0.16

     F (p-value)           10.56 (0.00)        11.51(0.00)        6.091(0.00)         3.62(0.00)          6.07(0.00)          3.17(0.00)

 Note: See notes to Table 1. Median refers to the median central bank in the particular regional grouping listed above; Min refers to
 the most credible central banks (top 10% of the distribution); Max to the least credible central banks (bottom 10% of the
 distribution). Credibility is based on equation (1).




                                                                                                                                    40
