NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

WORK AND CONSUMPTION IN AN ERA OF UNBALANCED TECHNOLOGICAL
ADVANCE
Benjamin M. Friedman
Working Paper 21713
http://www.nber.org/papers/w21713

NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
November 2015

I am grateful to Ben Sprung-Keyser for research assistance and to two referees for helpful comments
on an earlier draft. The conclusions I offer here differ from those I reached in a paper I wrote on this
subject some years ago (Friedman, 2008). The views expressed herein are those of the author and do
not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peerreviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.
© 2015 by Benjamin M. Friedman. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs,
may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to
the source.

Work and Consumption in an Era of Unbalanced Technological Advance
Benjamin M. Friedman
NBER Working Paper No. 21713
November 2015
JEL No. E21,E24
ABSTRACT
Keynes’s “Grandchildren” essay famously predicted both a rapid increase in productivity and a sharp
shrinkage of the workweek – to fifteen hours – over the century from 1930. Keynes was right (so
far) about output per capita, but wrong about the workweek. The key reason is that he failed to allow
for changing distribution. With widening inequality, median income (and therefore the income of
most families) has risen, and is now rising, much more slowly than he anticipated. The failure of the
workweek to shrink as he predicted follows. Other factors, including habit formation, socially induced
consumption preferences, and network effects are part of the story too. Combining the analysis of
Keynes, Meade and Galbraith suggests a way forward for economic policy under the prevailing circumstances.

Benjamin M. Friedman
Department of Economics
Littauer Center 127
Harvard University
Cambridge, MA 02138
and NBER
bfriedman@harvard.edu

1. Introduction
Most of John Maynard Keynes’s economic writings addressed phenomena that worked
themselves out (or not, in the case of a depressed economy’s ability to regain full employment
without fiscal stimulus) over limited time spans. As Keynes famously remarked, “in the long run
we are all dead.” It is ironic, then, that what has today become his most widely discussed
individual essay – his “Economic Possibilities for our Grandchildren” – focused on a distinctly
longer horizon: one hundred years. 1 In this paper Keynes laid out his expectations for how
consumption and work would evolve over the coming century, and he went on to speculate on
the social and moral consequences that would ensue. What he predicted has, in part, turned out
to be remarkably accurate so far. In other respects his image of the future was far wide of the
mark. The contrast, together with the reasons for it, is highly relevant to our own prospects
today.
What Keynes got right was the continuing advance of economic productivity, in the
standard sense of the economy’s ability to generate ever more output from any given amount of
labor and capital and other resources, and therefore the continuing increase in the quantity of
goods and services produced per person in the population. Although today most citizens of the
Western world probably think of unending economic growth resulting from technical progress as
simply a matter of course, not long before Keynes’s day this was not thought to be so. Judged by
the available historical record, there was little improvement in average Western living standards
over the two thousand or so years prior to the onset of the Industrial Revolution. Adam Smith,
who died in 1790, still thought that increased productivity came only from increased
specialization in production, not from technological advance (and Smith wrote at some length
about what society should therefore do to offset what saw as the deleterious effect of ever greater

2

“division of labor”). As late as the first quarter of the nineteenth century, prominent political
economists like Malthus and Ricardo failed to grasp the implications of ongoing technological
change. Not until the 1830s was it clear that the improvement in living standards increasingly
evident in Britain and America, and some other countries too, was more than just the upswing of
the latest “long wave.” 2
But by 1930, when Keynes published his “Grandchildren” essay, the ongoing
technologically driven advance of productivity, and with it the ongoing improvement in general
living standards, was widely understood. Even so, projecting its continuation for another
hundred years was bold. “I would predict,” Keynes wrote, “that the standard of life in
progressive countries one hundred years hence will be between four and eight times as high as it
is today” (pp. 325-326). 3 For the United States – see Figure 1 – his prediction was perhaps even
not optimistic enough. 4 Until the 2007-9 financial crisis, U.S. per capita output was on a
trajectory to reach a level in 2029 more than nine times as high as in 1929 (the last data point
Keynes would have had). Even after the downturn triggered by the crisis, the U.S. economy is
today right on track to reach Keynes’s eight-fold multiple.
By contrast, Keynes badly misconstrued how citizens of these “progressive countries”
would choose to enjoy the fruits of their economies’ ever-increasing productivity. With greater
productivity, people on average can consume more than before without needing to work more, or
they can work less than before without having to consume any less. Or they can do some of
both: consuming more while working less. When Keynes wrote, the historical record since the
Industrial Revolution was strongly consistent with “some of both,” and that is what he predicted
would follow. He was even quite specific on the matter, concluding that “a quarter of the human

3

effort to which we have become accustomed” would suffice, and envisioning “three-hour shifts
or a fifteen-hour week” (p. 325, 329).
Although perhaps overly ebullient, Keynes’s prediction for the path of per-person labor
input between 1929 and 2029 was roughly consistent with the pattern of the prior hundred years.
From 69 hours in 1830, the average workweek for Americans doing what was considered “full
time” work had fallen to 47 hours by 1930 – see Figure 2 – even as U.S. per capita production,
and therefore living standards, rose dramatically. 5 And, in the first four decades after Keynes
wrote, the workweek indeed continued to shrink at nearly the same rate. By 1970, Americans on
average were working not quite 39 hours per week.
So confident was Keynes about the matter that the principal thrust of his “Grandchildren”
argument concerned not whether the workweek would continue to decline, but what the human
consequences would be. He found them serious and challenging. Keynes wrote that he thought
“with dread of the readjustment of the habits and instincts of the ordinary man, bred into him for
countless generations, which he may be asked to discard within a few decades” (p. 327). The
central challenge to be presented by ever greater productivity was the need “to devote our further
energies to non-economic purposes” (p. 326). Man’s “real, his permanent problem” would be
“how to occupy the leisure, which science and compound interest [Keynes’s way of thinking
about ongoing productivity improvement] will have won for him.” It would be, he concluded,
“a fearful problem for the ordinary person” (p. 328).
That part of Keynes’s prediction has turned out to be wrong; or at least it is on hold, and
it seems highly unlikely to come true by 2029. After adjustment for the ups and downs of the
business cycle, the American workweek has now remained approximately unchanged for more
than four decades. In 2007, just before the onset of the recession triggered by the financial crisis,

4

the average American worker put in 39.2 hours on the job, slightly up from a then-recessionary
low of 38.0 hours in 1982. During the post-crisis recession, as involuntary part-time work
became more prevalent, the average workweek fell to an all-time low of 37.9 hours. By 2012 it
had recovered to 38.5 hours, identical to what it was in 1980.
Section 2 examines more closely why, and when, the evolution of work departed from
Keynes’s expectation. As Section 3 goes on to argue, the explanation is that Keynes has actually
turned out to be wrong about living standards too – at least the aspect of living standards that
matter for the ideas about work and consumption that he advanced in his “Grandchildren” essay.
Section 4 discusses a further dimension of the interaction between work and consumption that
Keynes certainly did take into account: the role of habit and social relations in determining
preferences. Section 5 looks forward, focusing on the prospect of what Keynes called
“technological unemployment” (p. 325), albeit now in a different context from what he
anticipated. Section 6 suggests a potential solution, though to be sure only a partial one, for this
problem in the form of increased production of public goods. Section 7 concludes.

2. Why Was Keynes Wrong about Work?
Where did Keynes’s thinking go wrong? How could he be strikingly right in one
dimension of economic activity – output consumed – but so wrong about another – labor input –
when standard economic theory relates the two in such a straightforward way? Further, why did
economic behavior in the first of these dimensions continue along the path it had followed since
the Industrial Revolution, while in the second it did so until the 1970s but then marked a distinct
departure?
Several potential explanations suggest themselves. To begin, as Keynes recognized,
conventions of human behavior, and the social and political institutions to which they give rise,

5

change slowly. Part of the problem he foresaw in the “Grandchildren” essay was precisely the
need to redirect human values away from the emphasis on achieving economic ends, as these
became easier to fulfill and hence demanded less effort and therefore became less worthy of
attention. But this argument is, at best, far from sufficient. Why would society’s presumptions
and arrangements surrounding work have exhibited enough flexibility to accommodate a decline
in the workweek from nearly 70 hours to little more than half that, but then no farther? Or, to put
the matter in terms of the calendar, why would these institutions have suddenly become
inflexible only in the 1970s? As is often the case, pointing to social conventions is rarely an
answer to any substantive question; at most, it helps organize ways of reaching toward an
answer.
A second potential explanation, to be taken more seriously, is that the character of work
changed. Economists’ standard model posits that consumption provides positive utility (perhaps
diminishing at the margin, but still with positive sign), while working generates disutility
(perhaps increasing at the margin). But the assumed disutility of labor surely depends on the
conditions under which people work, and these have changed enormously over time. 6 In 1870 a
quarter of American workers were farmers and another fifth were non-owner farm laborers.
Today both together represent barely 1 percent of the U.S. labor force. The change matters
because farm work is physically arduous and accident-prone, is typically performed in isolated
settings providing little social engagement, and is subject to the extremes of weather. Blue-collar
laborers (as distinct from craftsmen) have likewise diminished from nearly a tenth of the labor
force in 1870 (and about the same percentage as recently as 1940) to barely 1 percent today.
Maids, laundresses and other domestic servants have diminished from 8 percent of the labor
force to less than 1 percent over the same period. Fully three-fifths of the work force, for whom

6

the assumed disutility of labor once required no further explanation, is now doing something
else. 7
What, then, are all the workers doing? More than a third of all American workers are
now either professionals or managers, in contrast to less than 5 percent in 1870 (and still only 11
percent in 1940). And more than two-fifths work in service-sector jobs other than domestic
service – clerical workers, salesmen and -women, and other service jobs – also compared to less
than 5 percent in 1970. To be sure, not all clerical or sales jobs are enjoyable; nor, for that
matter, is all professional and managerial work. More than fifty years ago Sloan Wilson’s bestselling novel (and then the film featuring Gregory Peck) portrayed the frustrations of the “man in
the gray flannel suit.” Today’s newspapers are filled with stories of “the ennui of the cubical”
and the hardships of life on the front lines of a Walmart or a Starbucks. But compared to the
back-breaking physical labor of plowing and digging and hefting equipment, and the risk of
losing an arm or becoming crippled in some industrial accident, these unpleasantnesses appear
mild. And even for work that has continued to be done in factories and slaughterhouses and steel
mills, over time successive waves of occupational safety legislation have reduced the risks and
ameliorated the noxious environment. Even something as simple as the reduced need to clean up
ubiquitous manure, once cars and trucks and buses replaced horse-drawn transportation, surely
reduced the disutility of work for a substantial segment of the workforce.
Here too, however, the abruptness of the halt in the century-plus shortening of the
workweek calls for more explanation than these influences are able to provide without
significant further elaboration. The movement of the American labor force from farms and
messy and dangerous factory floors to offices and cubicles was well in progress long before the
1970s.

7

A further possible explanation is that, in an era of ever fewer settings that provide
effective opportunities for personal connections and relationships – a phenomenon famously
documented for the United States by Robert Putnam (2000) – the workplace may have, by
default, assumed greater importance in ways not immediately suggested by the concept of
“labor.” Many Americans now derive much of their sense of self, not to mention their identity as
seen by others, from their work rather than their church or club or pastime. Many define their
social circles by who sits in the next office, not in the next pew. But the evidence on Americans’
transference of their social connections to the workplace remains uneven at best, 8 and without
more chronologically detailed evidence its bearing on the abrupt change in trend in the U.S.
workweek in the 1970s is far from established.

3. Was Keynes Wrong about Living Standards Too?
A very different explanation arises from the fact that, on closer inspection, the first part
of Keynes’s prediction was perhaps not as accurate as it may seem after all. To recall, Keynes
predicted a four- to eight-fold increase over the coming hundred years, for countries like
America and Britain, in what he called “the standard of life” (p. 325), and when he went on to
discuss the implications he foresaw he assumed an eight-fold multiple. But he did not specify
what “the standard of life” meant. Per capita output – see again Figure 1 – has indeed grown at
that pace, on average, since he wrote. As the recent public discussion has increasingly
emphasized, however, for some time now most Americans’ incomes, and therefore what most
Americans consume, have not increased as rapidly as U.S. per capita output.
One reason is simply that larger shares of output are going to uses that do not visibly
contribute to living standards. At the most basic level, as the U.S. economy has become more
capital intensive, and as the composition of its capital has progressively shifted away from long-

8

lived plant toward shorter-lived equipment, the share of total output required merely to replace
what is either wearing out or becoming obsolete – in other words, the difference between gross
product and net product – has increased. In 1929 depreciation of all kinds of capital, whether
owned by businesses or households or government at all levels, amounted to slightly less than 10
percent of U.S. gross domestic product. In 2013 it was just under 16 percent. Compared with
when Keynes wrote, therefore, an additional six percent of the economy’s output (whether
measured in total or per capita) is not available for either current consumption or net increases in
capital stock to raise the future trajectory of consumption.
Another four percent has gone into defense spending. In 1929 the federal government’s
purchases of goods and services for the military totaled just under one percent of total output.
Defense spending is now somewhat under five percent of output (and, at some points in between
– especially the 1960s and 1970s – it was much higher than that). To be sure, national security is
a crucial underpinning of any country’s “standard of life.” But the output devoted to making
weapons and tanks and airplanes for the military is not part of the population’s living standard
construed in the usual way, nor are the services provided by uniformed soldiers and seamen and
airmen.
The quantitatively most important reason most Americans’ incomes and consumption
have increased far more slowly than U.S. output per capita is that, ever since the 1960s,
individuals’ personal shares of the nationwide aggregate have become less equal. The
phenomenon is not limited to the United States; income inequality has widened in practically all
of what Keynes considered the “progressive countries.” When inequality becomes greater, the
median of a rising distribution increases less rapidly than the mean, so that even if the fraction of

9

aggregate income devoted to consumption remains unchanged, more than half of the population
experiences a slower growth in living standard than what the growth of per capita output implies.
In the United States the difference has been substantial. U.S. data on median incomes are
not available prior to 1947, and so it is impossible (without inferring the median from other data,
which would expose the exercise to methodological questions of a different kind) to evaluate
Keynes’s prediction over the first eighteen years of his intended hundred-year horizon. But for
the 65-year span from 1947 to 2012 (the most recent available data) – see Figure 3 – it is clear
that Keynes was over-optimistic if one construes “the standard of life” as the median rather than
the mean. 9 Extrapolated to a hundred years, the realized growth rate of the U.S. median family
income over 1947-2012 would produce a multiple of just over 3 ½, modestly below the low end
of Keynes’s projected increase (and well below the trajectory of per capita output). 10
Moreover, the growth of U.S. median income exhibits a distinct slowing in the early
1970s, roughly coincident with the leveling off of the average workweek. From the beginning of
the series in 1947 (the local peak preceding the 1948-9 “inventory recession”) to 1973 (the local
peak preceding the “OPEC recession”), the median family’s income grew in real terms at 2.8
percent per annum – far in excess of the rate needed to deliver an eight-fold multiple over a
hundred years. By contrast, from 1973 to the present real median income has grown by just 0.3
percent per annum, not even enough for a doubling in a hundred years (the projected 100-year
multiple at that rate is merely 1.3). 11
The origins of this slowing of family income growth are clear enough: the dramatic
reversal in the trajectory of real wages for the majority of American workers. Between 1947 and
1973 the average hourly wage for nonsupervisory workers in private industries other than
agriculture (restated in 2013 dollars) nearly doubled, from $12.27 to $21.23 – an average growth

10

rate of 2.1 percent per annum. But by 2013 the average hourly wage was only $20.13 – a 5
percent fall from the 1973 level. Despite an increase in two-earner families, therefore, the
median family income declined. 12
This sharp difference between the pre- and post-1973 growth rates – for either family
incomes or wages – is not merely an artifact of the 2007-9 financial crisis. During the post-crisis
recession the median family’s income did fall more in percentage terms than per capita output,
and as late as 2012 there was still no sign of recovery; median income in 2012 stood more than 8
percent below the 2007 peak. But even without the post-crisis decline, the slowdown compared
to 1947-73 was major. In contrast to 2.8 percent per annum growth from 1947 to 1973, the
growth from 1973 to 2007 (not just a local peak but, as of the time of writing, the record high)
was just 0.6 percent per annum – again implying not even a doubling (a multiple of 1.8) if
extrapolated for a hundred years.
The reasons for widening inequality are many and varied, and the empirical research
needed to assign weights to the different factors involved (most of the posited explanations are
not mutually exclusive) remains unfinished. Most economists have placed greatest emphasis on
the changing technology of production, which attaches increased value in the labor market to
some sets of skills and reduced value to others. 13 Another explanation that has received
widespread attention, more in the popular press than among economists, is the ongoing
internationalization of markets for not only goods but, increasingly, services too (itself a
consequence of advancing technology) – so that an ever larger fraction of workers in the highly
developed economies face competition from those in countries where wages are low compared to
their own. Some further suggested causes of widening inequality are more specific to the United
States: the skill-biased composition of U.S. immigration, which exposes low-wage workers to

11

even more competition; the declining real value of the federally mandated minimum wage; and
declining American union membership. Because inequality is increasing in all of the major
industrialized economies, however, and in much of the developing world as well, the common
working presumption among most economists is that country-specific institutional features are
unlikely to bulk large in the overall story.
Finally, in addition to widening wage inequality, with its array of potential explanations,
within the past two decades the functional composition of income has been shifting. In most of
the advanced economies, income earned from providing labor has been shrinking as a share of all
income earned, while income earned from owning capital has correspondingly increased. 14
Given the highly unequal ownership of capital, this shift in functional shares results in an
increasingly unequal distribution of incomes overall. (This phenomenon, which stands quite
apart from wider wage inequality, is at the heart of Thomas Piketty’s (2014) argument that has
received so much public attention).
Widening inequality of incomes, of course, need not imply widening inequality of
consumption. Most obviously, as Keynes himself later emphasized (in a quite different context)
in the General Theory, those with higher incomes normally save more. The bearing of this
distinction on Keynes’s argument in the “Grandchildren” essay is not straight forward, however.
Especially in an economy like that of the United States, where the great majority of the
population significantly under-saves for retirement, 15 people’s inability to provide adequately for
their future consumption surely matters for their current sense of material well-being – which is
what Keynes thought would lead to dramatically reduced work effort. Consumption inequality
plausibly has increased less than income inequality also because of reliance on publicly provided
in-kind goods and services like food or shelter or medical care. 16 But even on its own terms, the

12

difference between the trends in inequality of income and of consumption turns out to be less
important than one might think. Although some work on this question using direct expenditure
data has emphasized the difference – a greater increase in inequality of income than of
consumption 17 – more recent research for the United States by Attanasio et al. (2012) and Aguiar
and Bils (2013) concludes that “consumption inequality has tracked income inequality much
more closely than estimated by direct responses on expenditures.” 18
It is also possible to argue that consumption today is not directly comparable to
consumption in prior years, especially in light of the far greater variety of choice confronting
today’s consumers. 19 (A familiar classroom exercise is to show students the 1902 Sears
Roebuck catalog, which is available in an inexpensive reprint, and ask them to choose between a
specified amount of money that they could spend only on selections from the catalog and some
lesser amount, adjusted for inflation since 1902, that they could spend on whatever they choose
from what is available today. 20) Presumably variety and choice do matter. But for increasing
variety and choice to negate the effect of the much slower growth of income and consumption
for purposes of Keynes’s incorrectly thinking that work effort would continue to decrease, it
would have to be the case that the increase in variety and choice has accelerated in recent years,
just as the growth of incomes and consumption for the majority of families has slowed. No one
has made this case.
In sum, with widening income inequality in recent decades the failure of either the
incomes or the consumption of most American families to keep up with the growth of U.S.
output per capita bears directly on the initial accuracy but subsequent failure of Keynes’s
prediction for work. Until the 1970s, Keynes was right on both fronts: per capita output grew at
the upper end of the range he predicted, most families’ incomes grew even faster (inequality was

13

mostly narrowing during that period), and the workweek continued to decline. But with
widening inequality from the early 1970s on, the growth of most families’ incomes became far
slower than he had predicted, and the workweek stopped declining. The latter combination has
persisted ever since.

4. The Role of “Non-Standard” Preferences
From the perspective of the standard economic model, with positive utility from
consumption and disutility of labor, one might still expect that the workweek might have
continued to decline after 1970, just not as rapidly. After all, despite the adverse shift in
distribution, up to 2007 the median family income (and therefore the incomes of the majority of
families) did continue to experience some modest increase. Under the standard substitutability
and convexity assumptions, the typical individual would have chosen to apply at least some part
of that increase toward eliminating the disutility of work. (Moreover, as women’s participation
in the paid labor force increased, the average workweek overall might have shortened on yet
other grounds.)
As Keynes was well aware, however, influences not encompassed within the standard
utility model readily account for why people with only modestly growing incomes would choose
to consume more and also work more. Economists since Adam Smith have well understood the
role of habit formation in shaping consumption preferences. Given any existing level of
economy-wide consumption, a modestly higher level does generate increased utility – for a
while. But in time the novelty erodes (one can think of the novelty either in terms of total
consumption or as utility from new goods), and to achieve again the higher level of utility
associated with the earlier increase, yet a further increase is required. Keynes of course knew the
thinking along these lines by Smith, Mill, Marshall and others. Further work since his time has

14

formalized the character of the preferences involved, and produced extensive empirical
verification, but the basic idea remains the same. 21
Keynes was also well aware of the role of socially determined consumption preferences.
This insight had likewise been explicit in Smith’s writings, and within Keynes’s lifetime Veblen
had popularized the idea. In his “Grandchildren” essay, Keynes similarly distinguished “those
needs which are absolute in the sense that we feel them whatever the situation of our fellow
human beings may be” from “those which are relative in the sense that we feel them only if their
satisfaction lifts us above, makes us feel superior to, our fellows.” He even anticipated the class
of wants that later thinkers like Fred Hirsch (1976) formalized as “positional goods,” going on to
argue that “needs of the second class, those which satisfy the desire for superiority, may be
insatiable” (p. 326).
A further spur to consumption demand (at the expense of leisure) that seems especially
relevant over a century-long time horizon, but that Keynes may not have taken into account, is
the role of network effects in creating new preferences. As he not only anticipated but
emphasized, the technology of everyday life has changed dramatically since 1930. People are
free to take advantage of many of those changes, or not, as they choose. Whether to own a
dishwasher in one’s house or apartment, for example, is a matter of individual choice. Other
technological changes, however, create networks that most people bear significant cost to refrain
from joining. When Keynes was born, there were no telephones. By 1930, nearly half of U.S.
households had them. Today in the United Sates residential or cellular telephone ownership is
nearly universal. 22 Not to have one means cutting oneself off from the society’s commonly
accepted communication system. Because of network effects, a good that was a luxury when
first introduced has become a necessity. Today the transition to a computer-based

15

communication network is likewise already well in place. Nor is communication the only area in
which such network effects regularly occur. In Keynes’s youth, owning an automobile was a
luxury, and in some countries it still is. But in countries like America and Britain, once cities
grew up along configurations based on the assumption of readily available transport by car, for
people living in those cities owning one became a necessity.
Especially with the addition of influences on consumption preferences due to habit
formation, social comparison, and network effects, the sharp slowing in the median family’s
income beginning in the 1970s seems persuasive as an explanation for the simultaneous reversal
of what had been, for at least a century and a half, a declining workweek. As standard theory
suggests, consumption and labor input are indeed related. Keynes’s error in predicting the path
of labor input looks to be largely a reflection of what, on closer inspection, turns out to have been
his error in predicting the path of income and therefore consumption.

5. Technological Unemployment
Keynes’s predictions for the workweek, and for the living standard of the median family
(if that is what the “standard of life” was supposed to mean) have not been realized. But there is
a different rendering of what he foresaw in his “Grandchildren” essay that looks more likely to
come about, perhaps even by 2029.
Keynes wrote in his essay of “technological unemployment,” which he defined as
“unemployment due to our discovery of means of economizing the use of labor outrunning the
pace at which we can find new uses for labor” (p. 325). He went on, as we have seen, to picture
the form this phenomenon would take as fewer hours on the job for the typical worker: “threehour shifts or a fifteen-hour week.” That is not what has happened. But an alternative
construction of what technological unemployment might mean is no job at all – or at least no

16

worthwhile job – for an increasing number of able-bodied and -minded citizens, while others
continue to work, with ample pay, for whatever the society construes as the normal number of
hours.
Replacing human work with that of machines has been a continual theme in Western
economic thinking – and in Western culture more broadly, sometimes as a concern and
sometimes as an aspiration – at least since the Industrial Revolution. So far, the resulting fears
of widespread labor idleness, however, have not been realized. Technological advances have
reduced the need for some forms of labor input, thereby freeing up the economy’s human
resources for other applications, often including new applications likewise opened up by new
technology. On net, labor input per person has gone down (as it did until the 1970s) or remained
steady (as it approximately has since then), while consumption has increased. Implicit in the
standard account of this process is that new applications for labor emerge, at least on a pace with
the technologically induced elimination of demand for labor in others. The invention of the
automobile mostly eliminated the jobs of saddlers and stable boys, but it created new jobs for
auto workers, mechanics and gas station attendants.
Keynes predicted that the race between technology freeing labor and new applications
(themselves perhaps technologically based) emerging would become lop-sided, with resulting
further decrease in labor input per person. But here too, his argument neglected distributional
considerations. Just as he implicitly assumed that the increase he foresaw in per capita output
would carry over to the living standard of the typical family, he assumed (in this case more
explicitly) that the reduction in labor input per person would be somewhat evenly spread
throughout the workforce – hence the three-hour shifts and fifteen-hour weeks.

17

By contrast, other observers of the economy’s ongoing technological advance have
suspected that the workforce would experience shrunken labor demand in a lumpier way. James
Meade (1965), writing a third of a century later, envisioned a world in which “the proportion of
the working population [importantly, the proportion of the population, not the proportion of the
typical worker’s time] required to man the extremely profitable automated industries would be
small” (p. 33). And what would the rest of the working-age population do? With adequately
high wage rates, each individual would be able to work only a limited number of hours per week
– as Keynes had predicted – so that the reduced labor demand would, in effect, be shared across
the population. Keynes clearly thought wages would be high enough that putting in fewer hours
would still give workers an adequate income to support an ample living standard. But with labor
demand so far reduced, what would keep wages high?
Meade instead thought “wages would thus be depressed” (p. 33), as ever less labor was
necessary for production. Correspondingly, an ever greater share of total income would go to the
owners of the machines. In the absence of government-provided welfare on a massive scale,
therefore, most of the workforce would be compelled to take whatever low-paying jobs they
could get, presumably in the service of the machine-owners but not working with the machines.
In Meade’s vision, “we would be back in a super-world of an immiserized proletariat of butlers,
footmen, kitchen maids, and other hangers-on” (p. 33). In today’s American context a halfcentury later, one might substitute gardeners, swimming pool attendants, personal trainers and
home nurses.
Two further influences at work today, foreseen by neither Keynes nor Meade (at least not
in making this argument), threaten to make the situation even worse in countries like the United
States. First, advances in communication technology are opening an ever wider array of not just

18

goods but also services to international trade. The mere displacement of workers from goodsproducing industries does not, per se, necessarily cause a reduction in overall labor input. The
result, historically, has been the movement of employment into the service sector. But today the
“off-shoring” of jobs from high-wage economies like that of the United States is no longer a
matter of goods-producing industries only. Nor are the only service jobs to be off-shored lowwage activities like staffing call centers. Computer programming, reading X-rays, preparing tax
returns, carrying out legal research – all are traditionally higher-wage professions, and today
each can be, and increasingly is, performed for U.S.-resident customers outside the United
States.
And second, even for many of the lower-wage jobs that must be done on site – again, the
gardeners and swimming pool attendants – a steady flow of (mostly illegal) immigrants is
available to do such work at wages that most Americans would find unacceptable. Wholly apart
from the question of whether these jobs would offer significantly higher wages if immigrant
workers were not there to take them, the point is that even the production that must be carried out
in the United States if it is to be consumed by Americans nonetheless often does not present
employment opportunities for American workers.
What remains in the “protected” sphere, therefore, are service-sector jobs that not only
must be performed on site but require sufficient training and qualification (and are subject to
sufficient monitoring from government or self-regulatory industry groups) to be resistant to
potential labor supply from large-scale immigration, including in particular illegal immigrants
lacking the requisite qualifications. Jobs requiring face-to-face client contact in sophisticated
contexts are the obvious example. 23 But with ongoing advances in communications technology
the meaning of “face-to-face” is changing, and even such sophisticated services as medical

19

evaluations are already beginning to be delivered remotely. Apart from resistance by industry
groups and licensing authorities, there is no economic reason why the medical examination
conducted via Skype between a U.S. patient in a rural area and a doctor at a U.S. urban medical
center could not instead be done a doctor at some hospital abroad.
Many economists today expect the pace of technological advance – and with it,
implicitly, what both Keynes and Meade called “technological unemployment” – to accelerate
over coming decades. Mostly prominently, Erik Brynjolfsson and Andrew McAfie (2011, 2014)
have argued that new digital technologies like driverless trucks and voice recognition systems
will significantly enhance the rate of productivity growth in the United States and similar
economies. But they acknowledge that these technologies will sharply reduce the demand for
labor, 24 and they offer little answer to the question of what new applications of labor will emerge
to take the place of the positions thereby eliminated; the technologies they see at the forefront of
the new, faster productivity trend are overwhelmingly labor-saving. Even those like Robert
Gordon (2012) who expect future productivity growth to be disappointing (mostly on the
grounds that nothing on the horizon looks capable of matching the impact of world-changing
advances of the past like steam power, railroads, electrification, the internal combustion engine
and powered flight) nonetheless do not foresee substantial new demands for labor in medium- to
high-wage jobs.
As a result, it increasingly looks as if Keynes’s benign vision of “technological
unemployment,” in which the “fearful problem for the ordinary person” will be “how to occupy
the leisure” (p. 328), is less likely than what Meade regarded as the “hideous outlook” of “an
immizerized proletariat” (p. 33) desperately seeking whatever low-wage work it can get.

20

6. A Potential Solution: Keynes Meets Galbraith
The difference between Keynes’s optimism and Meade’s pessimism is, as we have seen,
in large part a matter of disaggregation and distribution. Aggregate output has grown along the
robust path foreseen by Keynes. But as Meade presciently foresaw, not everyone has shared
equally in the fruits of this increase. Moreover, the widening inequality has not been random.
The same force that was at the heart of both Keynes’s and Meade’s analyses – technological
advance – has been central to the increasingly unequal distribution.
Writing after Keynes but before Meade, John Kenneth Galbraith (1958) spotlighted a
quite different problem he saw emerging in post-war Western society – but, interestingly,
likewise an issue apparent only from looking beneath economy-wide aggregates. While Meade’s
insight came from focusing on the distribution across individuals within the total of personal
income, Galbraith examined the distribution between private consumption and public within the
total of goods and services consumed. Writing fully a decade before the current trend of everwidening income inequality began, Galbraith described what he saw as the abundant
consumption of goods and services produced by private firms. In contrast, he thought
consumption of those goods and services that only government or other public institutions could
provide was inadequate and would become more so.
The difference between the two kinds of goods (and services too) is not entirely arbitrary.
Many goods can be produced either privately or publicly, and under normal circumstances both
efficiency grounds and other criteria that loom large in traditional Western thinking mostly
warrant relying on the private sector for this purpose. But others – called “public goods” for just
this reason – are inherently unsuitable for the private market, usually on grounds of nonexcludability. National defense, public security and roads are all classic examples. Galbraith

21

pointed in particular to schools, police, parks, playgrounds, streets, sanitation, transportation, air
quality, and parking. A key decision for any society, one that it cannot simply leave to the
market (again, because of non-excludability, for example), is therefore how to divide its
production, and its consumption, between privately and publicly produced goods. As Galbraith
saw it, Western society in the post World War II era was characterized by “public poverty”
together with “ever-increasing opulence in privately produced goods” (p. 199) – or, more
concisely, “private opulence and public squalor” (p. 203).
The origins of the problem, he argued, were twofold. First, as in much of his other work,
Galbraith assumed that advertising was highly effective in shaping consumer demands – not just
on matters of which brand to buy in preference to some other, but more importantly increasing
demand for the advertised products and even creating whole new demands for products that
otherwise would not have been bought. The difference between the private and public sectors, in
this context, was that the private sector had a profit-based incentive to engage in advertising, and
therefore did so heavily, while the public sector did not. The result was to skew the composition
of demand, bolstering the demand for privately produced goods, both individually and in the
aggregate, at the expense of demand for public goods. Whether advertising is as effective as
Galbraith assumed is a subject economists have long debated, and the question is far from
settled. Moreover, today, when many states aggressively market their lotteries, and new
government initiatives like expanded health care regularly rely on advertising to persuade the
target public to take advantage of the services provided, the distinction between a private sector
that advertises and a public sector that does not seems less clear-cut than it may once have been.
By contrast, the second argument Galbraith made for the skewing of demand toward
private and away from public goods seems, if anything, more persuasive today, at least in the

22

United States. Demand for public goods by definition expresses itself through the society’s
public institutions, government foremost among them. Funding to pay for them is likewise a
matter of public decision-making. The effectiveness of that demand, and of the funding for it, is
therefore only as great as the effectiveness of the society’s public institutions allows it to be. In
today’s era of paralyzed and otherwise dysfunctional government, in America especially at the
federal level but in many states as well, the inability of the relevant participants to reach political
agreement in effect blocks the demand for public goods from realization. When the economy is
not fully employed, as in the wake of the recent financial crisis, the result is an absence of
needed stimulus to aggregate demand. Under conditions of full employment, the outcome is
exactly the skewing of overall demand, away from public goods toward (by default) privately
produced goods, that Galbraith had in mind.
The relevance of Galbraith’s argument to the current Keynes-Meade trap in which many
of the advanced western economies now find themselves is that increased provision of public
goods, whether produced by private firms or directly by government, offers the prospect of partly
blunting both the aggregate and the distributional effects of ongoing technological advance about
which Keynes and Meade wrote. 25 As Galbraith predicted, by now much of America’s essential
physical infrastructure suffers from depreciation or obsolescence or both. Modernizing and
replacing it is a large task, likely to take not just years but a generation or more. Undertaking
that process would increase not just aggregate demand for labor but, specifically, demand for
labor not of the footman-butler-maid kind. And the nation would benefit not just from the
making of renewed infrastructure but from the having of it.
Keynes’s essay was prescient in some respects, though strikingly off the mark in others.
Such is the risk of hundred-year prediction. In a way that would be consistent with much of his

23

later writing, however – especially that prompted by the depression that was just beginning when
his “Grandchildren” essay was published – his error suggests a way forward. It is rare for an
economy’s short-term cyclical objectives (spurring employment during yet another protracted
“jobless recovery”), medium-run objectives (combating the perverse distributional consequences
of technological unemployment) and long-run objectives (where are today’s equivalents to
Grand Central Station and the Triboro Bridge?) to coincide to the extent that they do today. The
combined analysis of Keynes and Meade and Galbraith leads to a consistent solution, even if
only a partial one, at all three horizons.

7. Summary of Conclusions
Keynes’s expectations for dramatically reduced work effort – and with it, the deep
personal and societal challenges about which he expressed such vivid concern – have not
materialized, at least not in the United States. After declining for more than a century, the
average U.S. work week has now remained roughly unchanged for four decades. The primary
reason is that Keynes’s prediction for rising living standards has also been unfulfilled. With
declining real wages (looked at another way, widening inequality), the median family income
stopped rising at just about the same time that the work week stopped getting shorter. The
continuing strong increase in per capita output that Keynes correctly predicted did not translate
into rising living standards for the majority of families. What at first impression looks like a
puzzling contrast between Keynes’s strikingly accurate prediction about productivity and his
wide-of-the-mark prediction about work turns out not to be a puzzle after all.
One way for society to address not only the ongoing problem of stagnant incomes for the
majority of families but also the looming threat of what both Keynes called “technological
unemployment” (compounded in the United States and similar economies by the ongoing shift of

24

new categories of both goods and services from the nontradable to the tradable sector, and in the
United States by immigration patterns as well), is to take up the challenge of rebuilding the
nation’s deteriorating infrastructure. Doing so would simultaneously help ameliorate the
problems he raised in his “Grandchildren” essay, and that James Meade foresaw in a different
way, but also address the imbalance that John Kenneth Galbraith identified between private and
social consumption – an imbalance that, at least in the United States, has worsened in the halfcentury since Galbraith wrote.

25

26

27

28

References
Aguiar, Mark, and Mark Bils (2013). “Has Consumption Inequality Mirrored Income
Inequality?” (National Bureau of Economic Research, Working Paper No. 16807,
revised).
Attanasio, Orazio, Erik Hurst and Luigi Pistaferri (2012). “The Evolution of Income,
Consumption, and Leisure Inequality in the US, 1980-2010” (National Bureau of
Economic Research, Working Paper No. 17982).
Brynjolfsson, Erik, and Andrew McAfee (2011). Race Against the Machine: How the Digital
Revolution Is Accelerating Innovation, Driving Productivity, and Irreversibly
Transforming Employment and the Economy (Lexington: Digital frontier Press).
__________ (2104). The Second Machine Age: Work, Progress, and Prospecrity in a Time of
Brilliant Technologies (New York: W.W. Norton).
Campbell, John Y., and John H. Cochrane (1999). “By Force of Habit: A Consumption-Based
Explanation of Aggregate Stock Market Behavior.” Journal of Political Economy, 107
(April), 205-251.
Constantinides, George M. (1990). “Habit Formation: A resolution of the Equity Premium
Puzzle.” Journal of Political Economy, 98 (June), 519-543.
Elsby, Michael W.L., Bart Hobijn and Aysegul Sahin (2013). “The Decline of the U.S. Labor
Share,” Brookings Papers on Economic Activity (Fall), 1-52.
Frey, Carl Benedikt, and Michael A. Osborne (2013). “The Future of Employment: How
Susceptible Are Jobs to Computerisation?” (Programme on the Impacts of Future
Technology, Oxford Martin School, University of Oxford).
Friedman, Benjamin M. (2008). “Economic Well-Being in a Historical Context.” Pecchi and
Piga (eds.), Economic Possibilities for Our Grandchildren (Cambridge, MA: MIT Press).
Galbraith, John Kenneth (1958). The Affluent Society (Boston: Houghton Mifflin).
Goldin, Claudia, and Lawrence F. Katz (2008). The Race between Education and Technology
(Cambridge: Harvard University Press).
Gordon, Robert J. (2012). “Is U.S. Economic Growth Over? Faltering Innovation Confronts the
Six Headwinds” (National Bureau of Economic Research, Working Paper No. 18315).
__________ (forthcoming). Beyond the Rainbow: The Rise and Fall of Growth in the American
Standard of Living Since 1870 (Princeton: Princeton University Press).
Hirsch, Fred (1976). Social Limits to Growth (Cambridge: Harvard University Press).

29

Karabarbounis, Loukas, and Brent Neiman, (2104). “The Global Decline of the Labor Share,
Quarterly Journal of Economics, 129 (February), 61-103.
Keynes, John Maynard (1930). “Economic Possibilities for Our Grandchildren,” Nation and
Athenaeum (October 11 and 18).
__________ (1972). Essays in Persuasion. The Collected Writings of John Maynard Keynes,
vol. IX (London: Macmillan).
Krueger, Dirk, and Fabrizio Perri (2006). “Does Income Inequality Lead to Consumption
Inequality? Evidence and Theory.” Review of Economic Studies, 73 (January), 163-193.
Lebergott, Stanley (1993). Pursuing Happiness: American Consumers in the Twentieth Century
(Princeton: Princeton University Press).
Meade, J.E. (1965). Efficiency, Equality and the Ownership of Private Property (Cambridge:
Harvard University Press).
Meyer, Bruce D., and James X. Sullivan (2013). “Consumption and Income Inequality and the
Great Recession.” American Economic Review, 103 (May), 178-183.
Munnell, Alicia H., Matthew S. Rutledge and Anthony Webb (2014). “Are Retirees Falling
Short? Reconciling the Conflicting Evidence” (Center for Retirement Research, Boston
College).
Piketty, Thomas (2014). Capital in the Twenty-First Century (Cambridge: Harvard University
Press).
Putnam, Robert D. (2000). Bowling Alone: The Collapse and Revival of American Community
(New York: Simon & Schuster).
Vandenbroucke, Guillaume (2009). “Trends in Hours: the U.S. from 1900 to 1950,” Journal of
Economic Dynamics and Control, 33 (January), 237-249.
Wayland, Francis (1837). The Elements of Political Economy (New York: Leavitt, Lord).

30

1

Keynes (1930). Keynes apparently wrote the paper two years earlier, before the onset of what
became the Great Depression.
2
The first systematic recognition and treatment in the United States appears to have been
Wayland’s (1837) political economy text.
3
Page references for Keynes’s essay are from Keynes (1972).
4
Data on per capita gross domestic product are from the Bureau of Economic Analysis.
5
Data on the average workweek are from Vandenbroucke (2009) for 1830-1890, from the
Historical Statistics of the United States for 1900-1970, and from the Bureau of Labor Statistics
for 1980-2012.
6
See Gordon (forthcoming), Ch. 8, for a detailed discussion of the changes over time in the
United States.
7
Data on occupations are from the Historical Statistics of the United States.
8
See, for example, Putnam (2000), Ch. 5.
9
Data on median family income are from the Bureau of the Census.
10
Some part of the difference between the growth of output per capita and of median family
income reflects the fact that family size has shrunk over this period, and therefore does not
properly bear on the argument here. But the difference is not great in this context. Between
1947 and 2012 the average number of persons per family in the United States fell from 3.67 to
3.13 (data are from the Current Population Survey). With adjustment for family size, the growth
of real median family income over this period would produce a multiple of 4.6 over a hundred
years – more than for the raw data, but still well below the trajectory of real output per capita.
11
In 1973 the average number of persons per family was 3.48. With adjustment for the smaller
size of families, the realized growth between 1973 and 2012 would produce a multiple of 1.5
over one hundred years – somewhat larger than without the family size adjustment, but still far
from even doubling.
12
In 1973 female participation in the labor force was 44.7 percent; by 2012 it was 57.7 percent.
(The peak, in 1999, was 60.0 percent.) Much of this increase, however, was offset by declining
male labor force participation: from 78.8 percent in 1973 to 70.2 percent in 2012. As Figure 2
shows, there was also some modest further decline in average hours worked per week. But the
main reason for the slower rise of real family incomes was the decline in real hourly wages.
Data on real hourly wages are from the Bureau of Labor Statistics, adjusted (slightly) to correct
for a series break at 1966.
13
See especially Goldin and Katz (2008).
14
See Elsby et al. (2013) on the United States and Karabarbounis and Neiman (2014) on the
decline of the labor share as a global phenomenon. A large literature has developed suggesting
explanations for this development.
15
See Munnell et al. (2014) for a review of the most recent evidence.
16
In the United States the number of people participating in the Supplemental Nutritional
Assistance Program (“food stamps”) was roughly stable at 20-25 million until the 2007-9
financial crisis, but since then it has nearly doubled. By contrast, publicly provided housing has
shrunk relative to the growing population. Medicaid (the main medical care program for the
indigent) has increased enormously in cost, but it is not obvious that recipients feel better off
because their medical care costs more.
17
See, for example, Krueger and Perri (2006) and Meyer and Sullivan (2013).

31

18

Aguiar and Bils (2013), p. 1.
Lebergott (1993), for example, has made this argument.
20
The 1902 Edition of the Sears, Roebuck Catalogue (New York: Gramercy Books, 1993).
21
The modern literature on the role of habit formation in consumption preferences is large. For
two early contributions, see Constantinides (1990) and Campbell and Cochrane (1999).
22
Data on telephone penetration are from the Historical Statistics of the United States.
23
Frey and Osborne (2013), for example, emphasize this aspect of the shift to service-sector
employment.
24
See especially Brynjolfsson and McAfee (2014).
25
Tax payments also come from citizens’ incomes, of course, and so apart from distributional
consequences there would be little point, in the context of this discussion, of taxing the median
earner’s income in order to fund public-sector demand that creates employment for the median
worker. But the tax revenues would largely come from those citizens who already have highincome jobs, while the jobs created – in rebuilding the nation’s infrastructure, for example –
would presumably be taken by those who don’t.
19

