                               NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                          THE TAIL THAT WAGS THE ECONOMY:
                         BELIEFS AND PERSISTENT STAGNATION

                                         Julian Kozlowski
                                         Laura Veldkamp
                                       Venky Venkateswaran

                                       Working Paper 21719
                               http://www.nber.org/papers/w21719


                      NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                               1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                 Cambridge, MA 02138
                                    November 2015




We thank our four anonymous referees and our Editor, Harald Uhlig, as well as Mark Gertler, Mike
Golosov, Mike Chernov, Francois Gourio, Christian Hellwig and participants at the Paris Conference
on Economic Uncertainty, IMF Secular Stagnation conference, Einaudi, SED and NBER summer
institute for helpful comments and Philippe Andrade, Jennifer La'O, Franck Portier and Robert Ulbricht
for their insightful discussions. We thank Adrien Avernas for providing us the data on credit spreads
of bank holding companies. Veldkamp and Venkateswaran gratefully acknowledge financial support
from the NYU Stern Center for Global Economy and Business. The views expressed herein are those
of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.

© 2015 by Julian Kozlowski, Laura Veldkamp, and Venky Venkateswaran. All rights reserved. Short
sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided
that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
The Tail that Wags the Economy: Beliefs and Persistent Stagnation
Julian Kozlowski, Laura Veldkamp, and Venky Venkateswaran
NBER Working Paper No. 21719
November 2015, Revised February 2019
JEL No. D84,E32

                                             ABSTRACT

The Great Recession was a deep downturn with long-lasting effects on credit, employment and output.
While narratives about its causes abound, the persistence of GDP below pre-crisis trends remains puzzling.
We propose a simple persistence mechanism that can be quantfied and combined with existing models.
Our key premise is that agents don't know the true distribution of shocks, but use data to estimate it
non-parametrically. Then, transitory events, especially extreme ones, generate persistent changes in
beliefs and macro outcomes. Embedding this mechanism in a neoclassical model, we find that it endogenously
generates persistent drops in economic activity after tail events.


Julian Kozlowski                                    Venky Venkateswaran
Federal Reserve Bank of St Louis                    Stern School of Business
1421 Dr Martin Luther King Dr                       New York University
St Louis, MO 63106                                  7-81 44 West 4th Street
kozjuli@gmail.com                                   New York, NY 10012
                                                    and Federal Reserve Bank of Minneapolis
Laura Veldkamp                                      and also NBER
Columbia University                                 vvenkate@stern.nyu.edu
3022 Broadway, Uris 421
New York, NY 10027
and NBER
lv2405@columbia.edu
    The Great Recession was a deep downturn with long-lasting effects on credit markets, labor
markets and output. Why did output remain below trend long after financial markets had
calmed and uncertainty diminished? Why did the usual business cycle recovery not occur after
this recession? Such a persistent, downward shift in output (Figure 1) is not unique to the 2008
crisis. Financial crises, even in advanced economies, typically fail to produce the robust GDP
rebound needed to restore output to pre-crisis trends.1
                                                   2.5


                                                                                                       } 12%
                                                    2
                    ln(GDP per capita), 1952 = 1




                                                   1.5




                                                    1




                                                   0.5
                                                         1960   1970   1980       1990   2000   2010      2020

Figure 1: Real GDP in the U.S. and its trend.
Dashed line is a linear trend that fits data from 1950-2007. In 2014, real GDP was 0.12 log points below trend.


   Our explanation is that crises produce persistent effects because they scar our beliefs. For
example, in 2006, few people entertained the possibility of financial collapse in the U.S. Today,
the possibility of another run on the financial sector is raised frequently, even though the system
today is probably much safer. Such persistent changes in the assessments of risk came from
observing new data. We thought the U.S. financial system was stable. Economic outcomes
taught us that the risks were greater than we thought. It is this new-found knowledge that is
inducing long-lived effects on economic choices.
   The contribution of the paper is a simple tool to capture and quantify this scarring effect,
which produces more persistent responses from extreme shocks than from ordinary business
cycle shocks. We start from a simple assumption: agents do not know the true distribution of
shocks in the economy, but estimate the distribution using real time data, exactly like an econo-
metrician would. The scarcity of data on extreme events is what makes new tail observations
   1
       See Reinhart and Rogoff (2009), fig 10.4.

                                                                              2
particularly informative. Therefore, tail events trigger larger belief revisions. Furthermore, be-
cause it will take many more observations of non-tail events to convince someone that the tail
event really is unlikely, changes in tail risk beliefs are particularly persistent. To explore these
changes in a meaningful way, we need to use an estimation procedure that does not unduly
constrain the shape of the distribution’s tail. Therefore, we assume that our agents adopt a
non-parametric approach to learning about the distribution of aggregate shocks. Each period,
they observe one more piece of data and update their estimates using a standard kernel density
estimator. Section 1 shows that this process leads to long-lived responses of beliefs to transitory
events, especially extreme, unlikely ones. The mathematical foundation for persistence is the
martingale property of beliefs. The logic is that once observed, the event remains in agents’
data set. Long after the direct effect of the shock has passed, the knowledge of that tail event
continues to affect estimated beliefs and restrains the economic recovery.
    To illustrate the economic importance of these belief dynamics, Section 2 applies our be-
lief updating tool to a well-known model used recently to analyze the Great Recession. The
environment closely follows Gourio (2012, 2013) and is well-suited to our purposes because it
provides a simple and quantitatively plausible link from tail risk to macro outcomes. At its
core are firms subject to bankruptcy risk from aggregate capital quality shocks as well as id-
iosyncratic shocks to profitability. This set of economic assumptions is not our contribution.
It is simply a convenient laboratory to illustrate the persistent economic effects from observing
extreme events. We add one other ingredient – a financial sector, which intermediates between
these firms and households. While not central to our story, this allows us to incorporate changes
in beliefs about financial shocks and improve the model’s ability to match the data. Section 3
describes the data we feed into the model to discipline our belief estimates. Section 4 shows
that belief updating can, both qualitatively and quantitatively, explain the persistently low
level of recent economic activity colloquially known as “secular stagnation.” We highlight the
role of our mechanism by comparing our results to those from the same economic model, but
without belief revisions, i.e. with agents who have full knowledge of the distribution.
    The mechanism through which tail events have persistent effects does not depend on the
specific structure of the Gourio (2012) model. It requires three key ingredients. One is a shock
process that can capture the extreme, unusual aspects of a tail event. During the Great Re-
cession, these were evident mainly in real estate and capital markets. Total factor productivity
shocks do not meet this criterion.2 The capital quality shock specification is arguably the sim-
plest one that does. Was this the first time we have ever seen such shocks? In our data set,
which spans the post-WWII period in the US, yes. Of course, similar extreme events have
been observed before in global history – e.g. during the Great Depression or in other countries.
   2
       The fall in TFP was not particularly extreme and predates the crisis. See Appendix D.5 for more details.


                                                        3
Section 4.3 explores the effect of expanding the data set to include additional infrequent crises
and shows that it does temper persistence, but only modestly.
    The second ingredient is a belief updating process that uses new data to estimate the
distribution of shocks, or more precisely, the probability of extreme events. It is not crucial
that the estimation is frequentist.3 What is important is that the learning protocol does not
rule out fat tails by assumption (e.g. by imposing a normal distribution).
    The third necessary ingredient is an economic model that links the risk of extreme events
to real output. The model in Gourio (2012, 2013) has sufficient sources of non-linearity in
policy functions to deliver sizable output responses from modest changes in disaster risk. The
assumptions about preferences and debt/bankruptcy, that make Gourio’s model somewhat
complex, are there to deliver that curvature. They also make the economy more sensitive to
disaster risk than extreme boom risk. Section 4.5 explores the role of these ingredients, by
turning each on and off.
    Finally, we show that recent data on asset prices and debt are also consistent with an increase
in tail risk. The higher perceived risk of financial crises in the future raises credit spreads both
for financial and non-financial firms. The magnitudes line up reasonably well with changes in
the data. One might think a rise in tail risk should push down equity prices, when in fact,
they have rebounded. Our model argues against this hypothesis – when tail risk rises, firms
borrow less to avoid the risk of bankruptcy, which tends to increase the value of their equity
claims. Thus, low credit spreads and a rise in equity prices are not inconsistent with tail risk.
Others point to low interest rates as a potential cause of stagnation. Our story complements
this narrative by demonstrating how heightened tail risk makes safe assets more attractive,
depressing riskless rates in a persistent fashion. In sum, none of these patterns disproves our
theory about elevated tail risk, though, in fairness, they also do not distinguish it from others.
    There are other asset market variables that speak more directly to tail risk, e.g. options on
the S&P 500 index. Figure 2 shows that the SKEW, an index of implied skewness constructed
by the Chicago Board Options Exchange from traded option prices, has stayed persistently high.
In Section 4.4, we use this series to show that the model’s predictions for changes in of tail risk
– specifically, the third moment of equity returns and the implied probability of large negative
returns – lines up quite well with the data. Finally, other proxies for beliefs also show signs of
persistently higher tail risk today. Google searches for the terms “economic crisis,” “financial
crisis,” or “systematic risk” all rose during the crisis and never returned to their pre-crisis levels
(see Appendix D.1).
   3
       See Orlik and Veldkamp (2014) for an example of Bayesian estimation of tail risks.




                                                        4
                    130

                    128

                    126

                    124

                    122

                    120

                    118

                    116

                    114

                    112

                    110
                      1990       1995       2000       2005        2010       2015

Figure 2: The SKEW Index.
An index of skewness in returns on the S&P 500, constructed using option prices. Source: Chicago Board
Options Exchange (CBOE). 1990:2014.


Comparison to the literature There are many theories now of the financial crisis and its
consequences, many of which provide a more detailed account of its mechanics (e.g., Gertler
et al. (2010), Gertler and Karadi (2011), Brunnermeier and Sannikov (2014) and Gourio (2012,
2013)). Our goal is not a new explanation for why the crisis arose, or a new theory of business
cycles. Rather, we offer a belief-based mechanism that complements these theories by adding
endogenous persistence. It helps explain why extreme events, like the recent crisis, lead to
more persistent responses than milder downturns. In the process, we also develop a new tool
for tying beliefs firmly to data that is compatible with modern, quantitative macro models.
    A few uncertainty-based theories of business cycles also deliver persistent effects from tran-
sitory shocks. In Straub and Ulbricht (2013) and Van Nieuwerburgh and Veldkamp (2006), a
negative shock to output raises uncertainty, which feeds back to lower output, which in turn
creates more uncertainty. Fajgelbaum et al. (2014) combine this mechanism with an irreversible
investment cost, a combination which can generate multiple steady-states. These uncertainty-
based explanations leave two questions unanswered. First, why did economic activity stay
depressed long after measures of uncertainty (like the VIX) had recovered? Our theory em-
phasizes tail risk. Unlike measures of uncertainty, tail risk has lingered (as Figure 2 reveals),
making it a better candidate for explaining the continued stagnation. Second, why were credit
markets most persistently impaired after the crisis? Rises in tail risk hit credit markets because
default risk is particularly sensitive to tail events.


                                                   5
    Our belief formation process is similar to the parameter learning models by Johannes et al.
(2015), Cogley and Sargent (2005) and Orlik and Veldkamp (2014) and is advocated by Hansen
(2007). However, these papers focus on endowment economies and do not analyze the potential
for persistent effects in production settings. Pintus and Suda (2015) embed parameter learning
in a production economy, but feed in persistent leverage shocks and explore the potential for
amplification when agents hold erroneous initial beliefs about persistence. In Moriera and
Savov (2015), learning changes demand for shadow banking (debt) assets. But, again, agents
are learning about a hidden two-state Markov process, which has a degree of persistence built
in.4 While this literature has taught us a lot about the mechanisms that triggered declines in
lending and output, it often has to resort to exogenous persistence. We, on the other hand,
have transitory shocks and focus on endogenous persistence. In addition, our non-parametric
approach allows us to talk about tail risk.
    Finally, our paper contributes to the recent literature on secular stagnation. Eggertsson and
Mehrotra (2014) argue that a combination of low effective demand and the zero lower bound
on nominal rates can generate a long-lived slump. In contrast, Gordon (2014), Anzoategui
et al. (2015) and others attribute stagnation to a decline in productivity, education or shift
in demographics. Hall (2015a) surveys these and other theories. But, while these longer-run
trends may well be suppressing growth, they don’t explain the level shift in output after with
the financial crisis. So, while they may well be part of the explanation, our simple mechanism
reconciles the recent stagnation with economic, financial and internet search evidence suggesting
heightened tail risk.
    The rest of the paper is organized as follows. Section 1 describes the belief-formation
mechanism. Section 2 presents the economic model. Section 3 shows the measurement of
shocks and calibration of the model. Section 4 analyzes the main results of the paper while
Section 4.5 decomposes the key underlying economic forces. Finally, Section 5 concludes.


1       Belief Formation
A key contribution of this paper is to explain why tail risk fluctuations are persistent. Before
laying out the underlying economic environment, we begin by explaining the novel part – belief
revisions and their persistence. In order to do this, it is essential to depart from the assumption
that agents know the true distribution of shocks to the economy. Instead, we assume that they
estimate such distributions, updating beliefs as new data arrives. The first step is to choose a
    4
    Other learning papers in this vein include papers on news shocks, such as, Beaudry and Portier (2004),
Lorenzoni (2009), Veldkamp and Wolfers (2007), uncertainty shocks, such as Jaimovich and Rebelo (2006),
Bloom et al. (2014), Nimark (2014) and higher-order belief shocks, such as Angeletos and La’O (2013) or Huo
and Takayama (2015).


                                                    6
particular estimation procedure. A common approach is to assume that shocks follow a normal
distribution and estimate its parameters (namely, mean and variance). While tractable, its thin
tails make the normal distribution unsuited to thinking about tail risk changes. We could choose
a distribution with more flexibility in higher moments. However, this would raise concerns about
the sensitivity of results to the specific distributional form. To minimize such concerns, we take
a non-parametric approach and let the data inform the shape of the distribution.
    Specifically, we employ a kernel density estimation procedure, one of most common ap-
proaches in non-parametric estimation. Essentially, it approximates the true distribution func-
tion with a smoothed version of a histogram constructed from the observed data. By using the
widely-used normal kernel, we impose a lot of discipline on our learning problem but also allow
for considerable flexibility. We also experimented with a handful of other kernel and Bayesian
specifications, which yielded similar results (see Appendix C.11).
    Setup Consider a d × 1 shock vector xt whose true density g is unknown to agents in
the economy. They do know that it is i.i.d. Their information set at time t, denoted It , is
                                                  t −1
the observed history of those shocks {xt−s }ns=0       . They use the available data at every date to
construct an estimate ĝt , using the following normal kernel density estimator:

                                                   nt −1
                                                1 X
                                      ĝt (x) =          Ω (x − xt−s ; Ξt )
                                                nt s=0

where nt is the number of available observations at t, Ω (·) is the multivariate normal density
function with covariance Ξt , also referred to as the smoothing or bandwidth matrix. We use the
                                                                                          1/(d+4)
                                                                                     4
reference rule for the optimal bandwidth, where Ξt is a diagonal matrix with σ̂j (2+d)n  t

as the only non-zero element in its j−th row (σ̂j is the sample standard deviation of shock j).5
As new data arrives, agents update their estimates, generating a sequence of {ĝt }.
    Our mechanism rests on the persistence of belief changes induced by transitory shocks.
This stems from the martingale property of beliefs: conditional on time-t information (It ), the
estimated distribution is a martingale: on average, the agent expects her future belief to be the
same as her current beliefs. This property holds exactly if the bandwidth matrix is set to zero.6
    More generally, the smoothing embedded in the kernel induces a deviation from the mar-
tingale property. Numerically, however, these deviations are minuscule, both for the example
in this section and in our full model. In other words, the kernel density estimator with the
   5
      The optimal bandwidth minimizes the expected squared error when the underlying density is normal. It
is widely used and is the default option in MATLAB’s ksdensity function.
    6
      In this case, the kernel puts positive probability mass only on realizations seen before. In other words, an
event that isn’t exactly identical to one in the observed sample is assigned zero probability, even if there are
other observations arbitrarily close to it in the sample. This is obviously too extreme a specification – since
events are never identical in actual macro data, every observation will have zero probability before it occurs.


                                                        7
optimal bandwidth is, approximately, a martingale Et [ ĝt+j | It ] ≈ ĝt . As a result, any changes
in beliefs induced by new information are, in expectation, permanent. This property, which
also arises with parametric learning (Hansen and Sargent, 1999; Johannes et al., 2015), plays a
central role in generating long-lived effects from transitory shocks.
    We now illustrate how this mechanism works, using an illustrative univariate example. Since
our goal is to illustrate the effects of outlier realizations, we need a data series with such outliers.
We will use a series of shocks to capital ‘quality’, estimated from post-WWII US data (plotted
in the first panel of Figure 3). For now, we treat this as an arbitrary series and postpone a
detailed discussion of their economic interpretation and measurement to Section 3.

              Capital Quality                          Estimated beliefs                   Future beliefs
       1.2                                        40
                                                       2                          2007
                                                                                  2009
       1.1                                        30   1
                                        Density




                                                       0
                                                       0.8   0.85     0.9
         1                                        20


       0.9                                        10


       0.8                                         0
             1960     1980     2000                0.8              0.9       1      1.1


Figure 3: Estimated beliefs.
The first panel shows the realizations of “capital quality” shocks, defined later in the paper in (15) and measured
as described in Section 3. The second panel shows the kernel density, estimated from data available up to 2007
and up to 2009. The change in the left tail represents the effect of the Great Recession. The third panel shows the
average estimate of the probability density (along with a 2 standard deviation band) in 2039. This is computed
by simulating data for the period 2010-2039, drawing future realizations from the estimated distribution in 2009
and estimating a kernel on each simulated series.




Estimated belief changes The second panel of Figure 3 takes all the data up to and in-
cluding 2007 and shows the estimated probability distribution, based on that (pre-crisis) data.7
Then it takes all data up to and including 2009 (post-crisis) to plot the new probability dis-
tribution estimate. The two adverse realizations in ’08 and ’09 lead to an increase in the
assessment of tail risk: the 2009 distribution (ĝ2009 ) shows a pronounced hump in the density
around the 2008 and 2009 realizations, relative to the 2007 one (ĝ2007 ). Crucially, even though
these negative realizations were short-lived, this increase in left tail risk persists. To see how
persistent beliefs are, we ask the following question: What would be the estimated probability
distribution in 2039? To answer this question, we need to simulate future data. Since our best
estimate of the distribution of future data in 2009 is ĝ2009 , we draw many 30-year sequences of
   7
       From the 1950-2007 data, the optimal bandwidth for this univariate case is 0.0056.

                                                                          8
future data from this ĝ2009 distribution. After each sequence, we re-estimate the distribution
g, using all available data. Obviously, each simulated path gives rise to a different estimated
distribution, so we report the average across all those paths (as well as 2 standard deviation
bands) in the third panel of Figure 3, which shows that the average (dashed line) is very close
to the 2009 distribution. This Monte Carlo exercise illustrates how tail risk induced by finan-
cial crisis may never go away. Of course, in this simulation, we are drawing from the ĝ2009
distribution, so every once in a long while, another crisis is drawn, which keeps the left tail
“hump” from disappearing. If we instead drew future data from a distribution without tail risk
(e.g. ĝ2007 ), the hump would still be very persistent, but not permanent (see Section 4).
     Thus, every new shock, even a transitory one, has a persistent effect on beliefs. This
pattern is reminiscent of the evidence of heightened tail risk from asset markets and other
proxies presented in the Introduction. In the rest of the paper, we will use a specific economic
model, which maps shocks and beliefs into investment, hiring and production decisions, in
order to assess the implications of these belief changes for macroeconomic outcomes. However,
it is worth noting that our approach and mechanism have broader relevance as simple tools to
generate endogenous persistence in many economic environments.


2       Economic Model
To explore whether our belief formation mechanism can help explain the persistence of the recent
stagnation, we need to embed it in an economic environment. To have a shot at quantitatively
explaining the recent episode, our model needs two key features. First, we need a shock structure
that can capture extreme and unusual aspects of the 2008-’09 recession: namely, the unusually
low returns to firms’ (non-residential) capital and stress in the financial sector. To generate
large fluctuations in returns, we use shocks to capital quality. These shocks, which scale up or
down the effective capital stock, are not to be interpreted literally. A decline in quality captures
the idea that a Las Vegas hotel built in 2007 may deliver less economic value after the financial
crisis, e.g. because it is consistently half-empty. This would be reflected in a lower market
value, a feature we will exploit later in our measurement strategy. This specification is not
intended as a deep explanation of what triggered the financial crisis or the recession. Instead,
it is a summary statistic that stands in for many possible explanations and allows the model to
speak to both financial and macro data.8 This agnostic approach to the causes of the crisis also
puts the spotlight on our contribution – the ability of learning to generate persistent responses
    8
     Capital quality shocks have been employed for a similar purpose in Gourio (2012), as well as in a number
of recent papers on financial frictions, crises and the Great Recession (e.g., Gertler et al. (2010), Gertler and
Karadi (2011), Brunnermeier and Sannikov (2014)). Their use in macroeconomics and finance, however, goes
back at least to Merton (1973), who uses them to generate highly volatile asset returns.


                                                       9
to extreme events. Similarly, to capture stress in the financial sector, we adopt a tractable
specification without taking a stand on the root causes – an aggregate financial shock, which
directly induces default by financial intermediaries.
    Second, we need a setting where economic activity is sensitive to the probability of extreme
capital shocks. We use a version of the model in Gourio (2012, 2013), optimized for this purpose.
Two key ingredients – namely, Epstein-Zin preferences and costly bankruptcy – combine to
generate significant sensitivity to tail risk. Adding the assumption that labor is hired in advance
with an uncontingent wage increases the effective leverage of firms and therefore, accentuates
the sensitivity of investment and hiring decisions to tail risk. Similarly, preferences that shut
down wealth effects on labor avoid a surge in hours in response to crises.
    Thus, this combination of assumptions offers a laboratory to assess the quantitative poten-
tial of our belief revision mechanism. It is worth emphasizing that none of these ingredients
guarantees persistence, our main focus. The capital quality shock has a direct effect on output
upon impact but, absent belief revisions, does not change the long-run trajectory of the econ-
omy. Our formulation of the financial sector also rules out propagation through the financial
system (other than those coming through beliefs). Finally, the non-linearity from preferences
and debt influence the size of the economic response, but by themselves do not generate any
internal propagation.
    Persistence comes solely from our novel ingredient, belief formation and would arise even
without these ingredients. We model beliefs using the non-parametric estimation described in
the previous section and show how to discipline this procedure with observable macro data.


2.1     Setup
Preferences and technology: An infinite horizon, discrete time economy has a representa-
tive household, with preferences over consumption (Ct ) and labor supply (Lt ):
                                                                        1
                                           1+γ 1−ψ
                              "                                     # 1−ψ
                                         L                       1−ψ
                                                           1−η 1−η
                        Ut = (1 − β) Ct − t
                                                               
                                                    + βEt Ut+1                                               (1)
                                         1+γ

where ψ is the inverse of the intertemporal elasticity of substitution, η indexes risk-aversion, γ
is inversely related to the elasticity of labor supply, and β represents time preference.9
    The economy is also populated by a unit measure of firms, indexed by i and owned by the
representative household. Firms produce output with capital and labor, according to a standard
Cobb-Douglas production function kitα lit1−α . Firms are subject to an aggregate shock to capital
   9
     This utility function rules out wealth effects on labor, as in Greenwood et al. (1988). Appendix C.7 relaxes
this assumption.


                                                       10
quality φt . A firm that enters the period t with capital k̂it has effective capital kit = φt k̂it .
These capital quality shocks are i.i.d. over time. The i.i.d. assumption is made in order to
avoid an additional, exogenous, source of persistence.10
   Firms are also subject to an idiosyncratic shock vit . These shocks scale up and down the
total resources available to each firm (before paying debt, equity or labor). Formally,

                                       Πit = vit kitα lit1−α + (1 − δ)kit
                                                                         
                                                                                                              (2)

where δ is the rate of capital depreciation. The shocks vit are i.i.d. across time and firms and
are drawn from a known distribution, F .11 The mean of the idiosyncratic shock is normalized
            R
to be one: vit di = 1. The primary role of these shocks is to induce an interior default rate
in equilibrium, allowing a more realistic calibration, particularly of credit spreads.

Labor: We make two additional assumptions about labor markets. First, firms hire labor in
advance, i.e. before observing the realizations of aggregate and idiosyncratic shocks. Second,
wages are non-contingent – in other words, workers are promised a non-contingent payment
and face default risk. These assumptions create an additional source of leverage.

Credit and default: Firms have access to a competitive non-contingent debt market, where
lenders offer bond price (or equivalently, interest rate) schedules as a function of aggregate and
idiosyncratic states, in the spirit of Eaton and Gersovitz (1981). A firm enters period t + 1 with
an obligation, bit+1 to bondholders and a promise of wit+1 lit+1 to its workers. After workers
exert labor effort, shocks are realized and the firm’s shareholders decide whether to repay their
obligations or default. Default is optimal for shareholders if, and only if,

                                   Πit+1 − bit+1 − wit+1 lit+1 + Γt+1 < 0

where Γt+1 is the present value of continued operations. Thus, the default decision is a
function of the resources available to the firm (Πit+1 ) and the total obligations of the firm
(bit+1 + wit+1 lit+1 ≡ Bit+1 ). Let rit+1 ∈ {0, 1} denote the repayment policy of the firm.
    In the event of default, equity holders get nothing. The productive resources of a defaulting
firm are sold to a new firm at a discounted price, equal to a fraction θ < 1 of the value of the
  10
      The i.i.d. assumption also has empirical support. In the next section, we use macro data to construct a
time series for φt . We estimate an autocorrelation of 0.15, statistically insignificant. In Appendix C.9, we show
that this generates almost no persistence in the economic response.
   11
      This is a natural assumption - with a continuum of firms and a stationary shock process, firms can learn
the complete distribution of any idiosyncratic shocks after one period.




                                                       11
defaulting firm. The proceeds are distributed pro-rata among the bondholders and workers.12
    Let qit denote the bond price schedule faced by firm i in period t. The lenders pay qit at
time t in exchange for a promise of one unit of output at t + 1. Debt is assumed to carry a tax
advantage. A firm which issues bit+1 of debt at price qit , receives a date-t payment of χqit bit+1 ,
where χ > 1. This effective subsidy to debt issuance, along with the cost of default, introduces
a trade-off in the firm’s capital structure decision, breaking the Modigliani-Miller theorem.13
    For a firm that does not default, the dividend payout is its total available resources times
output shock, minus its payments to debt and labor, minus the cost of building next period’s
capital stock (the undepreciated current capital stock is included in Πit ), plus the proceeds
from issuing new debt, including its tax subsidy

                                     dit = Πit − Bit − k̂it+1 + χqit bit+1 .                                   (3)

Importantly, we do not restrict dividends to be positive, with negative dividends interpreted
as (costless) equity issuance. Thus, firms are not financially constrained, ruling out another
potential channel of persistence.

Intermediaries: Credit is extended to firms by a continuum of competitive intermediaries,
who live for 2 periods and have no resources of their own and so compete to raise money
from households by issuing debt and equity claims. We model intermediary default with a
simple formulation: with probability πt , an intermediary fails to repay both its debt- and
equity-holders. This can be interpreted in different ways, e.g. as stemming from shocks to
loan portfolios or losses from other activities (e.g. derivatives or mortgages) or the possibility
diversion of funds by the intermediaries. From our perspective, the exact micro-foundation is
not crucial and so we directly treat the default probability πt as a primitive financial shock. In
the next section, we use data on bank failures to construct a time series for this variable. As
with firm default, we assume that default by intermediaries does not destroy resources, so the
money lost ultimately flows to the representative household. Appendix B.2 formally presents
the problem of intermediaries.
    The two aggregate shocks – the capital quality shock, φt and financial shock, πt – are
assumed to be iid over time, but correlated with each other in an arbitrary fashion. Formally,
in each period, (φ, π) is an iid draw from a joint distribution g(·).



   12
      Default does not destroy resources - the penalty is purely private. This is not crucial - it is easy to relax
this assumption and assume that all or part of the penalty represents physical destruction of resources.
   13
      The subsidy is assumed to be paid by a government that finances it through lump-sum taxes.


                                                        12
Timing and value functions:

   1. Firms enter t with capital k̂it , labor lit , outstanding debt bit , and a wage obligation wit lit .

   2. All shocks – the aggregate shocks (φt , πt ) and the firm-specific profit shock vit – are
      realized. Production takes place.

   3. The firm decides whether to default (rit = 0) or repay (rit = 1) its bond and labor claims.
      The debt- and equity-holders of each intermediary are repaid with probability πt .

   4. The firm makes capital k̂it+1 , debt bit+1 and employment lit+1 choices for the following
      period, along with a wage contract wit+1 . Workers commit to next-period labor supply
      lit+1 . Note that all these choices are made concurrently.

    In recursive form, the problem of the firm is
                                                                                                                 
         V (Πit , Bit , St ) = max 0,               max                    dit + Et Mt+1 V (Πit+1 , Bit+1 , St+1 )    (4)
                                        dit ,k̂it+1 ,bit+1 ,wit+1 ,lit+1


subject to

             Dividends:          dit ≤ Πit − Bit − k̂it+1 + χqit bit+1                                                (5)
    Discounted wages:            Wt ≤ wit+1 qit                                                                       (6)
   Future obligations:           Bit+1 = bit+1 + wit+1 lit+1                                                          (7)
                                               h                                          i
                                                                1−α
              Resources:         Πit+1 = vit+1 (φt+1 k̂it+1 )α lit+1 + (1 − δ)φt+1 k̂it+1                             (8)
                                                                                                      
                                                                                 θV (Πit+1 , 0, St+1 )
             Bond price:         qit = Et Mt+1 (1 − πt+1 ) rit+1 + (1 − rit+1 )                                       (9)
                                                                                          Bit+1

    The first max operator in (4) captures the firm’s option to default. The expectation Et
is taken over the idiosyncratic and aggregate shocks, given beliefs about the aggregate shock
distribution.
    In (6), the firm’s wage promise wit+1 is multiplied by the bond price qit , since workers are
effectively paid in bonds and are subject to the risk of default.14 Equation (6) requires the
value of this promise be at least as large as Wt , the representative household’s marginal rate of
substitution. Both Wt and the stochastic discount factor Mt+1 are defined using the household’s
   14
      Note that this implies that workers’ claims are also subject to the risk of intermediary default. For example,
under the diversion interpretation, workers also stand to lose if the intermediary manages to successfully divert
funds. This assumption is made only to simplify the algebra and does not have a material effect on our results.




                                                              13
utility function:
                                      −1                                      −1
                                 dUt          dUt                          dUt          dUt
                    Wt =                                     Mt+1 =                                (10)
                                 dCt         dLt+1                         dCt         dCt+1

     Equation (9), derived in Appendix B.2, shows that the equilibrium bond price is a function of
the expected repayment (the term inside the square brackets) as well as the risk of intermediary
default πt+1 . The term V (Πit+1 , 0, St+1 ) denotes the value of a defaulting firm’s assets.
     The aggregate state St consists of (Πt , Lt , It ) where Πt ≡ AKtα L1−α    t   + (1 − δ)Kt is the
aggregate resources available, Lt is aggregate labor input (chosen in t−1) and It is the economy-
wide information set. Equation (9) reveals that bond prices are a function of the firm’s capital
k̂it+1 , labor lit+1 and debt Bit+1
                                  , as well as the aggregate
                                                               state St . The firm takes the aggregate
state and the function qit = q k̂it+1 , lit+1 , Bit+1 , St as given, recognizing that its capital, labor
and leverage choices affect its bond price.

Information and beliefs The set It includes the history of all shocks (φt , πt ) observed up
to and including time-t. For now, we specify a general function, Ψ, which maps It into an
appropriate probability space. The expectation operator Et is defined with respect to this
space. In the next section, we use the kernel density estimation procedure from section 1 to
fully characterize Ψ.

Equilibrium Definition. For a given belief function Ψ, a recursive equilibrium is a set
of functions for (i) aggregate consumption and labor that maximize (1) subject to a budget
constraint, (ii) firm value and policies that solve (4 − 8) , taking as given the bond price function
(9) and the stochastic discount factor and aggregate MRS functions in (10) and are such that
(iii) aggregate consumption and labor are consistent with individual choices.


2.2    Solving the Model
Here, we show the key equations characterizing the equilibrium, relegating detailed derivations
to Appendix B.1. First, use the binding dividend and wage constraints (5) and (6) to substitute
out for dit and wit in (4). This leaves 3 choice variables (k̂it+1 , lit+1 , bit+1 ) and a repayment
decision. The latter is characterized by a threshold rule in the idiosyncratic shock vit :
                                                (
                                                     0 if vit < v it
                                        rit =
                                                     1 if vit ≥ v it




                                                       14
It turns out to be more convenient to recast the problem as a choice of k̂it+1 , leverage, levit+1 ≡
Bit+1
 k̂
      , and the labor-capital ratio, k̂lit+1 . Since all firms make symmetric choices, we can suppress
 it+1                                     it+1

the i subscript: k̂it+1 = K̂t+1 , lit+1 = Lt+1 , levit+1 = levt+1 , v it+1 = v t+1 . The optimality
condition for K̂t+1 can be written as:

                     Lt+1             k                                         k
          1 + χWt           = E[Mt+1 Rt+1 ] + (χ − 1)levt+1 qt − (1 − θ)E[Mt+1 Rt+1 h(v t+1 )]
                    K̂t+1
                                                        k
                                              − E[Mt+1 Rt+1 πt+1 (v t+1 (1 − F (v t+1 )) + θh(v t+1 ))]     (11)

                      k         φαt+1 K̂t+1
                                        α
                                            L1−α
                                             t+1 + (1 − δ) φt+1 K̂t+1
    where            Rt+1   =                                                                               (12)
                                                 K̂t+1

             k
The term Rt+1     is the average ex-post per-unit, pre-wage return on capital, while h (v) ≡
Rv
 −∞
     vf (v)dv is the expected value of the idiosyncratic shock in the default states.
    The first term on the right hand side of (11) is the usual expected direct return from
investing, weighted by the stochastic discount factor. The other terms are all related to debt.
The second term reflects the tax advantage of debt – the firm raises levt+1 qt (per unit of capital)
from the bond market, on which it earns a subsidy of χ − 1. The third term captures default-
related costs, equal to a fraction 1 − θ of available resources. The final term reflects the effect
of intermediary default (it disappears if πt+1 = 0 w.p. 1).
    The optimal labor choice equates the expected marginal cost of labor, Wt , with its expected
marginal product, adjusted for the effect of additional wage promises on the cost of default:
                 "                                  !α                                                  #
                                            K̂t+1
        χWt = Et Mt+1 (1 − α) φαt+1                      (J l (v t+1 )(1 − πt+1 ) + πt+1 (1 − h(v t+1 )))   (13)
                                            Lt+1

where J l (v) = 1 + h (v) (θχ − 1) − v 2 f (v) χ (θ − 1) adjusts the marginal product of labor for
the fact that labor is chosen in advance in exchange for a debt-like promise. Finally, the choice
of leverage is governed by:
                                                 
                                           χ−1                            
        Et Mt+1 (1 − θ)v t+1 f v t+1 =               Et Mt+1 1 − F v t+1
                                                χ
                                                                                                  
                                          − Et Mt+1 πt+1 (1 − F (v t+1 ) − (1 − θ)v t+1 f (v t+1 )) .       (14)

The left hand side is the marginal cost of increasing leverage. Higher leverage shifts the default
threshold v, raising the expected losses from the default penalty (a fraction 1 − θ of the firm’s
value). The right hand side is the net marginal benefit – higher leverage brings in more subsidy
(the tax benefit times the value of debt issued) but entails paying intermediary default premium.
   The three firm optimality conditions, (11), (13), and (14) , along with those from the house-

                                                          15
hold side (10) and the economy-wide resource constraint, characterize the equilibrium.


3         Measurement, Calibration and Solution Method
This section describes how we use macro data to estimate beliefs and parameterize the model,
as well as our computational approach. One of the key strengths of our theory is that we can
use observable data to estimate beliefs at each date.

Measuring capital quality shocks Recall from Section 1 that the Great Recession saw
unusually low returns to non-residential capital, stemming from unusually large declines in the
market value of capital. To capture this, we need to map the model’s aggregate shock, namely
the capital quality shock, into market value changes. A helpful feature of capital quality shocks
is that their mapping to available data is straightforward. A unit of capital installed in period
t − 1 (i.e. as part of K̂t ) is, in effective terms, worth φt units of consumption goods in period
t. Thus, the change in its market value from t − 1 to t is simply φt .
    We apply this measurement strategy to annual data on non-residential capital held by US
corporates. Specifically, we use two time series Non-residential assets from the Flow of Funds,
one evaluated at market value and the second, at historical cost.15 We denote the two series
by N F AM t
            V
              and N F AHCt     respectively. To see how these two series yield a time series for φt ,
note that, in line with the reasoning above, N F AM      t
                                                           V
                                                             maps directly to effective capital in the
model. Formally, letting Ptk the nominal price of capital goods in t, we have Ptk Kt = N F AM     t
                                                                                                    V
                                                                                                      .
                                                                k              HC                  HC
Investment Xt can be recovered from the historical series, Pt−1 Xt = N F At −(1 − δ) N F At−1 .
                                                 k
Combining, we can construct a series for Pt−1      K̂t :

                           k                 k           k
                         Pt−1 K̂t = (1 − δ)Pt−1 Kt−1 + Pt−1 Xt
                                 = (1 − δ)N F AM V        HC
                                               t−1 + N F At  − (1 − δ) N F AHC
                                                                            t−1


                                 Kt
Finally, in order to obtain φt = K̂  , we need to control for nominal price changes. To do this,
                                   t
we proxy changes in Ptk using the price index for non-residential investment from the National
    15
         These are series FL102010005 and FL102010115 from Flow of Funds. See Appendix D.3.




                                                      16
Income and Product Accounts (denoted P IN DXt ).16 This yields:
                                          !
                                                       k
                               Ptk Kt
                                                            
                     Kt                        P IN DXt−1
              φt =         =
                     K̂t         k
                               Pt−1 K̂t         P IN DXtk
                                                                                         k
                                             N F AM V
                                                                                            
                                                  t                              P IN DXt−1
                 =                                                                                         (15)
                      (1 − δ)N F AM V
                                  t−1      + N F AHC
                                                  t   − (1 − δ) N F AHC
                                                                     t−1          P IN DXtk

    Using the measurement equation (15), we construct an annual time series for capital quality
shocks for the US economy since 1950. The left panel of Figure 3 plots the resulting series. The
mean and standard deviation of the series over the entire sample are 1 and 0.03 respectively.
The autocorrelation is statistically insignificant at 0.15.
    As Figure 3 shows, for most of the sample period, the shock realizations are in a relatively
tight range around 1. However, we saw two large adverse realizations during the Great Re-
cession: 0.93 in 2008 and 0.84 in 2009. These reflect the large drops in the market value of
non-residential capital stock – in 2009, for example, the aggregate value of that stock fell by
about 16%. What underlies these large fluctuations? The main contributor was a fall in the
value of commercial real estate (which is the largest component of non-residential assets).17
Through the lens of the model, these movements are mapped to a change in the economic value
of capital – in the spirit of the hypothetical example of the Las Vegas hotel at the beginning of
Section 2 whose market value falls.

Measuring financial shocks Recall that the financial shock, πt , denotes the fraction of
intermediary assets diverted or otherwise lost. To construct a proxy for the financial shock, πt ,
we use data on bank failures from the Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation and compute the
fraction of total bank assets held by institutions which were either taken over by or otherwise
obtained assistance from the FDIC. Applying an average loss rate18 of 30%, yields our proxy
for πt , which is plotted in the right panel of Figure 3. It shows an unusually large spike during
2008-’09, reflecting the extreme nature of the recent financial crisis.

Belief Estimation We then apply our kernel density estimation procedure to these two time
series and construct a sequence of beliefs. In other words, for each t, we construct {ĝt } using
  16
      Our results are robust to alternative measures of nominal price changes, e.g. computed from the price
index for GDP or Personal Consumption Expenditure, see Appendix C.1.
   17
      One potential concern is that the fluctuations in the value of real estate stem mostly from land price
movements. While the data in the Flow of Funds do not allow us to directly control for changes in the market
value of land, they do suggest a limited role for land. Measured at historical cost, land accounts for less than
5% of total non-residential capital. The observed fluctuations in the value of these assets during 2008-09 are
simply too large to be accounted for by land price movements, even if they are sizable.
   18
      This is consistent with the estimates in James (1991) and Bennett and Unal (2015).


                                                      17
                                 Capital quality shocks                                                                    Financial shocks
                 1.1                                                                                    0.05

                                                                                                        0.04
                    1
                                                                                                        0.03

                                                                                                        0.02
                 0.9
                                                                                                        0.01

                 0.8                                                                                          0
                                1960           1980         2000                                                         1960    1980         2000

Figure 4: Data: Capital quality and financial shocks.
Note: The first panel shows the realizations of “capital quality” shocks and the second panel shows the realizations
of financial shocks. In 2008 and 2009 we observe tail realization in both series.


the available time series until that point. Figure 5 reveals the effect of the extreme realizations
in 2008 and 2009. The first panel plots the marginal probability distribution of φt for two dates
– 2007 and 2009. They show that the Great Recession significantly increased perceived tail
risk. The estimated probabilities for 2007 implies almost zero mass below 0.90, while the one
for 2009 attaches a non-trivial (approximately 2.5%) likelihood to this region of the state space.
The second panel shows a similar pattern for the financial shock, πt – the likelihood of large
losses is much higher under ĝ2009 . Finally, since these extreme realizations were correlated, the
increases appear as concentrated spikes in the joint distribution. This is reflected in third panel,
which plots the difference between the probabilities implied by ĝ2009 and ĝ2007 .

                Capital quality shocks                                              Financial shocks                             Change in beliefs
                0.08            Data 2007                                 0.8
                         10-3   Data 2009
                0.06 5                                                    0.6                   0.02
  Probability




                                                            Probability




                                                                                                0.01
                0.04 0                                                    0.4
                                                                                                    0
                       0.8 0.85 0.9                                                                 0.03 0.035 0.04

                0.02                                                      0.2

                   0                                                       0
                         0.85     0.9   0.95   1     1.05                       0     0.01   0.02      0.03       0.04
                                   Capital quality                                      Financial shock

Figure 5: Change in beliefs due to the Great Recession.
Note: The first panel shows the probability distribution for capital quality shock, φt under ĝ2007 and ĝ2009 and the
second panel for the financial shock, πt . The third panel plots the change in the joint distribution, ĝ2009 − ĝ2007 .




                                                                                             18
Calibration A period is interpreted as a year. We choose the discount factor β and de-
preciation δ to target a steady state capital-output ratio of 3.5 (this is taken from Cooley
and Prescott (1995)) and an investment-output ratio of 0.12 (this is the average ratio of non-
residential investment to output during 1950-2007 from NIPA accounts).19 The share of capital
in the production, α, is 0.40, which is also taken from Cooley and Prescott (1995). The re-
covery rate upon default, θ, is set to 0.70, following Gourio (2013). The distribution
                                                                                          for the
                                                                           σ̂ 2 2        2
idiosyncratic shocks, vit is assumed to be lognormal, i.e. ln vit ∼ N − 2 , σ̂ with σ̂ chosen
to target a default rate of 0.02.20 The labor supply parameter, γ, is set to 0.5, in line with
Midrigan and Philippon (2011), corresponding to a Frisch elasticity of 2.
    For the parameters governing risk aversion and intertemporal elasticity of substitution, we
use standard values from the asset pricing literature and set ψ = 0.5 (or equivalently, an IES of
2) and η = 10.21 The tax advantage parameter χ is chosen to match a leverage target of 0.70,
which is obtained by adding the wage bill (approximately 0.2 of the steady state capital stock)
to financial leverage (the ratio of external debt to capital, about 0.5 in US data - from Gourio
(2013)). Table 1 summarizes the resulting parameter choices.

            Parameter             Value           Description
            Preferences:
            β                     0.91            Discount factor
            η                     10              Risk aversion
            ψ                     0.50            1/Intertemporal elasticity of substitution
            γ                     0.50            1/Frisch elasticity
            Technology:
            α                     0.40            Capital share
            δ                     0.03            Depreciation rate
            σ̂                    0.25            Idiosyncratic volatility
            Debt:
            χ                     1.06            Tax advantage of debt
            θ                     0.70            Recovery rate

                                          Table 1: Parameters



Numerical solution method Given the importance of curvature in policy functions for
our results, we solve the non-linear system of equations (11) − (14) using collocation methods.
  19
       This yields β = 0.91 and δ = 0.03, which are lower than other estimates in the literature. However, an
alternative calibration strategy with δ = 0.06 (consistent with reported depreciation rates in the Flow of Funds
data) and β = 0.95 (which leads to the same capital-output ratio) generates almost identical results.
   20
      This is in line with the target in Khan et al. (2014), though a bit higher than the one in Gourio (2013).
We verified that our quantitative results are not sensitive to this target.
   21
      Appendix C.6 examines the robustness of our main results to these parameter choices. See also the discus-
sion in Gourio (2013).

                                                      19
Appendix A describes the iterative procedure. In order to maintain tractability, we need to
make one approximation. Policy functions at date-t depend both on the current estimated
distribution, ĝt (φ, π), and the distribution H over next-period estimates, ĝt+1 (φ, π). Keeping
track of H(ĝt+1 (φ, π)), (a distribution over a distribution, i.e. a compound lottery) as a state
variable would render the analysis intractable. However, the approximate martingale property
of ĝt discussed in Section 1 offers an accurate and computationally efficient approximation to
this problem. The martingale property implies that the average of the compound lottery is
Et [ĝt+1 (φ, π)] ≈ ĝt (φ, π), ∀(φ, π). Therefore, when computing policy functions, we approximate
H(ĝt+1 (φ, π)) with its mean ĝt (φ, π), the current estimate of the distribution. Appendix C.2
uses a numerical experiment to show that this approximation is quite accurate. Intuitively,
future estimates ĝt+1 are tightly centered around ĝt , i.e. H(ĝt+1 ) has a relatively small variance.
This can also be seen from the illustrative example in Section 1: as Figure 3 shows, even 30
years out, beliefs are tightly clustered around the mean belief. For 1-10 quarters ahead, where
most of the utility weight is, this error is even smaller.


4     Main Results
In this section, we evaluate, quantitatively, the ability of the model of generate persistent
responses from tail events and confront its predictions with data. The key model feature
behind persistence is the learning mechanism. To isolate its role, we compare results from our
model to those from the same model where the distribution of shocks is assumed to be known
with certainty. In this “no learning” economy, agents know the true probability of the tail event
and so, observing such a realization does not change their beliefs. Next, we demonstrate how
this mechanism makes large, unusual recessions different from smaller, more normal ones by
comparing the model’s predictions for the response to the Great Recession to a counterfactual,
much less extreme shock. Then, we explore an economy where agents have learned from earlier
episodes such as the Great Depression. It shows that beliefs about tail risk are particularly
persistent, not because tail events were never seen before, but because relevant data on tail
events is observed infrequently. Finally, we show that incorporating learning delivers more
realistic equity, bond and option price predictions.


4.1    Belief Updating and Persistence
Our first set of results compare the predictions of the learning and no-learning models for
macro aggregates (GDP, investment and labor) since 2008-’09. They show that the model
with learning does significantly better in terms of matching the observed, persistent behavior


                                                  20
of macro variables. Then, to rule out the possibility that persistence comes primarily from the
occurrence of future crises, we show that the economic responses are extremely persistent, even
if no future crises occur.
     To compute our benchmark results, we begin by estimating ĝ2007 using the data on (φt , πt )
from 1950-2007. We then compute the stochastic steady state by simulating the model for
1000 periods drawing from the estimated ĝ2007 . We discard the first 500 observations and time-
average aggregate variables across the remaining periods. This corresponds to the long-run
average value of the variable under the assumption that the true data generating process is
ĝ2007 22 . This steady state is the starting point for our analysis: we are interested in changes
relative to this level. We then feed in the measured shocks from 2008 through 2014 and re-
estimate the distribution to obtain ĝ2014 . To see how persistent the responses are, we need to
simulate future time paths, which in turn requires an assumption about the distribution from
which future shocks will be drawn. Given all the data available to us, our best estimate for
this distribution is ĝ2014 . Therefore, we simulate future paths by drawing shock sequences from
ĝ2014 and compute the mean for various aggregate variables across these paths.

                GDP                                    Investment                           Labor
  0.2                                    0.2                                  0.2
                        Learning
  0.1                   No learning      0.1                                  0.1
                        Data

    0                                      0                                    0

  -0.1                                   -0.1                                 -0.1

  -0.2                                   -0.2                                 -0.2

  -0.3                                   -0.3                                 -0.3
         2010   2020   2030       2040          2010     2020   2030   2040          2010   2020    2030   2040

Figure 6: Learning leads to persistent effects on output, investment and labor.
Solid line shows the change in aggregates (relative to the stochastic steady state associated with ĝ2007 ). The
circles show de-trended US data for the period 2008-2014. For the dashed line (no learning), agents believe that
shocks are drawn from ĝ2014 and never revise those beliefs.


    The blue solid line in Figure 6 plots these averages for output, investment and employment
as log deviations from their steady state values under ĝ2007 . It shows a pattern of prolonged
stagnation, where the economy (on average) never fully recovers from the negative shocks in
2008-’09. and instead moves towards a new, lower (stochastic) steady state. These results do
not imply that stagnation will necessarily continue forever: they show that, from the perspective
of an agent with the current information set, recovery is not expected.23
  22
    Under this assumption, the long-run behavior of the economy is described by an ergodic distribution.
  23
    Appendix C.12 shows that a large fraction of this persistent response is due to changes in beliefs rather
than the direct impact of the φt shock on capital.


                                                           21
    The solid red line with circles in Figure 6 plots the actual data (in deviations from their
respective 1950-2007 trends) for the US economy.24 As the graph shows, the model’s predictions
line up reasonably well with the data, even though none of the series were used in the calibration
or measurement. The predicted path for employment lags and slightly under-predicts the actual
changes, largely due to the assumption that labor is chosen in advance. The predicted drop in
investment is also slightly lower than what was observed.25
    Table 2 summarizes the long-run effects of the belief changes, by comparing stochastic
steady states under ĝ2007 and ĝ2014 . As mentioned earlier, these are the average levels that
the economy ultimately converges to, under the assumption that the data-generating process
(and therefore, long-run beliefs) is ĝ2007 or ĝ2014 . Capital and labor are, on average, 15% and
7.5% lower under the post-crisis beliefs. This translates into 11% lower output and 12% fall
in investment.26 Thus, even though the shocks experienced during the Great Recession were
transitory, the resulting changes in beliefs persistently reduce economic activity.

                                 Stochastic steady state levels                         Change
                                 ĝ2007          ĝ2014
                     Output       6.2             5.5                                    -10.6%
                     Capital     26.3            22.3                                    -15.0%
                     Investment   0.7             0.6                                    -12.0%
                     Labor        2.3             2.2                                     -7.5%
                     Consumption 5.5              4.9                                    -10.4%

Table 2: Belief changes lead to significant reductions in economic activity.
Columns marked ĝ2007 and ĝ2014 represent average levels in the stochastic steady state of a model where shocks
are drawn from ĝ2007 or ĝ2014 distributions respectively.




Turning off belief updating To demonstrate the role of learning, Figure 6 also plots sim-
ulated outcomes (dashed green line) from an otherwise identical economy where agents know
the final distribution ĝ2014 from the very beginning. This corresponds to a standard rational
expectations econometrics approach, where agents are assumed to know the true distribution of
shocks and the econometrician estimates this distribution using all the available data. Now, by
assumption, agents do not revise their beliefs after the Great Recession. The post-2009 paths
in this case are simulated as follows: the economy is assumed to be at its stochastic steady state
   24
      Data on output and labor input are from Fernald (2014). The investment series is non-residential investment
from the NIPA published by the Bureau of Economic Analysis, adjusted for population and price changes. Each
series is de-trended using a log-linear trend estimated using data from 1950-2007, see Appendix D.4.
   25
      Additional outcomes are reported in Appendix C.4.
   26
      The investment drop is slightly smaller than that of capital because the shock distribution has also changed.
For example, under ĝ2014 , the mean shock is slightly lower (relative to ĝ2007 ). Intuitively, this acts like a slightly
higher depreciation rate – so, even though capital is lower by 15%, the drop in investment is only 12%.


                                                           22
in 2007 and is subjected to the same sequence of shocks – the actual realizations in 2008-14
and subsequently, sequences of shocks drawn from ĝ2014 .
    Without belief revisions, the negative capital quality shocks during 2008 and ’09 spark an
investment boom, as the economy replenishes the lost capital. While the curvature in utility
moderates the speed of this transition, the overall pattern of a steady recovery back to the
original steady state is clear.27 In contrast, with learning, agents revise higher the perceived
risk of intermediary default, which raises firm borrowing costs and dampens investment. This
effect is amplified because this risk covaries with the risk of adverse capital quality shocks. This
shows that learning is key to generating persistent reductions in economic activity.

What if shocks are persistent? An alternative explanation for the prolonged stagnation
is that the shocks themselves were persistent. In Appendix C.9, we show that allowing for a
realistic amount of persistence in the φt shocks does not materially change the dynamics of
aggregate variables. This is because the observed autocorrelation of the φt process is too low
to generate any meaningful persistence.

What if there are no more crises? In the results presented above, we put ourselves on the
same footing as the agents in our model and draw future time paths of shocks using the updated
beliefs ĝ2014 . One potential concern is that persistent stagnation comes not from belief changes
per se but from the fact that along future paths, crises occur with non-trivial probability.
This concern is not without merit. If future shocks were drawn instead from ĝ2007 , where the
probability of a crisis is near zero, beliefs are no longer martingales: they change by the same
amount on impact, but then converge back to their pre-crisis levels. Without the permanent
effect on beliefs, persistence should fall.
    However, as Figure 7 shows, persistence in aggregate variables over a 30 year horizon turns
out to be almost the same with and without future crises (solid and dashed lines respectively).
This is because beliefs about tail probabilities tend to be extremely persistent because tail-
relevant data arrives infrequently. In other words, it takes many, many no-crisis draws to undo
the initial upward shift in tail probability.
    The fact that most data is not relevant for inferring tail probabilities is a consequence of our
non-parametric approach. If instead, we imposed a parametric form like a normal distribution,
then probabilities (including those for tail events) would depend only on the mean and variance
of the distribution. Since mean and variance are informed by all data, tail probability revisions
are frequent and small. As a result, the effects of observing the ‘08 and ‘09 shocks are more
  27
    Since the no-learning economy has the same end-of-sample beliefs as the learning model, they both ulti-
mately converge to the same levels, even though they start at different points (normalized to 0 for each series).



                                                       23
                  GDP                                      Investment                                   Labor
  0.2                                        0.2                                         0.2
                  With crisis
  0.1             No more crisis             0.1                                         0.1
                  Data

    0                                          0                                           0

  -0.1                                       -0.1                                        -0.1

  -0.2                                       -0.2                                        -0.2

  -0.3                                       -0.3                                        -0.3
         2010   2015   2020    2025   2030          2010    2015    2020   2025   2030          2010   2015   2020   2025   2030

Figure 7: What if there are no more crises?
Solid (With crisis) line shows the change in aggregates when the data generating process is ĝ2014 and agent
updates beliefs. Dashed line (No more crisis) is an identical model in which future shocks are drawn from ĝ2007 .
The circles show de-trended US data for the period 2008-2014.


transitory. See Appendix C.10 for more details.


4.2       Shock Size and Persistence
The secular stagnation puzzle is about why this recession had more persistent effects than
others. Assuming exogenously persistent shocks does not answer this question, since that
would imply that all downturns are equally persistent. Our model provides an explanation
for long-lived responses to unusually large adverse shocks. Of course, in our setting, every
negative shock to capital quality has both a transitory direct effect (in our setting, it lowers
effective capital) and a persistent effect through beliefs. The extent to which a shock generates
persistent outcomes depends on the relative size of these two effects. Observing a relatively
unexpected tail event changes beliefs a lot and therefore, generates a large persistent effect. A
small shock, on the other hand, has a negligible effect on beliefs and therefore, generates little
persistence. This finding – that learning does not matter when ‘normal’ shocks hit – is also
why we focus on the Great Recession. With other, more normal cycles, versions of the model
with and without learning would be almost observationally equivalent, yielding little insight
into the role of learning.
    Figure 8 compares the effects on beliefs and output for small and large adverse shocks to
capital quality (1 and 5 standard deviations below the mean respectively28 ), again starting from
the stochastic steady state associated with ĝ2007 . Obviously, the output effects are smaller for
the smaller shock (the bottom left panel), but more importantly, they are also more transitory
and nearly the same with or without learning. Persistence comes almost entirely from the
gradual replenishment of capital, which is present even without learning. Belief changes are
  28
       These correspond to the realizations observed in 2001 and 2009 respectively.



                                                                   24
                           Small shock                                             Large shock
        0.05
                                                 Before                                               Before
                                                 After           0.06                                 After
        0.04

        0.03                                                     0.04

        0.02
                                                                 0.02
        0.01


                    0.95         1        1.05                               0.9     0.95   1       1.05
          0.1                                                      0.1
                                          Learning                                               Learning
                                          No learning                                            No learning
        0.05                                                      0.05


           0                                                         0


        -0.05                                                    -0.05


         -0.1                                                     -0.1
                0           10       20            30                    0          10      20             30

Figure 8: Small shocks create negligible persistence.
The top figures show the estimated probability for capital quality shocks before the shock (solid blue) and after a
shock (dashed red). The bottom figures show the response of output to the shock under learning and no learning.
The left (right) figure consider a small (large) shock of one (five) standard deviation.


still long-lived, but quantitatively, their effects on economic activity are small. In contrast, a
large shock induces an economic response that is both more clearly distinguishable from the
no-learning model and is more persistent (the bottom right panel).
     This is because beliefs do not change much after a 1 standard deviation shock, as the top left
panel of Figure 8 shows (there is a small increase in the distribution around 0.97). The increase
after a larger shock (the top right panel) is much more pronounced. This differential behavior
of beliefs has more to do with the likelihood than about the size of the shock per se. If, on the
other hand, large shocks were generally more frequent, then observing a small shocks would be
relatively more surprising and lead to larger belief changes. In other words, learning offers a
novel explanation for why fluctuations triggered by rare events are particularly persistent.


4.3     Longer data sample and the Great Depression
Since our data sample starts in 1950, the Great Depression is not in our agents’ information
set. This raises the question: How would access to more data, with large adverse shocks in it,
affect the response to the recent financial crisis? In the limit, as data accumulates, agents know

                                                          25
the true distribution; new data ceases to affect beliefs. However, this convergence occurs more
slowly for tail events converge than elsewhere in the distribution, precisely because they are
infrequent. In this section, we perform an experiment to show that, even if agents had access
to twice as much data, the 2008-09 experience continues to exert a large, persistent effect on
economic activity.
                                    0.2
                                               Actual sample
                                    0.1        Longer sample, [ , ] = [1,1]
                                               Longer sample, [ , ] = [1,0.99]
                                      0        Longer sample, [ , ] = [2,0.99]


                                   -0.1

                                   -0.2

                                   -0.3
                                          0        10          20           30

Figure 9: Longer data sample tempers persistence only slightly.
Each line shows the response of GDP to a tail event (shock realizations equal to those in 2009) under different
information sets. The solid line uses the actual data from 1950-2009, while the dashed lines use a hypothetical
series extended through 1890, where the actual time series from 1950-2009 is used as a proxy for the period
1890-1949, with one modification: {φ1929 , φ1930 } = {φε2008 , φε2009 }. The parameter ε indexes the severity of the
Great Depression relative to the Great Recession, while λ ∈ (0, 1] indexes the extent to which older observations
are discounted where λ = 1 represents no discounting.


     The key challenge to extending our analysis to earlier episodes is data availability – the
non-financial asset series used to measure φt is available only from 1950. Other macro and
financial series turn out to be unreliable proxies.29 But, our goal here is not to explain the
Great Depression, but to understand how more data, especially with previous crises, affects
learning today. Therefore, we pursue an alternative approach and use the post-WW II sample
to construct hypothetical scenarios for the pre-WW II period. Specifically, we assume that
(φt , πt ) realizations for the period from 1890-1949 were identical to those in 1950-2009, with
one adjustment: the shocks during the Great Depression period (i.e. for 1929 and 1930) were
as bad as the Great Recession, i.e. we set {φ1929 , φ1930 } = {φ2008 , φ2009 }.
     We then study the aggregate effects of a tail event – specifically, shock realizations that
are equal to those observed in 2009 – both under the benchmark information set (i.e. from
1950-2007) as well as the expanded one. Under the latter, the effect of the event on beliefs is
   29
     We projected the post-1950 φt series on a number of variables and used the estimated coefficients to
impute values for φt pre-1950. However, this did not produce accurate estimates – specifically, it missed
crises both in and out of sample. We explored a wide range of macro and asset pricing variables – including
GDP, unemployment, S&P returns and the Case-Shiller home price index. We also experimented with lead-lag
structures. Across specifications, the projections for 1929-1930 showed only modestly adverse realizations.

                                                        26
moderated by the larger size of data sample and by the presence of other tail events of similar
(or worse) magnitude in it.
    Of course, the further back the data sample extends, the assumption that old and new
data are treated as equally relevant becomes less realistic. We therefore consider the possibility
that agents discount older observations. This could reflect the potential for unobserved regime
shifts or experiential learning with overlapping generations (Malmendier and Nagel, 2011).30
To capture such discounting, we modify our kernel estimation procedure: observations from s
periods earlier are assigned a weight λs , λ ∈ (0, 1]. When λ = 1, there is no discounting.
    Figure 9 reveals that, even without discounting (λ = 1, the dashed line), the difference
between the benchmark and expanded information set is modest: the drop on impact is identi-
cal, by construction, but the additional data attenuates the longer term effects slightly. When
older data is discounted by 1% (λ = 0.99, the center panel), this attenuation almost completely
disappears and the response looks very similar to the benchmark.31
    It is also possible that the shocks during the Great Depression were larger than the 2008-
’09 ones. To allow for this, we also consider a case where (φ1929 , φ1930 ) = {φ22008 , φ22009 } =
(0.86, 0.70). Note that these are very large shocks – 5 and 10 standard deviations below the
mean, together eroding almost 50% of the effective capital stock. Figure 9 shows that, even in
this case, the 2009 shock generates considerable persistence (the dotted line shows responses
under 1% discounting, i.e. λ = 0.99).
    In sum, expanding the information set by adding more data does not drastically alter our
main conclusions, especially once we assume that agents discount older data.


4.4     Evidence from Asset Markets
Our framework stays close to a standard neoclassical macro paradigm and therefore, inherits
many of its limitations when it comes to asset prices. Our goal in this section is not to resolve
these shortcomings but to show that the predictions of the model are broadly in line with
the patterns in asset markets. As with macro aggregates, effects of learning are detectable
only after tail events, so we focus on the period since the Great Recession. In Table 3, we
compare the predictions of the model for various asset market variables, both pre- and post-
crisis, with their empirical counterparts, constructed using averages over 1990-07 and 2010-15
respectively.32 The model does not quite match levels, but our focus is on the changes induced
   30
      This is also similar to Sargent (2001), Cho et al. (2002) and Evans and Honkapohja (2001).
   31
      Stronger discounting leads to a larger decline in GDP. Intuitively, this raises the weight of recent observa-
tions. For example, with λ = 0.98, the persistent drop in GDP is about 16%.
   32
      The overall performance of the model is not sensitive to the time periods chosen. In an earlier version of
this paper, we used shorter samples for both pre- and post-crisis and reached similar conclusions. We exclude
2008 and 2009 in order to avoid picking up outsized fluctuations in asset markets at the height of the crisis.


                                                        27
by the 2008-09 experience. We find that while the model’s predictions for the change in credit
spreads and equity prices are broadly consistent with the data. More interestingly, the model’s
predictions for tail risk, a much more direct indicator, lines up quite well with the observed
changes in the probability of extreme events priced into traded options.

                                                      Model                                    Data
                                          ĝ2007      ĝ2014 Change           1990-2007       2010-2015      Change
 Asset prices and debt
 Credit Spreads (non-financial) 0.88% 1.18% 0.30%                             1.89%           2.23%          0.34%
 Credit Spreads (financial)     0.15% 0.47% 0.33%                             0.93%           1.51%          0.58%
 Equity Premium                 0.95% 2.43% 1.48%                             3.29%           7.50%          4.21%
 Equity/Assets                  46.88% 47.93% 1.05%                           55.28%          56.87%         1.59%
 Risk free rate                 9.60% 9.09% -0.50%                            1.42%           -1.32%         -2.74%
 Debt                                         -17%                            3%              -23%           -26%
 Tail risk for equity
 Third moment (×102 )           0.00   -0.24  -0.24                           -1.34           -1.59          -0.25
 Tail risk                      0.0%   1.6%   1.6%                            9.3%            11.2%          1.9%

Table 3: Changes in financial market variables, Model vs data.
Model: shows average values in the stochastic steady state under ĝ2007 hand ĝ2014 . The    equity/assets is the ratio
                                                                            e
                                                                                     3 i
of the market value of equity claims to capital Kt . Third moment is E R − R̄      e      , where Re is the return on
                                             
equity and Tail risk is Prob Re − R̄e ≤ −0.3 , where both are computed under the risk-neutral measure. Without
learning, all changes are zero.
Data: For non-financial credit spreads, we use the average spread on senior unsecured bonds issued by non-
financial firms computed as in Gilchrist and Zakrajek (2012). Financial credit spreads are option-adjusted
spreads on bank holding company bonds calculated by Bank of America Merrill Lynch, as in Atkeson et al.
(2018). For the equity premium, we follow Cochrane (2011) and Hall (2015b) and estimate the one-year ahead
forecast for real returns on the S&P 500 from a regression using Price-Dividend and aggregate Consumption-
GDP ratios. See footnote 39 for details. Equity/assets is the ratio of the market value of equities to value of
non-financial assets from Table B.103 in the Flow of Funds. The risk-free real rate is computed as the difference
between nominal yield of 1-year US treasuries and inflation. Debt is measured as total liabilities of nonfinancial
corporate business from the Flow of Funds (FL104190005, Table B.103), adjusted for population growth and
inflation. The numbers reported are deviations from a log-linear 1952-2007 trend. The third moment and tail
risk are computed from the VIX and SKEW indices published by CBOE. See footnote 41 and Appendix C.5 for
details.


   The model predicts a increase in credit spreads, both for financial intermediaries and firms.33
The former falls short of the observed change – 0.33% in the model versus 0.58% in the data.
The fact that financial credit spreads have remained persistently high since the financial crisis
has also been noted by Atkeson et al. (2018): our analysis shows that belief revisions in response
   33
     The model under-predicts the levels in both cases. Fixing this requires adding more sources of risk – either
aggregate or idiosyncratic – or additional curvature.



                                                          28
to the observed shocks during 2008-’09 can help explain a significant portion of this increase.34
    Spreads for non-financial firms are predicted to rise by less than that of financials. This is
due, in part, to equilibrium effects: an increase in bankruptcy risk induces firms to issue less
debt, which is 17% lower in the new steady state.35 In the data, total liabilities of non-financial
corporations (relative to trend)36 show a similar change – a drop of about 26%. This reduction
in debt offsets the rise in default risk and therefore, credit spreads: the net effect is a modest
increase (0.30%), which is quite close to its empirical counterpart (0.34%). 37
    One might think that higher tail risk should imply lower equity prices. The fact that
equity prices have surged recently and are higher than their pre-crisis levels thus would appear
inconsistent with a rise in tail risk. But again, this logic is incomplete – while higher tail
risk does increase the risk premium, it also induces firms to cut debt, which mitigates the
increase in risk (Modigliani and Miller, 1958). The net effect in the model is to slightly raise
the market value of a dividend claim associated with a unit of capital under the post-crisis
beliefs relative to the pre-crisis ones. In other words, the combined effect of the changes in tail
risk and debt is mildly positive.38 In the data, the ratio of the market capitalization of the
non-financial corporate sector to their (non-financial) asset positions also shows an increase.
While the magnitudes differ – we don’t claim to solve all equity-related puzzles here – our point
is simply that rising equity valuations are not evidence against tail risk.
    Furthermore, changes in equity premia (the difference between expected return on equity
and the riskless rate) are in the right ballpark, even though the model under-predicts the
level relative to the data (reflecting its limitations as an asset pricing model). The higher tail
risk under the post-crisis beliefs implies an rise of 1.48% in the equity premium, relative to
that under the pre-crisis ones. The analogous object in the data is computed following the
methodology in Cochrane (2011) and Hall (2015b)39 and shows that equity premia in 2010-15
were about 4.21% higher than the pre-crisis average. In other words, tail risk can account for
   34
      Sarin and Summers (2016) look at a broad range of asset prices and also conclude “To our surprise, we find
that financial market information provides little support for the view that major institutions are significantly
safer than they were before the crisis and some support for the notion that risks have actually increased.”
   35
      The leverage ratio (debt and wage obligation divided by total assets) is also slightly lower, by about 0.5%.
   36
      Total liabilities of nonfinancial corporate business is taken from series FL104190005 from Table B.103 in the
Flow of Funds. As with the other macro series, we adjust for inflation and population growth and then detrend
using a simple log-linear trendline. The numbers reported in the table are the (averages of the) deviations from
a log-linear trend, computed from 1952-2007.
   37
      Belief changes about financial shocks play an important role here. Without them, the rise in tail risk with
respect to capital quality shocks alone would have a negligible effect on spreads.
   38
      Aggregate market capitalization in the model is the value of this claim times the capital stock.
   39
      We estimate one-year ahead forecast from a regression where the left-hand variable is the one-year real
return on the S&P and the right hand variables are a constant, the log of the ratio of the S&P at the beginning
of the period to its dividends averaged over the prior year, and the log of the ratio of real consumption to
disposable income in the month prior to the beginning of the period.



                                                        29
about a third of the recent rise in equity premia. Of course, this measure, like all others, is
noisy and volatile. We are not claiming that the model can explain all the fluctuations – no
model can – but it doesn’t seem to be at odds with recent trends in equity market variables.
    The table also shows the model’s predictions for riskless rates. Again, as with the equity
premium, the model does not quite match the level40 , but does a better job predicting the change
since the Great Recession. Higher tail risk increases the premium for safe assets, reducing the
riskless rate. Under our calibration, the change in beliefs induced by the 2008-09 realizations
leads to a 50 bp drop in the riskless rate. In the data, the real rate (computed as the difference
between 1-year nominal Treasury yield and inflation) averaged -0.81 % between 2013-15, as
against 0.61% during 2005-07, a drop of about 1.4%. Thus, the model under-predicts the
drop. In Kozlowski et al. (2018), we show how liquidity considerations can amplify the drop in
government bond yields from higher tail risk.
    In sum, none of these trends in asset markets is at odds with the tail risk story we are
advancing. If credit spreads and equity premia are not clear indicators of tail risk, what is?
For that, we need to turn to option prices, in particular options on the S&P 500, which can
be used to isolate changes in perceived tail risk. A natural metric is the third moment of the
distribution of equity returns. It is straightforward to derive this from the SKEW and VIX
indices, calculated from options on the S&P 500 traded on the CBOE.41 As Table 3 shows,
the market-implied distribution has became more negatively skewed after the Great Recession.
We compute the same risk-neutral third moment in the model (using the distribution for stock
returns under the 2014 and 2007 beliefs). The model under-predicts the skewness in levels42 ,
but predicts a change (-0.0024) that lines up almost exactly with the data. To show how
this maps into probabilities of tail events, we also report the implied (risk-neutral) odds of a
return realization 30% less than the mean.43 Again, the model-implied level is too low, but the
predicted change (1.6%) is quite close to the corresponding object in the data (1.9%).


4.5     Understanding the Economic Response to Belief Changes
What model ingredients are needed for belief revisions to have substantial aggregate effects? To
answer this, we perform a series of experiments, turning off each ingredient one-by-one in order
  40
      This is partly due to our choice of a relatively low value for the discount factor, β. As we discussed in
footnote 19, an alternative calibration strategy with a higher value for β yields very similar results.
   41
      Formally, the third central moment under the risk-neutral measure is given by
                                                3       100 − SKEWt
                                   E Re − R̄e        =               · V IXt3 .
                                                               10
For more information, see http://www.cboe.com/micro/skew/introduction.aspx.
   42
      Fixing this would require additional shocks and/or amplification mechanisms.
   43
      For details of the computation, see Appendix C.5.


                                                           30
to isolate its contribution. Table 4 presents the results – columns (A), (B), (C) and (D) analyze
versions without intermediation, debt, capital quality shocks and mean changes respectively.

                                  Data                              Models
                                               Baseline       (A)     (B)        (C)       (D)
             Real economy
             Output         -12.0%              -10.6%       -6.6%    -4.4%     -1.6%      -7.7%
             Labor           -7.0%               -7.5%       -4.7%    -3.1%     -1.1%      -5.5%
             Investment     -17.0%              -12.0%       -6.2%    -3.0%     -2.3%     -10.6%
             Credit spreads
             Firms           0.34%               0.30%       0.02%              0.12%     0.21%
             Intermediaries 0.58%                0.33%       0.00%              0.13%     0.22%


Table 4: The contribution of various model elements.
Note: The model numbers report changes in the long-run under ĝ2014 , relative to ĝ2007 . Model (A) no interme-
diaries; (B) no debt; (C) no capital quality shocks; and (D) constant mean.




Role of financial shocks Column (A) in Table 4 shows that the tail realizations of the capital
quality shock in 2008 and 09 induce a long-run drop in GDP of 6.6%, about two-thirds of the
baseline decline. The fall in investment sees a larger attenuation (6% vs 12%). Abstracting from
financial shocks also has a much more significant effect on credit spreads of firms: this version
produces a very modest increase in spreads (0.02%). Thus, changes in beliefs about financial
risk plays a significant role in the model’s ability to match investment and credit spreads, but
large, persistent effects on economic activity obtain even without them.

Role of debt To abstract from debt, we set the tax advantage parameter χ to 1, which
implies all-equity financing, i.e. debt and leverage are 0. Note that this also makes financial
shocks irrelevant. Column (B) in Table 4 shows that belief revisions about capital quality shocks
trigger a 4.5% long-run reduction in output without debt, compared to 10.6% in the full blown
version. Thus, debt plays a central role in generating large economic responses, particularly in
combination with financial shocks: it accounts for about 2.2% without financial intermediation
(A-B) and an additional 4% (Baseline - A) once financial tail risk is introduced.
    Debt also helps explain why some shocks generate more persistent responses than others,
a central question of the paper. As we discussed in Section 4.2, the belief changes induced by
larger shocks are not only larger but also occur further out in the tail. As a result, they are
amplified by debt, further increasing the persistent component. See analysis in Appendix C.8.




                                                      31
Role of curvature in utility Curvature in utility also plays an important role. Appendix
C.6 shows that the effect of tail risk on aggregate outcomes is increasing in both risk aversion
and the intertemporal elasticity of substitution (IES). Higher risk aversion raises risk premia,
while a higher IES dampens a precautionary motive for accumulating capital in response to
higher risk. The analysis also highlights the role of Epstein-Zin preferences – with CRRA
preferences, for example, high risk aversion implies a low IES (and vice versa), moderating the
drop in long-run economic activity.

Role of mean vs higher moments. Observing a tail event changes the mean as well as
higher moments of estimated beliefs. The changes in the mean are relatively modest – E(φt ) is
only 0.0009 higher under ĝ2014 compared to ĝ2007 , while E(πt ) rises by 0.0011. To quantify their
effect, we simulated the long-run effects under the assumption that the mean belief remains
unchanged pre- and post-2007. The results, in column marked (D) in Table 4, suggest that
most of our effects on aggregate economic activity (almost 75%) stems from changes in higher
moments.44


4.6     Open Questions
The analysis in the preceding sections demonstrates the quantitative potential of belief revisions
in explaining macro aggregates and financial market variables. It also raises new questions –
both conceptual and empirical – where future research might be fruitful.
    One direction is to move towards an Bayesian approach. This would allow us to incorporate
the risk of future belief changes into agents’ current decisions, a channel we abstract from in
our classical non-parametric approach. (Collin-Dufresne et al., 2016), for example, use a model
of Bayesian parameter learning to improve asset pricing predictions in an endowment setting.
Embedding this in a model with production could bring to light new implications for macro
phenomena as well. We conjecture that tail events will have large, persistent effects even in a
Bayesian setting, provided two conditions are satisfied. First, the specification is sufficiently
flexible, e.g. has one or more parameters governing tail risk. Second, the priors about these
parameters reflects substantial uncertainty. Otherwise, there is not much scope for learning.
   44
     Economic activity is, in fact, quite sensitive to the mean capital quality shock. In Appendix C.3, we use
a deterministic version of the model without debt to derive, in closed form, the elasticity of the steady-state
capital to the mean capital quality:
                                                        
               d ln kss     1+γ α                1 α+γ           (1 − δ)
                        =                 +                                   = 2 + 3(7.5) = 24.5.
               d ln φss      γ 1−α            1−α γ          1/β − (1 − δ)φss

Capital, and thus output, is highly sensitive to capital quality because it affects both current returns (first term)
and holding gains on the undepreciated capital stock (second term). Total factor productivity, on the other
hand, only affects the first term and therefore, has a much lower effect.

                                                         32
    Another open question is the extent to which recent events reflect changes in beliefs or
preferences. It is nearly impossible to disentangle the two with aggregate macroeconomic data.
In this paper, we took what we believe to be the most fruitful approach – hold preferences fixed
and discipline beliefs with data. But, new approaches to preference formation could shed more
light on this question and provide a deeper understanding on the role of tail events.
    Finally, there have been other surprising and extreme economic events. Exploring the extent
to which they induced persistent responses and the ability of learning to explain those patterns
is an important area for future work. Similarly, the Great Recession was not an extreme event
along some dimensions. Pairing learning about tail events with limited attention might help
uncover why agents focused on capital returns, instead of other, less extreme series. Perhaps
this was because capital returns were both payoff-relevant and extreme, making them highly-
informative events.


5    Conclusion
Economists typically assume that agents in their models know the distribution of shocks. In
this paper, we showed that relaxing this assumption introduces persistent economic responses
to tail events. The agents in our model behave like classical econometricians, re-estimating
distributions as new data arrives. Under these conditions, observing a tail event like the 2008-
09 Great Recession in the US, causes agents to assign larger weights to similar events in the
future, depressing investment and output. Crucially, these effects last for a long time, even
when the underlying shocks are transitory. The rarer the event that is observed, the larger and
more persistent the revision in beliefs. The effects on economic activity are amplified when
investments are financed with debt. This is because debt payoffs (and therefore, borrowing
costs) are particularly sensitive to the probability of extreme negative outcomes.
    When this mechanism is quantified using data for the US economy, the predictions of the
model resemble observed macro and asset market outcomes in the wake of the Great Recession,
suggesting that the persistent nature of the recent stagnation is due, at least partly, to the fact
that the events of 2008-09 changed the way market participants think about tail risk.


References
Angeletos, G.-M. and J. La’O (2013). Sentiments. Econometrica 81 (2), 739–779.

Anzoategui, D., D. Comin, M. Gertler, and J. Martinez (2015). Endogenous technology adop-
 tion and r & d as sources of business cycle persistence. New York University working paper.


                                                33
Atkeson, A. G., A. d’Avernas, A. L. Eisfeldt, and P.-O. Weill (2018). Government guarantees
  and the valuation of american banks. NBER Macroeconomics Annual 33.

Backus, D. K., S. Foresi, and L. Wu (2008). Accounting for biases in black-scholes. SSRN
  Working Paper Series.

Bakshi, G., N. Kapadia, and D. Madan (2003). Stock return characteristics, skew laws, and the
  differential pricing of individual equity options. Review of Financial Studies 16 (1), 101–143.

Beaudry, P. and F. Portier (2004). An exploration into pigou’s theory of cycles. Journal of
  Monetary Economics 51, 1183–1216.

Bennett, R. L. and H. Unal (2015). Understanding the components of bank failure resolution
  costs. Financial Markets, Institutions & Instruments 24 (5), 349–389.

Bloom, N., M. Floetotto, N. Jaimovich, I. Sapora-Eksten, and S. Terry (2014). Really uncertain
  business cycles. NBER working paper 13385.

Brunnermeier, M. and Y. Sannikov (2014). A macroeconomic model with a financial sector.
  American Economic Review 104 (2).

Cho, I.-K., N. Williams, and T. J. Sargent (2002). Escaping nash inflation. The Review of
 Economic Studies 69 (1), 1–40.

Cochrane, J. H. (2011). Presidential address: Discount rates. The Journal of Finance 66 (4),
  1047–1108.

Cogley, T. and T. Sargent (2005). The conquest of us inflation: Learning and robustness to
  model uncertainty. Review of Economic Dynamics 8, 528–563.

Collin-Dufresne, P., M. Johannes, and L. Lochstoer (2016). Parameter learning in general
  equilibrium: The asset pricing implications. American Economic Review 106 (3), 664–98.

Cooley, T. and E. Prescott (1995). Frontiers of Business Cycle Research, Chapter Economic
  Growth and Business Cycles. Princeton University Press.

Eaton, J. and M. Gersovitz (1981). Debt with potential repudiation: Theoretical and empirical
  analysis. The Review of Economic Studies, 289–309.

Eggertsson, G. and N. Mehrotra (2014). A model of secular stagnation. NBER Working Paper
  No. 20574.



                                               34
Evans, G. W. and S. Honkapohja (2001). Learning and expectations in macroeconomics. Prince-
  ton University Press.

Fajgelbaum, P., E. Schaal, and M. Taschereau-Dumouchel (2014). Uncertainty traps. NBER
  Working Paper No. 19973.

Fernald, J. (2014). A quarterly, utilization-adjusted series on total factor productivity. Federal
  reserve bank of San Francisco working paper 19.

Gertler, M. and P. Karadi (2011). A model of unconventional montary policy. Journal of
 Monetary Economics 58, 17–34.

Gertler, M., N. Kiyotaki, et al. (2010). Financial intermediation and credit policy in business
 cycle analysis. Handbook of monetary economics 3 (3), 547–599.

Gilchrist, S. and E. Zakrajek (2012, June). Credit spreads and business cycle fluctuations.
  American Economic Review 102 (4), 1692–1720.

Gomme, P., B. Ravikumar, and P. Rupert (2011). The return to capital and the business cycle.
 Review of Economic Dynamics 14 (2), 262–278.

Gordon, R. (2014). The demise of u. s. economic growth: Restatement, rebuttal, and reflections.
 NBER working paper 19895.

Gourio, F. (2012). Disaster risk and business cycles. American Economic Review 102(6),
 2734–66.

Gourio, F. (2013). Credit risk and disaster risk. American Economic Journal: Macroeco-
 nomics 5(3), 1–34.

Greenwood, J., Z. Hercowitz, and G. W. Huffman (1988). Investment, capacity utilization, and
  the real business cycle. The American Economic Review , 402–417.

Hall, R. (2015a). Macroeconomics of persistent slumps. Handbook of Macroeconomics.

Hall, R. E. (2015b, October). High discounts and high unemployment. Hoover Institution,
  Stanford University.

Hansen, B. E. (2015). Econometrics.

Hansen, L. (2007). Beliefs, doubts and learning: Valuing macroeconomic risk. American
  Economic Review 97(2), 1–30.


                                               35
Hansen, L. and T. Sargent (1999). The Conquest of American Inflation. Princeton University
  Press.

Huo, Z. and N. Takayama (2015). Higher order beliefs, confidence, and business cycles. Uni-
 versity of Minnesota working paper.

Jaimovich, N. and S. Rebelo (2006). Can news about the future drive the business cycle?
  American Economic Review 99(4), 1097–1118.

James, C. (1991). The losses realized in bank failures. The Journal of Finance 46 (4), 1223–1242.

Johannes, M., L. Lochstoer, and P. Collin-Dufresne (2015). The asset pricing implications of
  priced structural parameter uncertainty.

Johannes, M., L. Lochstoer, and Y. Mou (2015). Learning about consumption dynamics.
  Journal of Finance forthcoming.

Khan, A., T. Senga, and J. K. Thomas (2014). Default risk and aggregate fluctuations in an
 economy with production heterogeneity. Technical report, Ohio State University working
 paper.

Kozlowski, J., L. Veldkamp, and V. Venkateswaran (2018). The tail that keeps the riskless rate
 low. National Bureau of Economic Research, Macroeconomics Annual forthcoming.

Lorenzoni, G. (2009). A theory of demand shocks. American Economic Review 99 (5), 2050–84.

Malmendier, U. and S. Nagel (2011). Depression babies: Do macroeconomic experiences affect
 risk taking?*. The Quarterly Journal of Economics 126 (1), 373–416.

Merton, R. (1973). An intertemporal capital asset pricing model. Econometrica 41 (5), 867–887.

Midrigan, V. and T. Philippon (2011). Household leverage and the recession.

Modigliani, F. and M. Miller (1958). The cost of capital, corporation finance and the theory of
 investment. The American Economic Review 48 (3), 261–297.

Moriera, A. and A. Savov (2015). The macroeconomics of shadow banking. New York University
 working paper.

Navarro, G. (2014). Financial crises and endogenous volatility. manuscript, New York Univer-
  sity.




                                               36
Nimark, K. (2014). Man-bites-dog business cycles. American Economic Review 104(8), 2320–
  67.

Orlik, A. and L. Veldkamp (2014). Understanding uncertainty shocks and the role of the black
  swan. Working paper.

Pintus, P. and J. Suda (2015). Learning financial shocks and the great recession. Aix Marseille
  working paper.

Sargent, T. J. (2001). The conquest of American inflation. Princeton University Press.

Sarin, N. and L. H. Summers (2016). Understanding bank risk through market measures.
  Brookings Papers on Economic Activity 2016 (2), 57–127.

Straub, L. and R. Ulbricht (2013). Credit crunches, information failures, and the persistence
  of pessimism. Toulouse School of Economics working paper.

Van Nieuwerburgh, S. and L. Veldkamp (2006). Learning asymmetries in real business cycles.
  Journal of Monetary Economics 53(4), 753–772.

Veldkamp, L. and J. Wolfers (2007). Aggregate shocks or aggregate information? costly infor-
  mation and business cycle comovement. Journal of Monetary Economics 54, 37–55.




                                              37
A      Solution Method
The equilibrium is characterized by the following non-linear system:

                     Lt+1              k                                         k
          1 + χWt            = E[Mt+1 Rt+1 ] + (χ − 1)levt+1 qt − (1 − θ)E[Mt+1 Rt+1 h(v t+1 )]
                     K̂t+1
                                            k
                                  − E[Mt+1 Rt+1 πt+1 (v t+1 (1 − F (v t+1 )) + θh(v t+1 ))]          (16)
                 "                          !α                                                 #
                                     K̂ t+1
     χWt = Et Mt+1 (1 − α) φαt+1               (J l (v t+1 )(1 − πt+1 ) + πt+1 (1 − h(v t+1 )))      (17)
                                     Lt+1
                                             
                                     χ−1                               
     Et Mt+1 (1 − θ)v t+1 f v t+1 =             Et Mt+1 1 − F v t+1
                                          χ
                                                                                               
                                    − Et Mt+1 πt+1 (1 − F (v t+1 ) − (1 − θ)v t+1 f (v t+1 ))        (18)
                                                                                              −ψ
                                       1−η
                                             η−ψ
                                               1−η  ψ−η                     u (Ct+1 , Lt+1 )
                         Mt+1    = β E Ut+1        Ut+1                                              (19)
                                                                              u (Ct , Lt )
                             Wt = Lγt+1 EMt+1                                                        (20)


                     where       Ct = φαt K̂tα L1−α
                                                t   + (1 − δ) φt K̂t − K̂t+1                         (21)
                                                                                   1
                                                            1−ψ                1−ψ 1−ψ
                                                                           1−η 1−η
                                 Ut = (1 − β) (u (Ct , Lt ))      + βE Ut+1                          (22)

                               k         φαt+1 K̂t+1
                                                 α
                                                     L1−α
                                                      t+1 + (1 − δ) φt+1 K̂t+1
                              Rt+1 =                                                                 (23)
                                                                K̂t+1
                                                              levt+1
                               v t+1 =                      α−1                                    (24)
                                                     K̂t+1
                                         φαt+1       Lt+1
                                                                    + (1 − δ) φt+1

                              J l (v) = 1 + v 2 f (v) χ (1 − θ) − (1 − χθ) h (v)                     (25)

Solution Algorithm To solve the system described above at any given date t (i.e. after any
observed history of (φt , πt )), we recast it in recursive form with grids for the aggregate state
(Π, L) and the shocks (φ, π). We then use the following iterative procedure:

    • Estimate ĝ on the available history using the kernel density estimator.

    • Start with a guess (in polynomial form) for U (Π, L), C(Π, L).

    • Solve (16)-(18) for K̂ 0 (Π, L), L0 (Π, L), lev 0 (Π, L) using a non-linear solver.

    • Update the guess for U, C using (21)-(22) and iterate until convergence.


                                                               38
Online Appendix
This material is for a separate, on-line appendix and not intended to be printed with the paper.

B Model solution and derivations                                                                                                               2
  B.1 Firm Optimality . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .                                                    2
  B.2 Intermediation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .                                                 5

C Additional Results                                                                                                                            7
  C.1 Measurement of φt : Alternative price indices . . . . . . . . .                                  .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .    7
  C.2 Numerical accuracy of solution method . . . . . . . . . . . . .                                  .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .    7
  C.3 Steady State Analysis . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .                              .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .    9
  C.4 Behavior of Consumption . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .                                  .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   10
  C.5 Computing option-implied tail probabilities . . . . . . . . . .                                  .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   10
  C.6 Role of Risk Aversion, Intertemporal Elasticity of Substitution                                  .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   11
  C.7 Role of GHH preferences . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .                                .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   12
  C.8 Debt and Shock Size . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .                                .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   13
  C.9 Exogenous persistence in φt . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .                                .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   13
  C.10 Learning with a Normal distribution . . . . . . . . . . . . . .                                 .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   15
  C.11 Alternative kernels . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .                             .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   16
  C.12 Tail Shocks vs Beliefs . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .                              .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   17
  C.13 Asymmetry: Right vs left tail events . . . . . . . . . . . . . .                                .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   18

D Other evidence                                                                                                                               19
  D.1 Internet search behavior . . . . . .     . . .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   19
  D.2 Stock market . . . . . . . . . . . .     . . .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   19
  D.3 Returns during the Great Recession         . .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   20
  D.4 De-trending . . . . . . . . . . . . .    . . .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   21
  D.5 TFP . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .    . . .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   21




                                                1
B        Model solution and derivations
B.1        Firm Optimality
Define                                                                       1−α
                                             k               α       lit+1
                                            Rit+1   ≡ φt+1                           + (1 − δ)φt+1 .
                                                                     k̂it+1
as the ex-post per-unit, pre-wage return on capital. Substituting for dividends and wages from
(5) and (6), the firm’s continuation value can be expressed as the solution to the following
maximization problem:
                                                                                                                     
                                                      lit+1                                    k                Γit+1
Γit =           max                   k̂it+1 −1 − χWt        + χqit levit+1 + EMt+1 rit+1 vit Rit+1 − levit+1 +
        k̂it+1 , levit+1 ,
                             lit+1
                             k̂it+1
                                                      k̂it+1                                                    k̂it+1

where                                                                                                                  
                                                                                                    k          Γit+1
                                                                                             vit+i Rit+1 +     k̂it+1
                         qit = EMt+1 (1 − πt+1 ) rit+1 + (1 − rit+1 ) θ                                                .
                                                                                                     levit+1

Leverage levit+1 includes debt and the wage promise made to workers. However, wage promises
(or operating leverage) are different from debt, in that they does not earn a tax advantage.
Since the above formulation credits the firm with tax advantage χ on all leverage, the wage
obligation Wt needs to be multiplied by χ, i.e. the firm pays back the tax advantage from labor
payments, so only external debt ends up accruing the subsidy.
    We guess (and later verify) that Γit+1 = 0.45 Using the threshold characterization of the
default decision,
                                                                                                                                 !
                                                                                         Z   ∞
                                              lit+1                                                    k
                                                                                                                             
Γit = max k̂it+1                −1 − χWt               + χqit levit+1 + EMt+1                        vRit+1 − levit+1 dF (v)
                                              k̂it+1                                        v it+1
                                                                                                 
                      lit+1                                     k                          
= max k̂it+1 −1 − χWt        + χqit levit+1 + EMt+1 1 − h v it+1 Rit+1 − levit+1 1 − F v it+1
                      k̂it+1

where
                                                                                                           k
                                                                                                                       
                                                                                                      Rit+1
                               qit = EMt+1 (1 − πt+1 ) 1 − F v it+1                         + h v it+1 θ
                                                                                                         levit+1
                                           levit+1
                         v it+1 =            k
                                                   .
                                            Rit+1
   45
      Intuitively, given constant returns to scale, the firm’s problem turns out to be linear in capital. In
equilibrium, therefore, in order for the firm’s value to be bounded, we must have Γit = 0. See Navarro (2014).




                                                                         2
                                                                          k
    Capital choice: Note that qit is only a function of levit+1 and Rit+1      (which only depends
on the labor-capital ratio k̂lit+1 ). As a result, the objective function is linear in k̂it+1 . At an
                              it+1
interior optimum, we must have:

                lit+1                                            k
                                                                                            
1 + χWt                  = χqit levt+1 + EMt+1             1 − h v it+1
                                                                 Rit+1 − levit+1 1 − F v it+1
                k̂it+1
                                  k
                                                                        k                            
                         = EMt+1 Rit+1 + χqit levt+1 − EMt+1 h v it+1 Rit+1     + levit+1 1 − F v it+1
                                                                                   k
                                                                                                          
                                  k
                                                                                Rit+1                  
                         = EMt+1 Rit+1 + χqit levt+1 − levit+1 EMt+1 h v it+1            + 1 − F v it+1      .
                                                                                 levit+1

Now,
                    k
                                           
                 Rit+1                  
EMt+1 h v it+1            + 1 − F v it+1      =
                  levit+1
                                                     k                                         k
                                                                                                 
                                               Rit+1                                   Rit+1
EMt+1 (1 − πt+1 ) 1 − F v it+1 + h v it+1                   + πt+1 1 − F v it+1 + h v it+1
                                                  levit+1                                    levit+1
                                                k                                                  k
                                                                                                     
                                             Rit+1                                          Rit+1
= qit + (1 − θ) E Mt+1 (1 − πt+1 ) h v it+1             + EMt+1 πt+1 1 − F v it+1 + h v it+1              .
                                              levit+1                                           levit+1

The optimality condition becomes

                lit+1    k
1 + χWt         = EMt+1 Rit+1 + χqit levt+1
         k̂it+1
                                                        k
                                                           
                                                    Rit+1
− levit+1 qit + (1 − θ) EMt+1 (1 − πt+1 ) h v it+1
                                                     levit+1
                                                       k
                                                          
                                                Rit+1
− levit+1 EMt+1 πt+1 1 − F v it+1 + h v it+1
                                                    levit+1
           k
= EMt+1 Rit+1 + (χ − 1) qit levt+1
                                    k                                               k 
− (1 − θ) EMt+1 (1 − πt+1 ) h v it+1 Rit+1   − EMt+1 πt+1 levit+1 1 − F v it+1 + h v it+1 Rit+1
           k                                          k
                                                                  
= EMt+1 Rit+1 + (χ − 1) qit levt+1 − (1 − θ) E Mt+1 Rit+1 h v it+1
               k
                                                
− E Mt+1 πt+1 Rit+1 θh v it+1 v it+1 1 − F v it+1       .                                (26)

Note that this verifies our guess that Γit+1 = 0. Labor and leverage choice solve

                                              lit+1                                        k
                                                                                                                            
   max               −1 + χqit levt+1 − χWt            + EMt+1           1 − h v it+1        Rit+1 − levit+1 1 − F v it+1
levit+1 ,
            lit+1
            k̂it+1
                                              k̂it+1




                                                                 3
which, after substituting for qit , becomes

                                                   lit+1         k
                                                                       Mt+1 J k v it+1 − πt+1 J kπ v it+1
                                                                                                         
                       max            −1 − χWt               + E Rit+1
                 levit+1 ,
                             lit+1
                             k̂it+1
                                                   k̂it+1

where

                                      J k (v) = 1 + (χ − 1) v (1 − F (v)) + (χθ − 1) h (v)
                                  J kπ (v) = χv (1 − F (v)) + χθh (v) .

                                                                                                          lit+1
   Labor choice: The first order condition with respect to                                                k̂it+1
                                                                                                                    is


                                k                     ∂J k (v it+1 )                             ∂Rk
                   χWt = EMt+1 Rit+1                                           + EMt+1                   J k (v it+1 )
                                                            ∂ k̂lit+1                        ∂ k̂lit+1
                                                                 it+1                             it+1


                                                   k              ∂J kπ (v it+1 )                                   ∂Rk
                                      −Eπt+1 Mt+1 Rit+1                                 − Eπt+1 Mt+1                            J kπ (v it+1 ),
                                                                            ∂ k̂lit+1                              ∂ k̂lit+1
                                                                                it+1                                     it+1



   Now,
                                                                                                                                                                    !
 k      ∂J k (v it+1 )       k          ∂v it+1                                                                                                      ∂h v it+1
Rit+1                     = Rit+1                  (χ − 1) 1 − F v it+1                          − v it+1 (χ − 1) f v it+1                   + (χθ − 1)                  ,
           ∂ k̂lt+1                     ∂ k̂lt+1                                                                                                         ∂v it+1
                it+1                       it+1
                                           k
     k        ∂v it+1                    ∂Rit+1
    Rit+1                 = −v it+1         ,
            ∂ k̂lit+1            ∂ k̂lit+1
                 it+1                 it+1
                    
        dh v it+1                         
                      = v it+1 f v it+1 ,
          dv it+1
                                                               !α
               k
             ∂Rit+1                                  k̂it+1
                          = (1 − α) φt+1 α                              .
              ∂ k̂lit+1                              lit+1
                   it+1



   Substituting and rearranging terms yields
                  "                                             !α                                                                                      #
                                                      k̂it+1
  χWt = E Mt+1 (1 − α) φt+1 α                                                J l v it+1 (1 − πt+1 ) + πt+1 1 − h v it+1
                                                                                                                                                 
                                                                                                                                                            (27)
                                                      lit+1

where
                                        J l (v) = 1 + χ (1 − θ) v 2 f (v) + (χθ − 1) h (v) .




                                                                                  4
   Leverage choice: The first order condition with respect to levit+1 is

                                            ∂J k (v it+1 )        ∂J kπ (v it+1 )
                                                                                   
                                k
                         EMt+1 Rit+1                       − πt+1                       = 0,
                                             ∂levit+1              ∂levit+1

where

∂J k (v it+1 )    ∂v it+1                                                                          
               =            (χ − 1) 1 − F v it+1 − (χ − 1) v it+1 f v it+1 + (χθ − 1) v it+1 f v it+1
 ∂levit+1        ∂levit+1
                   1                                                    
               = k        (χ − 1) 1 − F v it+1 − χ (1 − θ) v it+1 f v it+1 .
                 Rit+1

and
                                                                                                               !
        ∂J kπ (v it+1 )    ∂v it+1                                              ∂h v it+1
                                                                                        
                        =              χ 1 − F v it+1 − χv it+1 f v it+1 + χθ
         ∂levit+1         ∂levit+1                                                 ∂v it+1
                              1                                              
                       =      k
                                     χ 1 − F v it+1 − χ (1 − θ) v it+1 f v it+1 .
                             Rit+1

   Substituting and re-arranging,
                                   
      (1 − θ) EMt+1 v it+1 f v it+1 =
      χ−1                                                                      
            EMt+1 1 − F v it+1 − EMt+1 πt+1 1 − F v it+1 − (1 − θ) v it+1 f v it+1 .                                (28)
        χ

   Finally, since all firms make symmetric choices, we can suppress the i subscript, so

            k̂it+1 = K̂t+1        lit+1 = Lt+1           levit+1 = levt+1                   v it+1 = v t+1 .

   Using this, equations (26) − (28) become (11) − (14) in the main text.


B.2      Intermediation
In this subsection, we describe financial intermediation in detail and derive the bond price
schedule faced by firms.
    There is a continuum of competitive intermediaries who live for 2 periods. We assume that
they are members of the representative household (so any profits or rents they earn flow back
to the household) but have no direct control over its resources. They compete to raise money
and invest it in bonds issued by firms.
    We assume that each intermediary maintains an exogenous (but potentially time-varying)
                         D
leverage ratio. Let µ ≡ Lq be the target leverage, where D denotes debt issued by the interme-


                                                         5
diary, L is the face value of bonds purchased and q the corresponding price.
    Thus, for each dollar invested in bonds of firm i in period t, thehintermediary raises qit µit
from debtholders and the remaining from equity. The bond pays off rit+1 + (1 − rit+1 ) θBṼit+1
                                                                                            it+1


in period t + 1. In each period, a fraction of intermediaries are subject to a ‘default’ shock,
parameterized by πt+1 . As mentioned in the main text, this can be interpreted in several ways,
but for concreteness, we adopt a particular microfoundation here: πt+1 is the probability that a
given intermediary is able to divert the entire asset portfolio and makes zero payments to both
equity- and debt-holders. This stark assumption is not critical for our results. It is possible
to extend the model to allow for partial default, but given our focus, we chose the simpler
formulation. Note also that since the intermediaries are also members of the household, the
diverted funds flow back to the household, i.e. the losses here are private, not social.
    If the intermediary is not hit by the default shock, debt-holders are repaid in full (along
with a gross interest rate of Rtd )46 and equity-holders receive dividends. Competition among
intermediaries implies that, in the absence of default, they receive zero payments, i.e. the
proceeds from assets less payments to debt-holders are entirely paid out as dividends to equity-
holders.47 Thus, equity-holders’ payoffs (per dollar invested in bonds of i) are given by

                                − (1 − µ) qit + Et [Mt+1 Divit+1 ]

                                   ( h                                  i
                                         rit+1 + (1 − rit+1 ) θBṼit+1
                                                                   it+1
                                                                          − µt qit Rtd w.p. 1 − πt+1
             where Divit+1 =
                                                             0                        otherwise.

In equilibrium, we must have

                                         (1 − µ) qit = Et [Mt+1 Divit+1 ]                                     (29)

Debt-holders receive Rtd with probability 1 − πt+1 . In equilibrium, therefore,

                                                                                1
                    1 = Et Mt+1 (1 − πt+1 ) Rtd              ⇒ Rtd =
                                               
                                                                       Et [Mt+1 (1 − πt+1 )]
   46
      This is again a simplifying assumption and effectively makes intermediary leverage irrelevant for our pur-
poses. This implicitly assumes that intermediary leverage is not too high relative to the shocks on the asset
portfolio, which is not a bad approximation given our calibration of corporate default rates. While it is possible
to relax this assumption and allow for default on intermediary debt even in the absence of the financial shock,
Atkeson et al. (2018) and Sarin and Summers (2016) argue that the post-crisis changes in bank leverage have
not really led to lower risk premia. Our specification is consistent with this finding.
   47
      To see this, suppose an intermediary offers a contract where she receives a positive payment in the no-default
state. Then, another intermediary can offer equity-holders a better deal by slightly reducing that payment.




                                                         6
Substituting in (29) and re-arranging yields the equilibrium price schedule,
                                                   "                                  #
                                                                     θṼit+1
                      qit = Et Mt+1 (1 − πt+1 ) rit+1 + (1 − rit+1 )
                                                                     Bit+1

which is (9) in the main text.


C     Additional Results
C.1     Measurement of φt : Alternative price indices
Figure 10 shows that the measurement of capital quality shocks is unaffected when we use
the price index for GDP or Personal Consumption Expenditure to control for nominal price
changes.
                                             Capital quality shock
                    1.2
                                                         Investment
                                                         GDP
                   1.15
                                                         Personal Consumption Expenditures


                    1.1


                   1.05


                      1


                   0.95


                    0.9


                   0.85


                    0.8
                     1950     1960    1970        1980       1990       2000       2010

Figure 10: Time series of shocks φt using different indices to control for nominal
price changes.




C.2     Numerical accuracy of solution method
To test the numerical accuracy of our solution method, we perform the following exercise.
Starting from the steady state of ĝ2007 , we simulate time paths for two different economies. In
Model I, as new data arrives, we update beliefs and policy functions at each date and history. In

                                                    7
Model II, beliefs and policy functions are fixed at ĝ2007 . In our solution, we essentially assume
that agents use Model II as an approximation for Model I, while evaluating continuation values.
Table 5 shows the sample mean and coefficient of variation for output at different horizons for
these two versions.48 It is easy to see that aggregates (or at least, the first two moments
thereof) are very well-approximated by replacing the sequence of future distributions with their
conditional mean. Recall that this numerical procedure works reasonable well thanks to the
martingale property of beliefs.

                                                        Horizon
                                               s = 1 s = 5 s = 10 s = 15
                                 Et [yt+s ]
                                 Model I:      6.378     6.385    6.393     6.397
                                 Model II:     6.378     6.385    6.394     6.398
                                 CVt [yt+s ]
                                 Model I:      0.010     0.032    0.042     0.046
                                 Model II:     0.010     0.031    0.040     0.044

Table 5: Numerical accuracy
The rows labeled Model I show the actual moments under the assumption that beliefs ĝ2007+s are re-estimated
at each date. Model II corresponds to the assumption underlying our solution method, where future beliefs are
replaced by ĝ2007 .




  48
       These are averages over 4000 paths. Other aggregate variables, e.g. capital and labor, show similar patterns.


                                                          8
C.3        Steady State Analysis
To dig a little deeper into why long-run outcomes are so sensitive to φ, we turn to a special
case - a deterministic version of our economy without debt. The level of steady state capital is
given by the following equation49
                                                                                                 
                                 1+γ α                            1 α+γ                1
        ln kss = Const. +                       ln φss −                      ln         − (1 − δ) φss .          (30)
                                  γ 1−α                          1−α γ                 β

Hence, the effect of the mean shock on steady sate capital is given by
                                                                   
                     d ln kss         1+γ α                   1 α+γ           (1 − δ)
                              =                      +                                     .
                     d ln φss          γ 1−α                 1−α γ        1/β − (1 − δ)φss

Under our parameterization,
                                                                                               
        1+γ α                           1 α+γ                                (1 − δ)
               = 2,                           = 3,                                                        = 7.5
         γ 1−α                         1−α γ                             1/β − (1 − δ)φss        φss =1


which implies dd ln
                 ln kss
                    φss
                        = 2 + 3(7.5) = 24.5. This simple calculation shows the source of the high
sensitivity - the fact that capital quality shock affects not just the current return component
but also the portion that comes from the undepreciated stock.




  49
       In steady state, Mt = 1 and the intertemporal Euler equation and labor optimality conditions reduce to

                                       1 = β αφα      α−1 1−α
                                                                             
                                                  ss kss lss   + φss (1 − δ)
                                      γ                          α −α
                                     lss  = Wss = (1 − α) φα ss kss lss .

Substituting for lss from the second into the first and re-arranging yields the expression (30).


                                                             9
C.4      Behavior of Consumption
Figure 11 shows that the behavior of consumption, as predicted by the model and the corre-
sponding pattern in the data. The model over-predicts the drop in consumption in the years
immediately following impact – the flip side of its inability to match the full extent of the drop
in investment during that time – but over a longer horizon, the predicted drop lines up quite
well with the data.
                                        0.2
                                                                   Model
                                        0.1                        Data


                                         0

                                       -0.1

                                       -0.2

                                       -0.3
                                              2010   2020   2030       2040

                               Figure 11: Response of consumption.




C.5      Computing option-implied tail probabilities
To compute tail probabilities, we follow Backus et al. (2008) and use a Gram-Charlier expansion
of the distribution function.50 This yields an approximate density function for the standardized
random variable, ω = x−µ σ
                           :
                                                                                          3
                                      (3ω − ω 3 )
                                                                               
                                                                                  x−µ
                  f (ω) = ϕ (ω) 1 − γ                         where           γ=E
                                          6                                        σ

where ϕ (ω) is the standard normal density and γ is the skewness.51 The VIX and the SKEW
indices provide the standard deviation and the skewness of the implied risk-neutral distribution
of the returns on the S&P 500. The numbers reported for tail probabilities in Table 3 are
computed using this distribution.




  50
    The CBOE follows this method to compute implied probabilities in their white paper on the SKEW Index.
  51
    The Gram-Charlier expansion also includes a term for the excess kurtosis, but is omitted from the expansion
because, as shown by Bakshi et al. (2003), it is empirically not significant.


                                                       10
C.6      Role of Risk Aversion, Intertemporal Elasticity of Substitution

                                           Data              Epstein-Zin                 CRRA
            Risk Aversion (η)                           10        10     5             0.5   2
            IES(1/ψ)                                     2        1      2              2   0.5
            Real economy
            Output                        -12.0%     -10.6%      -8.4%     -6.7%     -4.2%      -3.7%
            Labor                          -7.0%      -7.5%      -6.0%     -4.7%     -2.9%      -2.7%
            Investment                    -17.0%     -12.0%      -8.6%     -6.4%     -2.7%      -1.9%
            Credit spreads
            Credit spreads                 0.34%      0.30%      0.29%     0.19%     0.13%     0.15%
            Intermediaries spreads         0.58%      0.33%      0.32%     0.21%     0.14%     0.16%
            Tail risk
            Third moment (×102 )           -0.24       -0.24     -0.24      -0.16     -0.11     -0.12
            Third risk (×102 )             1.60        1.63      1.59        0.49     0.12       0.19

Table 6: Role of risk aversion and intertemporal elasticity of substitution. The second panel reports the
difference in the value of the variable in the new (post-crisis) and old (pre-crisis) stochastic steady states.


    Risk aversion, IES and debt all play a role in determining the magnitude of the effects of
increased tail risk. In order to show how much, here we compare our baseline results to a
number of alternative parameterizations. The results for the role of recursive preferences and
assumptions are collected here in Table 6. The first column reproduces our benchmark results,
which sets risk aversion = 10 and IES = 2. The next two columns vary, respectively, risk
aversion holding IES constant and IES holding risk aversion constant. The last 2 columns show
results under CRRA utility, with a risk aversion coefficient of 2 and 0.5 respectively.
    Our estimate for the IES is drawn from the macro and asset-pricing literature – see, e.g.,
Bansal and Yaron (2004), Barro (2009), Baron et. al. (2014). In order to assess the robust-
ness of our results to this parameter, we ran the model with an IES of 1 – the results are
presented in Column 2. Under this parameterization, the model predicts a slightly lower, but
importantly just as persistent, drop in GDP (8.4% vs 10.6% in the benchmark). This is due
to a precautionary channel – agents dislike intertemporal fluctuations in consumption, so faced
with the increased likelihood of a tail event, they have an incentive to hold more capital to
mitigate the potential consumption drop. This channel is stronger, the lower is IES. In fact, as
the IES approaches 0, this channel becomes so powerful that it can overwhelm the disincentives
to invest and can lead agents to increase investment in response to higher tail risk. However,
in the region that the macro/asset-pricing literature typically focuses on, the effects of varying
IES are relatively modest.
    Analogously, column 3 reveals that the size of the drop in economic activity from increased
tail risk is lower when agents are less risk averse. This is intuitive – the extent to which agents

                                                        11
dislike the increased riskiness of investment depends on their aversion to risk. However, as with
IES, the magnitude of our effects is not particularly sensitive to this parameter.
    The previous two exercises show that the magnitude of effects of increased tail risk on the
macro economy are increasing, albeit modestly, in both risk aversion and IES. Under CRRA
utility, of course, the two are tightly (and negatively) linked – a high risk aversion necessarily
implies a low IES and vice-versa. For example, in Column 4 of Table 6, we show results for a
CRRA specification with the same IES as the benchmark parameterization. However, this now
comes with a much lower risk aversion (0.5 vs 10), which attenuates the long-run drop in GDP.
Finally, Column 5 shows results for a CRRA specification with an IES of 0.5 (or equivalently,
risk aversion of 2). This also implies a small drop in economic activity.


C.7        Role of GHH preferences
The GHH specification of utility has criticized as being inconsistent with the facts on long run
growth, specifically the observation that labor input is more or less constant (or maybe, slightly
declining) in most advanced economies. One resolution is the following specification proposed
by Jaimovich and Rebelo (2006):

                                              L1+γ                          1−% %
                         u(Ct , Lt ) = Ct − Xt t                      Xt = Xt−1 Ct
                                              1+γ

Now, on the balanced growth path, the state variable Xt grows at the same rate as wages,
ensuring labor stays constant. The parameter % governs the strength of wealth effects on labor
supply away from the long run. The lower value of %, the closer the behavior of the economy is
to the GHH specification in the short-to-medium run. In their baseline calibration, Jaimovich
and Rebelo use % = 0.001 at a quarterly frequency.
    Solving this version of our model with learning involves an additional state variable and
considerable computational complexity. However, a simple back-of-the-envelope calculation
suggests that the drop in GDP and consumption over a 30 year horizon would only be slightly
lower than our baseline (GHH) specification (about 9% instead of 11%). To see why, a 10% drop
in consumption, along with % = 0.001, implies a change in Xt over 30 years of approximately
0.1(1 − 0.999120 ) = 0.011. Assuming that wages change by about the same as in the baseline,
the optimality conditions for labor and capital imply that the drops in Lt and Kt are about 2%
lower than under GHH (5% instead of 7% and 13% instead of 15%, respectively), consistent
with the conjectured drops in GDP and consumption. Over shorter horizons, e.g. in the decade
immediately after the recession, the two specifications would be virtually indistinguishable. 52
  52
       As an additional robustness exercise, we repeated the steady-state exercise in Appendix C.3 with Cobb-



                                                      12
C.8      Debt and Shock Size
Debt also helps explain why some shocks generate more persistent responses than others, a
central question of the paper. The attractiveness of debt (and therefore, the incentives to
borrow) is affected disproportionately by perceived tail risk. As we discussed in Section 4.2,
belief changes from larger shocks are not only larger but also occur further out in the tail. As
a result, they are amplified by debt, further increasing the persistent component.
    In Figure 12, we plot the long-run effects of adverse capital quality shocks ranging in size
from 1 to 5 standard deviations in an economy without intermediation. The initial position
corresponds to the steady state under the beliefs induced by data through 2007. The re-
sponsiveness to small shocks is almost the same with and without debt, but larger shocks see
significant amplification from the non-linearity induced by debt. Thus, debt makes the severity
and persistence of unusual events differ from more common downturns.
                                                                     0
                                                                           With debt
                                                                  -0.01    Without debt
                                      Long run effect on output




                                                                  -0.02

                                                                  -0.03

                                                                  -0.04

                                                                  -0.05

                                                                  -0.06

                                                                  -0.07

                                                                      -5      -4          -3   -2       -1     0
                                                                            Shock size (standard deviations)


Figure 12: Debt amplifies belief revisions from large shocks.
Change in long-run GDP both with (solid line) and without debt (dashed line) in response to negative shocks of
various sizes. The initial condition is the ĝ2007 steady state.




C.9      Exogenous persistence in φt
In this section, we show that the observed degree of persistence in the data is just not enough
to explain the prolonged stagnation since 2008-’09: in other words, learning is key to generating
persistence. To do this, we solved a version of our model without learning where the φt shocks
are no longer iid. Formally, we fit an AR(1) process to the observed φt series (this produces an
autocorrelation estimate of 0.15) and then non-parametrically estimate the joint distribution of
innovations to this process and the financial shock πt (which is still assumed to be iid). As in
the standard rational expectations setting, agents are assumed to know this process from the
Douglas preferences: u(Ct , Lt ) = Ctκ (1 − Lt )1−κ . The responsiveness of capital and output to a change in the
steady-state level of φ is about 70% of the elasticity in the baseline case. In other words, even with wealth
effects on labor supply, the effects of increased tail risk in the long run are quite significant.


                                                                                          13
very beginning. In Figure 13, we plot the resulting impulse responses (the green dashed line).
As the graph shows, the implications are quite similar to the iid, no-learning case – investment
surges and the economy slowly but steadily recovers back to the pre-crisis level. Even if we
used a shock process that was twice as persistent (ρ = 0.30) as the data, the results do not
change significantly, as we see in Figure 14. These results suggest that persistence of the shock
itself is an unlikely candidate to explain the prolonged stagnation.

                   GDP                                       Investment                           Labor
  0.2                                          0.2                                  0.2
                Benchmark
  0.1           Exogenous persistence          0.1                                  0.1

    0                                            0                                    0

  -0.1                                         -0.1                                 -0.1

  -0.2                                         -0.2                                 -0.2

  -0.3                                         -0.3                                 -0.3
         2010     2020       2030       2040          2010     2020   2030   2040          2010   2020    2030   2040

Figure 13: No learning model, with persistent shocks (dashed line, ρ = 0.15) vs. learning model
with iid shocks.


                   GDP                                       Investment                           Labor
  0.2                                          0.2                                  0.2
                Benchmark
  0.1           Exogenous persistence          0.1                                  0.1

    0                                            0                                    0

  -0.1                                         -0.1                                 -0.1

  -0.2                                         -0.2                                 -0.2

  -0.3                                         -0.3                                 -0.3
         2010     2020       2030       2040          2010     2020   2030   2040          2010   2020    2030   2040

Figure 14: No learning model, with 2× estimated persistence (dashed line, ρ = 0.30) vs.
learning model with iid shocks (solid line).




                                                                 14
C.10     Learning with a Normal distribution
Here, we repeat our analysis under the assumption that agents fit a normal distribution. For-
mally, they assume that (φt , ln πt ) is an iid draw from a joint normal distribution and estimate
its parameters with the available data. The resulting beliefs for the marginal pdf of the cap-
ital quality shock are shown in the second panel of figure 15 (the first panel reproduces the
baseline kernel density estimates). The large, negative tail realizations observed in 2008-’09
lowers the mean and increases the variance of the estimated normal distribution. Qualitatively,
these belief revisions are also long-lived, for the same reason as those under the kernel density
estimation. The economic implications are also sizable and similar to our baseline, especially
in the short run. This is partly the result of the direct impact of the shock itself and partly
from the fact that changes in the first two moments have an substantial effect in this highly
non-linear setting.
    However, the two procedures imply different time paths for beliefs and economic activity.
This is seen most clearly in the exercise where we simulate the economy by drawing time paths
from the pre-crisis distribution. The third panel compares the average path for GDP when
agents estimate a lognormal distribution to the baseline (kernel density) case. The graph shows
faster recovery for macro variables under the former. This is because realizations anywhere in
the support contain information about the mean and variance of the normal distribution. The
kernel estimate of the distribution at a particular point in the support, on the other hand, places
relatively more weight on the observed history close to it, making learning more ‘local’. The
non-parametric procedure captures the idea that tail events are harder to learn about, because
they are, by definition, rare. Imposing a parametric form on the distribution essentially allows
the agent to learn about the probability of disasters from more normal times, and therefore,
ties learning about tail risk much more closely to learning about the rest of the distribution.
Obviously, if the parametric form of the distribution was known, this is the efficient thing to
do, but this exercise illustrates how the assumption can have a significant effect.




                                                15
               0.08             Data 2007                                 0.04          Data 2007
                                                                                                                       0.05
                         10-3   Data 2009                                               Data 2009                                     Kernel, no more crisis
               0.06 5                                                                                                                 Normal, no more crisis
 Probability




                                                            Probability
                                                                          0.03                                             0

                                                                                                                      -0.05
               0.04 0                                                     0.02
                       0.8 0.85 0.9
                                                                                                                       -0.1
               0.02                                                       0.01
                                                                                                                      -0.15
                   0
                         0.85     0.9    0.95   1    1.05                         0.85    0.9    0.95   1    1.05      -0.2
                                                                                                                               2010     2020        2030       2040
                                   Capital quality                                         Capital quality

Figure 15: Learning with a Normal distribution.
Beliefs under our baseline non-parametric proecudure (first panel) and assuming a normal dis-
tribution (second panel). The third panel shows the exercise where we simulate the economy by
drawing time paths from the pre-crisis distribution.


C.11                        Alternative kernels
We estimated our belief process using alternative kernel densities. In the benchmark solution
Ω (·) is the normal density. This appendix consider another two common kernel densities: (i)
the Epanechnikov, Ω (x) = 43 (1 − x2 ), and (ii) the box or uniform density, Ω (x) = 12 .53 Figure
16 shows that these approaches yielded similar changes in tail probabilities and therefore,
similar predictions for economic outcomes. A Bayesian approach is conceptually similar –
posterior beliefs exhibit the martingale property, the key source of persistence. However, the
departure from normality needed to capture tail risk, requires particle filtering techniques,
making it difficult to integrate it into any but the simplest economic environments. For a
detailed discussion of non-parametric estimation, see Hansen (2015).

                            Beliefs 2007                                                Beliefs 2009                                    GDP
0.08                                                        0.08                                                    0.2
                         Normal
                         Box
                         Epanechnikov                                                                               0.1
0.06                                                        0.06
                                                                                                                      0
0.04                                                        0.04
                                                                                                                    -0.1

0.02                                                        0.02
                                                                                                                    -0.2

               0                                                          0                                         -0.3
                   0.85         0.9     0.95    1    1.05                        0.85    0.9    0.95    1    1.05          2010       2020          2030        2040

Figure 16: Alternative Kernel densities
The solution of the model is very similar under normal, box or epanechnikov kernel densities.
           53
     We find similar results under further additional distributions: (i) the Champernowne transformation (which
is designed to better capture tail risk), (ii) semi-parametric estimators, e.g. with Pareto tails and (iii) the g-
and-h family of distributions which allows for a flexible specification of tail risk using various transformations
of the normal distribution.


                                                                                                16
C.12      Tail Shocks vs Beliefs
The time path of aggregate variables in our baseline model – e.g. in Figure 6 – reflect the
combined effects of the tail realizations of the capital quality shock in 2008-’09 (which directly
reduce productive capacity) as well as the belief changes they induce. Here, we perform an
exercise intended to isolate the role of the latter and show that they account for a significant
fraction of the persistence. In Figure 17, we plot the time path of GDP under the assumption
that beliefs (and therefore, policy functions) jump in 2009 to ĝ2014 from ĝ2007 but the realizations
in 2008 and 2009 are not tail events (instead, we simulate shocks for those two years by drawing
from ĝ2014 and average over time paths). Now, output does not drop immediately but the
economy steadily reduces its capital (by investing less) and converges to the new steady state.
Importantly, even without the large negative shocks, we obtain a sizable and persistent drop in
economic activity, underscoring the key role played by belief changes in driving our results.

                          0.2
                                             Benchmark
                          0.1                No tail realization


                            0

                         -0.1

                         -0.2

                         -0.3
                                2010        2020          2030        2040
Figure 17: Decomposition: Beliefs vs Shocks
Response of GDP under the counterfactual in which beliefs change in 2009 but there is no actual
realization of tail events φt that hit the capital stock.




                                                 17
C.13       Asymmetry: Right vs left tail events
Figure 18 compares (the absolute value of) responses of the economy to left and right tail
events starting from the stochastic steady state associated with ĝ2007 . The former uses the
actual realizations during 2008 and 2009 (φ2008 = 0.93 and φ2009 = 0.84) while the latter
considers positive shocks of a similar magnitude (φ2008 = 1.07 and φ2009 = 1.16). The graph
shows that long-run changes are smaller when the economy is hit by a positive tail event than
under negative ones. This asymmetry is the result of non-linearities in the model stemming
from curvature in utility and the presence of debt.

                                               Capital quality shock
                                         0.2


                                        0.15
                                 GDP)




                                         0.1
                                 abs(




                                        0.05
                                                                 Left tail
                                                                 Right tail
                                          0
                                               2010   2020     2030           2040

Figure 18: Response of GDP to left and right tail shocks.
Solid (dashed) line shows the absolute change in GDP after a left (right) tail event.




                                                        18
D       Other evidence
D.1      Internet search behavior
Data on internet search behavior lends support to the idea that assessments of tail risk are
persistently higher after the financial crisis. Figure 19 shows that the frequency of searches
for the terms “financial crisis,” “economic crisis,” and “systemic risk” spiked during the crisis
and then came back down. But this search frequency did not return to its pre-crisis level.
In each case, there was some sustained interest in crises at a higher level than pre-2007. We
find similar results for searches on the terms “economic collapse,” “financial collapse,” and “tail
risk” yielded similar results.

                100
                            Economic Crisis
                 80         Financial Crisis
                            Systemic Risk
                 60



                 40



                 20



                  2004        2006             2008    2010        2012        2014         2016



Figure 19: Tail risk-related Google searches rose permanently after 2008.
Search frequency for the terms ’financial crisis,’ ’economic crisis,’ and ’systemic risk’ world-wide, from December
2003 - September 2016. Each series is normalized so that the highest intensity month is set to 100. Source:
Google trends.




D.2      Stock market
One question that often arises is whether other unusual events, such as the large stock market
drop in 2008, might trigger a persistent economic response. Here, we illustrate what belief
revisions would look like for agents learning about the distribution of stock returns. Of course,
we acknowledge that this is not the driving force in our model. It is only intended to further
illustrate possible future applications of our persistence mechanism.
    Figure 20 shows the belief revision after observing 2008-09 equity returns, and the distri-
bution of future beliefs under two different assumptions about the true distribution of shocks.
Annual returns 1950-2009 come from Robert Shiller’s website.
    The figure shows that the negative equity returns during 2008-09, while large, were not
all that unusual. The stock market has plunged many times. Seeing one more drop was not

                                                        19
  0.6                                 3                                                  3
                                                  2007
  0.4                                     0.4     2009
  0.2                                 2 0.2                                              2
                                           0
   0                                       -0.5   -0.4   -0.3   -0.2


                                      1                                                  1
 -0.2

 -0.4
                                      0                                                  0
        1960      1980    2000        -0.5                             0         0.5     -0.5            0           0.5

    (a) Stock Market Returns                      (b) Estimated beliefs                   (c) Future beliefs under ĝ2009



           3                                                                    3
                                                                                                Under 2007 beliefs
                                                                                                Under 2009 beliefs
           2                                                                    2


           1                                                                    1


           0                                                                    0
           -0.5          0             0.5                                      -0.5            0             0.5
           (d) Future beliefs under ĝ2007                                  (e) Future beliefs under ĝ2007 and ĝ2009

Figure 20: Estimated beliefs about stock market returns.
The first panel shows the realized returns on the stock market. The second panel shows the estimated kernel
density for 2007 and 2009. The third panel shows the mean belief (along with a 2 standard deviation band) in
2039 (computed by simulating data for the period 2010-2039 using the estimated distribution in 2009).


unusual enough to change beliefs by much. We conclude that while stock returns can also
generate some persistence through belief updating, this force is not a likely candidate for the
recent stagnation, relative to the capital quality shock, because the downturn in stock prices
was less unusual.


D.3      Returns during the Great Recession
Not all authors agree that the Great Recession was an unusual event. For example, Gomme
et al. (2011) present a series for returns on capital that show adverse realizations for 2008-
09 that are not as extreme as our measures. The difference stems from their measurement
strategy. To compute capital gains, they use data from the NIPA, which values non-residential
capital (structures, equipment and software) at replacement cost. During 2008-09, we saw
massive declines in the market value (particularly, for commercial real estate), even though the


                                                                       20
replacement cost of structures fell only modestly. While appropriate for their purposes, these
NIPA measures miss one of the unusual aspects of the Great Recession – large declines in the
market value of business capital, notably commercial real estate.


D.4     De-trending
Our learning mechanism generates persistent movements in aggregate variables after extreme
events. Therefore, in order to make a meaningful comparison with the data, the choice of
the right de-trending procedure for the data is very important. We use a log-linear trend,
which removes only the lowest-frequency (permanent) part of the series. A common approach
in business cycle analysis is to non-linear filters (like the Hodrick-Prescott filter), which take
out more of the persistent movements in the series. By design, what is left will not have
much persistence left. In figure 21, we illustrate this using aggregate non-residential investment
(other aggregate series show very similar patterns). As the graph reveals, the trend component
of the HP filter (smoothing parameter 100) picks up some of the deviation from the linear
trend. Given that our focus is on low-frequency or persistent components, a linear detrending
procedure seems most appropriate.

                         −9
                                 Investment (log)
                                 Linear trend
                                 HP trend
                        −9.5



                        −10



                       −10.5



                        −11



                       −11.5
                          1950   1960     1970      1980    1990   2000   2010   2020

            Figure 21: Non-residential Investment, with log-linear and HP trends.



D.5     TFP
While a productivity slowdown may have contributed to low output, it does not explain the
timing or the rise in tail risk indicators. Figure 22 shows the time series of raw total factor
productivity, constructed as dT F Pt = dYt − αt dKt − (1 − αt )(dHourst + dLQt ) from Fernald


                                                       21
(2014). When we examine instead utilization-adjusted TFP, we find a slight decline during the
recession, but a decline that is will within two-standard deviation bands of the distribution of
TFP changes. Productivity did not have a precipitous decline that could be considered a tail
event.
                                1

                    log(TFP)   0.8

                               0.6

                               0.4

                               0.2

                                0
                                             1957       1971        1984          1998          2012




                                                                                         2007
                                     20                                                  2009



                                     18



                                     16



                                     14



                                     12



                                     10



                                     8



                                     6



                                     4



                                     2




                                     -0.15     -0.1   -0.05     0          0.05    0.1




                                                Figure 22: Productivity.




                                                               22
