                                 NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                     MEASURING AND CHANGING CONTROL:
                WOMEN’S EMPOWERMENT AND TARGETED TRANSFERS

                                            Ingvild Almås
                                             Alex Armand
                                           Orazio Attanasio
                                            Pedro Carneiro

                                         Working Paper 21717
                                 http://www.nber.org/papers/w21717


                      NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                               1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                 Cambridge, MA 02138
                                    November 2015




We would like to thank Pierre-André Chiappori, Nava Ashraf, Pascaline Dupas, Eliana La Ferrara,
Imran Rasul, Michèle Tertilt, Bertil Tungodden, Iliana Reggio and seminar participants at IIES, Stockholm
University, the 2015 EDePo IFS conference in London, the Families in Macroeconomics conference,
Edesheim, 2015, 8th COSME Gender Economics Workshop, University of Alicante, 2015 EEA Annual
Meeting, participants at the Normac conference, 2015, NOVAfrica and University of Essex for helpful
comments. We gratefully acknowledge the financial support from 3ie International Initiative for Impact
Evaluation (grant reference OW4-1022), The Choice Lab, NHH, the Economic and Social Research
Council (ESRC Professorial Fellowship ES/K010700/1) and the European Research Council (Advanced
Grants 249612). When carrying out part of this research, Almås was associated with the center of Equality,
Social Organization, and Performance (ESOP) at the Department of Economics at the University of
Oslo. ESOP is supported by the Research Council of Norway. The views expressed herein are those
of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.

© 2015 by Ingvild Almås, Alex Armand, Orazio Attanasio, and Pedro Carneiro. All rights reserved.
Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided
that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
Measuring and Changing Control: Women’s Empowerment and Targeted Transfers
Ingvild Almås, Alex Armand, Orazio Attanasio, and Pedro Carneiro
NBER Working Paper No. 21717
November 2015
JEL No. D13,J16,O12

                                               ABSTRACT

This paper studies how targeted cash transfers to women affect their empowerment. We use a novel
identification strategy to measure women's willingness to pay to receive cash transfers instead of their
partner receiving it. We apply this among women living in poor households in urban Macedonia. We
match experimental data with a unique policy intervention (CCT) in Macedonia offering poor households
cash transfers conditional on having their children attending secondary school. The program randomized
whether the transfer was offered to household heads or mothers at municipality level, providing us
with an exogenous source of variation in (offered) transfers. We show that women who were offered
the transfer reveal a lower willingness to pay, and we show that this is in line with theoretical predictions.


Ingvild Almås                                         Orazio Attanasio
Institute for International Economic Studies          Department of Economics
Stockholm University                                  University College London
SE-106 91 Stockholm                                   Gower Street
Sweden                                                London WC1E 6BT
ingvild.almas@iies.su.se                              UNITED KINGDOM
                                                      and NBER
Alex Armand                                           o.attanasio@ucl.ac.uk
University of Navarra
Pamplona                                              Pedro Carneiro
Spain                                                 Department of Economics
aarmand@unav.es                                       University College
                                                      Gower Street
                                                      London WC1E 6BT
                                                      United Kingdom
                                                      p.carneiro@ucl.ac.uk
1    Introduction
Most conditional cash transfer programs around the world select a woman in the
household to be the recipient of the transfer (Fiszbein et al., 2009). The argument
frequently used in support of targeting transfers to women is not only that such
transfers promote gender equality and empower women, but also that children in
turn benefit from such an equalization and empowerment.
    Policy interventions shifting the relative income of women versus men within
households have been shown to have an effect on different family decisions (Lund-
berg et al. (1997) and Ward-Batts (2008) use the 1979 UK Reform of Child benefits,
Attanasio and Lechene (2002, 2014) use Mexican Progresa). However, there is lim-
ited evidence on the exact mechanism linking targeted money transfers to women
and their empowerment within the household. Some studies suggest that one pos-
sible channel through which targeting payments to women affects family decisions
is by changing the control of resources within the household and the decision power
of each household member.
    Understanding this mechanism is central, given strong evidence that the amount
of resources that each household member contributes to the family affects its collec-
tive decisions (for a literature review, see Duflo, 2012). The collective models sug-
gest that targeting payments to a precise household member might result in different
outcomes if individuals have different preferences and the targeted payment affects
the relative decision power within the household (Browning and Chiappori, 1998;
for empirical applications, Thomas, 1990; Hoddinott and Haddad, 1995; Lundberg
et al., 1997; Doss, 2006; Ward-Batts, 2008). However, there is no clear consensus
on the precise mechanism through which households make decisions and allocate
consumption when receiving a cash transfer.
    This paper uses a novel identification strategy to measure women’s willingness
to pay to receive transfers themselves versus transfers to the spouse, implemented
through an economic experiment in urban areas of Macedonia. The women selected
to participate in the experiment are subject to a sequence of choices where they can
either choose an amount X for themselves or an amount Y for their spouse (where
X is usually smaller than Y). The experiment identifies the values that makes the
participants indifferent between receiving X or letting their spouse receive Y, which
gives us the respondent’s willingness to pay for receiving a transfer instead of having
their partner receive it.
    This willingness to pay measure can be matched with data used to study a
nationwide cash transfer program. In particular, all participants in the economic
experiment are women in households eligible for the Macedonian “Conditional Cash
Transfer (CCT) for Secondary School Education”, which provides cash transfers to

                                          2
poor households conditional on having their children enrolled in secondary school.
In the three years prior to the experiment we ran, the operation of the program was
not uniform across municipalities. In one group of randomly selected municipalities,
the CCT was paid to the mother figure in the household, while in the remaining
municipalities, the transfer was paid to household heads (generally a man). The
random assignment of the program modality across municipalities provides an ex-
ogenous source of variation in the amount of resources potentially controlled by
each household member, for about three years before the laboratory experiment
takes place. All women participating in the experiment also participated in at least
one round of a household survey, containing detailed information on demographics,
consumption, income and living conditions.
    Taken together, the laboratory, field, and survey data, constitute a unique
dataset which allows the identification of the empowerment effect, i.e. the effect
of gender specific transfers on women’s bargaining position in the household. Our
findings indicate that targeted transfers have a significant effect on female empow-
erment.
    The rest of the paper is organized as follows. Section 2 describes the economic
experiment. Section 3 describes the basic theoretical framework. Section 4 describes
the data in more detail and gives descriptive statistics and Section 5 discusses the
empirical analysis. Section 6 concludes.


2    Measuring control: a lab experiment in the field
In the past few decades, many surveys have included batteries of questions aimed at
measuring the extent to which women are empowered within the family. A typical
set of questions, used in many different contexts, asks respondents to identify who
is in charge of certain decisions, determining for example expenditures on different
household consumption items, schooling, or various investments. Possible answers
to these questions are either that the wife is in charge, the husband is in charge,
or spouses decide jointly. In many datasets, answers to these questions are often
bunched on the ‘both’ categories, and very limited variation is obtained.
    In the context of conditional cash transfers, for instance, the PROGRESA eval-
uation survey included several of these questions. This CCT did not seem to have
shifted the answers to these questions (see for instance Adato et al., 2000). There-
fore, if one were to interpret those results literally, one would conclude that the
CCT, despite being targeted to women, did not empower them. Yet, many stud-
ies (such as Attanasio and Lechene, 2014) find that PROGRESA and other similar
programmes did shift the position of women in the family in a substantive fashion.



                                         3
    One possible explanation of the failure of observing programmes such as PRO-
GRESA shifting measured empowerment appeals to measurement issues. Adato
et al. (2000), for instance, write: “Women’s status is difficult to quantify in the
context of large household surveys like the ENCASEH and ENCELs. These sur-
veys have several questions which attempt to tease out various aspects of women’s
status and bargaining power, such as attitudes towards women’s roles, questions on
who within the household takes major responsibility for certain household decisions,
questions on the disposition of women’s income, and questions on women’s mobility
and freedom of movement. Nevertheless, household surveys are blunt instruments
with which to examine intrahousehold relations, because the context of such decisions
is often unstated, and without adequate understanding of the socio-cultural context,
survey results can easily be misinterpreted.”
    One contribution of this paper is to propose an alternative quantitative measure
of women’s empowerment within the household. This measure is based on observing
women’s behaviour and choices in a lab setting. In particular, in the experiment
that we describe in detail below, we offer to transfer a particular amount of cash
to a woman’s husband, and identify the amount she is willing to pay so that the
transfer is given to her instead.
    The reason why this is a measure of female empowerment is simple. In a unitary
setting women should not be willing to pay anything to keep the transfer themselves,
and should try to maximize the transfer. On the other hand, the weaker the position
of the woman in the household (the lower her control of resources), the more she
should be willing to pay to obtain control of that transfer. In the next section, we
make this intuition precise within the framework of the collective model of Chiap-
pori (1992). The remaining of this section describes in detail the experiment we
performed.
    The experiment consists of a series of choices between two alternatives, which
the respondent is asked to make in sequential rounds. In the first round of questions,
the respondent is asked to choose between an amount, A, paid to them, or another
amount B paid to their spouse. Since B is kept constant across rounds we refer
to it as the ‘stake’ of the experiment. If the respondent in the first round chooses
A (money for herself), the amount A in the following round is reduced by 75% of
the original amount. If the respondent again chooses money for herself, the already
reduced amount A is again reduced by 75% in the second round. If the woman
continues to choose money for herself, we keep reducing the amount by 75%, till the
resulting amount is smaller than 20 MKD.1
  1
    The amounts are expressed in Macedonian Denars (MKD). Throughout the text,we consider
the exchange rate 0.0181079 USD/MKD.



                                           4
    If, however, in the first round the participant chooses B (having the spouse
receive the money) over A, the amount A is increased by 50 MKD in the next
round. If the participant again chooses B, the amount A is once again increased by
50 MKD. If the participant again chooses to have their partner receive the transfer,
the experiment stops.2
    Consider now the case where the respondent changes her choice when the value
of A changes. If, in one round, the participant switches from A (keeping the money)
to B (giving it to the spouse) or vice versa, the amount A offered in the next round
is set to be the average between two amounts: 1) the amount offered in the current
round, and 2) the amount offered in the last round where the respondent made a
decision different from the current one. Therefore, the amount offered to respondents
increases or decreases depending on whether they switch from either receiving the
transfer, or having the spouse receive it, and vice-versa. This procedure continues
as long as the difference between two consecutive amounts A is larger than 20 MKD.
The decision to introduce a stopping rule of 20 MKD rather than smaller amounts
is to avoid asking consecutive questions on amounts that are very similar in terms of
their monetary value, and for which would not be distinguishable by the respondent
in any meaningful way.
    We piloted this algorithm and its details extensively. The experiment was run
on a computer, and with a program making all the computations described above as
the experiment progressed. As a consequence, respondents faced alternatives in the
new round immediately after a decision was made and confirmed. Screenshots taken
from the software are presented in Appendix A.1. The algorithm was designed in
order to identify the participant’s indifference point between the two alternatives of
receiving the money or having the spouse receive it. Some examples of the mechanics
of the algorithm are presented in Figure 1.
    Respondents were told that one round of choices and their associated decision
would be randomly selected to determine the actual payment at the end of the game.
After the incentivized experiment, respondents were also asked to repeat the game
with a different set of choices, which were not incentivized but hypothetical, and
where payments were 10 times as large as the original one.
    The starting value for B (the stake) was randomized among nine amounts,3
   2
     The reason to stop the amount A from increasing further was to avoid situations in which the
amount would become too high. At the same time, we do allow the amount A to become larger
than the amount B in order to collect information for women that present a negative willingness
to pay, e.g. collect information for those that would be willing to be paid in order to not having
their spouse receive the money.
   3
     Appendix D.2 presents a test for whether the willingness to pay is a function of the stakes.
Results show that for both incentivized and non incentivized cases, the willingness to pay is uncor-
related to the stakes, both when testing the coefficients individually and jointly.



                                                 5
  Figure 1: Algorithm for the determination of offered amounts: some examples
           Always4to4spouse                Switcher21                      Switcher22              Always2to2self

       Participant      Spouse    Participant       Spouse        Participant       Spouse    Participant      Spouse

          550            600         550                600          550                600      550            600

          600            600         138                600          138                600      138            600

          650            600         344                600           35                600       35            600

                 STOP                447                600           86                600             STOP

                                     396                600           61                600

                                     421                600                  STOP

                                             STOP


           Note. The graph presents four possible combinations of respondent’s answers. From the
           left, the first shows a case in which the respondent choose to always give the money to the
           spouse. The second and the third show cases in which the respondent switches after the
           first question. The fourth shows instead a case in which the respondent always keep the
           offered money.



ranging from 400 MKD (7.24 US $) to 800 MKD (14.49 US $). The starting value
for A was then defined to be (B - 50 MKD), allowing the experiment to start from
an initial offer for which it is costly for the woman to keep the amount for herself.
The different starting points and their value in US $ are presented in Table 1.

Protocol As we discuss in more detail below, participants in the experiment were
also respondents to the household survey that was collected for the evaluation of
the Conditional Cash Transfer program in Macedonia. Women were invited to
participate in the experiment using contact information previously collected (phone
numbers), or through visits to their homes. The invitation stated that they were
asked to participate in an interview about the needs of women in their social stratum,
and that they would be financially compensated for their time.
    Each interview was carried out in a room where only the respondent and a female
assistant were present. Participation in the experiment did not involve any monetary
costs for the respondents. A driver picked up participants at their dwelling or at an
agreed meeting point, and took them to the office in the town where the experiment
was carried out.4 In addition, participants were given 300 MKD as a show-up fee.
We report further details on the experiment and its protocol in Appendix A.
    In terms of size of the incentive, stakes ranged from 42 to 84 percent of total
daily household expenditure, which is roughly 950 MKD in the sample. Relative to
   4
    The decision to cover transportation cost was made to avoid that heterogeneity in this cost
would influence the outcome of the experiment. In addition, we selected only participants living 10
km away or less from the closest urban settlement, such that distance would not be an important
factor in participants’ answers.



                                                              6
wages,5 the minimum offered stake corresponds to roughly 52 percent of the daily net
wage for a woman who has completed secondary school, and 68 percent for a woman
with completed primary school only. The maximum offered stake corresponds to 103
percent and 136 percent respectively.
    Following the incentivised version of the experiment, participants were asked
to answer a non-incentivized version of the experiment, where the amounts were
larger compared to the incentivized version. In this case, we asked the participants
to choose across alternatives, thinking of the situation as if it corresponded to a
real life scenario. Similarly to the incentivized version, initial values for B were
randomized between nine amounts, ranging from 4000 MKD (72.43 US $) to 8000
MKD (144.86 US $). The starting value for A was then defined by B - 500 MKD.

                                   Table 1: Starting points
                     Incentivized                           Non-incentivized
            Respondent           Partner              Respondent         Partner
             350 (6.34)        400 (7.24)             3500 (63.38)     4000 (72.43)
             400 (7.24)        450 (8.15)             4000 (72.43)     4500 (81.49)
             450 (8.15)        500 (9.05)             4500 (81.49)     5000 (90.54)
             500 (9.05)        550 (9.96)             5000 (90.54)     5500 (99.59)
             550 (9.96)        600 (10.86)            5500 (99.59)    6000 (108.65)
            600 (10.86)        650 (11.77)           6000 (108.65)    6500 (117.70)
            650 (11.77)        700 (12.68)           6500 (117.70)    7000 (126.76)
            700 (12.68)        750 (13.58)           7000 (126.76)    7500 (135.81)
            750 (13.58)        800 (14.49)           7500 (135.81)    8000 (144.86)

Note. Main units are expressed in Macedonian Denars (MKD), while in parenthesis we report the corre-
spondence with United States Dollars (USD). Exchange rate used for conversion is 0.0181079 USD/MKD.




3       Interpreting the Measures: A Theoretical Framework
The measurement tool that we described in the previous section, should identify
how much a woman is willing to give up in order to gain control of an amount
otherwise offered to her husband. While it is intuitive that such a measure should
be related to the bargaining power of a woman within the household, it is useful
    5
    Daily net wages for different educational levels are estimated using data provided by the Mace-
donian State Statistical Office. Gross wages by educational level were available for October 2010
(source: 2010 Structure of Earnings of Employees) and net/gross wages were available for October
2010 and July 2014 (sources: Average monthly net wage paid per employee, Average monthly gross
wage paid per employee). We made use of the net/gross wage ratio at October 2010 to build net
wages by educational level. We then computed wages by educational level in 2014, by using the
nominal growth rate of wages from October 2010 to July 2014. At the time of the interview, the
net daily wage for a woman with completed primary school is estimated at 590 MKD, while for a
woman with completed secondary school is estimated at 770 MKD.



                                                 7
to consider an explicit model of intrahousehold allocation of resources to interpret
our measure precisely. In this section, we consider the collective model as such a
framework, show how our measure could be interpreted within the context of such
a model, and how it relates to some of the parameters of that model.

3.1   The collective model
We assume that household decisions are carried out by two decision makers, the
woman (A) and her spouse (B), who decide how to allocate total household ex-
penditure to different goods, either publicly or privately consumed. Let Q be the
quantity consumed of a public good, say spending on children, and let qA and qB be
quantities consumed of private goods for the woman and her spouse. The household
budget constraint is given by:

                         P Q + p A qA + p B qB = x = x A + x B                      (1)

where P , pA , and pB are the prices for public and private consumption goods. x is
total household expenditure and, in this context where we do not consider savings,
equals income, which in turn is given by the sum of person A and person B’s incomes,
xA and xB , respectively. Individual preferences are defined over private goods and
public goods, and we assume that there is no direct caring for the spouse: uA (Q, qA )
is the utility function for person A, and uB (Q, qB ) is the utility function for person
B.
    A unitary model assumes that choices are made according to a “unitary” house-
hold utility function Ũ (Q, qA , qB ). A natural assumption is to impose that the
household utility function respects individual preferences such that it can be rep-
resented by a weighted sum of individual preferences (Samuelson, 1956; Browning
et al., 2014):

                  Ũ (Q, qA , qB ) = µuA (Q, qA ) + (1 − µ)uB (Q, qB ).             (2)
     In the unitary model, the weight µ is fixed and does not vary with prices or
income. In this case, we can derive market demands in the usual way. The demand
for each individual commodity depend on prices and total household income only,
and is independent of the distribution of income within the household. Such demand
functions satisfy the Slutsky conditions.
     The collective model, on the other hand, assumes that resources are allocated
efficiently, but it allows the weights µ to depend on prices, income, and distribution
factors. The distribution factors are, in line with the literature, defined as variables
that have an impact on the decision process, but affect neither preferences nor the
budget constraint. Distribution factors play a fundamental role in distinguishing the

                                           8
collective model from the unitary model. Such variables, within the unitary model,
should influence the allocation of household resources and, as a consequence, should
not influence any household demands. An often used example of a distribution
factor is the share of income controlled or generated by one of the spouses.
    In the collective setting, the household utility function can therefore be expressed
as:

 Ũ (Q, qA , qB ) = µ(P, pA , pB , x, z)uA (Q, qA ) + (1 − µ(P, pA , pB , x, z))uB (Q, qB ) (3)

where z is a vector of distribution factors.
    The collective model has been used to understand the effects of targeting cash
transfers to women (see, for example, Attanasio and Lechene, 2002, 2014 and Schady
and Araujo, 2006). Targeted cash transfers affect not only total income, but also
how it is distributed among household members. Within the framework of the
unitary model, these transfers would affect household decisions only through the
effect that they have on total income and the budget constraint. In a collective
model, instead, a targeted cash transfer could also affect each household member’s
bargaining power, both through x and through the woman’s share of income. If the
latter is a distribution factor and therefore affects the weights µ, then transfers will
have an effect on commodity demands over and above any effects operating through
total household income. As we discuss below, the context we study is that of a
cash transfer that was targeted to women in some municipalities, while in others it
was targeted to the person who is registered in the welfare center as the head of
household, who is their husbands in the large majority of cases.
    The experiment we have executed and described above induces respondents to
consider explicitly the tradeoff between the total amount of resources available to
the household and those controlled by them. In what follows we make this link
explicit. Before doing that, however, we note that while the collective model assumes
efficiency, it does so conditional on given weights µ(). Therefore, while women
choosing an s > 0 are effectively sacrificing some resources, they are doing so,
within the theoretical model we are considering, to change the weights µ. These
choices are therefore not inconsistent with the collective model. A choice of s > 0
is, however, inconsistent with the unitary model.

3.2   Identification of empowerment effects
Define the woman’s share of total household income as f = xAx+x A
                                                                  B
                                                                    . We construct
f for each household using survey data. We assume that f is a distribution factor
and that, as such, it affects µ. We also assume that the weight µ is affected by,
in addition to f , total resources x and a vector of distribution factors z, other

                                              9
than f . The vector z may contain both observable and unobservable variables.
Within the collective model, the level of utility ultimately obtained by member k in
the household is given by the indirect utility function (from here and onwards we
simplify by setting all prices to 1):

                    v k (x, µ(x, f, z)) = uk (qk∗ , Q∗ ),               k = A, B

where (qk∗ , Q∗ ) are the quantities maximizing equation (3) subject to the household
budget constraint. Relative to the indirect utility function that one would derive
from a unitary model, we note that this expression depends on µ and, through it,
on the distribution factors f and z.
     Our experiment offers a transfer either to the woman or to her spouse, and
identifies the woman’s willingness to pay to be the recipient of the transfer. Let s
denote her willingness to pay as a share of the total amount offered E. We define
f 0 to be the value of f that we would observe if the woman receives a transfer of
(1 − s)E:
                                       xA + (1 − s)E
                               f0 =                     ,                         (4)
                                     xA + xB + (1 − s)E
where xA and xB are other incomes for the wife and the spouse (which exist outside
of the experiment). Similarly, define f 00 to be the woman’s share of resources when
the husband receives a transfer E:
                                                   xA
                                    f 00 =                 .                            (5)
                                               xA + xB + E
    Since the transfer also affects the household’s total income, we define x0 the
resources available when the wife receives (1 − s)E, and x00 the resources available
when the husband receives E:

                                x0 = xA + xB + (1 − s)E,                                (6)

                                     x00 = xA + xB + E.                                 (7)

    The experiment identifies s as the amount the respondent is willing to pay to
be the transfer recipient. At this level of s the respondent is indifferent between
receiving (1 − s)E, or having her husband receiving E:

                     v A x0 , µ x0 , f 0 , z        = v A x00 , µ x00 , f 00 , z
                                                                                 
                                                                                        (8)

    The left hand side corresponds to the indirect utility of the wife when she receives
an amount (1 − s)E and her share of total income increases to f 0 . The right hand
side is the indirect utility of the wife when her partner receives an amount E and
her share decreases to f 00 .

                                                    10
    The main purpose of the experiment described above was to identify a measure
of the bargaining power of women within a couple. It is therefore important to
examine how the elicited s would be affected by changes in the existing bargaining
power of women, within the framework of the collective model. Our survey data
contains measures of f and z, and is collected in an environmment where one of
the components of x (the CCT) is randomly assigned to either one of the spouses.
Given the direct relationship between f and s, and given the assumption that µ
depends on the share of income controlled by women, we would like to know how s
varies with f , which is the proportion of income generated by the wife just prior to
the experiment.
    In order to see how s is determined, it is useful to start from a particular level
of utility v = v A (x, µ (x, f, z)), and consider small deviations in the income of each
spouse, by E in the case the transfer in the experiment is given to the husband, or
by (1 − s) E when the transfer is given to the wife.
    Assuming that E is small, we start by differentiating the indirect utility function
for the wife, v A , with respect to the amount of resources she receives, xA , and we
denote this by ∆A   A:

                              ∂v A                                          ∂v A
                                                                   
                                         ∂µ ∂f        ∂µ
                    ∆A
                     A      =                   ∆xA +    ∆xA            +        ∆xA        (9)
                              ∂µ         ∂f ∂xA       ∂x                    ∂x
This derivative is relevant for the left-hand-side of equation (8), which we expect
to be approximately equal to v + ∆A  A at the level of s determining indifference. We
                    A
also differentiate v with respect to xB , resources controlled by the husband, giving
∆AB :

                              ∂v A                                          ∂v A
                                                                   
                                         ∂µ ∂f        ∂µ
                   ∆A
                    B       =                   ∆xB +    ∆xB            +        ∆xB .     (10)
                              ∂µ         ∂f ∂xB       ∂x                    ∂x
     Equation (8) implies that, when ∆xA = (1 − s)E and ∆xB = E, we have
                                    ∂v A ∂v A ∂µ   ∂v A ∂v A ∂µ ∂v
∆A
 A   = ∆AB . In addition, if we use ∂f = ∂µ ∂f and ∂x = ∂µ ∂x + ∂x we get:

                 ∂v A                                        ∂v A
                                                    
                             ∂f        ∂f
                                ∆xA −     ∆xB            +        (∆xA − ∆xB ) = 0.        (11)
                 ∂f         ∂xA       ∂xB                    ∂x
                  ∂f                                −xA
Finally, since   ∂xA    =       xB
                                      , ∂f
                            (xB +xA )2 ∂xB
                                             =   (xB +xA )2
                                                            ,   and ∆xA = (1 − s)E, ∆xB = E, we
can write:
                             ∂v A                      ∂v A
                                  (1 − s(1 − f )) = sx                            (12)
                             ∂f                        ∂x
where f is the value of the share of resources controlled by the wife just before the
experiment.
   By totally differentiating equation (12), we can establish how the elicited s varies
with f . From the expression, however, it is clear how this depends on the shape of

                                                    11
the indirect utility function. From looking at equation (8), it is also intuitive that
the sign of this relationship should be ambiguous. An increase in f should lead to
an increase in both sides of equation (8). The question is which side is likely to
increase by more. If the increase in v A (x0 , µ (x0 , f 0 , z)) is larger than the increase in
v A (x00 , µ (x00 , f 00 , z)), then s needs to increase to restore equality in this expression.
The opposite happens when the increase in v A (x0 , µ (x0 , f 0 , z)) is smaller than the
increase in v A (x00 , µ (x00 , f 00 , z)).
                                                                                    ∂s
     Therefore, only under specific functional form assumptions does ∂f                have an
unambiguous sign. In particular, consider the preference specification investigated
by Chiappori and Ekeland (2009), namely, the Linear Expenditure System (LES).
With LES preferences, it can be shown that if the effect of woman’s share of income
on µ is linear or concave, the willingness to pay decreases in this share.6

Proposition 1. Under the assumption of LES preferences and Pareto weights that
are linear or concave functions of f , the effect of f on s is negative.
For proof see Appendix E.

    Similarly, it is also not possible to predict the sign of the response of s to an
increase or decrease in any other distribution factor, z (or in total expenditure, x).
Just like in the case of f , if µ increases unambiguously with z, then an increase in
z leads to increases in both sides of equation (8). Again, whether s rises or falls in
response depends on which side of this equation is more sensitive to increases in z.


4        Data
We are able to match the data from the experiment and subsequent survey with the
data from a more extensive household survey carried out for the evaluation of the
CCT during winter 2013. In this section, we describe the main features of our data.

4.1        Macedonian CCT for Secondary Education
The lab interview was conducted on a sample of women living in households eligible
for the Macedonian Conditional Cash Transfer for Secondary School Education. It
is a social protection program aimed at increasing secondary school enrolment and
completion rate among children in the poorest households of the population. It was
first implemented by the Macedonian Ministry of Labour and Social Policy in Fall
2010 and provided cash transfers to poor households conditional on having school-
age children attending secondary school at least 85 percent of the time. The program
was offered to the beneficiaries of the Social Financial Assistance (SFA) benefit,
    6
        For convex functional forms however, this may or may not be true.


                                                  12
which is the most significant income support program in the country, accounting for
around 0.5 percent of GDP and 50 percent of total spending on social assistance.
SFA is a means-tested monetary transfer granted to people who are fit for work,
but nevertheless are unable to support themselves. The amount determined for the
household depends on household size and time spent in SFA, varying from 1 825
MKD per month (around 40 USD) for a one-member household, to 4 500 MKD
(around 98 USD) for households with 5 or more members. The actual payment
to the household is the difference between the determined amount and household
income.
    During the first three years of the CCT program (school years 2010/11, 2011/12
and 2012/13), an experiment was designed to test whether gender-targeted transfers
generate differential outcomes in terms of household decision making and human
capital investment. The 84 municipalities in the country were randomly assigned
to one of two groups.7 In the first group, payments of the CCT were made to the
mother of the child, while in the second group they were made to the household
head, who is generally male.8
    Three waves of a household survey were collected to study the impacts of this
experiment on household outcomes: one baseline and two follow-up surveys. Each
survey contains detailed information on a variety of household characteristics and
outcomes (demographic characteristics, expenditures on durable and non durable
goods, housing) and individual level information on household members (education,
health, labour supply, time use). We add several sources of income to construct total
household income: labour income, income from financial assistance,9 and assistance
from family and friends. When available, we use income information for a given
household from up to two survey rounds. The wife’s income share is then defined
as the share of total parental income that can be attributed to the woman in the
household, such as, for example, the wife’s labour income, or income coming from
the wife’s relatives. Sometimes it is not clear how to attribute a particular source
of income to a household member. In the case of the SFA subsidy, for example, we
    7
      Random assignment was done after stratifying the sample of municipalities by population size.
The Republic of Macedonia is divided into 84 municipalities, which were first divided into 7 groups
depending on population size, and then randomized into two groups, one of which has 42 municipal-
ities and where the payment of the transfer is done to the mother of the child, and the other which
also has 42 municipalities and where the payment is transferred to the household head, regardless
of gender.
    8
      According to the rulebook for acquiring the right to financial assistance, the household head
is determined by the following ordered rules: if there is an employed person in the household, the
household head would be the employed person; if there is a pensioner, the household head would
be the pensioner; if no employed person or pensioner exist in the household, the household head
is the unemployed person representing the household; for all other households, the Social Welfare
Centre selects the household head as the person representing the household.
    9
      This includes assistance from the CCT program.


                                                13
attribute it to the household head, since the household head is the legal recipient
of this transfer. However, our results are robust to different definitions of income
shares. We discuss these issues in detail in Appendix D.3.
    In order to build the CCT transfer, we match administrative data from the CCT
program with each child enrolled in the program and being part of the survey and
we compute the amount of money transferred to each household in the first three
years of the program. We then assign the CCT income to the household member
eligible to the transfer.10

4.2    Lab interview
During the summer 2014, we invited a subset of the urban women who were sampled
for the evaluation of the CCT to participate in the lab experiment. These women
resided in urban areas, and had to live with a partner.11 An area is defined as
urban if it is within a 10 kilometres radius from an urban settlement, as defined
by Macedonian law. In particular, an urban settlement is defined as a “compactly
built up residential area with a population exceeding 3000, which has a developed
structure of various economic activities, which has over 51 percent of the workforce
working in the secondary and tertiary sector, which has an urban physiognomy of
zones for residence, recreation and green area (parks), town square, street infrastruc-
ture, communal services, and which acts as a functional center for the surrounding
populated places”.
     The experiment was carried out in 43 settlements,12 and an office location for
the experiment was arranged in each of these settlements. By doing it in an office
one avoids having to carry out the experiment in the household dwelling, where
answers could have been affected by the family environment, and where it could be
difficult to isolate the woman from the presence of the husband.
     Out of 906 selected women, 768 participated in the lab interview, giving a fairly
high response rate of 84.8 percent. In Appendix C we show that we cannot distin-
guish the response rates in municipalities where the CCT transfer is paid to the wife
from that of municipalities where it is paid to the head of household.13
     At the end of the lab interview, we conducted an additional short survey. The
  10
     The software used to implement the CCT requires entering the full household roster and delivers
automatically the payment based on the randomization rule. We therefore do not observe cases in
which the recipient of the payment in the administrative data is different from what was defined
by the randomization of the payment modalities.
  11
     As the aim is to study the control over resources between spouses, we excluded households with
only one parent.
  12
     10 out of the 43 are independent municipalities, which together form the capital city Skopje.
  13
     The main predictors of response rate in our sample are husband’s employment, ethnicity, and
for those who have the information available, baseline expenditure levels.



                                                14
survey included further questions about depression, domestic conflicts and violence,
prospects for future work opportunities, networks for financial assistance, division
of power in the household, and private goods consumption by the participant and
her spouse (cell phone bills, food for children, cigarette and alcohol consumption for
both adults).14 Our sample includes a set of households eligible for the first year of
the CCT (the 2010/2011 academic year),15 and another set of households eligible
for the third year of the program (the 2012/2013 academic year).
    Table 2 presents the summary characteristics for participants in the experiment
in terms of age and education, ethnicity, household size, and other household at-
tributes. It also tests whether there are differences in these characteristics for house-
holds residing in municipalities with different payment modalities for the CCT. On
average respondents are 44 years of age and have 7.5 years of education. Their
partners are slightly older (47 years old) and have higher levels of education (8.5
years of education). Average household size is about 4.7, 2.5 of whom are children,
and the vast majority of couples are legally married (98 percent). Since all house-
holds in the experiment (and in the CCT) are recipients of SFA we expect very
few adult members to report to be working in the month prior to the interview.
Only 9 percent of women and 19 percent of men report any employment during that
period and around 14 percent of households is involved in farming and breeding. In
terms of living standards, 90 percent of households have access to public water and
electricity.
    Figure 2 presents the distribution of respondents by their willingness to pay to
get control of the transfer in the experiment. The willingness to pay is measured as
share of the stake in the experiment.16


5        Empirical analysis
Among participants, women residing in municipalities where the CCT payment was
made to the mother have potentially been empowered by a shift in their household
income share when compared to women living in municipalities where the CCT was
paid to the household head. In this section, we test whether the payment modality
of the CCT during the years previous to the laboratory experiment described above
affect the amount a woman is willing to pay to make sure that she, rather than her
partner, receives a particular amount of cash.
    14
     The full questionnaire can be found in Appendix A.2.
    15
     Condition of eligibility was to be a recipient of SFA at the time of the launch of the program
and to have a least one child in secondary school age.
  16
     To analyse the correlation between the willingness to pay and self-reported measures of decision
making and domestic violence we perform principle component and factor analysis using different
indicators. The analysis is presented in Appendix D.1.


                                                 15
            Table 2: Respondent characteristics and randomization balance
                                                         Payment to           Difference with
                                                       Household Head       Payment to Mother
                                                            (1)                     (2)

          Age (husband)                                      47.19                   -0.26
                                                             (0.49)                 (0.65)
          Age difference (h-w)                                3.28                   -0.31
                                                             (0.27)                 (0.37)
          Schooling (husband)                                 8.45                    0.19
                                                             (0.31)                 (0.36)
          Schooling difference (h-w)                          0.96                   -0.26
                                                             (0.18)                 (0.30)
          Albanian                                            0.25                    0.06
                                                             (0.07)                 (0.11)
          Macedonian                                          0.47                   -0.05
                                                             (0.07)                 (0.10)
          Roma                                                0.18                    0.02
                                                             (0.05)                 (0.07)
          Turk                                                0.10                   -0.02
                                                             (0.04)                 (0.04)
          Household members                                   4.70                   -0.04
                                                             (0.12)                 (0.16)
          Number of children                                  2.51                    0.08
                                                             (0.09)                 (0.15)
          Legally married                                     0.98                   -0.01
                                                             (0.01)                 (0.01)
          Worked (wife)                                       0.09                   0.00
                                                             (0.03)                 (0.03)
          Worked (husband)                                    0.18                    0.02
                                                             (0.04)                 (0.05)
          Male household head                                 0.84                   -0.01
                                                             (0.03)                 (0.05)
          Muslim                                              0.56                    0.03
                                                             (0.07)                 (0.10)
          Farmer / breeder                                    0.14                    0.01
                                                             (0.04)                 (0.05)
          Access to public water and electricity              0.90                    0.01
                                                             (0.02)                 (0.03)
          Living in Skopje                                    0.29                    0.00
                                                             (0.11)                 (0.16)
          Living in main settlement                           0.77                    0.02
                                                             (0.05)                 (0.07)
          Observations                                        768                     768

          Enrolled in CCT (2012/2013)                         0.64                   -0.05
                                                             (0.03)                 (0.04)

Note: Standard errors clustered at municipality level are presented in parenthesis (*** p<0.01, ** p<0.05,
* p<0.1). This table shows estimates of a linear regression of the variables indicated in the first column on
the treatment indicator motherj and a constant. Column (1) presents estimates for the constant. Columns
(2) presents instead estimates of the coefficient for the treatment indicator motherj . The inclusion of
seven dummies for the randomization strata (each dummy indicating a quantile for the municipality in the
distribution of the population) doesn’t affect the results.



                                                    16
                                     Figure 2: Willingness to pay
                       .25



                        .2



                       .15



                        .1



                       .05



                        0
                             < -.065 -.033   .05   .15   .25   .35   .45   .55   .65   .75   .85   .95   1



    Note. The graph presents the distribution of respondents by the share the respondent is willing
    to pay in order to receive the payment. The left bar is representing all responses smaller or equal
    to -0.065, which is the largest value of censored share and is defined as - 50 MKD divided by the
    maximum stake, 800 MKD.


    The design of the CCT intervention in its early years, which randomly assigned
the identity of the recipient of the transfer (mother vs head of household) across
municipalities, allows a simple comparison between residents of municipalities where
the transfer is offered to mothers, and residents of municipalities where the transfer
is instead offered to household heads. Let motherj be an indicator variable taking
value 1 if the cash transfer is offered to mothers in municipality j, and zero otherwise.
The outcome of interest is the respondent i’s (living in municipality j) willingness
to pay for keeping the cash in the experiment, denoted sij .
    We estimate the following relationship:

                         sij = β0 + β1 motherj + Xi0 β2 + Vj0 β3 + ij                                       (13)
where Xi is a vector of respondent, spouse, and household characteristics, Vj is
a vector of settlement and municipality characteristics, and ij is the error term.
We estimate this equation using least squares, but allowing for within municipality
correlation in the ij (so we cluster standard errors at the municipality level). The
variables in X include household head’s and partner’s education, age and gender,
ethnicity and religion of the household, and household size and composition. Munic-
ipality controls include regional dummies, an indicator for whether the respondent
resides in the main settlement of the municipality, and whether it is part of the
capital city (Skopje).
    In columns (1)-(3) of table 3 we present estimates of β1 using different combina-
tions of controls. All estimates are negative and statistically significant, indicating

                                                               17
that in municipalities where mothers are the recipient of the CCT (and therefore are
potentially more empowered), women are on average willing to pay a lower amount
to keep the cash from the laboratory experiment, than in municipalities where the
CCT recipient is the head of household (and therefore, the level of empowerment of
women is potentially smaller).
    A large proportion of women report extreme values for sij (either 0 or 1).
Columns (4)-(6) of table 3 examine what happens when we exclude these extremes
from our analysis. Although we are using a substantially smaller sample size, our
results are essentially unchanged.
    Not all women in the sample are actual recipients of the CCT, because there
imperfect take-up of the program. In order to go beyond intent-to-treat estimates of
table 3 and estimate the impact of receiving a transfer paid to the mother as opposed
to receiving a transfer paid to the head of household (as opposed to the impact of
residing in different types of municipalities), we need to address two potential sources
of endogeneity in the take-up to the program.
    The first concern is that program participation is voluntary. In the year of the
CCT program just preceding the survey, only 60 percent of all eligible households
enrolled in the program. Such low take-up of the program is directly related to
the decision of not enrolling the child in secondary school, which is a condition for
receiving the transfer.17 .
    The second concerns it that the there is a proportion of households where the
person registered as the household head in the social welfare centre is the mother,
and the choice of who to declare as household head could be driven by unobservables
that also affect the outcome. Notice however that this decision is taken potentially
prior to the introduction of CCT, and is related to the application to SFA.
    In order to address these concerns we estimate the impact of targeting cash
transfers to mothers on their willingness to pay to keep all the cash in the lab
experiment using instrumental variables (IV), where the instrument is the modality
of payment in each municipality, motherj . We focus on two different measures of
take-up of the CCT program: the wife’s income share, and the total income from
the CCT received by the mother in the first three years of the program. We denote
these endogenous regressors by dij below.
   17
      There is also a set of households who do not participate in the CCT because they lost the
right to SFA, and therefore they indirectly lost the right to apply to the CCT program. We will
not address this issue explicitly. However, when we match the eligible SFA population in 2010
(baseline) and the eligible SFA population in 2013 (second follow-up), we obtain fairly high match
rates across different types of municipalities, suggesting that the severity of this problem may be
uncorrelated with the identity of the CCT recipient.




                                                18
                                    Table 3: ITT estimates of the effect of targeting payments on willingness to pay

                                                                                         Dep.var.: Willingness to pay
                                                                     Include all observations             Exclude always keep and always give
                                                                 (1)            (2)            (3)            (4)          (5)          (6)
                                                                OLS            OLS            OLS            OLS          OLS          OLS
                 Payment to mother                             -0.057**       -0.053**       -0.053**       -0.059***    -0.056***    -0.056***
                                                                                                                                     (0.020)
                                                              (0.025)        (0.024)        (0.024)        (0.021)      (0.020)

                                                                 Yes              Yes              Yes               Yes              Yes               Yes
                 Demographic controls




19
                                                                 No               Yes              Yes               No               Yes               Yes
                 Ethnicity controls
                 Stake controls                                  No               No               Yes               No               No                Yes
                 R2                                             0.054            0.073            0.074             0.060            0.082             0.082
                 Observations                                    768              768              768               576              576               576

     Note: Standard errors in parenthesis are clustered at municipality level (*** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1). The table presents estimates using equation 13 for the effect
     of targeting payments to mothers on the willingness to pay. Dependent variable is willingness to pay defined as the share of transfer the respondent is willing to give
     away to receive the money instead of the partner receiving the money. Payment to mother is a dummy variable equal to one if the household resides in a municipality
     where the CCT transferred the money to mothers. In Columns (4)-(6) we restrict the sample by excluding the respondents who decided to always keeping the money
     offered or always giving it to their partner. Controls include age and education of partner’s, the gender of the household head, religion and ethnicity of the household,
     regional dummies, indicator variables for the type of settlement and indicator variables for the stake.
       We estimate the following model:

                       sij   = β0 + β1 dij + Xi0 β2 + Vj0 β3 + ij
                       dij   = θ0 + θ1 motherj + Xi0 θ2 + Vj0 θ3 + ω ij                          (14)

where Xi is a vector of household characteristics, Vj is a vector of municipality
characteristics, and ij and ωij are household-specific error terms. As above, we
compute standard errors accounting for clustering at the municipality level.
    We start by focusing on the mother’s income share as the main endogenous
variable. The lower panel of Table 4 shows that the policy instrument motherj
strongly predicts the wife’s income share, which is 19 percentage points higher in
municipalities were mothers are paid the CCT, compared to municipalities where
the CCT was transferred to household heads. Our IV estimates shows that wife’s
income share has a significant effect on the willingness to pay to keep the money in
the lab experiment. Shifting all income from the male partner to the female partner
in the household would decrease this willingness to pay by about 25 percentage
points. A slightly larger effect is observed when we exclude from the sample those
respondents who decided to either always keep the money offered or to always give
it to the partner, but overall, results are robust either to the inclusion of controls
in the model, and to the treatment of extreme values. If we use instead as the
explanatory variable of interest the total CCT transfer received by the mother in
the first three years of the program, we estimate that an increase of 100MKD in
the transfer to the mother reduces her willingness to pay measure by around 0.4
percentage points.18

5.1      Censoring of willingness to pay
The data from our lab experiment is left and right censored, since we could not elicit
willingness to pay over an infinitely large support. On one hand, a respondent may
have been willing to receive an even larger compensation than the maximum pro-
posed in the experiment for giving away the cash to the partner instead of receiving
it herself. On the other hand, we never allow the willingness to pay to go above 1,
which could happen, if the respondent is willing to pay in order to avoid having the
partner receive the money).
    The exact censoring points in our data are different depending on the stakes.19
  18
     We obtain similar results when the endogenous variable is the number of years in which a
mother received transfers from the CCT. See Appendix D.4.
  19
     For example, when the initial stake is 600 MKD and the respondent always keep the money, the
willingness to pay is right censored at 0.9375 (i.e.(600 − 37.5) /600). If the respondent always gives
the money to their partner the answer is instead left censored at -0.083 (i.e.(600 − 650) /600). Table
B2 presents censoring points for each stake both in terms of last amount offered to the respondents
and in terms of the corresponding willingness to pay.


                                                 20
                                     Table 4: Effect of wife’s income share and CCT transfer on willingness to pay

                                                                                          Dep.var.: Willingness to pay
                                                                     Include all observations        Exclude always keep and always give
                                                                        (1)             (2)                 (3)                (4)
                                                                        IV              IV                  IV                  IV
                        Wife’s income share                           -0.271**                            -0.314***
                                                                      (0.109)                                   (0.114)
                        Wifes’s CCT income                                               -0.005**                                          -0.005***
                                                                                                                                          (0.002)
                                                                                         (0.002)
                        Controls                                        Yes                Yes                    Yes                        Yes
                        Observations                                    768                768                    576                        576




21
                        First stage results:

                        Payment to mother                             0.196***          10.663***                0.177***                  10.672***
                                                                      0.022              0.786                   0.024                      0.903
                        R2                                            0.442              0.321                   0.439                      0.315
                        F test of excluded instrument                 80.146            183.897                 52.738                    139.577

     Note: Standard errors in parenthesis are clustered at municipality level (*** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1). The table presents estimates for equation 14 on the effect of
     wife’s income share, defined as the share attributable to the wife of total household income, and on total CCT transfer to the woman on willingness to pay. Dependent
     variable is willingness to pay defined as the share of transfer the respondent is willing to give away to receive the money instead of the partner receiving the money.
     Endogenous variables are instrumented using the dummy variable Payment to mother which is equal to one if the household resides in a municipality where the CCT
     transferred the money to mothers.In Columns (3)-(4) we restrict the sample by excluding the respondents who decided to always keeping the money offered or always
     giving it to their partner. Controls include age and education of partner’s, the gender of the household head, religion and ethnicity of the household, regional dummies,
     indicator variables for the type of settlement and indicator variables for the stake.
The underlying willingness to pay (s∗i ) is therefore not observed beyond bounds
which are determined by the initial stake (Si ) and by the rules of the experiment.
In addition, the exact realization of si is never observed as the software is designed
to stop when the difference between two consecutive offered amounts with opposite
decisions (either to keep the amount or to give it to the partner) is smaller than 20
MKD.
    In this section we estimate the full distribution of willingness to pay using the
censored data and a maximum likelihood procedure which tries to fit a mixture
of normals to the data, accounting for the censoring in the data. We estimate
separate models for respondents living in the two different types of municipalities,
distinguished by the identity of the recipient of the CCT.20
    The top panel of figure 3 presents a comparison of the fitted distribution si for
women residing in the two groups of municipalities. It is clear that those residing
in municipalities where the CCT is paid to the mother have a lower si . The bottom
panel of the figure shows the non-parametric density fit to the raw data, which has
more limited support because of the censoring. The two pictures are very similar.
    Table 5 presents the estimated parameters of the distributions. Since we fit a
mixture of three normals, we report the weight on each of the three components,
and the mean and standard deviation of each component. In addition, at the top of
the table, we also report the overall mean and standard deviation of the mixture.
    In order to test for equality of means of si across the two groups of municipalities,
we assume independence between these groups, and we use a standard two tailed
t-test. There is a 6 percent difference in si for respondents in each type of munici-
pality, which is statistically different from zero. The estimates from this parametric
model are similar from the regression estimates from the previous section, which
didn’t account for censoring of the observations, providing further evidence of the
robustness of our results.


6    Conclusion
Identifying the empowerment effect of targeted money transfer is fundamental to
understanding the effect of targeting women as an instrument for empowering women
within households. In this paper we presented a novel identification strategy to
measure women’s willingness to pay for receiving transfers. We reported results
from an economic experiment among female urban recipients of SFA who are also
   20
      Appendix B discusses in details the methodology used to estimate the parameters of the dis-
tribution. We report the result for an unconditional version of the maximum likelihood estimation.
We extend the estimation using a version conditional on observable characteristics and the results
are unchanged.



                                               22
Figure 3: Distribution fit for willingness to pay: comparison of treatment groups

                                              Panel A. Parametric




                                          Panel B. Non-parametric
                                     Payment to HH   Payment to MOTHER
                           3




                           2
                 Density




                           1




                           0
                               -.5              0            .5           1     1.5
                                                     Willingness to pay


   Note. The figure shows a comparison of the distribution estimated for the two treatment groups
   (payment to household head and payment to mother). In Panel A, the distribution fit is com-
   puted assuming a mixture of three Normal distributions and estimating the parameters using
   Maximum Likelihood and imposing multiple censoring points. Estimated mixture weights and
   components parameters are presented in Table 5. In Panel B, the distribution fit is estimated
   non-parametrically using Kernel density.




                                                         23
     Table 5: Parameters of parametric fit for willingness to pay: distribution
                                                     Payment to HH        Payment to Mother
                                                          (1)                    (2)
        Mixture distribution
         Mean (µ)                                          0.217                   0.155
                                                          (0.020)                 (0.017)
          Standard deviation                               0.388                   0.332

        First component
          Weight (w1 )                                      0.690                   0.718
                                                          (0.028)                 (0.052)
          Mean (µ1 )                                       -0.010                  -0.012
                                                          (0.009)                 (0.010)
          Std. deviation (σ1 )                             0.117                    0.103
                                                          (0.010)                 (0.009)
        Second component
          Weight (w2 )                                     0.107                   0.166
                                                          (0.037)                 (0.056)
          Mean (µ2 )                                       0.402                   0.354
                                                          (0.044)                 (0.065)
          Std. deviation (σ2 )                            0.1189                   0.165
                                                          (0.035)                 (0.061)
        Third component
          Weight (w3 )                                     0.203                   0.115
                                                          (0.035)                 (0.019)
          Mean (µ3 )                                       0.890                   0.909
                                                          (0.046)                 (0.026)
          Std. deviation (σ3 )                             0.194                   0.127
                                                          (0.056)                 (0.029)

        Observations                                        768                     768
                                      a
        Test for equality of means :
          Difference in means (µHH − µM )                                        -0.062**
          t-test (p-value)                                                     2.38 (0.017)

Note. Standard errors in parenthesis. The distribution fit is computed using parametric distributional
assumption (assuming a mixture of three Normal distributions) and estimating parameters using Maximum
Likelihood and imposing left / right censoring points and bounds for each observation. a Test for equality
of the mean in the two groups
                           p is carried out assuming independence between the two groups and using
a t − test = (µHH − µM )/ s.e.(µHH )2 + s.e.(µM )2 where µHH is the mean for the individual living in
municipalities where the CCT payment was transferred to household heads and µM where the CCT payment
was transferred to Mothers.




                                                   24
part of a household that was offered a CCT.
    Targeted transfers alter household decision making through (at least) two chan-
nels. First, the transfer has an effect on total household income which may affect
bargaining positions for men and women directly. Second, the transfer has an effect
on the share of resources attributable to each household member. The experiment
identified the values that make the women indifferent between receiving the transfer
and letting their spouse receive it, providing information about the trade-off the
women makes between household income and empowerment. Our results showed
that women are, on average, willing to sacrifice some household income to receive
the money and gain more power over resources. Note that this result means that
the unitary model is generally rejected in our study. Our results further showed that
having already been empowered by the CCT (i.e., residing in a municipalities where
women were offered the CCT) leads, on average, to a lower willingness to sacrifice
household income to gain power.




                                         25
References
Adato, M., B. de la Briere, D. Mindek, and A. R. Quisumbing (2000). The impact
 of progresa on women’s status and intrahousehold relations. Technical report,
 IFPRI. http://ebrary.ifpri.org/cdm/ref/collection/p15738coll2/id/125438.

Attanasio, O. and V. Lechene (2002). Tests of income pooling in household decisions.
  Review of Economic Dynamics 5 (4), 720–748.

Attanasio, O. P. and V. Lechene (2014). Efficient responses to targeted cash trans-
  fers. Journal of Political Economy 122 (1), 178–222.

Browning, M. and P.-A. Chiappori (1998). Efficient intra-household allocations: A
  general characterization and empirical tests. Econometrica, 1241–1278.

Browning, M., P.-A. Chiappori, and Y. Weiss (2014). Economics of the Family.
  Cambridge University Press.

Chiappori, P.-A. (1992). Collective labor supply and welfare. Journal of Political
  Economy, 437–467.

Chiappori, P.-A. and I. Ekeland (2009). The microeconomics of efficient group
  behavior: Identification. Econometrica 77 (3), 763–799.

Doss, C. (2006). The effects of intrahousehold property ownership on expenditure
 patterns in ghana. Journal of African Economies 15 (1), 149–180.

Duflo, E. (2012). Women empowerment and economic development. Journal of
 Economic Literature 50(4), 1051–79.

Fiszbein, A., N. R. Schady, and F. H. Ferreira (2009). Conditional cash transfers:
  reducing present and future poverty. World Bank Publications.

Hoddinott, J. and L. Haddad (1995). Does female income share influence household
 expenditures? evidence from côte d’ivoire. Oxford Bulletin of Economics and
 Statistics 57 (1), 77–96.

Lundberg, S. J., R. A. Pollak, and T. J. Wales (1997). Do husbands and wives
  pool their resources? evidence from the united kingdom child benefit. Journal of
  Human Resources, 463–480.

Samuelson, P. A. (1956). Social indifference curves. The Quarterly Journal of
  Economics, 1–22.



                                        26
Schady, N. R. and M. Araujo (2006). Cash transfers, conditions, school enrollment,
  and child work: Evidence from a randomized experiment in ecuador. World Bank
  Publications 3.

Thomas, D. (1990). Intra-household resource allocation: An inferential approach.
  Journal of Human Resources, 635–664.

Ward-Batts, J. (2008). Out of the wallet and into the purse using micro data to
 test income pooling. Journal of Human Resources 43 (2), 325–351.




                                       27
       Appendices to “Measuring and Changing Control: Women
               Empowerment and Targeted Transfers”


A     Design: experiment and survey
This appendix shows the design implemented in full. A.1 shows the screenshots for
the experiment.

A.1    Experiment
At the beginning of the session, the following instruction was read by the respondent
together with an assistant. The assistant was present throughout the experiment to
collect the answers and go trough the questions with the respondent.

      Today you will respond to an important survey, which has been designed
      to study the needs of women within Social Financial Assistance house-
      holds. We kindly request you to participate by providing your sincere
      answers.Your answers will be kept anonymous and no replies will be re-
      vealed to anyone except the researchers who will not know who you are
      or even your name.
      In the following questions you will be facing different scenarios in which
      you will have to choose between two alternatives, A or B. You cannot
      choose both. You will have to state your preferred choice (A or B) in
      each situation. If you choose A it means you prefer alternative A to
      alternative B.
      In some sections of the questionnaire we will be rewarding you for your
      choices and this will be made clear at the beginning of each section. Your
      decisions will define your actual reward, which will be communicated at
      the end of the survey.
      We will start by providing you with an example, so that you can under-
      stand the setting. Please don’t hesitate to ask questions to the assistant
      in case you didn’t understand the setting.

   Once the session is started, the respondent is presented with different examples
and is therefore introduced to each section at the beginning of them. Figures A1 to
A3 show screenshots of the experiment setting.




                                          1
                         Figure A1: Introduction to the experiment




Note. This screenshot was presented to the respondents at the beginning of the incentivized section
of the experiment.




                     Figure A2: Introduction to the incentivized section




Note. This screenshot was presented to the respondents at the beginning of the session and was
read together with the interviewer.




                                                2
             Figure A3: Experiment setting for the incentivized section
                               A. Choice to keep the money




                      B. Choice to give the money to the partner




Note. These screenshots present the setting faced by the respondent in the experiment. The top
panel shows the screen when the respondent choose to keep the amount when choosing between
550 MKD for herself and 600 MKD for the partner. The bottom panel show the screen when the
respondent choose to give the amount to the partner when choosing between 138 MKD for herself
and 600 MKD for the partner.



                                              3
A.2     Full survey questionnaire
The following table presents the text and the coding of all questions in the survey.
Questions indicated as CES-D10 are part of the 10 questions composing the Center
for Epidemiologic Studies Short Depression Scale.

 ID     Questions                                             Coding
 CES-   For each of the following statements, please select   1 Rarely or none of the time 2 Some
 D10-   the answer that best describes how often you felt     or a little of the time 3 Occasionally
 1      or behaved this way during the past week: I was       or a moderate amount of the time
        bothered by things that usually don’t bother me.      4 Most or all of the time .a Not ap-
                                                              plicable .b Dont know
 CES- For each of the following statements, please select     1 Rarely or none of the time 2 Some
 D10- the answer that best describes how often you felt       or a little of the time 3 Occasionally
 2    or behaved this way during the past week: I had         or a moderate amount of the time
      trouble keeping my mind on what I was doing.            4 Most or all of the time .a Not ap-
                                                              plicable .b Dont know
 CES- For each of the following statements, please select     1 Rarely or none of the time 2 Some
 D10- the answer that best describes how often you felt       or a little of the time 3 Occasionally
 3    or behaved this way during the past week: I felt        or a moderate amount of the time
      depressed.                                              4 Most or all of the time .a Not ap-
                                                              plicable .b Dont know
 CES- For each of the following statements, please select     1 Rarely or none of the time 2 Some
 D10- the answer that best describes how often you felt       or a little of the time 3 Occasionally
 4    or behaved this way during the past week: I felt        or a moderate amount of the time
      that everything I did was an effort.                    4 Most or all of the time .a Not ap-
                                                              plicable .b Dont know
 CES- For each of the following statements, please select     1 Rarely or none of the time 2 Some
 D10- the answer that best describes how often you felt       or a little of the time 3 Occasionally
 5    or behaved this way during the past week: I felt        or a moderate amount of the time
      hopeful about the future.                               4 Most or all of the time .a Not ap-
                                                              plicable .b Dont know
 CES- For each of the following statements, please select     1 Rarely or none of the time 2 Some
 D10- the answer that best describes how often you felt       or a little of the time 3 Occasionally
 6    or behaved this way during the past week: I felt        or a moderate amount of the time
      fearful.                                                4 Most or all of the time .a Not ap-
                                                              plicable .b Dont know
 CES- For each of the following statements, please select     1 Rarely or none of the time 2 Some
 D10- the answer that best describes how often you felt       or a little of the time 3 Occasionally
 7    or behaved this way during the past week: My            or a moderate amount of the time
      sleep was restless.                                     4 Most or all of the time .a Not ap-
                                                              plicable .b Dont know
 CES- For each of the following statements, please select     1 Rarely or none of the time 2 Some
 D10- the answer that best describes how often you felt       or a little of the time 3 Occasionally
 8    or behaved this way during the past week: I was         or a moderate amount of the time
      happy.                                                  4 Most or all of the time .a Not ap-
                                                              plicable .b Dont know
 CES- For each of the following statements, please select     1 Rarely or none of the time 2 Some
 D10- the answer that best describes how often you felt       or a little of the time 3 Occasionally
 9    or behaved this way during the past week: I felt        or a moderate amount of the time
      lonely.                                                 4 Most or all of the time .a Not ap-
                                                              plicable .b Dont know




                                                 4
CES- For each of the following statements, please select    1 Rarely or none of the time 2 Some
D10- the answer that best describes how often you felt      or a little of the time 3 Occasionally
10   or behaved this way during the past week: I could      or a moderate amount of the time
     not get going.                                         4 Most or all of the time .a Not ap-
                                                            plicable .b Dont know
11    In your neighbourhood, how likely is it that a mar-   1 Very likely 2 Somewhat likely 3
      ried woman would divorce?                             Could happen 4 Unlikely 5 Very
                                                            unlikely .a Not applicable .b Dont
                                                            know
12    In the last 2 weeks, did you and your spouse argue    1 Yes 2 No .a Not applicable .b
      about ...MANAGING MONEY?                              Dont know
13    In the last 2 weeks, did you and your spouse argue    1 Yes 2 No .a Not applicable .b
      about ...DISCIPLINE OF THE CHILDREN?                  Dont know
14    Sometimes a husband is annoyed or angered by          1 Yes 2 No .a Not applicable .b
      things that his wife does. In your opinion, is a      Dont know
      husband justified in hitting or beating his wife if
      SHE ARGUES WITH HIM?
15    Sometimes a husband is annoyed or angered by          1 Yes 2 No .a Not applicable .b
      things that his wife does. In your opinion, is a      Dont know
      husband justified in hitting or beating his wife if
      SHE GOES OUT WITHOUT TELLING HIM?
16    Sometimes a husband is annoyed or angered by          1 Yes 2 No .a Not applicable .b
      things that his wife does. In your opinion, is a      Dont know
      husband justified in hitting or beating his wife if
      SHE NEGLECTS THE CHILDREN?
17    Sometimes a husband is annoyed or angered by          1 Yes 2 No .a Not applicable .b
      things that his wife does. In your opinion, is a      Dont know
      husband justified in hitting or beating his wife if
      SHE BURNS THE FOOD?
18    In your neighbourhood, is it usual for husbands       1 Yes 2 No .a Not applicable .b
      to beat the wives if THEY ARGUE WITH HIM?             Dont know
19    In your neighbourhood, is it usual for husbands       1 Yes 2 No .a Not applicable .b
      to beat the wives if THEY GO OUT WITHOUT              Dont know
      TELLING HIM?
20    In your neighbourhood, is it usual for husbands to    1 Yes 2 No .a Not applicable .b
      beat the wives if THEY NEGLECT THE CHIL-              Dont know
      DREN?
21    In your neighbourhood, is it usual for husbands       1 Yes 2 No .a Not applicable .b
      to beat the wives if THEY BURN THE FOOD?              Dont know
22    If your child doesn’t want to go to school, who       1 Wife 2 Husband 3 Together .a Not
      in the household usually decides whether he/she       applicable .b Dont know
      should go?
23    Who in the household usually decides how much         1 Wife 2 Husband 3 Together .a Not
      money to be spent on food?                            applicable .b Dont know
24    Who in the household usually decides about the        1 Wife 2 Husband 3 Together .a Not
      financial administration?                             applicable .b Dont know




                                               5
25   Imagine the following household composed by a           1 Wife 2 Husband 3 Together .a Not
     wife, a husband and three children. The wife is         applicable .b Dont know
     40 years old and her husband is 43 years old. The
     three children are aged 5, 10 and 14. Both wife
     and husband have been unemployed in the last
     2 years and have been receiving SFA. Today, the
     wife receives X MKD from her parents to help the
     family. Who do you think should decide what to
     do with that amount?
26   In 3 years time, how likely is it that you will have    1 Very likely 2 Somewhat likely 3
     worked at least once for A SALARIED JOB?                Could happen 4 Unlikely 5 Very
                                                             unlikely .a Not applicable .b Dont
                                                             know
27   In 3 years time, how likely is it that you will have    1 Very likely 2 Somewhat likely 3
     worked at least once for AN OCCASIONAL JOB?             Could happen 4 Unlikely 5 Very
                                                             unlikely .a Not applicable .b Dont
                                                             know
28   If your household is in need of financial help, think   1 Yes 2 No .a Not applicable .b
     whether you would ask for help to the following         Dont know
     people. Can you ask for financial help to your
     MOTHER?
29   If your household is in need of financial help, think   1 Yes 2 No .a Not applicable .b
     whether you would ask for help to the following         Dont know
     people. Can you ask for financial help to your
     FATHER?
30   If your household is in need of financial help, think   -
     whether you would ask for help to the following
     people. How many SIBLINGS can you contact for
     asking financial help? (Report the total number,
     write 0 if none)
31   If your household is in need of financial help, think   -
     whether you would ask for help to the following
     people. How many OTHER RELATIVES can you
     contact for asking financial help? (Report the to-
     tal number, write 0 if none)
32   If your household is in need of financial help, think   -
     whether you would ask for help to the following
     people. How many FRIENDS can you contact for
     asking financial help? (Report the total number,
     write 0 if none)
34   Does your partner own a cell-phone?                     1 Yes 2 No .a Not applicable .b
                                                             Dont know
35   How much do you believe he spends on paying the         -
     phone bill/buying pay-as-you-go cards in a typical
     month?
36   Do you have your own cell-phone (you own the            1 Yes 2 No .a Not applicable .b
     phone and you are not sharing the use of it with        Dont know
     nobody else in the household)?
37   How much do you spend on paying the phone               -
     bill/buying pay-as-you-go cards in a typical
     month?
38   Do any of your children have a cell-phone?              1 Yes 2 No .a Not applicable .b
                                                             Dont know




                                               6
39   Do you and your partner pay for the expenses?         1 Yes 2 No .a Not applicable .b
                                                           Dont know
40   How much do you think that they spend on the          -
     phone bill/buying pay-as-you-go cards in a typical
     month?
41   How much does your household spend on food in         -
     a typical week?
42   How much of what your household spend on food         -
     typically goes to your children?
43   How much does your household spend on                 -
     cigarettes in a typical week?
44   How many cigarettes do you smoke in a typical         -
     day? (write 0 if None, indicate the brand or type
     of tobacco in the additional information field)
45   How many cigarettes does your partner smoke in        -
     a typical day? (write 0 if None, indicate the brand
     or type of tobacco in the additional information
     field)
46   How much does your household spend on alcohol         -
     in a typical week?
47   Do you drink alcohol?                                 1 Yes 2 No .a Not applicable .b
                                                           Dont know
48   Does your partner drink alcohol?                      1 Yes 2 No .a Not applicable .b
                                                           Dont know




                                              7
B       Parametric distribution fit for willingness to pay
To correct for censoring at the extremes of the distribution of the willingness to pay,
we need to make distributional assumptions. To this end, we estimate a parametric
distribution fit using maximum likelihood assuming a mixture of three Gaussian
distributions.2 The probability density function of the willingness to pay, si , is
defined by:
                                            3
                                            X
                                 fi (si ) =   wj φj (si )                          (15)
                                               j=1
where φ(si ) is the p.d.f. of a normal distribution with mean µj and standard de-
viation σj , and wj are the weights associated with each p.d.f. such that wj ≥ 0
      P
and      wj = 1. We rely on maximum likelihood to estimate the parameters w =
(w1 , w2 , w3 ) , µ = (µ1 , µ2 , µ3 ) and σ = (σ1 , σ2 , σ3 ).3 The cumulative distribution
function is defined by:
                                                 3
                                                 X
                                      Fi (si ) =   wj Φj (si )                         (16)
                                               j=1
where Φj (si ) is the c.d.f. of a normal distribution with mean µj and standard
deviation σj .
    Since we don’t allow si to vary continuously beyond pre-defined thresholds, we
face multiple censoring points when the respondents report to always wanting to
keep the offered money or when they report to always wanting to give the money
to the partner. These points are different depending on the stakes. For example,
when the initial stake is 600 MKD and the respondent always keep the money,
the willingness to pay is right censored at 0.9375 (i.e.(600 − 37.5) /600). If the
respondent always give the money to partner the answer is instead left censored at
-0.083 (i.e.(600 − 650) /600). Table B2 presents censoring points for each stake both
in terms of last amount offered to the respondents and in terms of the corresponding
willingness to pay.
    This means that the underlying willingness to pay, s∗i is not observed beyond
these bounds that are determined by the initial stake, Ei , and by the rules of the
experiment. Assuming that s∗i ∼ fi (w, µ, σ), the observed willingness to pay, si , is
described by the following rule:
                            
                               ∗        if lbi (Ei ) > s∗i > ubi (Ei )
                            si
                            
                      si = lbi (Ei ) if s∗i ≤ lbi (Ei )                          (17)
                            
                                           ∗
                              ubi (Ei ) if si ≥ ubi (Ei )
    2
     The results are consistent when using different mixture of distributions. For example, assuming
a mixture of two Gaussian distributions or a mixture of a Gaussian and Weibull distributions leads
to the same conclusions.
   3
     w3 is not estimated via maximum likelihood, but is identified by w3 = 1 − w1 − w2 .


                                                 8
where lbi (Ei ) and ubi (Ei ) are the lower and the upper censoring points for partici-
pant i that was offered a stake Ei (for simplicity we will refer to lbi for lbi (Ei ) and
ubi for ubi (Ei )). Let {si = 1, ..., N } be a random sample of data from the model.
The log-likelihood function is therefore defined by:

       ln li (si ; w, µ, σ) = 1(si = lbi )ln [Fi (si )] + 1 (lbi > si > ubi ) ln [fi (si )] +
                                +1(si = ubi )ln [1 − Fi (si )]                                  (18)

    Using the sample likelihood function and substituting for (15) and (16), we can
derive (w, µ, σ) by maximizing the following log-likelihood function 4 :

                                                                                     
                                               N
                                               X                        X3
         argmax{w,µ,σ} ln LN (si ; .) =              {1 (si = lbi ) ln    wj Φj (si ) +
                                               n=1                     j=1
                                                                                     
                                                                        X3
                                               +1 (lbi > si > ubi ) ln    wj φj (si )
                                                                             j=1
                                                                                       
                                                                         3
                                                                         X
                                               +1 (si = ubi ) ln 1 −          wj Φj (si )}    (19)
                                                                         j=1

     Up to this point we have assumed that the willingness to pay, si , is observed
when the distribution is not upper or lower censored. However, the exact realization
si is never observed as the software is designed to stop when two consecutive offered
amounts with different decisions (either to keep the amount or to give it to the
partner) are separated by an amount lower than 20 MKD. In the paper, we therefore
assume that si is not observed, but we assume that si is within the two bounds, sU  i
and sL i . We can then express  the log-likelihood function by:

                         ln li (si ; w, µ, σ) = ln Fi (sU          L
                                                                     
                                                        i ) − Fi (si )                          (20)

where sU         L
        i and si are defined according to the stopping rule at each choice situation.
    In order to analyse the distribution and compare the estimated mean for different
groups we need to compute the mean of the distribution and its variance. The
distribution mean of a mixture of three Gaussian distribution can be computed using
parameter estimates derived from maximum likelihood estimation and is defined by:

                            µ = w1 µ1 + w2 µ2 + (1 − w1 − w2 )µ3                                (21)
   4
    We extend the estimation by considering a conditional version of the probability function and
allowing k controls. In this case the argument of the p.d.f. and the c.d.f. is (si − X 0 β), where
X is a k × N matrix of individual controls and β is a k × 1 vector of coefficients. Results for the
conditional version are comparable to the unconditional version.


                                                 9
    The variance of the mean is instead equal to

           σµ2 = V ar [w1 µ1 + w2 µ2 + (1 − w1 − w2 )µ3 ]
                 = V ar [w1 µ1 ] + V ar [w2 µ2 ] + V ar [(1 − w1 − w2 )µ3 ] +
                     +2Cov [w1 µ1 , w2 µ2 ] + 2Cov [w1 µ1 , (1 − w1 − w2 )µ3 ] +
                     +2Cov[w2 µ2 , (1 − w1 − w2 )µ3 ]                                       (22)

    Since different components of σµ2 are not directly observed, we use the Delta
Method to compute the standard error of the mean. The variance of µ is therefore
defined by:                           0           
                             ˆ        dµ      ˆ     dµ
                          V ar[µ] =        V ar[θ]                           (23)
                                      dθ            dθ
where θ = [w1 , w2 , w3 , µ1 , µ2 , µ3 ] is the vector of parameters composing the mean of
the distribution and dµ dθ = [µ1 , µ2 , µ3 , w1 , w2 , w3 ] is the vector of first derivatives of
µ with respect to each of the parameters in θ.

        Table B2: Lower and Upper Censoring points for different Stakes
                               Lower Censoring        Upper Censoring
    Stakes offered to partner
                              Last amount           Last amount
                                          lbi (Ei )                  ubi (Ei )
                Ei              offered                 offered
               800                850     -0.0625          12        0.9850
               750                800     -0.0667          11        0.9853
               700                750     -0.0714          10        0.9857
               650                700     -0.0769          10        0.9846
               600                650     -0.0833          34        0.9433
               550                600     -0.0909          31        0.9436
               500                550     -0.1000          28        0.9440
               450                500     -0.1111          25        0.9444
               400                450     -0.1250          22        0.9450
Note. Values are reported in Macedonian Denars (MKD). lbi (Ei ) and ubi (Ei ) are defined as the
share the person is willing to pay when the experiment stops as a share of the stake. For lower
censoring the willingness to pay is negative. The experiments stops when the difference between
two consecutive offered amounts is smaller than 20 MKD for upper censoring and is larger than the
stake plus 50 MKD for lower censoring.




                                               10
C     Sample selection
In this section, we present an analysis of response rate. Table C3 presents probit
regressions of participation in the lab interview on the policy instrument and other
individual and household controls. The dependent variable is equal to one if the se-
lected participant responded to the lab interview and zero if the selected participant
was not present during the days of the interview or rejected to participate. We can
observe that on average women living in municipalities where the CCT payments
were targeted to women have a slightly lower probability to participate in the lab
interview. However, this effect is not statistically significant in three of four speci-
fications and only weakly statistical significant in one (the probit-specification that
leaves out controls for ethnicity).

  Table C3: Response rate in the lab interview and the CCT policy experiment

                                         Dep.var.: Participated in the lab interview
                                          (1)       (2)       (3)           (4)
                                          OLS       OLS      Probit       Probit

          Payment to mother (d)           -0.045       -0.041    -0.046*      -0.042
                                         (0.028)      (0.027)   (0.027)      (0.026)

          Demographic controls             Yes         Yes       Yes           Yes

          Ethnicity controls                No         Yes       No            Yes
          pseudo-R2                                             0.049         0.062
          Observations                     906         906       906           906

Note: In columns 3 and 4, marginal effects are presented. Standard errors in parenthesis are clus-
tered at municipality level. Dependent variable is a dummy variable equal to one if the respondent
participated in the lab interview after being selected and zero otherwise. Controls include respon-
dent’s and partner’s age and education, gender of the household head, household size, religion and
regional dummies and ethnicity of the family.




                                                 11
D       Additional data analysis
D.1     Household decision making and domestic violence indexes
In this section we look at how the gender-targeted payments affected other measures
of women’s empowerment than the one proposed in the paper. We build two indexes:
a Domestic Violence Index and a Household Decision Making Index.5
    The Domestic Violence Index aims at capturing respondent’s attitudes towards
domestic violence and perceptions of domestic violence in the neighbourhood of
residence. We focus on whether the respondent believes that domestic violence
is acceptable if a woman argues with the partner, if a woman goes out without
informing her partner, if a woman neglects her children and if a woman burns the
food while cooking. In addition, we use information on whether the respondent
believes that these types of domestic violence are common in her neighbourhood.
    The Household Decision Making Index is instead looking at who within the
household is participating in decisions about children’s schooling, food expenses,
household financial administration and about an extra income. These variables are
coded as 0 if the man is deciding, 1 if the two partners are deciding together and 2
if the woman is deciding.
    For the DV Index we use Principal Component Analysis (PCA) on the selected
dummy variables and we construct the index using the first component only. For
the HDM Index, since the variables are ordinal, we perform Factor Analysis (FA)
using a polychoric correlation matrix. Table D5 presents the factor loadings for
the domestic violence index and the household decision making index. Figure D4
presents the distribution of the household decision making index by ethnic groups.
    In order to test whether the effect of targeting payments to mothers is captured
by these alternative measures, we estimated the effect of gender-targeted transfers on
the HDM and the DV index and we compare these with the effect on the willingness
to pay from the experiment (Table D6).
    First, in columns 1, 4 and 7, we focus on intent-to-treat estimates (equation 13)
on whether a respondent is residing in a municipality where CCT payments were
transferred to women. Second, we look at IV estimates (equation 14) of the effect
of wife’s income share (columns 2, 5 and 8), defined as the share attributable to
the wife of total household income, and third, we look at the effect of total CCT
transfer to the woman (columns 3, 6 and 9) on willingness to pay. We observe that
the effect of targeting payments to women on the HDM index and the DV index,
respectively, is not significant. However, the direction of the effect is in line with
    5
    Table D4 presents descriptive statistics about the variables we consider for the construction of
the two indexes.



                                                12
Figure D4: Distribution of domestic violence and household decision making indexes

      .8
                                                            .3


      .6

                                                            .2

      .4



                                                            .1
      .2




      0                                                     0
           -2    0            2                4   6             0   1            2            3        4
                     Domestic violence Index                          Household decision making Index



Note. The graph presents the distribution of an index of attitudes toward domestic violence (left
panel) and an index of household decision making (right panel. Indexes are built using principal
component analysis and using the first component only. See Table D5 for factor loadings.


the results obtained for the willingness to pay obtained from the lab experiment.




                                                       13
            Table D4: Descriptive statistics: household decision making

                                                      (1)       (2)        (3)     (4)    (5)
                                                     Mean     Median     St.Dev.   Min    Max
 Argued about managing money                          0.35      0.00      0.48      0      1
 Argued about children’s discipline                   0.30      0.00      0.46      0       1
 Violence justified for argument                     0.10      0.00       0.29      0      1
 Violence justified for going out                    0.16      0.00       0.37      0      1
 Violence justified for neglecting children           0.33      0.00      0.47      0       1
 Violence justified for burning food                 0.05      0.00       0.22      0      1
 Violence common for argument                        0.28      0.00       0.45      0      1
 Violence common for going out                       0.21      0.00       0.41      0      1
 Violence common for neglecting children              0.20     0.00       0.40      0      1
 Violence common for burning food                     0.10     0.00       0.30      0      1
 Wife decides about school                            0.94      1.00      0.24      0       1
 Wife decides about food                              0.81      1.00      0.39      0       1
 Wife decides about finance                           0.70      1.00      0.46      0       1
 Wife decides about extra amount                      0.96      1.00      0.21      0       1
 Husband decides about school                         0.88      1.00      0.33      0       1
 Husband decides about food                           0.76      1.00      0.42      0       1
 Husband decides about finance                        0.73      1.00      0.44      0       1
 Husband decides about extra amount                   0.92      1.00      0.27      0       1
 Depression Index                                    13.01     13.00      6.34      0      30
 Presence of depression symptoms                      0.70     1.00       0.46      0      1
 High likelihood of divorce in the neighborhood       0.22      0.00      0.41      0       1
 High likelihood of salaried job                      0.24     0.00       0.42      0      1
 High likelihood of occasional job                   0.40      0.00       0.49      0      1

Note: Depression index is based on CES-D10 test. Presence of depression symptoms is a dummy
variable equal to one if the CES-D10 depression value is equal or larger to 10. For variables
concerning likelihood, we refer to ”high likelihood” the answers ”Very likely” and ”Somewhat
likely”, while the excluded answers are ”Could happen”, ”Unlikely” and ”Very unlikely”. For
variables concerning decisions, we refer to ”wife (husband) decides” if the respondent (partner)
decides alone or together with the partner.




                                              14
Table D5: Principal component analysis for domestic violence and household deci-
sion making
                                                            Factor loadings
                                                                           Household
                                                       Domestic
                                                                        decision making
                                                     violence (DV)
                                                                            (HDM)
                                                          (1)                  (2)

       Violence justified for:
          argument                                       0.280
          going out                                      0.289
          neglecting children                            0.299
          burning food                                   0.234
       Violence common for:
          argument                                       0.380
          going out                                      0.447
          neglecting children                            0.450
           burning food                                  0.386
       Participation in the decision about:
         school                                                               0.510
         food expenses                                                        0.714
         financial administration                                             0.701
                                                                              0.516
           managing an extra amount

       Share of total variance explained                 0.401                  .
                                                         768                   768
       Observations

Note. For the DV index, the table presents the Principal Component Analysis (PCA) factor loadings
of the first component. “Violence justified for” refers to the question “Sometimes a husband is
annoyed or angered by things that his wife does. In your opinion, is a husband justified in hitting
or beating his wife if...”. “Violence common for” refers to the question “In your neighbourhood,
is it usual for husbands to beat the wives if...”. For the HDM Index, index weights are computed
performing Factor Analysis (FA) using a polychoric correlation matrix. Variables about household
decision making are coded as 0 if the man is deciding, 1 if the two partners are deciding together
and 2 if the woman is deciding.




                                                15
                       Table D6: Effect of targeting payments to women on different measure of women’s empowerment

                                          Dep.var.:       Willingness to pay                         HDM index                       DV index
                                                        (1)      (2)       (3)              (4)        (5)         (6)      (7)        (8)        (9)
                                                        OLS      IV        IV               OLS         IV         IV       OLS        IV         IV

                Payment to mother                       -0.053**                            0.112                           -0.202
                                                       (0.024)                             (0.089)                         (0.171)

                Wife’s income share                                 -0.271**                           0.573                           -1.030
                                                                   (0.109)                            (0.445)                         (0.852)

                Wifes’s CCT income                                              -0.005**                          0.011                          -0.019




16
                                                                               (0.002)                           (0.008)                        (0.015)

                Controls                                 Yes        Yes         Yes         Yes         Yes       Yes       Yes        Yes       Yes
                Observations                             768        768         768         768         768       768       768        768       768

     Note: Standard errors in parenthesis are clustered at municipality level (*** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1). In columns 1 and 4, the table presents
     estimates using equation 13 for the effect of targeting payments to mothers on the willingness to pay. In columns 2-3 and 5-6, the table presents estimates
     for equation 14 on the effect of wife’s income share, defined as the share attributable to the wife of total household income, and on total CCT transfer to
     the woman on willingness to pay. Willingness to pay is defined as the share of transfer the respondent is willing to give away to receive the money instead
     of the partner receiving the money. Household Decision Making (HDM) Index is built using information on who within the household is participating
     in decisions about school, food expenditures, financial administration and about what to do with extra income, and performing Factor Analysis (FA)
     using a polychoric correlation matrix. Domestic Violence (DV) Index is built using information on respondent’s attitudes towards domestic violence
     and perceptions of domestic violence in the neighbourhood of residence and performing Principal Component Analysis (PCA). Controls include age and
     education of partner’s, the gender of the household head, religion and ethnicity of the household, regional dummies, indicator variables for the type of
     settlement and indicator variables for the stake.
D.2     Incentivized and non incentivized willingness to pay
In this section we compare willingness to pay reported by the respondent in the
incentivized version and in the non-incentivized version (with larger stakes).
    Willingness to pay in the incentivized version appears to be strongly correlated
with the willingness to pay in the non-incentivized versions. Table D7 presents
OLS regression of incentivized willingness to pay on non-incentivized willingness to
pay, controlling for different sets of regressors. The coefficient on non-incentivized
willingness to pay is around 58 percent and is not affected by adding individual and
ethnic controls and controlling for stake dummies.
    Initial stakes seems not to be related to incentivized willingness to pay. Table
D8 shows estimates of an OLS regression of willingness to pay on a set of dummy
variables for different starting points6 . Columns (1) and (2) show that willingness
to pay in the incentivized version is not correlated with the offered stake. A joint
test cannot reject the equality of the coefficients to zero. Figure D5 presents the
distribution of willingness to pay by stake. If we turn our attention to the non-
incentivized version (columns (3) and (4)), we can observe instead that, while not
following a precise pattern, the largest stakes have a significant effect on willingness
to pay. However, using controls we cannot reject joint equality to zero.

Table D7: Correlation between incentivized and non-incentivized willingness to pay

                                                     Dep.var.: Willingness to pay
                                                   (1)      (2)       (3)       (4)
                                                  OLS      OLS        OLS      OLS
          WTP (non incentivized)                  0.594*** 0.585*** 0.578*** 0.580***
                                                 (0.036) (0.036) (0.037) (0.037)

          Individual controls                        No       Yes       Yes        Yes

          Ethnic controls                            No       No        Yes        Yes

          Stake dummies                            No         No        No         Yes
          Observations                             768        768       768        768
          R2                                      0.386      0.404     0.412      0.413

Note: Standard errors in parenthesis are clustered at municipality level (*** p<0.01, ** p<0.05,
* p<0.1). Dependent variable is willingness to pay (in the incentivized version) defined as the
share of transfer the respondent is willing to give away to receive the money instead of the partner
receiving the money. Controls include age and education of partner’s, the gender of the household
head, religion and ethnicity of the household, regional dummies, indicator variables for the type of
settlement and indicator variables for the stake.


  6
    We aggregate starting points in the following groups: 400-500 MKD, 550-650 MKD, 700-800
MKD.


                                                17
                          Figure D5: Willingness to pay by stake

                    400                            450                            500
    .4
    .3
    .2
    .1
     0
         -.065
             33
              5
              5
              5
              5
              5
              5
              5
              5
              5
              5
               1



                                      -.065
                                          33
                                           5
                                           5
                                           5
                                           5
                                           5
                                           5
                                           5
                                           5
                                           5
                                           5
                                           1



                                                                     -.065
                                                                         33
                                                                          5
                                                                          5
                                                                          5
                                                                          5
                                                                          5
                                                                          5
                                                                          5
                                                                          5
                                                                          5
                                                                          5
                                                                           1
            .0
            .1
            .2
            .3
            .4
            .5
            .6
            .7
            .8
            .9




                                         .0
                                         .1
                                         .2
                                         .3
                                         .4
                                         .5
                                         .6
                                         .7
                                         .8
                                         .9




                                                                        .0
                                                                        .1
                                                                        .2
                                                                        .3
                                                                        .4
                                                                        .5
                                                                        .6
                                                                        .7
                                                                        .8
                                                                        .9
         -.0




                                      -.0




                                                                     -.0
         <




                                     <




                                                                    <
                    550                            600                            650
    .4
    .3
    .2
    .1
     0
         -.065
             33
              5
              5
              5
              5
              5
              5
              5
              5
              5
              5
               1



                                      -.065
                                          33
                                           5
                                           5
                                           5
                                           5
                                           5
                                           5
                                           5
                                           5
                                           5
                                           5
                                           1



                                                                     -.065
                                                                         33
                                                                          5
                                                                          5
                                                                          5
                                                                          5
                                                                          5
                                                                          5
                                                                          5
                                                                          5
                                                                          5
                                                                          5
                                                                           1
            .0
            .1
            .2
            .3
            .4
            .5
            .6
            .7
            .8
            .9




                                         .0
                                         .1
                                         .2
                                         .3
                                         .4
                                         .5
                                         .6
                                         .7
                                         .8
                                         .9




                                                                        .0
                                                                        .1
                                                                        .2
                                                                        .3
                                                                        .4
                                                                        .5
                                                                        .6
                                                                        .7
                                                                        .8
                                                                        .9
         -.0




                                      -.0




                                                                     -.0
         <




                                     <




                                                                    <




                    700                            750                            800
    .4
    .3
    .2
    .1
     0
         -.065
             33
              5
              5
              5
              5
              5
              5
              5
              5
              5
              5
              1



                                      -.065
                                          33
                                           5
                                           5
                                           5
                                           5
                                           5
                                           5
                                           5
                                           5
                                           5
                                           5
                                           1



                                                                     -.065
                                                                         33
                                                                          5
                                                                          5
                                                                          5
                                                                          5
                                                                          5
                                                                          5
                                                                          5
                                                                          5
                                                                          5
                                                                          5
                                                                          1
           .0
           .1
           .2
           .3
           .4
           .5
           .6
           .7
           .8
           .9




                                         .0
                                         .1
                                         .2
                                         .3
                                         .4
                                         .5
                                         .6
                                         .7
                                         .8
                                         .9




                                                                       .0
                                                                       .1
                                                                       .2
                                                                       .3
                                                                       .4
                                                                       .5
                                                                       .6
                                                                       .7
                                                                       .8
                                                                       .9
         -.0




                                      -.0




                                                                     -.0
         <




                                     <




                                                                    <




Note. The graph presents the distribution of respondents by the share the respondent is willing to
pay in order to receive the payment for each of the stakes. The left bar is representing all responses
smaller or equal to -0.065, which is the largest value of censored share and is defined as - 50 MKD
divided by the maximum stake, 800 MKD.




                                                 18
                  Table D8: Correlation of willingness to pay to stakes
                                                   Incentivized             Non incentivized
                                                 (1)           (2)           (3)         (4)
                                                OLS           OLS           OLS         OLS
    Stake equal to 550-650 MKD                 -0.000         0.003        -0.036      -0.036
                                              (0.028)       (0.027)       (0.033)     (0.029)
    Stake equal to 700-800 MKD                 -0.017        -0.008        -0.057      -0.052*
                                              (0.028)       (0.027)       (0.034)     (0.030)
    Stake equal to 5500-6500 MKD                                           0.017       0.018
                                                                          (0.031)     (0.031)
    Stake equal to 7000-8000 MKD                                           0.060**     0.058**
                                                                          (0.026)     (0.026)
    Controls                                    No            Yes            No         Yes
    Observations                                768           768           768         768
    R2                                         0.001         0.048         0.009       0.057
    F test of joint equality to zero of        0.780         0.922         0.060       0.084
    corresponding stakes (p-value)

Note. Standard errors in parenthesis are clustered at municipality level (*** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, *
p<0.1). Dependent variable is willingness to pay (in the incentivized and non-incentivized versions)
defined as the share of transfer the respondent is willing to give away to receive the money instead
of the partner receiving the money. Excluded controls include a dummy variable for the stake 400-
500 MKD for the incentivized willingness to pay and a dummy for the stake 4000-5000 MKD for
the non incentivized. Controls include age and education of partner’s, the gender of the household
head, religion and ethnicity of the household, regional dummies, indicator variables for the type of
settlement and indicator variables for the stake. F test of joint equality is carried out on the stakes
corresponding to the reported willingness to pay.




                                                  19
D.3     The definition of income share
Throughout the paper, we defined respondent’s income share as her share of the sum
of income for her and her spouse. Income share is built using information about
assignable income from labour income, income from financial assistance (including
the CCT transfer) and assistance from family and friends. If available, we sum
income from up to two rounds of data collection. Figure D6 presents the distribution
of wife’s income share using all available information on attributable income.
    In order to validate our measure, we focus on the panel sample, i.e. respondents
of the lab interview that were interviewed at baseline in 2010, and we compare the
wife’s income share at baseline and at the time of the second follow up in 2013 in
municipalities where the CCT transfer was targeted to mothers and where it was
targeted to household heads. Table D9 shows that, while at baseline (columns (1)
and (2)), there is no significant difference among these two groups, at follow-up
respondents that are residing in a municipality where the CCT transfer targeted
mothers have a significantly larger income share (columns (3) and (4)). We also
observe a significant effect of the payment modality on willingness to pay (columns
(5) and (6)).

                     Figure D6: Distribution of wife’s income share
                    .5



                    .4



                    .3



                    .2



                    .1



                    0
                         0          .2         .4            .6     .8         1
                                            Wife's income share


Note. The graph presents the distribution of wife’s income share, define as the share total parental
income that is assignable to the women in the household.


   In this section we perform a series of robustness checks to show that results are
robust to the definition used to compute income shares.
   First, the main source of income for SFA recipients is the social benefit paid by
the state. In this case the official recipient of the income is the household head,
which is the person entitled to receive the payment. In the main definition, we


                                                 20
attribute income from financial assistance to the household head. In order to test
whether the results are sensitive to this, we define the income share taking into
account only income different from SFA.
    Second, in our main definition we consider income assignable to a member the
financial assistance received from its family and friends. It might well be that such
assistance is provided to the household and not assignable to a specific member.
Because of this we present the results by excluding not only the assistance from
SFA, but also the income derived from assistance from family and friends.
    Third, in order to use additional information about income, we summed income
using each wave of household survey post-baseline. In order to check the robustness
of this measure, we present the results by looking at income shares computed using
only the latest source of information, the 2013 data collection wave.
    Table D10 shows the relation between willingness to pay and the respondent’s
income share using different definition to account for individual income and present-
ing IV estimates (equation 14) where income share is instrumented by the payment
modality introduced by the CCT.
    While the interpretation of the coefficient is slightly different as income share is
defined differently, we can observe that the results are robust to the definition of
income share: in all cases, we can identify a significant effect of the respondent’s
income share on its willingness to pay.

         Table D9: Income shares and willingness to pay in the panel sample
       Dependent var.:            Baseline wife’s       Follow-up wife’s      Willigness
                                   income share           income share           to pay
                                   (1)       (2)          (3)      (4)       (5)        (6)
                                  OLS       OLS          OLS      OLS       OLS        OLS
       Payment to mother         -0.017    -0.015        0.138*** 0.137*** -0.094** -0.100**
                                (0.022) (0.022)         (0.034) (0.034) (0.043) (0.038)

       Individual controls        Yes        Yes         Yes       Yes        Yes       Yes

       Ethnic controls            No         Yes         No        Yes        No        Yes
       Observations               249        249         249       249        249       249
       R2                        0.747      0.751       0.394     0.396      0.080     0.121

Note: Standard errors in parenthesis are clustered at municipality level (*** p<0.01, ** p<0.05,
* p<0.1). The table presents OLS estimates on the effect of living in a “Payment to mother”
municipality on different outcomes. In Columns (1) and (2), the dependent variable is wife’s income
share computed at baseline (pre-programme). In Columns (3) and (4), the dependent variable is
wife’s income share computed at follow-up. In Columns (5) and (6), the dependent variable is
willingness to pay to receive a transfer rather than having the partner receiving it. Controls include
age and education of partner’s, the gender of the household head, religion and ethnicity of the
household, regional dummies, indicator variables for the type of settlement and indicator variables
for the stake.



                                                   21
                                       Table D10: Willingness to pay and different definitions of income shares
                                                                                             Dep.var.: Willingness to pay
                Subsample:                                                 Include all observations    Exclude always keep and always give
                                                                            (1)       (2)       (3)       (4)       (5)          (6)
                                                                            IV        IV        IV        IV        IV           IV
                Wife’s income share (exclude SFA income)                  -0.122**                      -0.125***
                                                                         (0.054)                       (0.046)

                Wife’s income share (exclude all assistance)                         -0.104**                         -0.107***
                                                                                    (0.047)                          (0.039)

                Wife’s income share (consider only latest survey)                                -0.336**                             -0.386**
                                                                                                (0.140)                              (0.158)

                Controls                                                   Yes        Yes        Yes        Yes        Yes             Yes
                Observations                                               768        768        768        576        576             576




22
                First stage results:

                Payment to mother                                        0.437*** 0.510***      0.158*** 0.444*** 0.521***           0.144***
                                                                         0.026    0.029         0.024    0.032    0.035              0.029
                R2                                                       0.363    0.409         0.409    0.358    0.404              0.393
                F test of excluded instrument                           275.379 310.162         43.169 188.906 216.496               24.191

     Note: Standard errors in parenthesis are clustered at municipality level (*** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1). The table presents estimates for equation 14
     on the effect of wife’s income share, defined as the share attributable to the wife of total household income, and on total CCT transfer to the woman on
     willingness to pay. Dependent variable is willingness to pay defined as the share of transfer the respondent is willing to give away to receive the money
     instead of the partner receiving the money. Endogenous variables are instrumented using the dummy variable Payment to mother which is equal to one
     if the household resides in a municipality where the CCT transferred the money to mothers.In Columns (3)-(4) we restrict the sample by excluding the
     respondents who decided to always keeping the money offered or always giving it to their partner. Controls include age and education of partner’s, the
     gender of the household head, religion and ethnicity of the household, regional dummies, indicator variables for the type of settlement and indicator
     variables for the stake.
D.4    Alternative measures of empowerment
In this section, we focus on alternative measures of empowerment that can point
out the effect of payments targeting man versus woman. Since the randomization
of the payment modality in the CCT program didn’t include a pure control, in
municipalities where the transfer targeted household heads, the transfer could have
empowered men even further.
    We therefore look at two measures that can distinguish transfers towards men to
transfers towards women. First, we focus on the number of years in which a woman
has been recipient of the CCT transfer versus the number of years in which a man has
been a recipient. This number ranges from 0 to 3 and is dependent on the payment
modality assigned by the CCT to the municipality of residence of the household.
Second, we look at the actual CCT transfer to the woman versus the actual CCT
transfer to the man. In both cases, we estimate the effect on willingness to pay using
equation 14 and instrumenting the endogenous variable using the dummy variable
“Payment to Mother”, which is equal to 1 if the respondent resides in a municipality
where the CCT transfer targeted women.
    Table D11 presents estimates for these indicators of endogenous program par-
ticipation. A higher number of years in which a woman has been the recipient of
the CCT transfer and a higher amount received by a woman are linked to a lower
willingness to pay. On the contrary, a higher number of years in which a man has
been recipient of the CCT transfer and a higher amount received by a man are
linked to a higher willingness to pay.




                                         23
            Table D11: Effect of the number of years of gender-targeted recipiency and amount received on willingness to pay

                                                                                    Dep.var.: Willingness to pay
                  Subsample:                                     Include all observations           Exclude always keep and always give
                                                            (1)       (2)        (3)       (4)         (5)      (6)      (7)      (8)
                                                            IV        IV         IV        IV          IV       IV       IV       IV
                  N. of years with mother recipient       -0.056**                                   -0.059***
                                                         (0.025)                                    (0.020)

                  N. of years with father recipient                  0.048**                                     0.049***
                                                                    (0.021)                                     (0.017)

                  Wifes’s CCT income                                            -0.005**                                     -0.005***
                                                                               (0.002)                                      (0.002)

                  Husband’s CCT income                                                      0.004**                                       0.004***
                                                                                           (0.002)                                       (0.001)




24
                  Controls                                 Yes        Yes        Yes        Yes        Yes        Yes        Yes          Yes
                  Observations                             768        768        768        768        576        576        576          576
                  Uncentered R2                           0.302      0.301      0.297      0.302      0.393      0.390      0.385        0.391

                  First stage results:

                  Payment to mother                      0.942*** -1.107*** 10.663***-12.982*** 0.945*** -1.133*** 10.672***-13.679***
                                                         0.059    0.046     0.786     0.751     0.066     0.058    0.903     0.833
                  R2                                     0.390    0.495     0.321     0.371     0.379     0.514    0.315     0.397
                  F test of excluded instrument         253.325 575.486 183.897 299.156 202.726 381.525 139.577 269.593

     Note: Standard errors in parenthesis are clustered at municipality level (*** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1). Table presents estimates for equation 14
     on the effect of the number of years of gender-targeted recipiency and of total CCT transfer to the woman on willingness to pay. Dependent variable
     is willingness to pay defined as the share of transfer the respondent is willing to give away to receive the money instead of the partner receiving the
     money. Payment to mother is a dummy variable equal to one if the household resides in a municipality where the CCT transfers the money to mothers.
     In Columns (5)-(8) we restrict the sample by excluding the respondents who decided to always keeping the money offered or always giving it to their
     partner. Controls include age and education of partner’s, the gender of the household head, religion and ethnicity of the household, regional dummies,
     indicator variables for the type of settlement and indicator variables for the stake.
E          Identifying the empowerment effect
Consider preferences as specified in the Linear Expenditure System (LES):

               uS (Q, qA , qB ) = aS log(qS − cS ) + AS log(Q − C)    (S = A, B)         (24)

   so that individual S only cares about the consumption of his own private good
and the public good.
   The household then solves the following:


max (µ(aA log(q A − cA ) + AA log(Q − C)) + (1 − µ)(aB log(q B − cB ) + AB log(Q − C))
                                                                     s.t. pA q A + pB q B + P Q = x,
                                                                                          (25)

   Using the FOCs and the budget constraint, we get the following demands for
the private and public goods:7

                                    pA q A = pA cA + aA µX                               (26)


                                 pB q B = pB cB + aB (1 − µ)X                            (27)


                             P Q = P C + (AA µ + AB (1 − µ))X                            (28)

where X = x − pB cB − pA cA − P C.
   We find that the collective indirect utility of individual A is, up to an additive
constant:

v A (p, P, x, f ) = log X −aA log pA −AA log P +aA log(µaA )+AA log(µAA +(1−µ)AB ).
                                                                              (29)
     Setting all prices to 1, we can simplify this to:


         v A (x, f ) = k0 + log(x − k) + aA log(µaA ) + AA log(µAA + (1 − µ)AB ).        (30)

         Consider the Pareto weights to be additive separable function of f , x and z:

                                   µ = g(x) + h(f ) + k(z).                              (31)
     7
  When solving for this is to solve in the standard way, remember that aA + AA = 1 and
a + AB = 1.
 B




                                              25
   Using 30 and 12, we then arrive at:

                                          aA ∂µ          AA (AA −AB ) ∂µ
                                                                      ∂f
                                           µ ∂f     +    µAA +(1−µ)AB
                       s=                                                                                 (32)
                               x                   aA ∂µ        AA (AA −AB ) ∂µ
                              x−k     +x            µ ∂x   +    µAA +(1−µ)AB
                                                                             ∂x




                                 aA        AA (AA −AB )
   Using the notation Ω =         µ   +   µAA +(1−µ)AB
                                                                  we can write:

                                                         Ω ∂µ
                                                           ∂f
                                          s=                          ,                                     (33)
                                                    x
                                                   x−k   + xΩ ∂µ
                                                              ∂x

   and:                                                           
                                           2
                           ∂Ω ∂µ
                ∂s         ∂f ∂f   + Ω ∂∂fµ2          x
                                                     x−k    + xΩ ∂µ       ∂µ ∂Ω ∂µ
                                                                  ∂x − xΩ ∂x ∂f ∂f
                   =                                               2              .                        (34)
                ∂f
                                               
                                                    x           ∂µ
                                                   x−k     + xΩ ∂x

   Which can be simplified to:
                                                           2
                                                                                   
                                   ∂Ω ∂µ x
                       ∂s          ∂f ∂f x−k       + Ω ∂∂fµ2         x
                                                                    x−k   + xΩ ∂µ
                                                                               ∂x
                          =                                              2             .                   (35)
                       ∂f
                                               
                                                    x
                                                   x−k     + xΩ ∂µ
                                                                ∂x

   As:                                                                 
                 ∂Ω      ∂µ aA             AA (AA − AB ) AA ∂µ
                                                            ∂f − A B ∂µ
                                                                     ∂f
                    =−      −                                                                               (36)
                 ∂f    µ ∂f                          (µAA + (1 − µ)AB )2
                                                    ∂2µ             ∂s                               ∂2µ
is negative, we can see that as long as             ∂f 2
                                                           ≤ 0,     ∂f    is negative. However, if   ∂f 2
                                                                                                            > 0,
 ∂s
∂f may or may not be negative.




                                                      26
