NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

IT’S ABOUT TIME:
EFFECTS OF THE AFFORDABLE CARE ACT DEPENDENT COVERAGE MANDATE ON TIME USE
Gregory Colman
Dhaval Dave
Working Paper 21725
http://www.nber.org/papers/w21725

NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
November 2015
Revised February 2017

The authors are very grateful to Grace Bagwell-Adams, Erin George, Jennifer Kohn, and Jim
Marton for helpful comments. The authors would also like to thank session participants at the
2014 Southern Economic Association Conference, 2015 Eastern Economic Association
Conference, 2015 World Congress of the International Health Economics Association, and 2015
Conference of the International Atlantic Economic Society for valuable feedback and
suggestions. Dave thanks Bentley University for research support. The views expressed herein
are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of
Economic Research.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.
© 2015 by Gregory Colman and Dhaval Dave. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to
exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit,
including © notice, is given to the source.

It’s About Time: Effects of the Affordable Care Act Dependent Coverage Mandate On Time
Use
Gregory Colman and Dhaval Dave
NBER Working Paper No. 21725
November 2015, Revised February 2017
JEL No. H0,I1,J2
ABSTRACT
One of the main purposes of the Patient Protection and Affordable Care Act (ACA) is to enable
Americans to make more productive use of their time. This is apparent in the rationale given for
the ACA’s extension of dependent care coverage, which requires employer-sponsored insurance
plans that cover the children of insured workers to continue to cover these dependents until they
turn 26. While a number of studies have examined the effect of the ACA’s dependent coverage
provision on work, none that we are aware has examined other uses of time. If, as predicted, the
provision reduced the amount of time young adults work, the question arises, what have these
young adults done with this time? A related question is whether the change has made them better
off. We use the American Time Use Survey (2003-2013) to assess how the ACA’s dependent
coverage mandate has affected labor supply among young adults, and to provide some of the first
evidence on time use other than working, such as educational activities, obtaining medical care,
and pursuing leisure activities. Estimates suggest that the ACA’s dependent coverage provision
has reduced labor supply and job-lock, as well as the duration of the average doctor’s visit,
including time spent waiting for and receiving medical care, among persons ages 19-25. The
latter effect is consistent with a substitution from hospital ER utilization to greater routine
physician care. The extra time has gone into socializing, and to a lesser extent, into education
and job search. Availability of insurance and change in work time appear to have increased
young adults’ subjective well-being, enabling them to spend time on activities they view as more
meaningful than those they did before insurance became available.

Gregory Colman
Pace University
Department of Economics
41 Park Row, 11th Floor
New York, NY 10038
and NBER
gcolman@pace.edu
Dhaval Dave
Bentley University
Department of Economics
175 Forest Street, AAC 195
Waltham, MA 02452-4705
and NBER
ddave@bentley.edu

I.

Introduction
One of the main purposes of the Patient Protection and Affordable Care Act (ACA),

signed into law in March, 2010, is to enable Americans to make more productive use of their
time. This is apparent in the rationale given for the ACA’s extension of the dependent care
coverage mandate (DCM), which went into effect on September 23, 2010 and requires employersponsored insurance plans that cover the children of insured workers to continue to cover these
dependents until they reach the age of 26. In the Federal Register, the Administration states that
providing health insurance for these dependents will permit “greater job mobility for this
population as their health coverage will no longer be tied to their own jobs or student status” (FR
Vol. 75, No. 92, 2010/05/13 p. 27130). The assumption is that improved job mobility will
enable young persons to find jobs they view as more rewarding and where they can apply their
skills more productively.
The Federal Register further notes that the coverage mandate should “decrease the costshifting of uncompensated care onto those with coverage, increase the receipt of preventive
health care and provide more timely access to high quality care” (italics added). Prevalence of
insurance coverage among young adults has been historically low. Prior to the ACA and the
Great Recession, for instance, about 30% of younger adults (ages 19-26) lacked health insurance
compared with 17% of older adults (ages 27-64).1 Good health, higher risk tolerance,
unaffordability (due to lower earnings, job turnover, and/or higher premiums), and reduced
access to employer-sponsored benefits are important factors in young adults’ decision to forgo
coverage. Although young adults are generally healthier, they also exhibit non-trivial rates of
certain risk factors such as being overweight or obese, HIV and other sexually transmitted
1

Authors’ calculation from the 2007 March Current Population Survey, referring to information from the previous
year.

2

diseases, and chronic conditions such as asthma and hypertension for which access to timely care
is particularly important. Lack of insurance disrupts this access, with 60% of uninsured young
adults reporting that they had foregone medical care despite need (Collins et al. 2012).2 Thus,
the dependent coverage mandate aimed at reducing these barriers to healthcare by expanding
insurance coverage among young adults.
A number of studies have examined the effect of the ACA’s dependent care coverage
provision on uninsurance rates, health, and health care utilization among persons ages 19 to 25
(Blumenthal and Collins 2014; Barbaresco, Courtemanche and Qi 2015; Saloner and Lê Cook
2014) and on labor supply (Antwi, Moriya, Simon 2013). None that we are aware of has directly
examined the effect of the dependent care provision on time use. If, as suggested by Antwi,
Moriya, and Simon (2013), the provision reduced the amount of time young adults work, the
question arises, what have these young adults done with the time they used to spend working? A
related question is whether the change has made them better off. The answer to this last question
is not obvious, to judge by views of the ACA revealed in public opinion polls. For instance,
according to a poll conducted by Gallup, 53% of Americans disapprove of the ACA and 46%
think that the law will make things worse; only 16% believe it has helped them.3
We utilize the American Time Use Survey (ATUS) from 2003 through 2013 to answer
these two main questions, providing a number of contributions to the literature on the ACA.
First, we provide the most accurate estimates of the effect of the dependent care provision on
time spent working. The accuracy reflects two factors: 1) the greater precision of the ATUS in
2

Specifically, these young adults reported that they either did not fill a prescription, skipped recommended tests,
treatment, or follow-up, had a medical problem and did not visit the doctor or clinic, or did not get needed specialist
care. In comparison, 29% of insured young adults reported at least one of these access problems.
3
http://www.gallup.com/poll/182318/americans-slightly-positive-toward-affordable-care-act.aspx
http://www.gallup.com/opinion/polling-matters/178619/american-public-attitudes-toward-affordable-care-actfrozen-negative-state.aspx

3

measuring time use in comparison with surveys such as the Survey of Income and Program
Participation (SIPP) and the Current Population Survey (CPS);4 2) our data extend through 2013,
while prior work, such as Antwi, Moriya, and Simon (2013), use data only through 2011, before
the provision reached its full effect. Second, we are the first to examine the effects of the
provision on time use other than working, such as going to school, obtaining medical care, and
pursuing leisure activities. Third, we measure the effect of the provision on young adults’ selfreported levels of stress, happiness, sadness, sense of accomplishment, and tiredness, factors that
are collectively referred to as “subjective well-being”, as reported in the 2010, 2012, and 2013
rounds of the ATUS. Studies, such as those mentioned above, of the effect of gaining insurance
on young adults’ objective well-being (as measured by their health and finances) are certainly
necessary, though an equally valid question and component into cost-benefit calculus relates to
whether the beneficiaries of the law themselves reveal it has improved their lives – and if it has
not, such a finding may undermine a rationale for the policy shift.
II.

Background

Prior Studies
Studies of the dependent care provision have consistently found that rates of insurance
coverage have increased, though the magnitude of the increase varies. Using the CPS from 2004
to 2011, Lloyd, DeLia, Cantor, and Monheit (2014) find that uninsurance rates for non-students
19 to 25 years old declined by 4.5 percentage points when compared with 27- to 30-year-olds,

4

Prior research finds that compared with data from time diaries as well as from employers, data from the CPS tend
to overstate work time. Three reasons have been noted to account for much of the overstatement. 1) The ATUS has
less recall bias. 2) The ATUS asks respondents to account for all of their time in the prior day, so that the total time
spent adds up to 24 hours; as this constraint is of course true, imposing it increases precision. 3) The CPS asks about
work time during the week containing the 12th of the month, called the CPS “reference week”. This week is not
randomly chosen, and also not representative of a typical week during the month; in particular, it excludes most
holidays. In contrast, the days surveyed in the ATUS are distributed randomly throughout the year. Hence, the
ATUS offers some distinct advantages which make it worthwhile to estimate effects on work hours, and add to the
limited weight of the evidence in the literature on this issue.

4

reflecting an increase of 7.2 percentage points in parental employer-sponsored insurance (ESI)
and a decline of 2.8 percentage points in own- or spousal-coverage.5 The change increases with
income and declines with health. Using the SIPP from 2008 through 2011, Antwi, Moriya, and
Simon (2013) find a net decline of 3 percentage points in comparison with 27- to 29-year-olds,
reflecting a similar increase of 7 percentage points in parental ESI and a decline of 3 percentage
points in own-ESI and another one percentage point in individually-purchased or government
coverage. Using the Behavioral Risk Factor Surveillance System (BRFSS) from 2008 to 2012,
Barbaresco, Courtemanche, and Qi (2015) find a drop in uninsurance of 6.2 percentage points
among 23- to 25-year-olds, compared with 27- to 29-year-olds. The control groups are basically
the same in all three studies. Thus, the larger decline found in the latter study likely reflects the
combination of an additional year since the passage of the ACA and a stronger response among
their older treatment group of 23-25 year olds. Using the National Health Interview Survey for
2005 through 2011, Sommers, Buchmueller, Decker, Carey, and Kronick (2013) find a decrease
in uninsurance of 4.7 percentage points among 19- to 25-year-olds compared with 26- to 34year-olds. Thus, prior studies indicate a median decline of 4 to 5 percentage points in
uninsurance rates, using data mainly through 2011.
In order to frame our estimates for labor supply and time use, we require some such
estimate of the impact of the DCM on insurance coverage. However, since our data extend two
years further, to 2013, during which time the dependent care provision may have reduced
uninsurance rates further, we also generate our own estimate of the effect of the provision with a
difference-in-differences specification using the American Community Survey (ACS) from 2003
through 2013 and the Survey of Income and Program Participation (SIPP) through 2013. The

5

This suggests a crowd-out (of own for parent-based coverage) rate of about 39%.

5

ACS and SIPP analyses are in line with the prior studies and suggest a decline in uninsurance of
5.3 percentage points among young adults ages 23-25 (relative to older adults ages 27-29).
A number of studies have also examined whether gaining insurance increases emergency
room visits. This is relevant to our study because we assess effects on the duration of medical
visits, and visits to the hospital emergency department tend to consume more time than visits to
doctors’ offices. Such studies show mixed results. Medicaid expansions and health insurance
lotteries, such as the Rand Health Insurance Experiment, appear to increase emergency room
visits (Newhouse 1993, Currie & Gruber 1996; Taubman et al. 2012). In contrast, the expansion
of health insurance to large non-poor populations, as in Massachusetts in 1996 (Miller 2011) and
among young adults in the ACA (Hernandez-Boussard 2014; Antwi et al. 2015), appears to
reduce emergency department (ED) visits. The ACA’s dependent coverage provision also
increased physician visits among young adults (Jhamb, Dave and Colman 2015), which together
with the above evidence is consistent with a substitution from ED-based care to physician officebased care.
Very few studies have specifically estimated the effect of the ACA on time spent at work.
Antwi, Moriya, and Simon (2013), find that persons 19 to 25 years of age reduced their work
hours by about 48 minutes per week, or 10 minutes per day, compared with persons 27 to 29
years old, and Slusky (2015) cautions that such effects may be overstated due to confounding
differential trends. Depew (2015) studies the effects of earlier state mandates that extended the
age that young adults could continue to be covered as dependents on their parents’ insurance
plans, and finds that these laws reduced young adults’ labor supply at the intensive margin
though not significantly at the extensive margin. Using tax records over 2008-2012, Heim,
Lurie, and Simon (2014) find no meaningful changes in labor market outcomes at any margin,

6

though they note several limitations with the tax data, including having to use parental retirement
benefits as a proxy for health insurance coverage, access to only two years of pre-policy data,
and lack of information on hours worked or part-time vs. full-time status.
In contrast, Bailey and Chorniy (2016) do not look at work time per se but rather at job
mobility in the Current Population Surveys, studying whether the respondent switched jobs, and
they find no evidence that the ACA’s DCM had any effect on this measure of job mobility.
Bailey (2013) looks at self-employment and also finds no robust evidence that the DCM raised
self-employment. These two studies conclude that job-lock may not be a major concern for
young adults, and lack of health insurance may not be an impediment to entrepreneurship among
this age group.
Contributions
We add to this very limited, and conflicting, evidence base on how the DCM has affected
labor supply decisions among young adults, based on detailed data from the American Time Use
Surveys. We also re-estimate first-order effects on insurance coverage, based on longitudinal
data from the Survey of Income and Program Participation (SIPP), updating the estimates of
Antwi, Moriya, and Simon (2013) to reflect the same time periods used in our analysis.6
No study we are aware of has examined the effect of gaining insurance on non-labor uses
of time. We provide the first estimates on how the DCM has affected these other uses of time,
and also provide some of the first evidence on time spent receiving and waiting for medical care,
which would capture shifts in the use of medical care inputs (for instance, from hospital
emergency room care to routine physician care) associated with a shift from being uninsured to
gaining insurance coverage. Finally, we provide some suggestive evidence on whether these
6

Antwi, Moriya, and Simon (2013) provided insurance effects based on SIPP data up to 2011. We re-estimate the
effects based on the most recent SIPP waves (up to 2013).

7

changes have made young adults better off in their own assessment, based on a novel module on
subjective well-being which measures adults’ self-reported levels of stress, happiness, sadness,
sense of accomplishment, and tiredness associated with the activities that they were performing.
III.

Data
We use the American Time Use Survey (ATUS) from 2003 through 2013, the period

which enveloped the enactment of the DCM and which allows us to observe responses over three
years post-enactment. We do not incorporate ATUS data from 2014-2015 in the main analyses
since the effects in these years may be confounded by the impacts of the 2014 components of the
ACA, which had different effects across age groups. Instead, we incorporate these two recent
waves in auxiliary analyses for specification checks (described in the Results section).
The ATUS is a subsample of the Current Population Survey (CPS), which interviews
about 60,000 households per year. Each household in the CPS is interviewed for four months,
left out for eight months, and then re-interviewed for four additional months. Thus each
household, if it does not dissolve or move, is interviewed eight times. Each month about oneeighth of the sample is being interviewed for the first time, and one-eighth, for the final time.
Two months after households complete their eighth CPS interview, they become eligible for
selection into the ATUS sample. About half of the households invited to participate in the
ATUS choose to do so. African-Americans, Hispanics, and households with young children are
oversampled for the ATUS. About 10% of the sample is randomly assigned to report on each
weekday, and 25%, on each weekend day. The day on which they report is called the “diary
day”. Sampling weights are provided to account for the oversampling of the different
demographic groups and of weekends, as well as for non-response. Hence, as the CPS, the

8

ATUS is nationally representative of the civilian, non-institutional population residing in
occupied households.
Participants are interviewed the day after the diary day to minimize recall errors. The
time diary component of the interview contains a detailed account of the respondent’s activities,
starting at 4 a.m. the previous day and ending at 4 a.m. on the interview day. Each activity in the
time diary component is assigned a six-digit classification code. The first two digits represent
one of 17 major activity codes (ranging from personal care to household services to exercise and
sports); the next two digits represent the second-tier level of detail, and the final two digits
represent the third, most detailed level of activity. For example, the ATUS code for “Using
health and care services outside the home” is 080401, which is part of code 0804, “Medical care
and services”, which is part of code 08, “Professional & Personal Care Services”.
From the reported measures of time use we construct outcomes capturing time spent in
various activities, at the extensive and intensive margins. These include activities related to the
labor market: minutes working, including time spent actually working, other work-related
activities, such as socializing, eating, and drinking related to work (for salespeople, etc.), and
other income-generating activities, such as hobbies, performances, and renting assets; a
dichotomous indicator for whether the respondent is employed; work minutes conditional on
being employed; and minutes spent searching and interviewing for jobs. We also capture
activities related to healthcare utilization: minutes receiving and waiting for medical care outside
the home; minutes receiving medical care outside the home; minutes receiving medical care
conditional on receiving any care (intensive margin); minutes waiting for medical care; and
minutes waiting for medical care conditional on receiving any care (intensive margin). The
remaining measures capture minutes spent on: recreational exercise, educational activities

9

(including time spent in class, studying, researching, and homework, as well as dealing with the
school administration), sleeping, eating and drinking, purchasing goods and services, and
socializing and relaxing (excluding watching television).
We also use the 2010, 2012, and 2013 Well-Being Supplement to the ATUS, in which all
respondents to the ATUS are included. Respondents are asked about three randomly selected
activities from the diary day, and for each activity, to report using scales of 0 to 6 their
happiness, sadness, pain, stress, and tiredness, as well as how meaningful the respondent
considers the activity. We create a measure of the average level of each effect over the
respondent’s three activities using the time spent in each activity. For example, the average
happiness of respondent i is
(1)
where

refers to the time person i spent in activity k, and

is the degree of happiness of

person i during activity k.
All models include various controls for the respondent’s socio-demographic
characteristics, including education, marital status, race and ethnicity, and gender. We match
data on the unemployment rate, from the Bureau of Labor Statistics (BLS), based on the
respondent’s state of residence, and month and year of interview. In addition, we construct and
control for a dummy variable for incomplete interviews, that equals 1 if the respondent did not
account for all of his or her activities during the day. About 88% of the sample have complete
reports (reporting for the full 24 hours), and 94% of the sample report on at least 23 of the past
24 hours. Excluding incomplete interviews from the analyses does not materially change the
results or conclusions.
IV.

Conceptual Framework
10

We discuss here how the ACA’s dependent coverage mandate may impact various
activities, basing our discussion informally on a partial equilibrium set-up and highlighting
potential mechanisms that suggest that many of the effects are theoretically ambiguous. We leave
it to future research to disentangle all of the potential pathways that may underlie these effects.
Any first-order effects of the ACA’s dependent coverage mandate would necessarily be
on insurance and employment outcomes. Employment and health insurance coverage remain
intrinsically connected in the United States because of the tax deductibility of employer-provided
health insurance benefits and the absence of a universal, public health insurance system.
Availability of low-cost coverage options apart from one’s job would be expected to affect
employment outcomes, specifically reducing “job-lock” and increasing job mobility (Gruber
2000). Optimization of the labor-leisure tradeoff also predicts a decrease in labor supply
associated with the DCM. That is, obtaining dependent insurance coverage is akin to an increase
in non-labor income, leading to a pure income effect and an increase in leisure. We confirm this
prediction using detailed data on time use, following limited prior work on labor supply (Antwi,
Moriya, and Simon 2013; Heim, Lurie, and Simon 2014; Depew 2015).
By delinking the availability of low-cost health insurance from work, the DCM would be
expected to affect the marginal valuation of time spent on non-work activities and thus affect the
tradeoff between labor and leisure.7 The predicted reduction in labor supply and the associated
decrease in earnings have potentially reinforcing income and substitution effects.8 These shifts
would have second-order effects on non-work related time use. (Since the mandate operates
7

See Colman and Dave (2013) for a more formal model set-up, which frames the question of how employment
decisions can affect other activities within a modified static version of the human capital model for the demand for
health. Here we abstract from the formal set-up and discuss some of intuitive predictions as relevant to this study.
8
The DCM may also be associated with a positive income effect as uninsured young adults gain coverage and
experience a reduction in out-of-pocket medical spending. While this may moderate the negative income effect
from the reduction in labor supply, the net income effect is still likely to be negative since we find that virtually all
of the reduction in the labor supply is occurring at the extensive margin (see results).

11

mainly through its labor market impact, a null labor market effect would imply small or no
effects on the other outcomes as well.) From the hypothesized reduction in labor supply and
easing of the discretionary time constraint, young adults are predicted to allocate more of their
freed-up non-work time towards activities that are relatively more time-intensive and less
intensive in market-based inputs. We therefore expect an increase in activities that require more
time inputs (such as job search, education, and socializing) and a decrease in the demand for
activities that are complementary to market inputs (such as time spent shopping and purchasing
goods and services). The negative income effect, however, may offset any positive effects on
time spent shopping.
A priori, effects on time spent receiving medical care are ambiguous. On the one hand,
there may be a scale effect as expansion of coverage to uninsured individuals raises the demand
for medical care -- both ER visits as well as for a regular source of care. On the other hand, there
is also a substitution effect from unscheduled ER-based care to scheduled and routine physician
office-based care; thus, it is likely that visits to a regular source of care probably increased more
than visits to emergency rooms, which may reduce the average time spent receiving medical
care. This effect would also predict that there would be a decrease in the time spent waiting for
medical care.
Since the ACA’s DCM is a mandate on employers and not on consumers, young adults
who opt to take up coverage under their parents’ health insurance are presumably doing so
because the benefits from this option outweigh those from others (such as taking up coverage
under their own jobs, accepting a job to obtain coverage, or remaining uninsured). Any shift in
activities and time use brought about by the ACA’s DCM must therefore necessarily make these

12

young adults better off from the standpoint of utility maximization. Thus, we predict an increase
in subjective well-being from the dependent coverage mandate.
V.

Empirical Framework
The objective of this study is to assess how the ACA’s dependent coverage mandate

affected labor supply and various other measures of time use in healthcare and non-healthcare
activities among young adults. We empirically frame this question and test the above predictions
within a difference-in-differences (DD) analysis, comparing conditional trends pre- and postDCM for groups affected and not affected by the policy. Specifically, we follow the literature
and define the “treatment” group as comprising young adults between the ages of 19-25, the age
group targeted by the DCM. Individuals, between the ages of 27-34 constitute the control group,
who because of being older than 26 years of age are not eligible to obtain health insurance under
the DCM.9
Our primary specification takes the following form,

(2)
where

references time-use outcomes (for individual i residing in state j and interviewed on

day d, month m, and year t), and

refers either to after 2010 or after 2011. The DCM went

into effect in September of 2010, and did not apply until the start of the next plan year. Thus,
2010 is always a pre-treatment period. We expect the effects to be larger when the treatment
period is further from the enactment date. The vector

includes demographic controls and

9

We follow the literature and exclude 26 year olds from either the treatment or control groups in order to minimize
any measurement error as this is a transition period and some 26 year olds may be shifting coverage in anticipation
of aging out.

13

the indicator for an incomplete diary. The variable

refers to the unemployment rate in the

respondent’s state of residence during the year and month of interview.
All specifications further control for state fixed effects (μ), which account for any
unobserved time-invariant state-specific factors, as well as time fixed effects. Insurance status
had been trending downwards prior to the ACA both among 19- to 25-year-olds and among 27to 34-year-olds. Also, the Great Recession has caused fluctuations in work and other time use. It
is likely that only some of these trends are picked up by the state unemployment rate. The year
indicators (θ) would capture any such national trends in time use and in insurance status
independent of the changes caused by the ACA, most notably shocks to the labor and healthcare
markets from the recent economic downturn. We also include month dummies (τ) because many
activities, such as exercise, as well as mood, vary substantially by season, and we include day-ofthe-week dummies (φ) to control further for changes in time use and mood over the week. As an
obvious example, most work time occurs during the week, while most exercise and socializing
occur during the weekend. Also, subjective well-being varies noticeably over the week, with
respondents reporting being least happy, saddest, most tired, most stressed, but engaged in their
most meaningful activity, on Wednesday. In our primary specification, we do not control for
school enrollment or for health status, as these are two of the likely outcomes of the change in
the law we are analyzing.
Some research suggests that the effects of the ACA on labor and health outcomes found
in the prior literature may be spurious, reflecting different trends in the control and treatment
groups prior to the ACA taking effect (Slusky 2015). The validity of difference-in-differences
analysis, of course, depends on common trends between the control group and the treatment
group had the treatment group not been treated. Figures 1-3 present these trends for our

14

outcomes. Due to sample size limitations (a limitation not exclusive to our study, but also
pervasive in most of the ACA literature), the trends are noisy. The commonality of trends cannot
be tested after the new policy takes effect, since the policy will itself affect the trend of the
treated group. However, the parallel trends assumption can be tested prior to that time. We
therefore formally test for differential trends in two ways, which also serve as placebo checks.
First, we estimate equation (2), adding the interaction of the treatment dummy and a
variable that equals the year if the year is prior to 2010, and equals zero afterwards. The p-value
on this variable indicates whether linear trends in the treatment and control groups differed in the
pre-treatment period. Our second test follows Slusky (2015), wherein we estimate our main
equation (2) above but define the treatment period from 2007 to 2009 or to 2008, and the control
period, from 2003 to 2007. Since the law only went into effect in 2010, we should find no effect
of the pseudo-treatment when the sample is limited to period prior to implementation of the
DCM. As a third check on our specification, we redefine the treatment group as only persons
between the ages of 23 and 25. This reduces our sample size by about half, but creates a
treatment group that is more attached to the labor market, less likely to be still enrolled in school,
and in general more similar to the control group of persons 27 to 34 (Table 1). Fourth, we also
estimate specifications that include state-specific linear trends to evaluate if our estimates are
driven by unobserved state level heterogeneity and systematic differential trends.
Prior to the passage of the ACA in 2010, 37 states had laws protecting the insurance
coverage of dependent children,10 the great majority having been passed after 2005. Monheit et
al. (2011) find that the state laws had little net effect on the insurance coverage of young adults.
To gauge if state dependent coverage laws might affect our results, we estimate equation (2) only
on young adults who would not be eligible for coverage under these state regulations.
10

http://www.ncsl.org/research/health/dependent-health-coverage-state-implementation.aspx

15

Further, when presenting the results, we discuss additional checks which assess the
validity of the identifying variation, and robustness to alternate sample restrictions and
controls.11 All models are estimated with OLS, as the outcomes are in general continuous.12
Since we include state effects and the policy change is at the national level starting in September
of 2010 and affecting persons of a particular age, we assume that the error terms (denoted by ε in
equation 2) are correlated within single year of age and survey year. In fact, the variance of the
coefficient matrix hardly changes whether we assume merely heteroskedasticity, or
heteroskedasticity combined with the clustering described above. Since policy variation is at the
age by time level, we also alternately estimated standard errors clustered at the age level. These
results reinforce those presented in the tables, and our inferences and conclusions are not
materially altered.13
VI.

Results

Descriptive Statistics
Table 1 reports the means of the variables used in the main analyses, across the two
treatment groups (ages 19-25 and ages 23-25) and the control group (ages 27-34). Time use
clearly differs between 19- to 25-year-olds and 27- to 34-year-olds. The older group spends more
time working, but less time in exercise, education, sleep, and socializing. The 23- to 25-year-old
group is closer to the older group in work-related activities, but closer to the younger group in
the other activities. With respect to time spent receiving medical care, this is somewhat larger
11

We are grateful to the editor and two anonymous referees for suggesting these.
The ATUS oversamples weekends and certain demographic groups and provides sampling weights to generate
population-based estimates. Because we include dummy variables for demographic characteristics as well as day of
the week of the survey, we do not use survey weights in our estimates (DuMouchel & Duncan 1983; Solon, Haider,
Wooldridge 2015). We also use OLS for dichotomous outcomes, and confirm that the results are not sensitive to
estimation via logit or probit regression.
13
Clustering at the age level leads to a small number of clusters, which may bias standard errors, and hence
inferences were drawn based on degrees of freedom determined by the number of clusters. Alternately, we could
have clustered at the state level, though this is less logical in our case since the treatment is not at the state level.
Nevertheless, clustering by state actually makes our standard errors slightly smaller and strengthens our inferences.
12

16

among 27-34 year olds, particularly in relation to the 23-25 year olds, consistent with a larger
prevalence of insurance among the older group. However, among those who receive medical
care, time spent waiting to receive care is higher among the younger adults (12-14 minutes)
relative to the older adults (10 minutes), which is consistent with uninsured younger adults
receiving more of their healthcare through non-scheduled clinic or ED visits. All three groups
are quite similar in demographic characteristics and in levels of happiness, sadness, stress,
tiredness, and meaningfulness of their activities.
Main Analyses
Table 2 reports estimates from our main DD models (equation 2) on the effects of the
DCM on labor supply. Specifications 1-4 utilize the full treatment group (ages 19-25), and
specifications 5-7 utilize the narrowly-defined treatment group (23-25) who are more likely to
have finished schooling and entered the labor force. As found by Antwi, Moriya, and Simon
(2013), the availability of insurance reduces time spent working, though our baseline estimate
(specification 1) —about 18 minutes per day or about 9% (relative to the treatment group mean)
— is about double that found in the prior study.14 This could be due to a longer time period
since the ACA took effect, as well as a different measure of work time, and a different
comparison group, as we use persons ages 27 to 34. In fact, the effect size increases in
magnitude (23 minutes decline) the further we get from implementation (specification 2, which
allows for a lag and defines the post-period as post-2011 compared with specification 1 which
defined the treatment period as post-2010). This suggests that the DCM may have gradually
changed behavior, which speaks to the value of using more post-policy data to assess its
cumulative and full effects.
14

Our results mainly reflect a post-ACA decline in work among the treatment group, rather than an increase among
the control group, which adds a degree of confidence that it was the ACA and not a spurious trend in the control
group that accounts for our results.

17

Next, we decompose whether this decrease in labor supply is occurring at the extensive
and/or the intensive margin by separately assessing effects on employment and on work time
conditional on employment. Most of the decline appears to reflect declines at the extensive
rather than intensive margin, as we find insignificant and much smaller effects on labor supply
among those who are currently employed and a significant decline in employment status of 4-6
percentage points.
The first-order effect of the mandate is necessarily on dependent coverage rates. In order
to gauge the credibility of these employment effects, we therefore compare them to changes in
dependent coverage rates, which must be bigger than the change in employment. To do so we
require estimates of the extent to which eligible young adults opted for coverage under their
parents’ plans because of the mandate. As the ATUS does not contain information on insurance
coverage, we instead employ the Survey of Income and Program Participation (SIPP), also used
by Antwi, Moriya, and Simon (2013) in their early study of the dependent coverage mandate.
Their study, however, only extends through 2011 and may not be informative about the effect of
the mandate during our study period. We therefore estimated models of dependent coverage as
well as of any coverage using the full 16 waves of the 2008 SIPP, spanning through 2013.15 The
effect of the mandate on dependent coverage was 10.2 percentage points (p-value ≤ 0.01), with a
little less than half of these individuals switching from employer-sponsored health insurance to
dependent coverage, and the rest newly gaining coverage. The net gain in insurance in the SIPP
(5.28 percentage points; p-value ≤ 0.01) is quite close to that estimated in other research and also
to our estimate using the American Community Survey. These effects in combination with the
employment effects are consistent with a subset of those gaining dependent coverage quitting
15

We applied the Stata code associated with Antwi, Moriya, and Simon (2013) (posted on the American Economic
Journal website) and recreated their variables, extending their analyses to 16 waves of the 2008 SIPP.

18

their work and/or those entering the labor market for the first time taking longer to look for a
better-matching job. Others are not, and yet others are remaining employed while just switching
their coverage. Thus, most importantly, it is validating that the gain in dependent coverage,
which is the relevant first-order margin, is much larger than the drop in employment.
Furthermore, the magnitude of the observed decline in work minutes (18-23 minutes
daily) is also consistent with and can be fully explained by the observed decline in employment
(4-6 percentage points). If there are no major effects on labor supply at the intensive margin, as
there does not seem to be, then inflating the work minutes estimates by a factor of 17-25
(reciprocal of the estimates of employment) yields an average implied work day of about 7-7.5
hours among those who shifted status from employment to non-employment. This is virtually
identical to the Census estimate of 7.5 average hours worked daily by employed persons in 2010.
In this as in almost all the outcomes we examine, the effects are stronger when the treatment
period is limited to 2012 and 2013, suggesting stronger cumulative effects.16
The final row of results suggests an increase in time spent looking for new jobs. While
the coefficient on time spent searching and interviewing for jobs is insignificant using the full
sample, it is significant at the 5 percent level when the outcome period is limited to post-2011,
after the law had more time to take effect. Among 23- to 25-year-olds, who would have a
stronger attachment to the labor force and more likely to have completed their schooling, the
effects were larger and more precisely estimated in both time periods.17

16

We confirm these patterns by estimating an event study (Appendix Table 1), decomposing the timing of the
effects. Since our samples sizes are small, to gain some precision we grouped pre-policy years into two-year pairs,
and, in some models group three post-policy years together. The analysis reveals no significant effects before the
dependent care provision took effect, but afterwards, both working time and employment declined monotonically
and significantly.
17
Though the absolute effect magnitudes appear small (in terms of minutes), they are substantial in relation to the
baseline mean. Even when imprecisely estimated, they suggest an increase of 30%.

19

Table 2 also reports on some of our specification checks. First, the results are generally
robust to the inclusion of state-specific linear trends (model 4) and to limiting the sample to
young adults who would be ineligible for coverage under state laws (models 3 and 7). In fact, as
expected, the effect of the ACA is a bit stronger for these state-ineligible young adults, though
the loss in sample sizes also reduces the precision of our estimates.18 Table 2 also reports one of
our placebo checks, whether there are any systematic differences in the trends in each reported
outcome between the treatment and control groups prior to 2010. The p-value for this test is
reported in the square brackets. It is validating that none of the pre-policy trend differences are
significant at conventional levels. Overall the results for labor-market outcomes in Table 2
appear to confirm the benefits of non-work-related health insurance in reducing job-lock. We
also find suggestive evidence of an increase in job-searching, which is consistent with the
availability of insurance outside of employment allowing young adults to take longer to possibly
search for more suitable jobs. The employment effects in conjunction with this increase in jobsearch activity is consistent with greater job mobility and a reduction in job-lock.
Table 3 reports estimates for time spent receiving and waiting for medical services.
These results suggest a decline in these uses of time, though the point estimates are generally
statistically insignificant. However, in some cases they do represent a somewhat sizeable
decline. For instance, the estimates for total time receiving care suggest a decline of about 2025% relative to the baseline mean. Estimates for total time waiting for medical care are
statistically insignificant for the broad treatment groups (ages 19-25) but significant for young
adults ages 23-25, suggestive of a decline in waiting time of about 0.4 minutes daily on average.
18

Monheit et al. (2011) find little effects of these pre-ACA state laws on the insurance coverage of young adults,
which we confirm with the ACS data as well. Thus, we would not expect a substantially larger effect of the ACA’s
DCM when omitting those individuals who would be eligible under the state laws since if these individuals had not
substantially expanded their insurance status prior to the ACA, they would be potentially impacted by the DCM and
would be a valid inclusion in the treatment group.

20

We find more solid evidence that these effects are being realized at the intensive margin. That
is, conditional on receiving any medical care, the DCM is significantly associated with a drop in
the time spent both obtaining medical care (by about 25-30 minutes on average) and in the time
spent waiting for medical care (by about 10-20 minutes on average).
These estimates are generally robust when we control for state-specific trends (model 4)
or omit individuals from the sample who may be eligible for dependent coverage under state
laws prior to the ACA’s DCM (models 3 and 7). As with our models for labor supply, we do not
find any statistically significant differences in pre-policy trends between the treatment and
control groups (p-values for this test reported in square brackets).
Young adults between the ages of 19-25 have the highest prevalence of ER (emergency
room) use among adults; in 2008, 26% of young adults had obtained some care in the hospital
ER (National Health Interview Survey – NHIS). The findings in Table 3 lend support to the
view that making insurance more easily available to non-poor households19 with working parents
reduces the use of emergency-room care and increased office-based physician visits (Antwi et al.
2015; Jhamb et al. 2015; Hernandez-Boussard et al. 2014).20 According to the National
Ambulatory Medical Care Survey (2011 and 2012 NAMCS, produced by the CDC), the median
time spent in visits to the ER was 120 minutes, while the median time for visits with general
practitioners was 17 minutes; and for specialties, the median time was higher than general
practitioners but varied considerably. Since, visits to doctors’ offices take less time than visits to
the ER, average time spent waiting for and seeing doctors must have declined, as we find using
the ATUS.
19

Households wherein family income exceeds the poverty thresholds reported each year by the Census Bureau.
Both Antwi et al. (2015) and Hernandez-Boussard et al. (2014) find a significant and direct decrease in ER visits –
on the order of 6-7 visits (per 1000 population). Non-adjusted estimates from the NHIS also suggest a decline in the
prevalence of care at the hospital ER by about 2-3 percentage points among the treatment group relative to the
control group (authors’ calculations). Jhamb, Colman, and Dave (2015) find that the dependent care provision
increased yearly doctor visits by about ¾ of a visit.
20

21

The decrease in time spent receiving medical care may also reflect an improvement in the
quality of medical care, both from a substitution from ER-based healthcare to a more routine
source of physician care, and also since time spent with the physician is generally lower than
with more expensive specialist doctors. Similarly, time spent waiting to receive medical care
declined substantially among those who received care, consistent with a number of young
persons switching their regular source of care from the emergency room to the doctor’s office.
The estimates in Tables 2 and 3 suggest that the ACA’s DCM likely reduced employment
among those eligible for dependent coverage, and also reduced the time spent obtaining and
receiving medical care services particularly at the intensive margin. To some extent, some of
this time was spent in looking for new jobs. The question remains how those no longer working
used the rest of their freed-up time. Table 4 reports estimates for the other uses of time. Young
adults (ages 19-25) spent more time in education, an additional 6 to 8 minutes daily on average,
which translates into a 15-20% increase relative to the baseline treatment group mean.21 As
expected, the effect on education is smaller for 23- to 25-year-olds since fewer individuals in this
group are enrolled in school; it is also insignificant. It is still, however, positive, and the lower
precision is to be expected with the much smaller sample size. We also find some decrease in the
time spent purchasing goods and services (3-5 minutes daily; 10-15%), which reflects the
negative income effect associated with the reduction in employment. Most of the freed-up time
from the reduction in labor supply (at least 50% or so) is reallocated into socializing and relaxing
– an additional 9-13 minutes daily (8-10% relative effect size). Significant coefficients on the
differential pre-policy time trends for all outcomes are generally rejected for all of these
21

As noted in the Data section, educational activities include time spent in class, in extra-curricular activities, in
school-related research, and in school-related administrative activities. The estimate in the model is an average
effect across the treatment population, including those whose educational activities are affected (mostly those who
are current students) and those for whom there is no effect. As a reference, daily time in educational activities
averages 149.9 minutes (145.5 minutes) for youth ages 19-25 (ages 23-25) who are currently enrolled in school
either full-time or part-time. About 15.7% of youth ages 19-25 are full-time students.

22

outcomes among all subgroups within a Type 1 error. Our overall conclusion that the DCM was
associated with an increase in time spent on education and socializing is also robust to
controlling for state-specific trends and restricting the sample to those young adults who would
be ineligible for dependent coverage under pre-ACA laws.
Table 5 shows the results of our placebo regressions. Almost all of the coefficients
become insignificant and often have different signs from our main results. In particular, the
effect on being employed among those in the treatment group drops to zero and is insignificant in
all but one subgroup, in which its sign is opposite to that of Table 2. The effect on total work
time also changes sign, but is significant in some subgroups. The magnitude and significance of
the coefficients, however, vary so much as to suggest that the results are largely due to chance.
Given the results of our specification tests, we conclude that the ACA likely reduced
employment among those eligible for dependent coverage
As mentioned above, young persons spent much of the time they were no longer working
in socializing and relaxing. This may or may not necessarily represent a positive shift from the
point of view of the former worker. During the Great Recession it was also found that persons
who lost their jobs socialized more than before (Colman and Dave 2013), but their levels of
sadness and stress rose. Thus the question remains whether those obtaining insurance and
working less view the change as positive. For this we consider effects on the measures of
subjective well-being reported in Table 6. Consistent with the view that unlinking insurance
status with working full-time provides more flexibility, the significant change in well-being is an
increase in the sense that the respondent is doing something he or she finds meaningful. Further,
measures of happiness increase significantly, and of tiredness and stress decline, though the latter
changes were not significant (except among young adults ages 23-25 in the restricted sample in

23

specification 7). The effect magnitudes suggest about a 3-5% increase in happiness and
meaningfulness, and overall these patterns are consistent with a general increase in subjective
well-being associated with the shift in activities due to the ACA’s DCM.22
The Well-Being Supplement began in 2010, which we take to be our control year. But as
suggested by Antwi, Moriya, and Simon (2013), some insurance companies announced as soon
as the ACA was passed that they would allow dependent adults to remain on their parents’
insurance plan until 26. Thus, if anything, our estimates for subjective well-being would be
conservative and biased toward zero. The concern remains that we only have one pre-treatment
period for this part of the analysis. In order to assess the importance of this limitation, we also
re-estimated our main employment models using only data from 2010 onwards, and thus only
using 2010 as a pre-policy period. Expectedly, standard errors inflate and reduce precision,
rendering most of the estimates insignificant. However, the effect magnitudes remain very
similar (14.0 to 23.7 minute decline in daily work time, and 5-8 pct. points decline in
employment). The results on well-being should be viewed as suggestive in light of these
caveats.
Specification Checks
In models not reported, we implement several checks to confirm that our estimates are
robust to alternate sample restrictions, extensions, and controls.23 First, we re-estimated our
main models allowing the trends to differ non-parametrically based on demographics, interacting
year effects by marital status, race, ethnicity, and education. Second, we also estimated models
(for treatment group ages 23-25) while excluding those enrolled in school and those who are
current students in order to produce treatment and control groups more similar in terms of work
22

Sample sizes for these models are reduced due to the well-being modules being available only in the 2010, 2012,
and 2013 waves of the ATUS.
23
Available from the authors upon request.

24

and non-work time. Both of these extensions aim to address baseline dissimilarities in some
non-work related activities across groups that may also be correlated with changes over time.
Our results are not materially affected either in terms of effect magnitudes or significance.
Next, we assess whether the policy response differs across sub-populations. While we
are not able to stratify by each socio-demographic group due to sample size limitations, we
estimated our main model interacting our treatment variables with marital status. The joint Fstatistic on the interactions was 1.23, with a p-value of 0.23. Thus there appears to be little
difference in the law’s effect along this direction. We also tested for differential effects by race
and ethnicity, and by education. All of the interactions were singly and jointly insignificant at the
10 percent level.
We also confirm our previous result that virtually all of the labor market effects we
identify are at the extensive margin, by separating out effects for full-time and part-time
employed workers. Limiting the sample to part-time or full-time workers does indeed remove
most of the law’s effect. Including only part-time workers, the sample size drops from 30,803 to
4,556, and the estimated effect on work time drops to an insignificant 2.8 (std. error = 14.5)
minutes. Including only full-time workers, the sample size drops to 8,835 and the effect on work
time to an insignificant 1.3 (std. error = 6) minutes.
Since older cohorts on average work more hours relative to younger cohorts, one concern
may be that they are employed in different types of jobs, which may be correlated with trends in
labor supply. We consulted the American Community Surveys and find that the industry
composition between the two groups (ages 23-25; ages 27-34) is broadly similar, except for an
expectedly larger share of younger adults working in retail trade (25.5% vs. 16.9%). Level
differences (in hours worked) are problematic only if they imply differential trends as well. We

25

explicitly test for differential trends overall, either in terms of employment or hours worked in
the pre-periods (reported as the p-value on the joint significance of the pre-trends in all tables in
the text), and do not find any strong evidence to this effect. We also estimated models that
control for industry (which can be matched to the ATUS based on the CPS records) – current
industry for those employed and previous industry of work for those non-employed, with no
significant changes to the estimates.
Though the ACA DCM was implemented in late 2010, we employ all ATUS waves
going back to 2003 in order to maximize our sample size. This allows for longer pre-treatment
periods, adding more precision to the estimation of the pre-policy baseline effects and in turn
raising the precision of the post-policy estimates. We confirm that limiting the sample to 20072013 does not meaningfully change the magnitude or the direction of the effects, though their
precision (for some of the non-work activities) is somewhat reduced.
We also extend our sample size to incorporate two additional waves of the ATUS that
have become recently available. During the additional years—2014 and 2015—the treatment and
control groups were affected similarly by the ACA, since starting in 2014 everyone is required to
have health insurance. Thus 2014 and 2015 are essentially two additional non-treatment years.
Including them as additional non-treatment years leaves the main results unchanged, both in
magnitude and in significance. The placebo results, in contrast, all become smaller in absolute
value and statistically insignificant.
Finally, in an attempt to make the treatment and control groups even more balanced,
specifications further restricted the sample to persons between 23- and 29-years-old. This
substantially reduces the sample sizes. Estimates may differ across age groups (comparing 23-25
vs. 27-29 year olds, or comparing 23-25 or 19-25 vs. 27-34 years olds) because narrower age

26

groups may allow for more balanced trends or because different age groups may respond to the
policy differently. Hence, a key question is about the underlying populations. Does the average
treatment effect among the population between 23- and 29-years-old differ meaningfully from
the average treatment effect among the population between 19 and 34? If they are the same, the
estimates based on the latter are as valid as the former and more precise. To investigate this, we
used an outcome with enough observations with positive values in samples of both populations.
In our case, these are the work-related outcomes. The results based on a narrower control group
(comparing young adults ages 23-25 to a control group of young adults ages 27-29) are virtually
the same as when using the full sample.24
VII.

Discussion
Two major rationales underlying the dependent care coverage mandate of the Affordable

Care Act were to provide more timely access to high quality care and to enable Americans to
make more productive uses of their time. Prior studies have assessed and confirmed that the
DCM led to a net increase in insurance coverage among eligible younger adults, and one study
has shown that it was also associated with a decrease in labor supply. We broaden the lens and
evaluate the effects of the ACA’s DCM on several outcomes, not studied heretofore, which
inform on how effective the DCM was in fulfilling its stated objectives. First, we add to the very
sparse evidence and provide a more precise analysis of labor supply outcomes based on the
American Time Use Surveys. The precision reflects the collection of work-time measures based
on time diaries and also the incorporation of data up to 2013, spanning three years post-policy
implementation (compared to data up to 2011 in most prior work). We find robust evidence that
24

The restricted sample yields treatment effects on the order of 20-29 minutes decline in daily work time, and 6-7
percentage points decline in employment. All of the labor supply effects are statistically significant. We cannot
carry out the same comparison for other time-use outcomes because restricting the sample to those between 23 and
29 results in far too few observations with positive values to obtain any precision. Since there appears to be no
difference for outcomes with sufficient observations and no precision for other outcomes, restricting the sample to
persons between 23 and 29 imposes a high cost in precision for no benefit in identification.

27

the DCM reduced labor supply at the extensive margin by about 5 percentage points. It is
validating that this estimate is fully consistent with prior estimates of a net increase in insurance
coverage on the order of 4-6 percentage points. We also find a suggestive increase in time spent
searching for a job, which together with the labor supply estimates may reflect a reduction in job
lock and an increase in time spent potentially searching for more suitable work.
Second, we provide the first estimates on how the DCM affected both time spent
receiving and waiting for medical care – which directly speak to both of the stated goals of the
DCM. These results suggest that, particularly at the intensive margin, the duration of both of
these activities declined significantly. This decrease may reflect an improvement in the quality of
medical care, both from a substitution from ER-based healthcare to a more routine source of
physician care. Furthermore, any decrease in time spent waiting for medical care would
represent a more productive shift. The decrease in labor supply and time spent waiting for and
receiving medical care has freed up time for young adults to allocate towards other activities.
To the best of our knowledge, we also provide the first estimates on these other uses of
time. Specifically, we find that, in addition to job search, this extra time has flowed into
socializing, and to a lesser extent, into educational activities. We further contribute to the
literature by assessing whether these shifts in activities are welfare-improving from the
respondent’s own standpoint. Here, we find that the availability of insurance and change in work
time appears to have increased the subjective well-being of young adults, enabling them to spend
time on activities that they view as more meaningful than those they did before insurance
became available. It should be noted that the DCM was a mandate for insurers, but opting to
obtain coverage under their parents’ plans, now made possible by the DCM, was of course
voluntary. Thus, those taking advantage of the DCM would be the ones who would presumably

28

benefit from it, and the reallocation of time is presumably optimal from the standpoint of utility
maximization. This is consistent with our results which are suggestive that the shift in activities
is associated with an increase in subjective well-being. Overall, the results from this study
suggest that the ACA’s dependent care coverage mandate has shifted labor supply outcomes and
uses of time, and raised the reported well-being of young adults in ways that are consisted with
its stated rationales.

29

Bibliography
Antwi, Y. A., Moriya, A. S., & Simon, K. (2013, November). Effects of Federal Policy to Insure
Young Adults: Evidence from the 2010 Affordable Care Act's Dependent-Coverage
Mandate. American Economic Journal: Economic Policy, 5(4), 1-28. Retrieved from
https://ideas.repec.org/a/aea/aejpol/v5y2013i4p1-28.html
Antwi, Y. A., Moriya, A. S., & Simon, K. I. (2015). Access to health insurance and the use of
inpatient medical care: evidence from the Affordable Care Act young adult mandate.
Journal of health economics, 39, 171-187.
Barbaresco, S., Courtemanche, C. J., & Qi, Y. (2015). Impacts of the Affordable Care Act
dependent coverage provision on health-related outcomes of young adults. Journal of
health economics, 40, 54-68.
Cantor, J. C., Monheit, A. C., DeLia, D., & Lloyd, K. (2012, July). The Role of Federal and State
Dependent Coverage Eligibility Policies on the Health Insurance Status of Young Adults.
Working Paper, National Bureau of Economic Research. Retrieved from
http://www.nber.org/papers/w18254
Collins, S. R., Robertson, R., Garber, T., & Doty, M. M. (2012). Young, uninsured, and in debt:
why young adults lack health insurance and how the Affordable Care Act is helping.
Issue Brief (Commonwealth Fund).
Colman, G., & Dave, D. (2013). Exercise, physical activity, and exertion over the business cycle.
Social Science \& Medicine, 93, 11-20.
Currie, J., & Gruber, J. (1996). Health insurance eligibility and Child Health: lessons from recent
expansions of the Medicaid program. Quarterly Journal of Economics, 111(2), 431-466.
DuMouchel, W. H., & Duncan, G. J. (1983). Using sample survey weights in multiple regression
analyses of stratified samples. Journal of the American Statistical Association, 78(383),
535-543.
Hamel, M. B., Blumenthal, D., & Collins, S. R. (2014). Health care coverage under the
Affordable Care Actâ€”a progress report. New England Journal of Medicine, 371(3), 275281.
Hernandez-Boussard, T., Burns, C. S., Wang, N. E., Baker, L. C., & Goldstein, B. A. (2014). The
Affordable Care Act reduces emergency department use by young adults: evidence from
three states. Health Affairs, 33(9), 1648-1654.
Miller, S. (2012). The effect of insurance on emergency room visits: an analysis of the 2006
Massachusetts health reform. Journal of Public Economics, 96(11), 893-908.
Newhouse, J. P., & Group, R. C. (1993). Free for all?: lessons from the RAND health insurance
experiment. Harvard University Press.
Saloner, B., & L{\^e} Cook, B. (2014). An ACA Provision Increased Treatment For Young Adults
With Possible Mental Illnesses Relative To Comparison Group. Health Affairs, 33(8),
1425-1434.
Slusky, D. J. (2014). Measuring the ACAâ€™s Parental Mandate Using Difference-inDifferences. Available at SSRN 2177436.
30

Solon, G., Haider, S. J., & Wooldridge, J. M. (2015). What are we weighting for? Journal of
Human Resources, 50(2), 301-316.
Sommers, B. D., Buchmueller, T., Decker, S. L., Carey, C., & Kronick, R. (2013). The Affordable
Care Act has led to significant gains in health insurance and access to care for young
adults. Health affairs, 32(1), 165-174.
Taubman, S. L., Allen, H. L., Wright, B. J., Baicker, K., & Finkelstein, A. N. (2014). Medicaid
increases emergency-department use: evidence from Oregon's Health Insurance
Experiment. Science, 343(6168), 263-268.

31

Table 1
Sample Statistics
ATUS 2003 – 2013
Variable
Ages 19 to 25
Work excluding job search (in minutes)
213.4
(344.8)
Respondent employed (%)
72.2
(0.6)
Work time among workers (in minutes)
438.1
(216.3)
Job Search and Interviewing (in minutes)
3.2
(36.9)
Exercise (in minutes)
22.2
(85.6)
Medical Care (receiving & waiting) (in minutes)
1.7
(23.4)
Receiving Medical Care (in minutes)
1.5
(22.2)
Time spent receiving medical if medical >0 (in
77.3
minutes)
(94.0)
Waiting for medical services (in minutes)
0.2
(4.9)
Time waiting for medical if medical>0 (in minutes)
11.9
(29.7)
Education (in minutes)
51.9
(210.8)
Sleep (in minutes)
539.6
(201.4)
Eating & drinking (in minutes)
60.0
(69.9)
Purchasing goods & services (in minutes)
25.1
(65.9)
Socializing & relaxing except television (in minutes)
125.9
(215.9)
Happiness (0-6)
4.3
(1.8)
Meaningfulness (0-6)
4.0
(2.3)
Sadness (0-6)
0.4
(1.1)
Stress (0-6)
1.4
(2.0)
Tiredness (0-6)
2.4
(2.2)
Female (%)
49.6
(0.7)
High School (%)
30.7
(0.6)
Some college (%)
42.4
(0.7)

Ages 23 to 25
250.0
(359.9)
78.1
(0.6)
455.6
(209.5)
3.1
(38.5)
20.3
(89.2)
1.7
(21.1)
1.4
(19.4)
74.7

Ages 27 to 34
264.7
(371.3)
80.1
(0.5)
466.2
(226.6)
2.4
(31.9)
15.8
(65.6)
1.8
(23.8)
1.6
(21.0)
77.6

(80.7)
0.3
(5.7)
14.3
(36.3)
32.8
(175.5)
530.2
(192.4)
62.5
(73.6)
24.7
(63.7)
112.5
(204.9)
4.3
(1.9)
4.0
(2.4)
0.4
(1.2)
1.5
(2.2)
2.5
(2.2)
51.1
(0.7)
27.9
(0.6)
33.2
(0.7)

(89.8)
0.3
(6.4)
10.0
(27.6)
14.6
(116.4)
510.5
(170.6)
64.7
(69.0)
28.6
(69.0)
92.0
(170.4)
4.3
(1.9)
4.2
(2.2)
0.5
(1.5)
1.6
(2.2)
2.5
(2.2)
50.2
(0.7)
26.3
(0.6)
25.3
(0.6)
32

College or more (%)

14.8
27.3
37.4
(0.5)
(0.6)
(0.7)
Widowed (%)
0.0
0.0
0.2
(0.0)
(0.0)
(0.1)
Divorced (%)
2.3
3.6
7.7
(0.2)
(0.2)
(0.3)
Never married (%)
81.4
70.5
34.3
(0.5)
(0.6)
(0.7)
Hispanic (%)
20.5
19.5
19.3
(0.5)
(0.5)
(0.5)
Non-Hispanic black (%)
12.6
11.8
11.4
(0.4)
(0.4)
(0.4)
Non-Hispanic other (%)
6.3
6.8
7.3
(0.4)
(0.4)
(0.4)
Time diary incomplete (%)
12.5
12.1
12.8
(0.5)
(0.5)
(0.4)
Observations
9852
4834
20951
Notes: Weighted means are reported. Standard deviations are reported in parentheses. Number of
observations represents maximum sample size. For some variables, the sample size is smaller due to
missing information. For the subjective well-being measures, the sample size is 2160, 1071, and 4887 for
the 3 respective samples (see text). Minutes refers to minutes per day.

33

Model
Treatment group
Post indicator represents:
Sample

1
Post-2010

Table 2
Effect of the ACA DCM on Labor Supply
2

3
Ages 19-25
Post-2011
Post-2011

4

5
Post-2010

6
Ages 23-25
Post-2011

Post-2011

7
Post-2011

All

All

State Ineligible

All

All

All

State Ineligible

Work excluding job search

-17.82***
(6.67)
[0.85]
N=30,803

-23.20***
(7.95)
[0.85]
N=28,265

-20.86*
(11.47)
[0.37]
N=17,476

-17.02**
(6.68)
[0.78]
N=30,803

-15.67*
(8.59)
[0.39]
N=25,785

-25.33**
(10.42)
[0.39]
N=23,684

-11.64
(13.98)
[0.21]
N=16,544

Respondent employed

-0.04***
(0.01)
[0.08]
N=30,803

-0.06***
(0.02)
[0.08]
N=28,265

-0.05**
(0.02)
[0.70]
N=17,476

-0.04***
(0.01)
[0.08]
N=30,803

-0.06***
(0.02)
[0.29]
N=25,785

-0.08***
(0.02)
[0.29]
N=23,684

-0.07***
(0.02)
[0.39]
N=16,544

Work time among workers

-5.19
(8.40)
[0.90]
N=13,703

-0.30
(10.11)
[0.90]
N=12,542

6.58
(14.19)
[0.37]
N=8,102

-5.21
(8.44)
[0.95]
N=13,703

11.49
(10.08)
[0.68]
N=11,756

14.40
(12.18)
[0.68]
N=10,768

24.83
(15.58)
[0.34]
N=7,716

Job Search and Interviewing

0.95
(0.90)
[0.69]
N=30,803

2.70**
(1.25)
[0.69]
N=28,265

-0.14
(1.19)
[0.74]
N=17,476

0.91
(0.90)
[0.69]
N=30,803

2.23*
(1.32)
[0.81]
N=25,785

4.07**
(1.88)
[0.81]
N=23,684

0.48
(1.48)
[0.80]
N=16,544

State indicators
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Year indicators
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Month indicators
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Day indicators
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
State-specific linear trends
No
No
No
Yes
No
No
No
Notes: Coefficients on the interaction between the treatment group and the post-indicator are reported. Each coefficient represents a separate regression model.
Clustered standard errors are in parentheses (see text). Square brackets report the p-values on the pre-policy linear trend (interaction of a linear year trend and the
treatment group indicator for 2003 through 2010). All coefficients represent changes in minutes except for the indicator for employed, which shows the
percentage point change associated with the policy. N represents the number of observations. Asterisks denote statistical significance as follows: *** 0.01 ≥ pvalue; ** 0.05 ≥ p-value > 0.01; * 0.10 ≥ p-value > 0.05.

34

Model
Treatment group
Post indicator represents:
Sample

Table 3
Effect of the ACA DCM on Time Receiving & Waiting for Medical Care
1

Post-2010

2

3
Ages 19-25
Post-2011
Post-2011

4

5

Post-2011

Post-2010

6
Ages 23-25
Post-2011

7
Post-2011

All

All

State Ineligible

All

All

All

State Ineligible

Medical Care
(receiving & waiting)

-0.19
(0.40)
[0.69]

-0.43
(0.50)
[0.69]

0.09
(0.65)
[0.35]

-0.19
(0.40)
[0.60]

-0.51
(0.46)
[0.56]

-0.67
(0.55)
[0.56]

-0.41
(0.70)
[0.25]

Receiving Medical Care

-0.03
(0.36)
[0.93]

-0.21
(0.44)
[0.93]

0.11
(0.54)
[0.44]

-0.02
(0.36)
[0.95]

-0.20
(0.39)
[0.87]

-0.27
(0.48)
[0.87]

-0.05
(0.63)
[0.38]

Receiving medical care
(medical care>0)

-35.09**
(16.38)
[0.44]

-35.16*
(19.06)
[0.44]

-34.30
(23.69)
[0.15]

-28.92
(18.05)
[0.44]

-36.80*
(20.39)
[0.41]

-25.46
(22.13)
[0.41]

-45.14*
(25.66)
[0.11]

Waiting for medical care

-0.18
(0.13)
[0.34]

-0.23
(0.17)
[0.34]

-0.05
(0.24)
[0.26]

-0.18
(0.13)
[0.33]

-0.35*
(0.19)
[0.42]

-0.43*
(0.22)
[0.42]

-0.39*
(0.20)
[0.15]

Waiting for medical care
(medical care>0)

-15.91**
(7.19)
[0.44]

-17.96**
(9.08)
[0.44]

-6.82
(12.08)
[0.20]

-10.00
(7.28)
[0.40]

-19.43*
(10.95)
[0.59]

-22.41*
(12.51)
[0.59]

-22.43**
(10.25)
[0.10]

Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
No

Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
No

Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
No

Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes

Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
No

Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
No

Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
No

State indicators
Year indicators
Month indicators
Day indicators
State-specific linear trends

Notes: Coefficients on the interaction between the treatment group and the post-indicator are reported. Each coefficient represents a separate regression model.
Clustered standard errors are in parentheses (see text). Square brackets report the p-values on the interaction of a linear year trend and the treatment group
indicator for 2003 through 2010. All coefficients represent changes in minutes. Sample sizes for the non-truncated outcomes are similar to those listed in Table 2
(ranging from 16,544 to 30,803). Asterisks denote statistical significance as follows: *** 0.01 ≥ p-value; ** 0.05 ≥ p-value > 0.01; * 0.10 ≥ p-value > 0.05.

35

Model
Treatment group
Post indicator represents:

1
Post-2010

Table 4
Effect of the ACA DCM on Other Uses of Time
2

3
Ages 19-25
Post-2011
Post-2011

4

5

Post-2011

Post-2010

6
Ages 23-25
Post-2011

7
Post-2011

Sample

All

All

State Ineligible

All

All

All

State Ineligible

Exercise

-0.55
(1.84)
[0.23]

0.49
(2.18)
[0.23]

-3.94
(2.71)
[0.85]

-0.66
(1.84)
[0.27]

-1.25
(2.27)
[0.13]

0.72
(2.89)
[0.13]

-2.60
(3.27)
[0.47]

Education

6.41**
(3.26)
[0.26]

7.97**
(3.92)
[0.26]

4.81
(2.97)
[0.19]

6.35*
(3.25)
[0.27]

3.16
(3.48)
[0.28]

4.01
(4.00)
[0.28]

2.04
(3.24)
[0.12]

Sleep

2.02
(4.24)
[0.19]

1.47
(5.24)
[0.19]

4.34
(7.52)
[0.06]

1.75
(4.23)
[0.19]

2.20
(5.23)
[0.12]

0.86
(6.66)
[0.12]

-0.27
(8.51)
[0.03]

Eating & drinking

-1.24
(1.51)
[0.72]

-0.95
(1.79)
[0.72]

-3.43
(2.37)
[0.36]

-1.24
(1.51)
[0.77]

-1.86
(1.99)
[0.27]

-2.16
(2.30)
[0.27]

-4.34
(2.71)
[0.30]

Purchasing goods & services

-2.14
(1.51)
[0.11]

-3.28*
(1.78)
[0.11]

-4.98**
(2.52)
[0.85]

-2.21
(1.51)
[0.09]

-2.40
(1.85)
[0.03]

-2.53
(2.21)
[0.03]

-4.65
(2.94)
[0.47]

Socializing & relaxing
(except TV)

8.80**
(4.41)
[0.84]

12.96**
(5.49)
[0.84]

7.63
(7.07)
[0.14]

8.88**
(4.43)
[0.81]

3.63
(5.34)
[0.60]

10.01
(6.66)
[0.60]

3.09
(8.44)
[0.37]

Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
No

Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
No

Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
No

Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes

Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
No

Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
No

Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
No

State indicators
Year indicators
Month indicators
Day indicators
State-specific linear trends
Notes: See Table 3.

36

Model
Treatment group
Post indicator represents:
Sample

1
2007-2009
All

2

Table 5
Placebo Models
2003 – 2008/2009

3
Ages 19-25
2007-2009
2007-2008
All

State Ineligible

4

5

2007-2009

2007-2009

All

All

6
Ages 23-25
2007-2008
All

7
2007-2009
State Ineligible

Work excluding job search

12.09*
19.84**
24.60**
11.46
15.31*
23.74**
12.27
(7.27)
(8.56)
(11.19)
(7.27)
(8.44)
(10.58)
(12.71)
Respondent employed
0.00
0.01
0.00
0.00
0.02
0.04**
0.00
(0.01)
(0.02)
(0.02)
(0.01)
(0.02)
(0.02)
(0.02)
Work time among workers
0.95
8.99
7.44
0.81
5.12
7.20
-0.60
(8.38)
(9.68)
(12.50)
(8.43)
(9.86)
(11.78)
(14.05)
Job search & interviewing
-0.48
-0.46
-0.17
-0.47
-1.13*
-1.33*
-0.11
(0.63)
(0.77)
(0.88)
(0.63)
(0.67)
(0.76)
(0.93)
Exercise
2.48
3.88*
1.77
2.33
3.26
4.06
2.28
(1.92)
(2.23)
(2.92)
(1.91)
(2.51)
(2.96)
(3.21)
Medical Care
0.11
0.36
-0.57
0.13
0.34
0.42
-1.12
(receiving & waiting)
(0.43)
(0.49)
(0.66)
(0.43)
(0.57)
(0.67)
(0.75)
Receiving medical care
-0.10
0.07
-0.34
-0.07
0.16
0.23
-0.64
(0.35)
(0.38)
(0.53)
(0.35)
(0.40)
(0.45)
(0.56)
Receiving medical Care
-10.08
0.84
-11.61
-6.50
-16.90
5.35
-48.38
(medical care>0)
(16.59)
(19.35)
(27.79)
(16.68)
(21.44)
(23.55)
(34.84)
Waiting for medical care
0.20
0.29
-0.26
0.19
0.19
0.23
-0.52*
(0.17)
(0.22)
(0.23)
(0.17)
(0.26)
(0.33)
(0.30)
Waiting for medical care
7.66
17.10
-5.31
8.53
-6.63
0.85
-25.92*
(medical care>0)
(8.37)
(10.51)
(14.13)
(9.07)
(10.46)
(12.48)
(15.13)
Education
2.19
0.15
-3.02
2.15
-4.24
-6.09
-5.80**
(3.60)
(4.16)
(2.42)
(3.59)
(3.76)
(4.20)
(2.84)
Sleep
-6.39
-13.02***
-9.17
-6.61
-11.34**
-15.85***
-6.78
(4.52)
(5.00)
(6.75)
(4.53)
(5.31)
(5.97)
(7.11)
Eating & drinking
-1.22
-0.82
0.41
-1.31
0.74
1.15
-0.98
(1.52)
(1.72)
(2.37)
(1.52)
(2.00)
(2.26)
(2.76)
Purchasing goods & services
1.50
1.52
-3.42
1.70
2.64
2.07
-3.64
(1.70)
(1.89)
(2.66)
(1.70)
(2.00)
(2.23)
(3.02)
Socializing & relaxing
-9.24**
-10.14*
-5.31
-8.95**
-5.29
-7.67
0.61
(except TV)
(4.41)
(5.23)
(6.87)
(4.44)
(5.48)
(6.56)
(8.15)
Notes: Coefficients on the interaction between the treatment group and the post-indicator are reported. Each coefficient represents a separate regression model.
Clustered standard errors are in parentheses (see text). See Tables 2-4. Asterisks denote statistical significance as follows: *** 0.01 ≥ p-value; ** 0.05 ≥ p-value
> 0.01; * 0.10 ≥ p-value > 0.05.

37

Model
Treatment group
Post indicator represents:
Sample

1
Post-2010

Table 6
Effect of the ACA DCM on Subjective Well-being
2

3
Ages 19-25
Post-2011
Post-2011

4

5

Post-2011

Post-2010

6
Ages 23-25
Post-2011

7
Post-2011

All

All

State Ineligible

All

All

All

State Ineligible

Happiness

0.14**
(0.07)
N=7,042

0.14**
(0.07)
N=7,042

0.18
(0.14)
N=3,950

0.14**
(0.07)
N=7,042

0.11
(0.09)
N=5,954

0.11
(0.09)
N=5,954

0.13
(0.16)
N=3,785

Meaningfulness

0.19**
(0.09)
N=7,041

0.19**
(0.09)
N=7,041

0.25
(0.17)
N=3,950

0.17*
(0.09)
N=7,041

0.03
(0.11)
N=5,954

0.03
(0.11)
N=5,954

0.11
(0.19)
N=3,785

Sadness

-0.00
(0.06)
N=7,047

-0.00
(0.06)
N=7,047

-0.01
(0.09)
N=3,952

0.00
(0.06)
N=7,047

-0.08
(0.08)
N=5,958

-0.08
(0.08)
N=5,958

-0.05
(0.11)
N=3,787

Stress

-0.00
(0.08)
N=7,047

-0.00
(0.08)
N=7,047

-0.09
(0.15)
N=3,952

0.02
(0.08)
N=7,047

-0.05
(0.10)
N=5,958

-0.05
(0.10)
N=5,958

-0.06
(0.16)
N=3,787

Tiredness

-0.04
(0.09)
N=7,047

-0.04
(0.09)
N=7,047

-0.20
(0.15)
N=3,952

-0.04
(0.09)
N=7,047

-0.11
(0.12)
N=5,958

-0.11
(0.12)
N=5,958

-0.33*
(0.18)
N=3,787

Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
No

Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
No

Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
No

Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes

Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
No

Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
No

Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
No

State indicators
Year indicators
Month indicators
Day indicators
State-specific linear trends

Notes: Coefficients on the interaction between the treatment group and the post-indicator are reported. Each coefficient represents a separate regression model.
Clustered standard errors are in parentheses (see text). All coefficients represent changes in the weighted measure of each affect, which ranges from 0 to 6. The
Well-being outcomes have only one row (and no pre-ACA interactions) because the Well-being Supplement was administered only in 2010, 2012, and 2013. N
represents the number of observations. Asterisks denote statistical significance as follows: *** 0.01 ≥ p-value; ** 0.05 ≥ p-value > 0.01; * 0.10 ≥ p-value > 0.05.

38

Appendix Table 1
Dynamic Effect of the ACA DCM on Labor Supply
Outcome

Work Time

Work Time

Employed

Employed

Treatment Group* Years 2004-2005

-5.768
(14.95)

-5.710
(14.95)

-0.0111
(0.0282)

-0.0111
(0.0281)

Treatment Group* Years 2006-2007

11.39
(16.60)

11.42
(16.60)

-0.0158
(0.0285)

-0.0157
(0.0285)

Treatment Group* Years 2008-2009

1.898
(14.65)

1.939
(14.65)

0.00729
(0.0266)

0.00733
(0.0266)

Treatment Group*Year 2011

1.403
(17.13)

-0.0405
(0.0328)

Treatment Group*Year 2012

-19.84
(19.93)

-0.0785**
(0.0350)

Treatment Group*Year 2013

-31.05*
(17.09)

-0.104***
(0.0317)

Treatment Group* Years 2011-2013
Observations

-15.14
(14.89)
22053

22053

-0.0726***
(0.0267)
22053

22053

Notes: Treatment group comprises individuals ages 23-25. The reference pre-adoption period is 2010. See
additional notes to Table 2.

39

Figure 1

Trends in Outcomes
Treated: 19-25 vs. 23-25
.8

.8
2015

.7
19-25

2003

2010

2015

Job Search

27-34

0

440
2003

2010

exercise

19-25

2015

2003

23-25

27-34

27-34

2010

2015

2003

2010

2015

23-25

27-34
2003

2010

2015

15

15

20

20

25

25

exercise

2015

Job Search

2015

5

460

23-25

19-25
2010

2010

6

480

Work among workers

27-34

2003

2003

10

2010

4

Work among workers
420 440 460 480

.6
2003

23-25

0

2015

27-34

19-25

2

2010

23-25

200

200
2003

Employed (1/0)
27-34

27-34

250

250

27-34

19-25

Employed (1/0)
.9

Work

300

300

Work

27-34
2003

2010

2015

Source: American Time Use Survey. All outcomes are measured in minutes per day
except for Employed, which is a proportion.

40

Figure 2

Trends in Outcomes
Treated: 19-25 vs. 23-25
27-34

2

19-25

1

3

2

2015

2003

2010

2015

2003

2010

2015

.6

27-34

19-25

23-25

2015

2003

0

0
2010

2010

2015

2003

2010

2015

Waiting for care | > 0
40

30

2015

23-25
2003

Waiting for care | > 0

2010

Waiting for care

27-34

27-34

50

60

19-25

2003

Waiting for care

.2

80

2015

With doctor | > 0

100

27-34

2010

.2

100 120

With doctor | > 0

2003

.6

2010

150

2003

.4

1

1

19-25

27-34
23-25

.4

2

2

23-25

With doctor

1

3

27-34

27-34

With doctor
3

Receiving medical care
3

Receiving medical care

27-34

10

19-25

20

20

27-34

0

0

23-25
2003

2010

2015

2003

2010

2015

Source: American Time Use Survey. All outcomes are measured in minutes per day.

41

Figure 3

Trends in Outcomes
Treated: 19-25 vs. 23-25

Eating & Drinking

2010

2015

Eating & Drinking

70

27-34

2003

2003

2010

19-25

2010

2015

560
540

2010

2015

Shopping
27-34

25

25
2003

2003

2003

2010

23-25

2015

2003

2010

2015

Socializing
23-25

27-34

80

80

27-34

100

100

120

120

140

Socializing

2015

140

2010

19-25

20

60
55

55
2003

27-34

30

65

65
60

23-25

520

Shopping

27-34
19-25

2015

35

2015

27-34

500

540
520

2010

35

2003

23-25

30

30
20

0

10

27-34

27-34

500

40

27-34

19-25

Sleeping

20

23-25

20

19-25

Sleeping

560

Education
40

60

Education

2003

2010

2015

2003

2010

2015

Source: American Time Use Survey. All outcomes are measured in minutes per day.

42

