NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

IMPACTS OF BEING DOWNWIND OF A COAL-FIRED POWER PLANT ON INFANT HEALTH AT BIRTH:
EVIDENCE FROM THE PRECEDENT-SETTING PORTLAND RULE
Muzhe Yang
Shin-Yi Chou
Working Paper 21723
http://www.nber.org/papers/w21723
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
November 2015

The views expressed herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the
National Bureau of Economic Research.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peerreviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.
© 2015 by Muzhe Yang and Shin-Yi Chou. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed
two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice,
is given to the source.

Impacts of Being Downwind of a Coal-Fired Power Plant on Infant Health at Birth: Evidence
from the Precedent-Setting Portland Rule
Muzhe Yang and Shin-Yi Chou
NBER Working Paper No. 21723
November 2015
JEL No. H23,I1
ABSTRACT
We conduct the first study on the impacts of prenatal exposure to a uniquely identified large polluter,
a coal-fired power plant located near the border of two states, on the birth outcomes of the downwind
state. For mothers who live as far as 20 to 40 miles away but downwind of the power plant, being
exposed to power plant emissions, in particular sulfur dioxide, during the first month of pregnancy
could increase the likelihood of having full-term babies but with low birth weight, an indicator of slow
fetal growth, by as much as 42 percent. This adverse impact could be driven by reactive sulfur speciesinduced intrauterine oxidative stress, arising from maternal exposure to emissions of sulfur dioxide,
whose travelling from the emission source to the downwind region has been confirmed in the Portland
Rule. In light of EPA’s continual efforts in regulating power plant emissions, our study is aimed at
broadening the scope of cross-border pollution analysis by taking into account adverse infant heath
impacts from upwind polluters, which can burden the downwind states disproportionately.
Muzhe Yang
Department of Economics
College of Business and Economics
Lehigh University
621 Taylor Street
Bethlehem, PA 18015-3117
muy208@lehigh.edu
Shin-Yi Chou
Department of Economics
College of Business and Economics
Lehigh University
621 Taylor Street
Bethlehem, PA 18015-3117
and NBER
syc2@lehigh.edu

1

Introduction

Coal-…red power plants in the process of electricity production can put human health at
greater risks than any other industrial source of air pollution (Schneider and Bank, 2010).
Emissions from those power plants contain particles, mercury, and acid gases such as sulfur
dioxide (SO2 ), which can cause premature death (from …ne particles), neurological damage (from mercury) and respiratory diseases (from acid gases).1 To regulate power plant
emissions and protect public health, the U.S. Environmental Protection Agency (EPA) has
been using a four-part regulatory approach, including the Cross-State Air Pollution Rule
(CSAPR, …nalized in July 2011),2 the Clean Power Plan (introduced in August 2015), the
Mercury and Air Toxics Standards (MATS, …nalized in December 2011), and the Acid Rain
Program (ARP, started in 1995), all established under the Clean Air Act (CAA).3
Despite mounting evidence of public health bene…ts from the EPA’s regulations on power
plant emissions,4 the recent U.S. Supreme Court’s decision (announced on June 29, 2015) of
blocking (but not striking down) the EPA’s MATS highlights the importance of evaluating
net bene…ts of regulating power plant emissions.5 One way of improving the cost-bene…t
analysis needed for the EPA’s regulations is to broaden the scope of external costs imposed by
coal-…red power plants upon the society. For example, Currie et al. (2015) show that, besides
posing health risks, toxic emissions from power plants can have signi…cant and irreversible
impacts on housing values; speci…cally, they …nd that aggregate housing values in the vicinity
1

Source: http://www.epa.gov/airquality/powerplants (accessed July 15, 2015).
The CSAPR is the replacement for the EPA’s 2005 Clean Air Interstate Rule (CAIR).
3
For detailed information about these four regulations, see http://www.epa.gov/crossstaterule (for the
CSAPR), http://www2.epa.gov/cleanpowerplan (for the Clean Power Plan), http://www.epa.gov/mats (for
the MATS), and http://www.epa.gov/airmarkets/programs/arp (for the ARP).
4
For example, the CSAPR has been shown to yield “$120 to $280 billion in annual health and environmental bene…ts, including the value of avoiding 13,000 to 34,000 premature deaths” (Source: http:
//www.epa.gov/crossstaterule); for MATS: “These new standards will avert up to 11,000 premature deaths,
4,700 heart attacks and 130,000 asthma attacks every year” (Source: http://www.epa.gov/airquality/
powerplanttoxics/health.html); and the ARP is shown to have e¤ectively reduced acid deposition: “Between 1989 to 1991 and 2010 to 2012, wet deposition of sulfate decreased by 59 percent across the Eastern
United States”(Source: http://www.epa.gov/airmarkets/documents/progressreports/ARPCAIR12_02.pdf,
accessed July 15, 2015).
5
http://www.nytimes.com/2015/06/30/us/supreme-court-blocks-obamas-limits-on-power-plants.html
(accessed July 15, 2015).
2

1

of a toxic plant can decrease by $4.25 million when the plant is opened, but closing the plant
will not undo the loss caused by the plant’s opening. Another case of external costs is the
disproportionate pollution impact of coal-…red power plants due to wind: emissions from
those power plants such as SO2 and PM2:5 6 can be carried long distances by wind, posing
health risks to those who live far away but downwind of the power plants (Schneider and
Bank, 2010).
Indeed, the presence of disproportionate pollution impacts between upwind and downwind states has been considered in the CAA’s “Good Neighbor” Provision (i.e., Section
110(a)(2)(D)) and the “Interstate Pollution Abatement” (i.e., Section 126(b)),7 which provide the EPA with the basis for regulations such as the CSAPR. However, continual reduction of cross-border pollution from coal-…red power plants is not without obstacles. One
hindrance stems from the postponement of installing emission controls, such as the ‡ue gas
desulfurization (FGD, a.k.a. “scrubbers”) for SO2 emission controls,8 by some of the oldest
and dirtiest coal-…red power plants: “Unfortunately, not all power companies are committed
to cleaning up their dirtiest plants, choosing instead to buy their way out of emissions caps.”
(EIP, 2007, p. 1).9 According to the EPA’s emission tracking summary, as of 2014 still
only 57 percent of the coal-…red power plant units had installed the FGD for SO2 emission
controls.10
We conduct the …rst study on infant health risks posed by an upwind coal-…red power
plant, a large polluter located near the border of two states, of which the pollution impact on the downwind state has been scienti…cally veri…ed. Speci…cally, our study draws
6

PM2:5 stands for particulate matter that is smaller than 2.5 micrometers (a.k.a., microns) in diameter.
For details, see http://www.epa.gov/airtransport/index.html and http://www.epa.gov/air/caa/title1.
html (accessed July 15, 2015).
8
The use of scrubbers is currently the predominant technology for removing SO2 emissions from the
exhaust of coal-…red power plants (Luechinger, 2014).
9
Speci…cally, the EIP’s 2007 report points out: “For example, Mirant mid-Atlantic has been silent about
its cleanup plans for its three Maryland plants (Morgantown, Chalk Point, and Dickerson), even though state
law requires a large reduction of sulfur dioxide no later than 2010. Other notorious polluters, like Alcoa’s
Warrick plant in Indiana, may be banking on their ability to avoid cleanup by purchasing pollution allowances
from other states”(p. 11, http://www.dirtykilowatts.org/Dirty_Kilowatts2007.pdf, accessed July 15, 2015).
10
Source: http://www.epa.gov/airmarkets/progress/datatrends/summary.html (accessed July 15, 2015).
7

2

evidence from a precedent-setting Portland Rule that involves the coal-…red power plant
in Pennsylvania— the Portland Generating Station; the owner of the power plant— GenOn
REMA, LLC (now NRG REMA, LLC); the New Jersey Department of Environmental Protection (NJDEP); the EPA; and the U.S. Court of Appeals for the Third Circuit (hereafter,
the Third Circuit). The Portland Rule provides us with a rare opportunity to study infant
health implications of power plant emissions for a scienti…cally veri…ed impact area, where a
single power plant has been con…rmed by the NJDEP and the EPA to be an independent and
signi…cant air pollution contributor. In fact, the Portland Rule marks the EPA’s …rst-ever
granting of a sole-source petition under the “Interstate Pollution Abatement”section of the
CAA, and our study is the …rst to utilize the Portland Rule to pinpoint the region that is
a¤ected exogenously by the power plant emissions.11
In contrast to Currie et al.’s (2015) study, which shows that toxic released from an
industrial plant a¤ects the air quality only within one mile of the plant, we …nd that power
plant emissions such as SO2 , a major precursor to ambient PM2:5 concentrations, can have
adverse health impacts on infants born to mothers who live as far as 40 miles away downwind
of the power plant. Speci…cally, among all live singleton and full-term births12 we …nd that for
mothers who live in the impact area identi…ed by the NJDEP, being downwind of the power
plant during their …rst month of pregnancy (i.e., during the embryo stage) can increase the
likelihood of having low birth weight (LBW) babies (birth weight below 2,500 grams) by one
percentage point, which is an approximately 42 percent increase given that the nationwide
live singleton full-term LBW rate is about 2.4 percent during our sample period.13
11

We give detailed discussions on our research design, including the construction of the measure for being
downwind of the power plant in Sections 3.2 and 3.3.
12
A full-term birth (a.k.a. term birth) has at least 37 completed weeks of gestation, counting from the …rst
day of the mother’s last menstrual period (Wilcox, 2001). Gestational length is commonly measured by the
interval (often measured in weeks) between the …rst day of the mother’s last menstrual period (LMP) and
the date of her childbirth (Maisonet et al., 2004). Although ultrasonography is another method of measuring
gestational length, it is not a substitute for the LMP-based method because of the estimation error: for
instance, if a fetus has already experienced growth restrictions during the …rst trimester and the ultrasound
taken at that time is not able to detect the slowed fetal growth, then the use of ultrasound will underestimate
the actual length of in-utero period at the time of the measurement (Slama et al., 2008).
13
In Section 2.3 we give detailed explanation on why our study focuses on full-term LBW.

3

The Portland Rule contains scienti…c evidence on the travel distance and direction of
SO2 emitted from the Portland Generating Station, which is about 40 miles downwind of
the power plant. Within this impact area the Portland Rule also substantiates that the
power plant is an independent source of air pollution and a signi…cant contributor to the
violation of air quality standards in the downwind region. Both aspects of the Portland Rule
guide our research design. By focusing on the impact area identi…ed in the Portland Rule, we
are able to utilize the variation in power plant emissions that is exogenous to local pollution
sources, such as vehicle exhaust worsened by tra¢ c congestion (Currie and Walker, 2011;
Ritz and Wilhelm, 2008), which can be important confounding factors in our study of the
impacts of power plant emissions on infant birth outcomes.
We focus on those mothers who live at a distance to the power plant but within the
impact area, to exclude possible presence of protection behaviors of those who live close
to the power plant as well as selective migration away from the power plant. In fact, the
impact area that we focus on belongs to the Greater New York metropolitan area, which
overlaps the wealthiest part of New Jersey that is 20 to 40 miles away from the power plant.
It can be reasonable to assume that the decision to live in this particular part of New Jersey
largely depends on job and career opportunities that are o¤ered in the Greater New York
metropolitan area, not the distance to the power plant. Furthermore, our study period is
2004–2010, which precedes the date of the Portland Rule. As a result, those who live 20 to
40 miles away but downwind of the power plant may not have been aware of the pollution
impact of the power plant during our study period.
Our study assembled a set of new evidence fully consistent with the Portland Rule, based
on New Jersey’s 2004–2010 birth certi…cate data as well as data on wind directions, power
plant emissions, and mothers’residential zip codes. Speci…cally, we …nd the impacts of being
downwind of the power plant on the occurrence of full-term LBW to be in the area within 40
miles of the power plant, the area including these three New Jersey counties which are not
adjacent to the power plant— Hunterdon, Morris and Sussex. In contrast, the infant health

4

impacts are not found in the area far away from the power plant: for example, in the area
that is at least 80 miles away from the power plant, or in those New Jersey counties that
are far away and also not directly downwind of the power plant (e.g., Cape May, Hudson
and Salem Counties). We also conduct falsi…cation checks by including leading terms of
the downwind measure, and our results show no statistically signi…cant coe¢ cients of those
terms that indicate being downwind during the months after birth on infant birth outcomes.
Using data on the power plant emissions adjusted by how downwind a New Jersey zip
code is relative to the power plant, we …nd that the health impacts of the direction-adjusted
power plant emissions follow the same pattern of the previous …ndings on the health impacts
of being downwind of the power plant: being exposed to an increase of 1,000 tons of SO2
emissions (which is about three percent of the power plant’s annual total SO2 emissions)
from the power plant in a perfectly upwind direction during the …rst month of pregnancy
could increase the likelihood of full-term LBW by approximately 0.24 percentage points, or
by 10 percent (relative to the national level live singleton full-term LBW rate during our
sample period) in the impact area that is 20 to 40 miles away from the power plant including
Hunterdon, Morris and Sussex Counties. Combining the air pollution data and the power
plant emission data, we further …nd that it is the SO2 emissions from the power plant that
signi…cantly increase the SO2 (a major precursor to ambient PM2:5 concentrations) and PM2:5
concentrations measured at each New Jersey zip code in the impact area, but not in the area
far away (e.g., at least 80 miles away) from the power plant. Our analysis also suggests that
it is SO2 , not NOx (whose emissions, in addition to SO2 emissions, are reported in the EPA’s
Air Markets Program Data), that has the potential to travel long distance in the air through
prevailing winds.
Taken together, our results suggest an impact of in-utero exposure to SO2 and PM2:5
during the …rst month of pregnancy (i.e., during the embryo stage) on the occurrence of slow
fetal growth, indicated by the full-term LBW. In particular, our …ndings on the impacts of
exposure to air pollution (caused by power plant emissions) during the embryo stage on the

5

occurrence of full-term LBW are consistent with the …ndings of studies by Dejmek et al.
(1999), Dugandzic et al. (2006), Liu et al. (2003) and Mohorovic (2004). In general, our
…ndings contribute to a growing body of literature investigating the critical gestation period
for adverse impacts on infant health14 from prenatal exposure to air pollution such as SO2
and PM2:5 due to coal-…red power plant emissions.
One potential mechanism underlying our …ndings on the infant health impacts from coal…red power plants could be intrauterine oxidative stress— an excessive oxidation induced
usually by an imbalance between antioxidants and cellular reactive oxygen species (ROS)
production in utero, which can cause cellular and DNA damages. The adverse impacts of
ROS-induced oxidative stress on fetal growth have been extensively studied in the medical
…eld (Al-Gubory, Fowler and Garrel 2010; Kannan et al., 2006). However, as Giles and Jacob
(2002) and Mohorovic (2004) point out, an emerging concept is that reactive sulfur species
(RSS) can also contribute to oxidative stress. To the best of our knowledge, we provide the
…rst evidence in the economics …eld on the adverse impact on fetal growth from possibly
RSS-induced intrauterine oxidative stress due to maternal exposure to a coal-…red power
plant emissions of SO2 (a major precursor to ambient PM2:5 concentrations) travelling to a
downwind state.
Furthermore, we …nd that the impacts of being downwind of the power plant during the
early stage of pregnancy on the occurrence of slow fetal growth are salient among males, but
not among females on average. Our …nding is consistent with the sex di¤erence predicted
by the theory of Developmental Origins of Health and Disease (Aiken and Ozanne, 2013) by
showing that male fetuses can be more vulnerable than female fetuses to in-utero environmental insults (such as power plant pollutions) during the early stage of pregnancy, and the
adverse impacts during the …rst month of pregnancy may not be overcome by the catch-up
growth of male fetuses during the later stage of pregnancy.
The rest of the paper is organized as follows. Section 2 describes the empirical setting
14

For details, see Selevan, Kimmel and Mendola (2000).

6

of our study and why we focus on full-term LBW, followed by Section 3, which explains the
data and methods as well as our research design. Section 4 presents our empirical …ndings
with potential biological mechanisms discussed in Section 5, and Section 6 concludes.

2

Background

2.1

Portland Generating Station

Portland Generating Station is a coal-…red power plant, formerly owned by Reliant Energy
Mid-Atlantic Power Holdings, LLC. In 2010 the ownership was changed to GenOn REMA,
LLC, which is a subsidiary of GenOn Energy, Inc., as a result of the merger between GenOn
Power Generation, LLC and Reliant Energy Mid-Atlantic Power Holdings, LLC. In August
2013 GenOn REMA, LLC was renamed to NRG REMA, LLC15 because of the merger
between GenOn Energy Inc. and NRG Energy, Inc. completed in December 2012.16
Figure 1 shows the location of Portland Generating Station on a regional map of eastern
Pennsylvania and western New Jersey. Located right across from Warren County, New
Jersey, the power plant sits on the west bank of the Delaware River in Upper Mount Bethel
Township of Northampton County, Pennsylvania.17 According to the EPA’s Emissions &
Generation Resource Integrated Database (eGRID) of 2009, Portland Generating Station
is one of the 43 large coal-…red power plants (de…ned as having a nameplate capacity of
300 megawatts or more) in the Mid-Atlantic Region,18 and it is also one of the only two
15

“NRG REMA, LLC, together with its subsidiaries, engages in the ownership and operation of, and contracting for power generation capacity in the United States. The company provides energy, capacity, ancillary,
and other energy services to wholesale customers. The company owns or leases interests in approximately
17 generating facilities with an aggregate net electric generating capacity of 2,935 megawatts in Pennsylvania and New Jersey. The company was formerly known as GenOn REMA, LLC and changed its name to
NRG REMA, LLC as a result of merger of GenOn Energy, Inc. with NRG Energy, Inc. in August 2013.
The company is based in Houston, Texas. NRG REMA, LLC is a subsidiary of NRG Northeast Generation,
Inc.”(http://www.bloomberg.com/research/stocks/private/snapshot.asp?privcapId=3636215, accessed July
15, 2015)
16
For details, see http://www.bizjournals.com/houston/news/2012/12/14/nrg-genon-merger-complete.
html (accessed July 15, 2015).
17
The address of the power plant is 40897 River Road, Portland, PA 18351.
18
This refers to EPA’s Region 3, which includes Delaware, District of Columbia, Maryland, Pennsylva-

7

large coal-…red power plants in Pennsylvania that immediately border New Jersey.19 Figure
2 demonstrates that Portland Generating Station is in fact the only coal-…red power plant
without full controls of its emissions that immediately borders New Jersey,20 and there are
no uncontrolled coal-…red power plants in New Jersey, except one near Ocean City, New
Jersey, next to the Atlantic Ocean.
According to a 2007 report by the Environmental Integrity Project (EIP), Portland Generating Station was ranked …fth among the top 50 dirtiest power plants for SO2 by emission
rate (with 28.30 lbs SO2 per MWh), and its 2006 annual SO2 emission reached 30,685.44
tons.21 The EIP’s 2007 report also points out that a number of coal-…red power plants,
such as Portland Generating Station, have been postponing the installation of scrubbers to
control their SO2 emissions. In fact, in 2009 Portland Generating Station emitted 30,465
tons of SO2 ,22 which exceeded the combined SO2 emissions (of 12,810 tons) from all power
generating facilities in New Jersey23 by a signi…cant margin (NJDEP, 2010a).

2.2

The Portland Rule

In May and September 2010 the NJDEP …led two petitions (NJDEP, 2010a and 2010b) with
the EPA against Portland Generating Station, pursuant to the Section 126(b) of the Clean
Air Act (CAA), which allows State A to request that the EPA should take actions against an
nia, Virginia, and West Virginia, excluding federally recognized tribes (http://www.epa.gov/tribalportal/
whereyoulive/regions.htm, accessed July 15, 2015).
19
The other coal-…red power plant is Eddystone Generating Station, which is located in the extreme
southeast of Pennsylvania, near the Philadelphia International Airport. For details, see “Power Plants in the
Mid-Atlantic Region,” http://www.epa.gov/reg3artd/globclimate/r3pplants.html (accessed July 15, 2015).
20
The other coal-…red power plant that immediately borders New Jersey, Eddystone Generating Station
(located near Philadelphia), is a plant with controlled units. As a result, the annual SO2 emissions from
Eddystone Generating Station (8,678.00 tons) are only about 30 percent of the annual SO2 emissions from
Portland Generating Station (29,105.07 tons), according to the 2009 eGRID data (http://www.epa.gov/
reg3artd/globclimate/r3pplants.html, accessed July 15, 2015).
21
For details, see Table 3 of the 2007 report by EIP (page 12), available at http://www.dirtykilowatts.
org/Dirty_Kilowatts2007.pdf (accessed July 15, 2015).
22
For details, see “Exhibit 2: Excerpts from EPA’s Clean Air Markets Emissions Database–Portland
Plant’s 2008/2009 Emissions” of NJDEP (2010a, pp.17–18).
23
For details, see “Exhibit 3: Excerpts from EPA’s Clean Air Markets Emissions Database–New Jersey
Power Generation Facilities Total 2009 Emissions” of NJDEP (2010a, pp.19–28) and “Exhibit 4: Excerpts
from EPA’s Clean Air Markets Emissions Graph” of NJDEP (2010a, pp.29–30).

8

entity in State B if pollution from that entity causes State A to violate the National Ambient
Air Quality Standards (NAAQS). The NJDEP’s petitions provided scienti…c evidence based
on air quality and aerial dispersion modeling analyses showing that Portland Generating
Station is in violation of the “Good Neighbor Provision”— Section 110(a)(2)(D) of the CAA:
emissions from the power plant caused SO2 concentrations in four downwind counties of
New Jersey— Warren, Sussex, Morris and Hunterdon (shown in Figure 3)— to have exceeded
the SO2 NAAQS. The May 2010 petition points out that the coal-fueled units of the power
plants have no air pollution controls for SO2 emissions and only outdated controls for nitrogen
oxides and particulate matter. Furthermore, trajectory analysis reported in the September
2010 petition (which was conducted by NJDEP’s Bureau of Technical Services in the second
petition) demonstrates how SO2 emissions from the power plant were transported through
the air and reached the borough of Chester in Morris County, located approximately 21 miles
east-southeast of the power plant.
In response to the NJDEP’s petitions the EPA conducted its own independent investigation to verify the presence of impacts of the power plant emissions on the nonattainment
of SO2 NAAQS, using the American Meteorological Society/EPA Regulatory Model (a.k.a.,
AERMOD). On November 7, 2011, the EPA issued its …nal ruling— the Portland Rule (76
Fed. Reg. 69052)— concluding that the emissions from the Pennsylvania power plant alone
caused the violations of the SO2 NAAQS in the downwind state, New Jersey; the EPA also
required the power plant to reduce SO2 emissions by 81 percent within three years of the
e¤ective date (i.e., January 6, 2012) of the …nal ruling (EPA, 2011). The Portland Rule is
the EPA’s …rst-ever granting of a sole-source petition under the Section 126(b) of the CAA.
The 2010 NJDEP petitions also mark the second-ever use of the Section 126(b) of the CAA
in its history, with the prior case (i.e., Appalachian Power Co. v. EPA, 249 F.3d 1032) set
in 1998.
On January 6, 2012, GenOn …led a petition for review with the Third Circuit, challenging

9

the EPA’s authority in imposing emission limits on the power plant.24 On July 12, 2013,
the Third Circuit issued its ruling— GenOn REMA LLC v. EPA, 3rd Cir., No. 12–1022,
upholding the Portland Rule (United States Court of Appeals for the Third Circuit, Opinion
Filed July 12, 2013).25 The Third Circuit’s ruling con…rmed the validity of EPA’s AERMOD
analysis and supported the …ndings of the NJDEP and the EPA that the Portland Generating
Station alone caused the NAAQS violations in the downwind state. On June 1, 2014, the
coal-…red generating units of the power plant were shut down by its current owner, NRG
REMA, LLC.26 Since then, the power plant has become a “peak plant,” running only on
days when the demand for electricity is high and using low-sulfur diesel fuel to generate
electricity.27

2.3

Our Study’s Focus on Full-Term LBW

In this study we aim to identify critical windows of prenatal exposure to power plant emissions
for infant health, and knowing these critical windows could improve pollution risk assessment
(Selevan, Kimmel and Mendola, 2000). We examine the critical windows by month, not by
trimester. As Slama et al. (2008) point out, “Most studies on IUGR [i.e., intrauterine
growth restriction] used trimester-speci…c exposure windows. Yet when there are no strong
a priori biologic hypotheses, investigating …ner time scales (e.g., months) might be a more
informative and appropriate approach”(p. 794). We use birth weight as a summary measure
of a newborn’s health for the reason explained by Currie (2011): birth weight is not the ideal
measure for summarizing a newborn’s health, but it is still widely used for that purpose
because “little progress has been made toward …nding an alternative, superior measure”(p.
24

For details, see http://www.nj.gov/dep/docs/petition20120206.pdf (accessed July 15, 2015).
For details of the Third Circuit’s ruling, see http://www2.ca3.uscourts.gov/opinarch/121022p.pdf (accessed July 15, 2015).
26
Source: http://www.lehighvalleylive.com/slate-belt/index.ssf/2014/05/portland_generating_station_
st.html (accessed July 15, 2015).
27
Source: http://www.lehighvalleylive.com/slate-belt/index.ssf/2014/06/portland_generating_station_
sw.html (accessed July 15, 2015).
25

10

3). One important reason why we exclude preterm births28 from our empirical analysis is
that a preterm birth could be a result of maternal exposure to power plant emissions during
pregnancy. If we include both preterm and full-term births into our empirical analysis, the
former will confound our identi…cation of critical windows of prenatal exposure to power
plant emissions, and furthermore, we will not be able to disentangle the e¤ect of in-utero
exposure to power plant emissions on shortened gestational length from the e¤ect of in-utero
exposure to power plant emissions on slowed fetal growth. A LBW birth can be the result
of either preterm or slow fetal growth, or both.
Another problem of including both preterm and full-term births into our empirical analysis comes from assigning zero values to non-exposure to power plant emissions. Note that
the third trimester of a pregnancy starts at the 27th week of gestation, which is also the
beginning of the seventh month of a pregnancy.29 Thus, cases with zero values assigned to
exposure to power plant emissions in the third trimester can be problematic because the
pregnancies that have the third trimester can include two substantially di¤erent groups of
mothers: (a) those with a seven-month gestation (i.e., preterm de…ned as gestational length
less than 37 weeks) and (b) those with a nine-month gestation. A zero value of in-utero
exposure for group (b) means no exposure to power plant emissions during the last phase of
a normal pregnancy. But, a zero value of in-utero exposure for group (a) does not mean the
same thing; instead, it means no exposure to power plant emissions during the last phase of
an abnormal pregnancy, which is shortened from nine months to seven months. When groups
(a) and (b) coexist, those cases with zero values of in-utero exposure assigned for the third
trimester should not be used without distinction as the baseline group for the comparison of
being exposed to versus not being exposed to power plant emissions. To choose the proper
baseline group, we consider cases that have the same length of gestation (i.e., nine months
28
A preterm infant is one who was born with gestational length (de…ned by the interval between the …rst
day of the mother’s last menstrual period and her childbirth date) shorter than 37 weeks (Maisonet et al.,
2004).
29
The …rst trimester includes the …rst 13 weeks of gestation; the second trimester covers weeks 14–26 of
gestation; and third trimester starts from the 27th week of gestation.

11

in our study), meaning that the chosen cases all have the same length of potential exposure
to power plant emissions.
By focusing on full-term births, we also aim to identify the impact of in-utero exposure
to power plant emissions on LBW that is driven by slow fetal growth. However, including
only full-term births will incur a sample selection bias: we will under-estimate the impact
of in-utero exposure to power plant emissions on the occurrence of LBW because full-term
infants under normal circumstances are healthier than preterm infants, which means fewer
occurrences of LBW than what it should be for a general population. Nonetheless, an
understated impact in this context could be more informative for policy considerations than
an overstated impact, and we are likely to over-estimate the adverse impact of the power
plant emissions if we focus only on preterm births where LBW is more prevalent than what
it should be for a general population.
Despite numerous studies showing adverse impacts of LBW, few studies in the economics
…eld have examined these two cases separately: LBW due to preterm delivery and LBW
due to intrauterine growth restriction (a.k.a. intrauterine growth retardation, IUGR).30
However, when LBW is used for evaluating pathological smallness (which is a strong predictor
of infant mortality), the separation of these two cases will become important because not
all preterm babies are pathologically small and full-term babies can still be pathologically
small (Goldenberg and Cliver, 1997). Since pathological smallness can result from restricted
growth in utero (i.e., IUGR) or shortened time of growth in utero (i.e., preterm birth), the
measurement for pathological smallness should take the length of gestation into account,
such as small for gestational age (SGA), which is de…ned as having a weight below the 10th
30

In general, infants born with LBW can die at rates of up to 40 times those of infants born with normal
weight (Goldenberg and Culhane, 2007). Almond, Chay and Lee (2005) estimate that the costs of delivery
and initial care of an infant born weighing 1,000 grams can exceed $100,000 (in year 2000 dollars). LBW
infants are also found to be at greater risk of developing conditions such as hypertension, cerebral palsy, and
asthma during childhood (Brooks et al., 2001; Nelson and Grether, 1997); having coronary heart disease
(Barker, 1995), type 2 diabetes and metabolic syndrome in adult life (Hales and Barker, 2001); as well
as having lower educational attainment, poorer self-reported health status, and reduced employment and
earnings (Behrman and Rosenzweig, 2004; Behrman, Rosenzweig and Taubman, 1994; Currie and Hyson,
1999).

12

percentile of a weight distribution for each gestational age stratum. However, using SGA as
a measure for pathological smallness is not without problems for at least three reasons. First,
as Wilcox (2001) points out: “At a given gestational age, births are not a random sample
of all intrauterine fetuses”(p. 1239). Thus, using birth weight to calculate SGA (i.e., using
the 10th percentile of a birth weight distribution) can misrepresent the actual proportion of
births that are pathologically small, especially for preterm deliveries. Second, the de…nition
of SGA essentially requires the use of fetal weight measured at each gestational age. Unlike
birth weight, which can be exactly measured, antenatal fetal weight has to be inferred using
fetal biometry, and the timing of conducting an ultrasonography can a¤ect the accuracy of
the inference (Yoshida et al., 2000). Third, even if antenatal fetal weight can be accurately
measured, the SGA measure still can misclassify babies who are constitutionally (i.e., not
pathologically) small as those who are growth-restricted due to pathological factors because
the SGA measure does not take into account a fetus’s genetically determined potential size.
In light of these problems associated with the SGA measure, our study focuses on LBW
among full-term births (a.k.a. term LBW),31 following Wilcox’s (2001) suggestions: we
exclude the in‡uence on slow fetal growth from untimely interruptions of growth in utero
(i.e., preterm births) by focusing on full-term births. Despite the fact that full-term LBW is
a crude measure for IUGR, which like SGA will include babies who are only constitutionally
(i.e., intrinsically) small, full-term LBW itself is still a distinct and important health outcome,
which however has not been extensively studied in the economics …eld.32 Nevertheless,
adverse health e¤ects of full-term LBW have been separately documented in the medical
…eld. For example, using a longitudinal birth cohort study with an exclusive focus on fullterm births, Caudri et al. (2007) …nd that children born at full term with LBW can have
31
The birth certi…cate data that we obtained from the New Jersey Department of Health contain no
information on fetal biometry, which prevents us from inferring fetal weight needed for the calculation of
SGA.
32
In contrast, in the medical …eld full-term LBW is often examined as one case of IUGR, with the assumption that “37 weeks of gestation was su¢ cient to reach 2500 g (5.5 pounds) and that a failure to reach
this weight was indicative of IUGR” (Maisonet et al., 2004, p. 112); for example, studies using full-term
LBW as a separate outcome variable include (but not limited to) Dugandzic et al. (2006), Lin et al. (2004),
Maisonet et al. (2001) and Wang et al. (1997).

13

signi…cantly higher risk for developing respiratory symptoms through age 5, which could
be explained by a disturbed lung development due to restricted fetal growth. In addition,
Wiles et al. (2005) …nd that it is full-term LBW, not preterm births with LBW, that
is associated with having psychological distress in adulthood, and this association remains
after controlling for childhood factors. They interpret this direct link between full-term LBW
and adult mental health as evidence for the impacts of impaired neurodevelopment due to
IUGR on adult psychiatric morbidity. Furthermore, Wiles et al.’s (2005) …nding suggests
that the link between impaired neurodevelopment in early life and psychological distress in
adult life could be attributed to placental insu¢ ciency, a cause for full-term IUGR, rather
than other pathological factors associated with preterm births that could a¤ect the brain.

3

Data and Methods

3.1

Data

Our study combines data from the following six sources: New Jersey Department of Health;
the EPA’s Air Markets Program Data (AMPD); Weather Source, LLC; the National Climatic
Data Center (NCDC); the EPA’s Air Quality System (AQS); and the Zip Code Database.
We obtained the 2004–2010 birth certi…cate data directly from New Jersey Department
of Health. The birth certi…cate data provide us with the key information for our study,
that is, birth weight and gestational length, as well as important information on the sex of
the baby and the mother’s age, race and ethnicity, education, marital status, and the zip
code of her residence. However, in our birth certi…cate data there is no unique identi…er
for each mother, which prevents us from identifying mothers who have multiple pregnancies
during our sample period (2004–2010).33 Our study focuses on live births, which consist
33
Because our study focuses on the impact region of the Portland Generating Station, not the entire state
of New Jersey, and for the period of 2004–2010, we may not have the number of mothers who had multiple
pregnancies in that region and during our sample period large enough to achieve the statistical power needed
for detecting any health impacts, even if we have the identi…er for each mother in the birth certi…cate data
allowing us to use mother …xed e¤ects.

14

of approximately 97% of the original data. Among those live births kept in our sample
we further dropped about 6% of the sample, in which we found that the zip codes of the
mothers’homes are not in New Jersey. The birth certi…cate data also provide us with the
information on the mother’s …rst day of her last menstrual period (LMP) and the exact
birth date. We then compared our calculated di¤erence between the birth date and the
LMP with the gestational length directly reported in the birth certi…cate data.34 At the end
of this comparison we dropped about 0.7% of the sample where the calculated gestational
length is not equal to the reported one in the birth certi…cate data.35 Lastly, we kept all
singleton births by dropping those cases of multiple births, about 6% of the sample36 , to
exclude the cases where LBW occurs for reasons related to multiple fetuses resulting from a
single pregnancy. The …nal number of birth records in our main estimation sample (including
Hunterdon, Morris, Sussex and Warren counties) is 51,809 (reported in Table 1 and Panel
A of Table 2); the …nal number of birth records from all New Jersey counties is 678,537
(reported in Panel B of Table 2). The key dependent variable of our study is full-term LBW,
which is de…ned as infant birth weight below 2,500 grams while gestational length is greater
than or equal to 37 weeks.
From AMPD we extracted the Portland Generating Station’s daily emission data.37 In
AMPD the following three categories of power plant emissions are reported: sulfur dioxide
(SO2 , measured in tons), nitrogen oxides (NOx , measured in tons) and carbon dioxide (CO2 ,
measured in short tons).38 For some of the additional analyses explained in Section 4.3 we
34

The gestational length directly reported in the birth certi…cate data is based on the di¤erence between
the mother’s LMP and the birth date.
35
This gestational length directly reported in the birth certi…cate data is measured in weeks and in integers.
When we calculated the gestational length ourselves for the comparison, we used (a) the mother’s LMP and
(b) the exact birth date; then used (b) minus (a); then divided the di¤erence by seven; and then rounded
the result to the nearest integer.
36
Furthermore, we dropped the observations in the birth certi…cate data (i) where the year of LMP is
shown to be 2002 or earlier; (ii) where the gestational length is either shorter than 13 weeks or longer than
45 weeks; and (iii) where the birth weight information is indicated by the New Jersey Department of Health
as to be followed up for veri…cation. Note that (i) and (ii) consist of approximately 1% of the sample, and
(iii) consists of 0.55% of the sample.
37
The AMPD’s power plant emission data are available at http://ampd.epa.gov/ampd/. The earliest year
of Portland Generating Station’s emission data is 1995.
38
Our study does not focus on carbon dioxide emissions from the power plant, mainly because carbon

15

also extracted the hourly SO2 emission data (measured in pounds) from AMPD for each day
from January 1 to December 31 and for each year from 2004 to 2010.
To have the information on hourly wind directions near the power plant, we purchased
a database at Weather Source, LLC,39 from which we selected the Allentown Lehigh Valley
International Airport weather station. This weather station is located in Pennsylvania,
southwest of the power plant. We selected this weather station because it is the one closest
to the power plant that has a complete series of records on hourly wind directions every day
since January 1, 1960.40 The wind direction reported in this weather database is a continuous
variable measured in degrees ranging from 0 to 360, with 0-degree (or 360-degree) indicating
the wind comes from due North and accordingly, 90-degree for due East, 180-degree for due
South, and 270-degree for due West.
In addition to the hourly wind direction data, we obtained monthly weather data from
all weather stations in New Jersey from the NCDC’s Global Historical Climatology Network
Database (GHCND). The weather variables that we extracted from the GHCND are monthly
high temperature, monthly low temperature, monthly mean temperature, monthly rainfall
and monthly snowfall.41
From AQS we retrieved data on SO2 , PM2:5 and NO2 concentrations measured by the
EPA’s monitors placed in New Jersey and the adjacent states including Delaware, Maryland,
New York and Pennsylvania.42 In our retrieved AQS data, SO2 concentrations are represented by the one-hour daily maximum readings by the EPA’s monitors for SO2 , measured in
dioxide is one of the greenhouse gases and it is not among the six common air pollutants (i.e., carbon
monoxide, lead, nitrogen dioxide, ozone, particulate matter, and sulfur dioxide) for which the Clean Air Act
requires the EPA to set NAAQS.
39
Detailed descriptions of the weather data provided by the Weather Source, LLC, are provided at http:
//weathersource.com/.
40
This weather station is also included in the wind …elds analysis provided in the May 2010 NJDEP’s
petition.
41
There are 427 New Jersey weather stations in this GHCND dataset. The weather variables in this dataset
are measured on a monthly basis, and there is no information on wind. The monthly high (monthly low, or
monthly mean) temperature is the monthly mean minimum (monthly mean maximum, or monthly average)
temperature derived by the GHCND from daily minimum (daily maximum, or daily average) temperature.
42
The EPA’s AQS data are available at http://aqsdr1.epa.gov/aqsweb/aqstmp/airdata/download_…les.
html.

16

parts per billion (ppb);43 PM2:5 concentrations are represented by the daily maximum readings by the EPA’s monitors for PM2:5 , measured in microgram per cubic meter ( g=m3 );44
and NO2 concentrations are represented by the one-hour daily maximum readings by the
EPA’s monitors for NO2 , measured in parts per billion (ppb).45
Lastly, we purchased a zip code database that includes all of the 723 New Jersey zip
codes.46 This database provides us with the exact latitudinal and longitudinal coordinates
of each New Jersey zip code centroid; we merged these coordinates into the New Jersey birth
certi…cate data for the zip code of every mother’s residence.

3.2

Construction of Variables

We use the following four-step procedure to construct a variable representing a geographic
area located downwind of the Portland Generating Station; hereafter, we call this variable
“being downwind of the power plant,” which varies by each New Jersey zip code and also
varies monthly from January 2004 to December 2010.
First, we calculate the direction in which each New Jersey zip code centroid is located
relative to the power plant. This calculation uses the latitudes and longitudes of two points—
the power plant47 and each New Jersey zip code centroid, with the earth’s surface taken into
account. Throughout our study we use azimuth, which is an angle between point A and
43

The ppb measures the concentration of a gaseous pollutant by its volume per 109 volumes of ambient

air.
44

The g=m3 (microgram per cubic meter) measures the concentration of a gaseous pollutant in units of
mass ( g) per volume (m3 ) of ambient air.
45
For PM2:5 we retrieved the data measured by the Federal Reference Methods (FRM) because it is the
PM2:5 measured by the FRM (i.e., the category “88101”coded by the EPA), not the non-FRM (i.e., “88502”
coded by the EPA), that is used for the evaluation of PM2:5 NAAQS attainment. For detailed explanations
on FRM, see http://www.epa.gov/ttn/airs/airsaqs/memos/PM-cont-Reporting-Tech-Note-053106.pdf (accessed July 15, 2015). For PM2:5 we use the daily monitor readings because NAAQS’s primary and secondary
standards regulate PM2:5 concentrations at the 24-hour level. We retrieved from the AQS the data on onehour daily maximums for SO2 and NO2 because they are used to evaluate attainment of the NAAQS primary
standards for SO2 and NO2 . For details on NAAQS, see http://www.epa.gov/air/criteria.html (accessed July
15, 2015).
46
For detailed descriptions of this database, see http://www.zip-codes.com/zip-code-statistics.asp (accessed July 15, 2015).
47
We obtained latitude (i.e., +40:91) and longitude (i.e., 75:0789) of the Portland Generating Station
from the EPA’s AMPD.

17

point B in a spherical coordinate system (expressed in degrees), as the measure for direction.
To calculate the azimuth of point B (the point of interest, such as a New Jersey zip code
!
centroid) from point A (the origin, such as the power plant), we project the vector AB onto
a horizontal plane. On that horizontal plane, the reference vector is due North, which is
used for point A (the origin) and has an azimuth of 0 or 360 degrees; moving clockwise on
a 360-degree circle, a point due East has an azimuth of 90 degrees, and accordingly, 180
degrees for due South and 270 degrees for due West. The azimuth of point B from point
!
A is given by the angle between the projected vector of AB and the reference vector on
that horizontal plane.48 For example, the direction in which New York City is located from
Chicago can be expressed by the azimuth of 91.95 degrees (i.e., east-southeast of Chicago);
the direction in which Vancouver (of Canada) is located from Chicago can be expressed by
the azimuth of 298.93 degrees (i.e., west-northwest of Chicago).
In the second step we convert the wind direction from being measured as where the
wind comes from (based on the meteorological de…nition in the weather database) to being
measured as where the wind blows, that is, the wind vector azimuth: we subtract 180 degrees
from the direction from which the wind comes, and we will add 360 degrees if the subtraction
results in a negative value. We use the wind vector azimuth throughout our study to be
consistent with the measurement of the direction of each New Jersey zip code relative to the
power plant, near which we consider the direction toward which the wind blows. It is also
worth noting that in meteorology a wind blowing eastward is called a westerly wind.
In the third step we use vector means, not arithmetic means, for the calculation of daily
average wind direction using the hourly wind direction data we obtained from Weather
Source, LLC. Wind direction data are examples of “circular” data, where both the start
value (0 degree) and end value (360 degree) indicate exactly the same direction. Ignoring
this fact can result in serious mistakes when calculating an average wind direction. For
!
The azimuth of point A from point B is given by the angle between the projected vector of BA and the
reference vector on that horizontal plane. It is di¤erent from the azimuth of point B from point A by 180
degrees.
48

18

example, based on the meteorological de…nition, both a 5-degree wind and a 355-degree
wind can be regarded as a northerly wind, and so should be the average of the two; however,
the arithmetic mean of 5 degrees and 355 degrees is 180 degrees, which indicates a southerly
wind, not a northerly wind that should have been the result of averaging two northerly
winds. In contrast to the arithmetic mean, the vector mean of 5 degrees and 355 degrees is
0 degree (or 360 degrees).
In the fourth step we calculate a cosine function of the di¤erence between each New
Jersey zip code centroid azimuth ( 1 ) and the wind vector azimuth near the power plant
( 2 ), that is, the cosine function of the direction of a New Jersey zip code centroid relative to
the power plant minus the direction toward which the wind blows near the power plant (i.e.,
cos(

1

2 )),

for each day from January 1, 2003 (one year before the …rst year of our birth

certi…cate data) to December 31, 2010 (the last year of our birth certi…cate data). We use
the value of this cosine function as a continuous measure for how downwind a New Jersey
zip code is, on a daily basis, relatively to the power plant: a zero-degree (or a 180-degree)
di¤erence gives the cosine function the maximum (or the minimum) value of 1 (or -1), which
is used to indicate a perfectly downwind (or perfectly upwind) location relative to the power
plant.49 Next, we average the daily values of this cosine function for each New Jersey zip
code-year-month pair, to make it vary monthly by each New Jersey zip code.
In some of our analyses we use direction-adjusted sulfur dioxide (or nitrogen oxides)
emissions from the power plant. They are measured by …rst taking the product of the daily
sulfur dioxide (or nitrogen oxides) emissions from the power plant (reported in the AMPD)
and the cosine function of the di¤erence between daily wind direction (where the wind
blows) near the power plant and the azimuth of New Jersey zip code centroid (relative to
the power plant), and then aggregating the aforementioned product to the zip code-monthly
level. This construction of the direction-adjusted power plant emissions assumes that, all
else being equal, pollution impacts from the power plant will increase if a zip code is more
49

Note that 0 6 cos ! 6 1 when 0 6 ! 6 90 and

1 6 cos ! < 0 when 90 < ! 6 180 .

19

downwind of the power plant.
In addition to the variables indicating how downwind (relative to the power plant) each
New Jersey zip code is and the associated direction-adjusted (SO2 and NOx ) emissions from
the power plant, we construct zip code-level monthly pollution variables for SO2 , NO2 and
PM2:5 using the AQS data, as well as zip code-level monthly weather variables using the
NCDC data.
To construct those pollution variables we use the following four-step procedure. In the
case of SO2 we …rst compute a monthly simple average of SO2 concentration for each SO2
monitor, using the one-hour daily maximum readings. Second, we pair each New Jersey zip
code with all SO2 monitors. Using the latitudinal and longitudinal coordinates of each zip
code centroid and each SO2 monitor, we calculate the geodetic (a.k.a., geodesic) distance
between each zip code centroid and each paired SO2 monitor. The geodetic distance approximates the length of the shortest curve between two points along the surface of the earth.50
Third, based on the geodetic distance, we select those SO2 monitors located within 20 miles
of the zip code centroid. Fourth, we compute the zip code-level monthly SO2 concentration,
which is the weighted average of the monthly SO2 concentrations obtained in the …rst step
(i.e., the monitor-level monthly simple averages of SO2 concentrations), including readings
for monitors within our chosen radius of the zip code centroid. The weight is equal to the
inverse of the geodetic distance between the zip code centroid and the paired SO2 monitor.
Our use of the inverse-distance weighting method, as well as our chosen radius of 20 miles,
follows Currie and Neidell (2005).51 We repeat this four-step procedure for NO2 and PM2:5
to get the zip code-level monthly variables.52
To construct zip code-level monthly weather variables we use the following three-step procedure. First, we pair each New Jersey zip code with all weather stations in New Jersey that
are included in NCDC’s GHCND. Using the latitudinal and longitudinal coordinates of each
50

We use geodetic distance for all the distance calculations in this paper.
We also use a 15-mile radius for robustness checks.
52
Summary statistics of the pollution variables are reported in Appendix Table 2.
51

20

zip code centroid and each weather station, we calculate the geodetic distance between the
zip code centroid and each paired weather station. Second, based on the geodetic distance,
we select those weather stations located within 20 miles of the zip code centroid.53 Third,
we compute the zip code-level monthly-measured weather variable, which is the weighted
average of the monthly-measured weather variable provided by NCDC’s GHCND within our
chosen radius of the zip code centroid. The weight is equal to the inverse of the geodetic
distance between the zip code centroid and the paired weather station.54

3.3

Selection of Estimation Sample

Among the four New Jersey counties identi…ed in the NJDEP’s petitions, we focus on these
three counties: Hunterdon, Morris and Sussex. These three counties all belong to the New
York-Northern New Jersey-Long Island Metropolitan Statistical Area (MSA), and they are
20 to 40 miles away from the Portland Generating Station. The decision to live in one of
these three counties may largely depend on the job and career opportunities that are available
in the New York-Northern New Jersey-Long Island MSA, not on the distance to the power
plant. As a result, the behavior of avoiding the power plant in residential choice can be
largely precluded. One implication of this focus is that our study’s …ndings may not be valid
for other states or other counties of New Jersey, since we focus on a wealthy state and also
a wealthy part of the state.55 However, this focus also implies that our …nding on adverse
impacts of power plant emissions on infant health based on a wealthy part of the United
States are more likely to be an under-estimation than an over-estimation, because residents
of that wealthy region have higher income than the general population, and higher income
can be associated with better access to health care, which tends to reduce the occurrence of
adverse birth outcomes. In the evaluation of adverse impacts of power plant emissions, an
53

We also use a 15-mile radius for robustness checks.
Summary statistics of the weather variables are reported in Appendix Table 2.
55
According to the U.S. Census Bureau, median household income (2009–2013) is $106,143 in Hunterdon
County, $98,633 in Morris County, $87,335 in Sussex County, and $70,912 in Warren County, all except
Warren exceeding the New Jersey average of $71,629 and all four counties exceeding the national average of
$53,046 (Source: http://quickfacts.census.gov/qfd/states/, accessed July 15, 2015).
54

21

under-estimation can be more informative than an over-estimation to policy-makers, when
a lower bound of the actual adverse impacts is preferred to an upper bound.

3.4

Regression Models

For our main analyses we use the following regression models:

yi;jt =

0 downwindjt

+

1 downwindj;t 1

+

+

8 downwindj;t 8

x0i + zip codej + monthlyt + error termi;jt .

+
(1)

In equation (1) yi;jt is a binary indicator, equal to one for full-term LBW and zero otherwise,
for infant i whose mother lives in a New Jersey zip code j; the subscript t indexes the year
and month, ranging from January 2004 to December 2010, during which infant i was born.
We use a comma between the subscripts i and jt to emphasize the fact that our data are
not longitudinal for infant i’s mother over time.
The construction of the “downwind” variable uses the four-step procedure explained
in Section 3.2. Our estimation sample includes live singleton full-term births only (i.e.,
live singleton births with gestational length greater than or equal to 37 weeks). A normal
pregnancy is usually 39 to 40-week long, which is 9-month long.56 Accordingly, we include
nine “downwind” terms for each of the nine months of a full-term pregnancy, aiming to
disentangle the impacts of being downwind of the power plant during the early stage of
pregnancy from those during the late stage of pregnancy.
The control variables xi include infant i’s sex, male (0) or female (1); infant i’s mother’s
age; dummy variables (1/0) for the mother’s race and ethnicity (White, Black, Hispanic);
having completed a four-year college or higher (1), or not (0); and being married (1) or
not (0). In our regression model we also control for zip code …xed e¤ects, denoted by “zip
codej ,”as well as the linear and quadratic time trend, denoted by “monthlyt ,”which are the
56

Note that each calendar month includes four full weeks and up to three more days; February (not in a
leap year) is the only month that includes exactly four weeks.

22

linear and quadratic terms of the consecutive integers generated from all year-month pairs
(January 2004–December 2010).
In the analyses of the impacts of power plant emissions we revise equation (1) to the
following equation:

yi;jt =

0 downwind

emissionjt +

+

8 downwind

emissionj;t

8

+

x0i + zip codej + monthlyt + error termi;jt ,

(2)

where the variable “downwind emission” is the previously discussed power plant emission
(SO2 or NOx ) adjusted by how downwind a New Jersey zip code is relative to the power
plant (with details given in Section 3.2).
To examine the impacts of the power plant emissions on local pollution measured at each
New Jersey zip code level, we use the following regression model:

0
pollutionjt = downwind emissionjt + wjt
+ zipcodej + monthlyt + error termjt .

(3)

In equation (3) the variable “pollutionjt ” denotes the previously discussed SO2 , NO2 and
PM2:5 variables that vary monthly by each New Jersey zip code (with details given in Section 3.2). The zip code-level weather variables previously discussed (in Section 3.2) are
denoted by wjt , including monthly high temperature, monthly low temperature, monthly
mean temperature, monthly rainfall, and monthly snowfall.
We estimate equations (1)–(3) by ordinary least squares (OLS) with standard errors
clustered at the zip code-level. Similar to our study, Currie, Neidell, and Schmieder (2009)
compute standard errors clustered at the census tract-level.
Throughout our analysis we use the downwind variable together with the New Jersey zip
code …xed e¤ect. By using the zip code …xed e¤ect, we control for the distance between each
New Jersey zip code and the power plant. Because the downwind variable we constructed
varies by each zip code and also by the wind direction near the power plant, once we control
23

for the zip code …xed e¤ects, the remaining variation of the downwind variable should come
only from the latter. Thus, the inclusion of the New Jersey zip code …xed e¤ects should
allow the downwind variable to be exogenous, since the wind direction is indeed driven by
nature.

4
4.1

Results
Descriptive Statistics

Table 1 reports the summary statistics about the power plant emissions and the New Jersey
zip codes based on the sample of our main analysis, which includes the four New Jersey
counties identi…ed in the NJDEP’s petitions— Hunterdon, Morris, Sussex, and Warren. The
sample period is from January 2004 to December 2010. One important observation is that
the direction-adjusted monthly SO2 emissions (806 tons, Panel A) and NOx emissions (92
tons, Panel A) from the power plant are much lower, on average, than the actual monthly SO2
emissions from the power plant (2,469 tons, Panel A) and NOx emissions (275 tons, Panel A)
from the power plant.57 This downward adjustment can be explained by the fact that New
Jersey zip codes are not all perfectly downwind of the power plant. Being perfectly downwind
of the power plant means that the direction toward which the wind blows is exactly equal
to the direction toward which a New Jersey zip code is located relative to the power plant.
Note that the average wind direction (measured on a monthly basis) near the power plant is
151.458 degrees (Panel A of Table 1), indicating that the wind blows south-southeastward.
Panel A of Figure 4 further demonstrates that for the majority of our sample period the
wind near the power plant blows south-southeastward (i.e., between 135 and 180 degrees
regardless of the season). In comparison, Panel B of Table 1 shows that on average Sussex
County is east-northeast of the power plant; Morris and Warren Counties are east-southeast
57

Panel B of Figure 4 shows the monthly emissions of SO2 and NOx from the Portland Generating Station
for the entire sample period.

24

of the power plant; and Hunterdon County is the most aligned with the wind direction near
the power plant among the four counties.
Figure 5 shows that the direction-adjusted monthly SO2 emissions from the power plant
are indeed uniformly lower than the actual monthly SO2 emissions throughout the entire
sample period. Furthermore, Figure 5 shows that the downward adjustment is largest for
Sussex County (Panel D), which is the county whose location is least aligned with the wind
direction among the four counties; in contrast, the downward adjustment is smallest for
Hunterdon County (Panel B), which is the county whose location is most aligned with the
wind direction among the four counties. Consistent with Figure 5, Panel B of Table 1 shows
that among the four New Jersey counties, Hunterdon is the most downwind of the power
plant (with the average value of the cosine function being equal to 0.470); Morris and Warren
are similarly downwind of the power plant (with the average values of the cosine function
being equal to 0.335 and 0.350, respectively); and Sussex is the least downwind of the power
plant (with the average value of the cosine function being equal to 0.077).
Table 2 reports the summary statistics about the birth outcomes and mothers’characteristics based on the sample of our main analysis including the four New Jersey counties
(Panel A) and the full sample including all New Jersey counties (Panel B); both the estimation sample and the full sample include live singleton births only, and the sample period is
from January 2004 to December 2010. Panel A shows that the proportion of full-term LBW
is 1.7 percent among the four New Jersey counties; Panel B shows that the proportions of
LBW and preterm births (i.e., gestational length less than 37 weeks) are 5.3 percent and 9.7
percent, respectively.
In contrast, according to the gestation and birth weight summary tables reported by
the National Vital Statistics System (NVSS), the nationwide proportions of full-term LBW,
LBW, and preterm births among all live singleton births during 2004–2010 (i.e., our sample
period) are 2.4 percent, 6.4 percent and 10.7 percent, respectively, which are all higher

25

than the corresponding proportions for New Jersey.58 This pattern could be explained by a
common belief that higher income is associated with better access to health care, which tends
to improve birth outcomes, such as the reduction in LBW, and New Jersey is a wealthy state.
According to the 2011 and 2012 American Community Survey, New Jersey has the second
highest median household income (about $69,000 in 2012 in‡ation-adjusted dollars) in the
United States, only behind the state of Maryland (about $71,000 in 2012 in‡ation-adjusted
dollars; Noss, 2013, table 1 on p. 3).
In our birth certi…cate data there is no variable on household or family income. Nonetheless, in Table 2 we observe that among the four counties, Hunterdon has the highest proportion of mothers who completed a four-year college (or higher), followed in turn by Morris,
Sussex and Warren. This ranking is exactly matched to the ranking of county-level median
household income (2009–2013), according to the U.S. Census Bureau’s statistics, with Hunterdon being the highest ($106,143), followed in turn by Morris ($98,633), Sussex ($87,335)
and Warren ($70,912).59 As a result, it could be a reasonable assumption that for our study
region the proportion of mothers who completed a four-year college (or higher) is not only
a control variable for the mother’s educational attainment but also a proxy variable for
the mother’s income, because of the positive correlation suggested by Table 2 and the U.S.
Census Bureau’s statistics between educational attainment (information from Table 2) and
income level (information from the U.S. Census Bureau’s statistics).
58

Speci…cally, the national level proportions of full-term LBW among live singleton births are 2.30%,
2.32%, 2.38%, 2.39%, 2.42%, 2.40%, and 2.43% for 2004–2010, respectively; the national level proportions of
LBW among live singleton births are 6.30%, 6.40%, 6.48%, 6.44%, 6.40%, 6.35%, and 6.38% for 2004–2010,
respectively; the national level proportions of preterm births among live singleton births are 10.66%, 10.92%,
11.03%, 10.96%, 10.62%, 10.43%, and 10.29% for 2004–2010, respectively The NVSS summary tables are
available at http://205.207.175.93/Vitalstats/ReportFolders/reportFolders.aspx (accessed July 15, 2015).
59
Detailed county-level statistics are provided at http://quickfacts.census.gov/qfd/states/ (accessed July
15, 2015).

26

4.2

Impacts of Being Downwind of the Power Plant on the Occurrence of Full-Term LBW

Table 3 reports the estimated impacts of being downwind of the power plant on the occurrence of full-term LBW for the sample including all four counties identi…ed by the NJDEP’s
petitions and also for the sample including Hunterdon, Morris and Sussex. One important
observation is that among all live singleton full-term births the impact is exclusively detected during the …rst month of pregnancy. Speci…cally, we …nd that being downwind of the
power plant (represented by a change from zero to one in the value of the cosine function)
during the …rst month of pregnancy, which is the eighth month prior to the birth month of
a full-term (i.e., nine-month) pregnancy, could increase the likelihood of full-term LBW by
approximately one percentage point. Given that the nationwide live singleton full-term LBW
rate during our sample period (2004–2010) is about 2.4 percent, the …nding of an increase
of one percentage point could imply an approximately 42 percent increase in the occurrence
of full-term LBW, one case of slow fetal growth, among live singleton births.
Because there are fetal developments unobserved to researchers and also not measured in
the birth certi…cate data, the impacts estimated in our study are aimed to capture the e¤ects
of the interactions between maternal exposure to power plant emissions and the development
of her fetus during the course of a full-term pregnancy. Our …ndings suggest that embryos
could be most vulnerable during the early stage of pregnancy: there are no detected impacts
of being downwind of the power plant during the course of a full-term pregnancy except
for the …rst month; this …nding could be explained by the possibility that fetal development
during the later stage of pregnancy is able to mitigate the adverse impacts of certain in-utero
environmental insults, but the mitigation will not be strong enough to undo those adverse
impacts during the early stage of pregnancy, making an embryo (i.e., the fetus in the early
stage of pregnancy) vulnerable to in-utero environmental insults such as maternal exposure
to power plant emissions.
In Table 3 we also note that when Warren County is excluded from our estimation sam27

ple, the estimates remain very similar (columns 1–3 compared with columns 4–6), suggesting
that the actual avoidance behavior of mother’s relocation from Warren County to other counties is not prevalent, although this avoidance behavior is conceivable because the Portland
Generating Station is located on the border between Northampton County of Pennsylvania
and Warren County of New Jersey. Although we have a seven-year (i.e., 2004–2010) sample
period, we lack the statistical power to conduct a separate analysis exclusively for Warren
County because of the small number of full-term LBW in the sample including one county
alone (i.e., Warren County).
Another important observation in Table 3 is that our estimates of the impacts of being
downwind of the power plant are very similar, whether or not we control for important
individual-level variables such as mother’s age, education, race and ethnicity, all believed
to be associated with infant birth outcomes (columns 1 vs. 2 and columns 4 vs. 5). This
pattern suggests that the variations in those downwind variables are exogenous to those
individual-level important covariates of infant birth outcomes, conditional on the fact that
we use zip code …xed e¤ects to control for the distance between each New Jersey zip code
centroid and the power plant. The exogeneity of those downwind variables is also supported
by the fact that the variations of those downwind variables come from two sources: the
direction of each New Jersey zip code relative to the power plant and the wind direction
near the power plant; when the former is controlled by the New Jersey zip code …xed e¤ect,
the rest of the variation of the downwind variable will be determined by the wind direction,
and the wind direction being measured is indeed driven by nature and varying exogenously.
To examine the presence of important omitted variables that vary monthly and also by
each zip code, we conduct a falsi…cation check by adding a term of being downwind of the
power plant during the month after the childbirth, that is, a “leading” term. If our …nding
is actually driven by certain zip code-level unobserved variables that vary monthly, then
this leading term can be a proxy of those unobserved variables and its coe¢ cient can be
statistically signi…cant if those unobserved variables do have impacts on the occurrence of

28

full-term LBW. In columns (3) and (6) of Table 3 we see that the coe¢ cient of that leading
term is not statistically signi…cant, suggesting that the zip code-level unobserved variables
that vary monthly have little impact on the occurrence of full-term LBW; furthermore, the
estimate of that coe¢ cient is close to zero, which is also consistent with the fact that there
is no impact on the occurrence of full-term LBW from being downwind of the power plant
during the month after childbirth.
To check the robustness of our estimates, we use two additional samples including all
zip codes that are 40 miles and 35 miles of the power plant, respectively.60 The results of
our robustness checks are reported in Table 4 with two important observations. First, the
estimates reported in Table 4 are fully consistent with the estimates reported in Table 3. By
focusing on the zip codes that are close to the power plant, we con…rm the same pattern as
what we …nd by using the four counties identi…ed by the NJDEP’s petitions— Hunterdon,
Morris, Sussex and Warren. Second, because most of the zip codes of the four counties are
within 35 miles of the power plant, the estimates (columns 4–6 of Table 4) obtained from
the 35-mile sample are similar to those reported in Table 3: being downwind of the power
plant during the …rst month of pregnancy could increase the likelihood of full-term LBW
by approximately one percentage point. Furthermore, we note that the magnitude of this
estimate becomes smaller and it decreases to 0.6 percentage points (columns 1–3) when we
use the 40-mile sample, which includes counties (i.e., Mercer, Middlesex, Passaic, Somerset
and Union) that are actually not identi…ed by the NJDEP’s petitions as the impacted area
of the Portland Generating Station.
Overall, the …ndings reported in Table 4 are consistent with the NJDEP’s petitions that
Hunterdon, Morris, Sussex and Warren Counties are impacted by the Portland Generating
Station, and the impact on full-term LBW from being downwind of the power plant can be
increasing (or decreasing) as the distance between the power plant and the mother’s residence
decreases (or increases). Indeed, the impact is not found in the area that is far away from the
60
The New Jersey counties included in the 40-mile and 35-mile samples and the associated summary
statistics are reported in Appendix Table 1.

29

power plant. Speci…cally, Table 5 shows that no impact is found in these three counties—
Cape May, Hudson and Salem (with their locations shown on Figure 3) that are far away
from the power plant and also not directly downwind of the power plant. In addition, in the
sample including New Jersey zip codes that are at least 80 miles away from the power plant
we …nd no impact on the occurrence of full-term LBW from being downwind of the power
plant. Note that the numbers of observations of the three-county sample (56,054, column 1
of Table 5) and the 80-mile sample (67,573, column 2 of Table 5) are all greater than the
numbers of observations of the 35-mile sample (48,997, columns 4–6 of Table 4) and the
four-county sample (51,809, columns 1–3 of Table 3), so the statistically insigni…cant e¤ects
reported in Table 5 are not the results from having smaller samples but rather likely to be
the results from mothers’living far away from the power plant.
To further check the potential bias (in our estimated health impacts of the power plant
emissions) from omitting important variables that vary monthly and also by each zip code,
we conduct falsi…cation checks on the 35-mile and the 40-mile samples by including leading
terms of the downwind variable, that is, being downwind of the power plant during the sixth
month after birth, till during the 12th month after birth. The results of the falsi…cation
checks are reported in Table 6: none of the coe¢ cients of those leading terms are statistically
signi…cant, which is fully consistent with the null hypothesis known to be true that there
is no impact of being downwind of the power plant during the period of six months to one
year after birth on the infant health at birth. Overall, the results in Tables 5 and 6 suggest
that the impacts on slow fetal growth (indicated by full-term LBW) shown in Tables 3 and
4 stem from the Portland Generating Station and the proximity to that power plant, rather
than the e¤ects of unmeasured determinants of fetal development that vary monthly and
also by each zip code.

30

4.3

Impacts of Power Plant Emissions on the Occurrence of FullTerm LBW

We further examine whether the impacts on full-term LBW are indeed the results of maternal
exposure to the emissions from the Portland Generating Station during pregnancy. We report
the results in Tables 7 and 8 for the SO2 emissions and the NOx emissions from the power
plant, respectively.
In Table 7 we observe the same pattern as the ones shown in Tables 3–5: the impacts on
full-term LBW from maternal exposure to the SO2 emissions from the Portland Generating
Station are exclusively detected for the …rst month of pregnancy among live singleton fullterm births (columns 1–6). Based on the sample including Hunterdon, Morris and Sussex,
the three counties that are not adjacent to the Portland Generating Station, we …nd that
when the direction in which a zip code is located from the power plant is the same as the
direction toward which the wind blows near the power plant, an increase of 1,000 tons of
SO2 emissions (which is about 3 percent of the power plant’s annual total SO2 emission)
from the power plant during the …rst month of pregnancy could increase the likelihood
of full-term LBW by approximately 0.24 percentage points among live singleton full-term
births (columns 1–2). Based on the national level live singleton full-term LBW rate during
our sample period (2004–2010), which is 2.4 percent, this …nding of an increase of 0.24
percentage point could imply an approximately 10 percent increase in the occurrence of live
singleton full-term LBW. This estimate increases slightly to 0.25 percentage points (or 10.42
percent) when we keep only Hunterdon and Morris Counties in the sample (columns 3–4),
which is consistent with the fact that, compared with Sussex County, Hunterdon and Morris
Counties are located in an area more aligned with the direction toward which the wind near
the power plant blows, and therefore the estimated impact could be greater for the area more
downwind of the power plant once the distance to the power plant is controlled by using the
zip code …xed e¤ects. In addition, we …nd that the estimate decreases to 0.17 percentage
points (or 7.08 percent) when we include all zip codes that are 40 miles of the power plant
31

(column 5–6), which could be explained by the fact the 40-mile sample includes counties
that are actually not identi…ed in the NJDEP’s petitions (i.e., Mercer, Middlesex, Passaic,
Somerset and Union). Furthermore, when the sample includes only Cape May, Hudson and
Salem, the three counties that are far away from the power plant and also located in an area
not directly downwind of the power plant, we …nd no impact on full-term LBW from being
exposed to SO2 emissions from the power plant (column 7).
In contrast to SO2 emissions, in Table 8 we …nd no statistically signi…cant impact on the
occurrence of full-term LBW from maternal exposure to the power plant’s NOx emissions
in each of the cases (with the same number of observations) examined in Table 7. This
…nding, however, is consistent with the Portland Rule, which exclusively identi…ed that it
is SO2 emitted from the Portland Generating Station that has reached the downwind state,
New Jersey. One possible reason for this …nding is that two processes— reaction with the
hydroxyl radical (OH) and dry deposition, either of which can remove SO2 and NOx from
the atmosphere and therefore terminate their lifetime, are preventing less SO2 , but more
NOx , emitted from the power plant from a¤ecting the downwind region.61
We further investigate the transportability of SO2 and NOx emissions from the power
plant by examining the pollution level measured at each New Jersey zip code based on the
EPA’s AQS data. The results are reported in Table 9.62 Consistent with the Portland Rule,
Panel A shows that, on a monthly basis, SO2 levels measured at zip codes that are within
40 miles of the power plant could increase by approximately 1.587 ppb as a result of the
increase of 1,000 tons of SO2 emissions from the power plant, when the direction in which
a zip code is located from the power plant is the same as the direction toward which the
61

Longer lifetime of these gases will allow them to be transported in the atmosphere farther away from
their origin. For instance, the lifetime of SO2 , based on the reaction with OH (at a typical atmospheric level
of OH), is about one week; it is much longer than that of NO2 (one case of NOx ), which is about one day
(Seinfeld and Pandis, 1998, p. 259 and p. 314). The average dry deposition velocities above land for SO2
and NO2 are about 0.8 and 0.02 centimeters per second, respectively (Möller, 2010, p. 448). When both
processes considered, the lifetime of SO2 can be two days, but the lifetime of NO2 can be one day only.
62
In Appendix Table 3 we report the results of our robustness check, where we use a 15-mile radius for
the construction of pollution and weather variables. The results in Appendix Table 3 are similar to those in
Table 9.

32

wind blows near the plant (column 4). When we include two or three of the four New Jersey
counties identi…ed in the NJDEP’s petitions, the estimate increases to 1.664 ppb (column 2)
or 1.752 ppb (column 3), and the estimate of the impact becomes the greatest (2.249 ppb
in column 1) when only Warren County is included in the sample, which is consistent with
the fact that the Portland Generating Station is immediately next to Warren County. In
contrast, we …nd that among the zip codes that are at least 80 miles away from the power
plant, the estimate of the SO2 pollution impact is statistically insigni…cant and also close to
zero (column 5); this result is consistent with the previous …ndings that no impact on the
occurrence of full-term LBW from being downwind of the power plant is found in the sample
including zip codes that are at least 80 miles away from the power plant.
In Panel B we also …nd an increase in the PM2:5 level in the area including the four New
Jersey counties (columns 1–4), as a result of the SO2 emissions from the power plant, but
we do not …nd this impact in the area that is far away (i.e., at least 80 miles) from the
power plant (column 5). These …ndings are similar to the ones reported in Panel A. The
reason why PM2:5 levels in a downwind region can be a¤ected by the power plant’s SO2
emissions is that SO2 contributes to the formation of sulfates, which can be transported
in the atmosphere through prevailing wind and then become an ingredient of …ne particle
pollution in the region downwind of the power plant (Schneider and Bank, 2010). In contrast,
Panel C shows that NOx emitted from the power plant appears to be able to reach Warren
County only (the county immediately next to the power plant), which could be the result of
the aforementioned two atmospheric processes (i.e., reaction with the hydroxyl radical and
dry deposition) of this geographic region.
Taken together, Panels A, B and C of Table 9 suggest that the increases in the SO2 and
PM2:5 levels measured at the zip code level in the downwind region could be the reason for the
previous …ndings that being downwind of the power plant and in particular, being exposed
to the power plant’s SO2 emissions during the …rst month of pregnancy could increase the
likelihood of slow fetal growth, which is indicated by the occurrence of full-term LBW.

33

One drawback of our study is that we have the information on which zip code the mother
resides in, but we do not have the information on the scope of the mother’s daily activities.
It is possible that the mother spends most of her day at work, especially during the early
stage of pregnancy, and the workplace is in a zip code that is far away from her residential
zip code. As a result, our measures of being downwind of the power plant and being exposed
to the power plant’s emissions are for potential exposure only, which can be substantially
di¤erent from the mother’s actual exposure to the power plant’s emissions.
To assess the impact of this measurement error, we check the power plant’s hourly emission data provided by the EPA’s AMPD. The results are reported in Figure 6, where we
…nd that the power plant’s SO2 emissions were consistently peaked around 3:00 PM during
our sample period (2004–2010). The monthly average speed of the wind measured near the
power plant during our sample period is about 6.7 miles per hour (mph). Panel B of Table
1 shows that the average distance between the mother’s residential zip code and the power
plant is 12.574 miles for Warren, 25.483 miles for Hunterdon, 26.017 miles for Sussex, and
31.117 miles for Morris. So, the travel time for SO2 emitted from the power plant to reach the
four counties could be between two and …ve hours, based on the 6.7 mph wind speed. Thus,
it is possible for the SO2 emissions that are peaked at 3:00 PM to reach the four counties
between 5:00 PM and 8:00 PM, at the time when workers usually return home from work.
According to the U.S. Census Bureau, during 2009–2013 the average travel time for workers
of age 16 and over is 33.6 minutes for Hunterdon, 30.0 minutes for Morris, 37.7 minutes for
Sussex, and 34.4 minutes for Warren (all close to the New Jersey average of 30.4 minutes,
which is higher than the national average of 25.5 minutes).63 Hence, even though the mothers from the four counties can spend most of the daytime at work, away from their homes,
they still can be exposed to elevated pollution levels measured at their residential zip codes,
because of the power plant’s emissions that are peaked in the afternoons. Therefore, in our
empirical setting the variables of being downwind of the power plant and being exposed to
63

These summary statistics are available at http://quickfacts.census.gov/qfd/states/ (accessed July 15,
2015).

34

the power plant’s emissions, all measured at the mothers’residential zip codes, can still be
meaningful for capturing a portion of the mothers’actual pollution exposure that is a¤ected
by the power plant’s emissions

5

Discussion

Our …nding suggests that maternal exposure to power plant emissions during early pregnancy
may be most consequential for fetal development. Speci…cally, we …nd that the consequence
of prenatal exposure to power plant emissions of SO2 (a major precursor to ambient PM2:5
concentrations) on the occurrence of LBW among live singleton full-term births is signi…cantly impactful during the …rst month of pregnancy, which adds more evidence in support
of several association-based studies by Dejmek et al. (1999), Dugandzic et al. (2006), Liu et
al. (2003) and Mohorovic (2004). In particular, Dejmek et al. (1999) …nd that among live
singleton full-term births of European origin, IUGR is signi…cantly correlated with prenatal
exposure to PM2:5 (and also PM10 ) during the …rst month of pregnancy. Dugandzic et al.
(2006) …nd a signi…cant association between SO2 exposure in the highest quartile during
the …rst trimester and the risk of LBW among live singleton full-term births in Canada.
Similarly, also based on pregnancy outcomes in Canada, Liu et al. (2003) …nd that SO2
exposure during the …rst month of pregnancy is signi…cantly associated with LBW among
live singleton full-term births. Using data from Croatia, Mohorovic (2004) …nd that greater
exposure to SO2 during the …rst two months of pregnancy is associated with not only lower
birth weight but also shorter gestational length.
Our …nding also suggests that in-utero exposure to SO2 and PM2:5 due to coal-…red
power plant emissions could induce fetal growth restrictions, of which the exact biological
mechanism is still being examined in the medical and environmental health …elds. Among
several potential pathways proposed in the literature, such as in‡ammation, changes in blood
coagulability and viscosity, endothelial function and hemodynamic responses (Kannan et al.,

35

2006; Slama et al., 2008), there is growing evidence showing that intrauterine oxidative
stress is highly correlated with the occurrence of IUGR (Al-Gubory, Fowler and Garrel
2010; Kannan et al., 2006). Inhaled …ne particles can contain many free radicals, which
include reactive oxygen species (ROS), reactive nitrogen species, and reactive sulfur species
(RSS). One important response to oxidative stress is the in‡ux of in‡ammatory cells to
the sites of damage. In‡ammatory cells can generate and release more free radicals, which
will initiate another round of oxidative stress. Moreover, maternal in‡ammation could be
associated with inadequate placental perfusion that restricts fetal growth due to interference
of transplacental oxygen and nutrient transport (Kannan et al., 2006). In‡ammation could
also a¤ect maternal host’s immune system that increases maternal risk of infections, which in
turn could in‡uence maternal nutrition supply or disturb transplacental nutrient exchanges
or cause fetal infection that impairs fetal growth and development. While the ROS-induced
oxidative stress and its adverse impact on fetal growth have been extensively studied in the
medical …eld (Al-Gubory, Fowler and Garrel 2010; Kannan et al., 2006), the RSS-induced
oxidative stress has become an emerging concept (Giles and Jacob, 2002; Mohorovic, 2004).
Usually, sulfur is considered as part of cellular antioxidant system, which will reduce oxidative
stress; however, there is more evidence showing that RSS can actually have stressor properties
that are similar to ROS, inducing oxidative stress (Giles and Jacob, 2002; Mohorovic, 2004).
Our …nding suggests that the adverse impact on fetal growth could arise from possibly RSSinduced intrauterine oxidative stress due to Portland Generating Station’s emissions of SO2
(a major precursor to ambient PM2:5 concentrations) travelling to the downwind region of
New Jersey.
Previous studies have suggested that when facing a compromised in-utero environment,
male and female fetuses will respond di¤erently, and therefore they can exhibit sexually
dimorphic birth outcomes. However, sex-speci…c e¤ects of prenatal exposure to air pollution
on fetal growth have not received much attention in the epidemiological literature. Existing
studies that have examined sex-speci…c e¤ects, reviewed in Ghosh et al. (2007), suggest

36

a stronger e¤ect of pollution exposure (e.g., SO2 , PM2:5 , CO, O3 , and NO2 ) on low birth
weight or very low birth weight for males than for females.
Indeed, in Table 10 we …nd that the impacts of being downwind of the power plant during
the …rst month of pregnancy on the occurrence of slow fetal growth are salient among males,
but on average there is no e¤ect detected among females; the magnitudes of the estimate
among males (between 1.2 and 1.3 percentage points, reported in Table 10) are slightly
greater than the magnitudes of the estimate (approximately 1 percentage point, reported in
Table 3) when both sexes are included in the estimation sample. This pattern suggests that
the adverse impact of maternal exposure to power plant emissions during the early stage
of pregnancy could concentrate among male fetuses. Our results indicate that male fetuses
can be more vulnerable than female fetuses to in-utero environmental insults (such as power
plant pollutions) during the early stage of pregnancy, and the adverse impacts during the
…rst month of pregnancy may not be overcome by the catch-up growth of male fetuses during
the later stage of pregnancy, such as the fetal growth spurt starting at the end of the second
semester or the beginning of the third trimester.
The …ndings of our study are consistent with the sex di¤erence predicted by the theory
of Developmental Origins of Health and Disease (Aiken and Ozanne, 2013). Our results
also provide evidence supporting a contention that “boys live dangerously in the womb”
(Eriksson et al., 2010). Unless otherwise stated, the following discussions on sex-speci…c
response to in-utero insults are based on Aiken and Ozanne (2013), Clifton (2010), Eriksson
et al. (2010), and Renzo et al. (2007).
Starting from the early stage of human development, males tend to grow faster at every
gestation age. To sustain their fast growth, males also invest less in placental growth. Prior
to the 10th week of pregnancy (a period when most of organs are forming), male embryos
experience more rapid cell divisions, and more frequent cell cycles can expose male embryos
to a higher risk of e¤ective in-utero insults. After the 10th week of pregnancy, male fetuses
continue to grow faster but mature more slowly than female fetuses. The greater growth

37

velocity, which demands more nutrition and oxygen but with less mature organs and systems,
potentially can make males more susceptible to in-utero environmental insults.
More importantly, when facing an in-utero insult that restricts nutrition and oxygen
supply, females tend to perform a higher level of epigenetic modi…cations and changes of
mRNA and protein expressions, to reduce their growth rates and adapt placenta to the
compromised in-utero environment. This developmental adaptation potentially explains
why we do not detect any statistically signi…cant e¤ect (on average) of maternal exposure to
power plant emissions during pregnancy on the full-term LBW (columns 2, 4 and 6 of Table
10) among females. In contrast, male fetuses lack the same level of “plasticity”that female
fetuses have, which will expose male fetuses to greater risks of becoming undernourished.
In other words, when resource constraints change, female fetuses can remaximize the usage
of intrauterine environment to achieve their optimal outcomes under the new constraints,
and the new optimal outcomes can lead to minor reductions in fetal growth, thus avoiding
IUGR; in contrast, when facing more constrained resources, male fetuses can continue to
develop without recognizing the new constraints and in the end fail to sustain their growth
and development or fail to have any capacity to mitigate the in-utero environmental insults.
Interestingly, our results suggest that the …rst month of pregnancy could have a crucial
impact on male fetuses’growth if fetuses are carried to full terms. It is possible that male
fetuses’ organs and placenta are not developed to the level of adjusting male fetuses to a
compromised in-utero environment during the early stage of pregnancy, and when maternal
exposure to pollution persists, growth of male fetuses will eventually be restricted.

6

Conclusion

The Portland Rule provides us with a rare opportunity to examine the impacts of coal-…red
power plant emissions on infant health at birth: the impact area was scienti…cally veri…ed
and the sole source of the air pollution in the downwind region was exactly identi…ed by the

38

NJDEP and also by the EPA independently. Our study assembled a set of evidence showing
the infant health impacts from coal-…red power plant emissions, such as sulfur dioxide, which
can contribute to the formation of sulfates in the atmosphere— a dominate ingredient of …ne
particle pollution east of Mississippi of the United States (Schneider and Bank, 2010): infant
birth outcomes could be adversely a¤ected by the Portland Generating Station, a large
polluter identi…ed in the Portland Rule, and the impact region can be 20 to 40 miles far
away from the power plant due to prevailing winds.
Speci…cally, among all live singleton births during 2004–2010 we …nd that for mothers
who live in the impact area identi…ed in the Portland Rule, being downwind of the power
plant during the …rst month of pregnancy can increase the likelihood of full-term LBW, an
indicator of slow fetal growth, by approximately one percentage point, which is an increase
of approximate 42 percent since the national average rate of live singleton full-term LBW
is about 2.4 percent during our sample period. In contrast, no e¤ect of being downwind of
the power plant on slow fetal growth (represented by full-term LBW) is found in the area
far away from the power plant: for instance, the area that is at least 80 miles away from the
power plant, or the counties that are far away and also not directly downwind of the power
plant.
Using data on the power plant’s emissions adjusted by how downwind a New Jersey zip
code is relative to the power plant, we …nd that the health impacts of the direction-adjusted
power plant emissions are fully consistent with the …ndings on the health impacts of being
downwind of the power plant: maternal exposure to an increase of 1,000 tons of SO2 emissions
from the power plant (roughly three percent of the power plant’s annual total SO2 emissions)
in a perfectly upwind direction during the …rst month pregnancy could increase the likelihood
of full-term LBW by about 0.24 percentage points, or 10 percent (when compared with the
national level live singleton full-term births during our sample period) in the area that is 20
to 40 miles away but downwind of the power plant, which includes the Hunterdon, Morris,
and Sussex Counties of New Jersey. Furthermore, we provide evidence that is consistent

39

with the Portland Rule, suggesting that it is SO2 and PM2:5 , not NOx (whose emissions are
reported in the EPA’s AMPD in addition to SO2 emissions), that have the potential to travel
long distance in the air through prevailing winds.
Adding to the scienti…c …ndings presented in the Portland Rule, our results suggest an
impact of in-utero exposure to SO2 and PM2:5 during the …rst month of pregnancy (i.e.,
during the embryo stage) on the occurrence of slow fetal growth, indicated by the full-term
LBW. This …nding echoes the results of several studies pinpointing the critical gestation
period for adverse impacts on infant health from in-utero environmental insults (such as
prenatal exposure to air pollution). To the best of our knowledge, we also provide the …rst
evidence in the economics …eld regarding the adverse impact on fetal growth from possibly
reactive sulfur species-induced intrauterine oxidative stress, arising from maternal exposure
to emissions of SO2 (a major precursor to ambient PM2:5 concentrations), whose travelling
from the emission source to the downwind region has been con…rmed in the Portland Rule.
Furthermore, we …nd suggestive evidence in support of the theory of Developmental Origins
of Health and Disease (Aiken and Ozanne, 2013): male fetuses can be more vulnerable than
female fetuses to in-utero environmental insults during the early stage of pregnancy, and the
adverse impacts during the early stage of pregnancy may not be countervailed by the growth
spurts of male fetuses during the later stage of pregnancy.
Our research design is guided by two aspects of the Portland Rule: …rst, it provides
scienti…c evidence on the travel distance and direction of SO2 emitted from the Portland
Generating Station, which is about 40 miles downwind of the power plant; second, it shows
that the power plant is an independent source of air pollution and a signi…cant contributor to
the violation of NAAQS in the downwind region. By focusing on the impact area identi…ed
in the Portland Rule, we are able to exploit the variation in the power plant emissions that
can be independent of local pollution sources. By focusing on those mothers who live in
the Hunterdon, Morris and Sussex Counties of New Jersey, the area that is 20 to 40 miles
away from the power plant, we aim to preclude possible presence of protection behaviors

40

of those who live in close proximity to the power plant, as well as selective migration away
from the power plant. Furthermore, we focus on the period (2004–2010) that is prior to the
date of the Portland Rule, during which residents living 20 to 40 miles away but downwind
of the power plant may not have been aware of the impacts of the power plant, and thus the
possibility of their selective migration away from the power plant can be minimal.
However, the focal region of our study is a wealthy part of New Jersey, which is a wealthy
state. Thus, our …ndings on the adverse infant health impacts of the power plant emissions
can be an under-estimation compared with the actual impacts for a general population, since
higher income can be associated with better access to health care, which usually prevents
the occurrence of adverse infant health outcomes. Besides, to have infant birth weight
information, we rely on the birth certi…cate data, from which we only observe infant weights
of live births. As a result, our study will incur a bias from “fetal selection”(Currie, 2009) or
“selective mortality”(Almond and Currie, 2011): we are likely to have under-estimated the
actual infant health impacts of power plant emissions by using a sample of survivors of inutero environmental insults. Nonetheless, in the evaluation of adverse impacts of power plant
emissions, an under-estimation may still be informative to policy-makers, when a potential
lower bound of the actual adverse impact is considered.
The Portland Rule is precedent-setting and it is expected to encourage more petitions
from the downwind states against upwind polluters. The ruling by the Third Circuit in
the GenOn REMA LLC v. EPA case a¢ rmed EPA’s proper use of the AERMOD for
air quality impact analysis, which also has precedential impact because the court’s ruling
essentially allows the EPA to continue using its own air quality impact modeling to identify
individual upwind polluters causing downwind NAAQS violations and hold those upwind
polluters accountable. In this regard, our study is aimed at broadening the scope of crossborder pollution analysis by taking into account adverse infant heath impacts from upwind
polluters, which can burden the downwind states disproportionately.

41

References
Aiken, C. E. and S. E. Ozanne (2013). “Sex Di¤erences in Developmental Programming
Models.”Reproduction 145 (1): R1–R13.
Al-Gubory, K. H., P. A. Fowler and C. Garrel (2010). “The Roles of Cellular Reactive Oxygen
Species, Oxidative Stress and Antioxidants in Pregnancy Outcomes.”International Journal
of Biochemistry & Cell Biology 42 (10): 1634–1650.
Almond, D., K. Y. Chay and D. S. Lee (2005). “The Costs of Low Birth Weight.”Quarterly
Journal of Economics 120 (3): 1031–1083.
Almond, D. and J. Currie (2011). “Killing Me Softly: The Fetal Origins Hypothesis.”Journal
of Economic Perspectives 25 (3): 153–172.
Barker, D. J. P. (1995). “Fetal Origins of Coronary Heart Disease.” BMJ: British Medical
Journal 311 (6998): 171–174.
Behrman, J. R. and M. R. Rosenzweig (2004). “Returns to Birthweight.” Review of Economics and Statistics 86 (2): 586–601.
Behrman, J. R., M. R. Rosenzweig and P. Taubman (1994). “Endowments and the Allocation
of Schooling in the Family and in the Marriage Market: The Twins Experiment.” Journal
of Political Economy 102 (6): 1131–1174.
Brooks, A.-M., R. S. Byrd, M. Weitzman, P. Auinger and J. T. McBride (2001). “Impact of
Low Birth Weight on Early Childhood Asthma in the United States.”Archives of Pediatrics
& Adolescent Medicine 155 (3): 401–406.
Caudri, D., A. Wijga, U. Gehring, H. A. Smit, B. Brunekreef, M. Kerkhof, M. Hoekstra, J.
Gerritsen and J. C. de Jongste (2007). “Respiratory Symptoms in the First 7 Years of Life
and Birth Weight at Term.” American Journal of Respiratory and Critical Care Medicine
175 (10): 1078–1085.
42

Clifton, V. L. (2010). “Review: Sex and the Human Placenta: Mediating Di¤erential Strategies of Fetal Growth and Survival.”Placenta 31 (Supplement): S33–S39.
Currie, J. (2009). “Healthy, Wealthy, and Wise: Socioeconomic Status, Poor Health in
Childhood, and Human Capital Development.”Journal of Economic Literature 47 (1): 87–
122.
Currie, J. (2011). “Inequality at Birth: Some Causes and Consequences.” American Economic Review: Papers & Proceedings 101 (3): 1–22.
Currie, J., L. Davis, M. Greenstone and R. Walker (2015). “Environmental Health Risks
and Housing Values: Evidence from 1,600 Toxic Plant Openings and Closings.” American
Economic Review 105 (2): 678–709.
Currie, J. and R. Hyson (1999). “Is the Impact of Health Shocks Cushioned by Socioeconomic
Status? The Case of Low Birthweight.”Papers and Proceedings of the One Hundred Eleventh
Annual Meeting of the American Economic Association (May, 1999) 89 (2): 245–250.
Currie, J. and M. Neidell (2005). “Air Pollution and Infant Health: What Can We Learn
from California’s Recent Experience?”Quarterly Journal of Economics 120 (3): 1003–1030.
Currie, J., M. Neidell and J. F. Schmieder (2009). “Air Pollution and Infant Health: Lessons
from New Jersey.”Journal of Health Economics 28 (3): 688–703.
Currie, J. and R. Walker (2011). “Tra¢ c Congestion and Infant Health: Evidence from
E-ZPass.”American Economic Journal: Applied Economics 3 (1): 65–90.
Dejmek, J., S. G. Selevan, I. Beneš, I. Solanský and R. J. Šrám (1999). “Fetal Growth
and Maternal Exposure to Particulate Matter during Pregnancy.” Environmental Health
Perspectives 107 (6): 475–480.

43

Dugandzic, R., L. Dodds, D. Stieb and M. Smith-Doiron (2006). “The Association between
Low Level Exposures to Ambient Air Pollution and Term Low Birth Weight: A Retrospective
Cohort Study.”Environmental Health 5: 3.
Environmental Integrity Project (EIP) (2007). “Dirty Kilowatts: America’s Most Polluting
Power Plants.”July 2007 Report. Washington D.C.: Environmental Integrity Project, available at http://www.dirtykilowatts.org/Dirty_Kilowatts2007.pdf (accessed July 15, 2015).
Environmental Protection Agency (EPA) (2011). “Final Response to Petition From New
Jersey Regarding SO2 Emissions From the Portland Generating Station.” Federal Register
76 (215) (Monday, November 7, 2011/Rules and Regulations): 69052–69077.
Eriksson, J. G., E. Kajantie, C. Osmond, K. Thornburg and D. J. P. Barker (2010). “Boys
Live Dangerously in the Womb.”American Journal of Human Biology 22 (3): 330–335.
Ghosh, R., J. Rankin, T. Pless-Mulloli and S. Glinianaia (2007). “Does the E¤ect of Air
Pollution on Pregnancy Outcomes Di¤er by Gender? A Systematic Review.”Environmental
Research 105 (3): 400–408.
Giles, G. I. and C. Jacob (2002). “Reactive Sulfur Species: An Emerging Concept in Oxidative Stress.”Biological Chemistry 383 (3-4): 375.
Goldenberg, R. L. and S. P. Cliver (1997). “Small for Gestational Age and Intrauterine
Growth Restriction: De…nitions and Standards.”Clinical Obstetrics and Gynecology 40 (4):
704–714.
Goldenberg, R. L. and J. F. Culhane (2007). “Low Birth Weight in the United States.”
American Journal of Clinical Nutrition 85 (2): 584S–590S.
Hales, C. N. and D. J. P. Barker (2001). “The Thrifty Phenotype Hypothesis: Type 2
Diabetes.”British Medical Bulletin 60 (1): 5–20.

44

Kannan, S., D. P. Misra, J. T. Dvonch and A. Krishnakumar (2006). “Exposures to Airborne
Particulate Matter and Adverse Perinatal Outcomes: A Biologically Plausible Mechanistic
Framework for Exploring Potential E¤ect Modi…cation by Nutrition.”Environmental Health
Perspectives 114 (11): 1636–1642.
Lin, C.-M., C.-Y. Li, G.-Y. Yang and I. F. Mao (2004). “Association between Maternal Exposure to Elevated Ambient Sulfur Dioxide during Pregnancy and Term Low Birth Weight.”
Environmental Research 96 (1): 41–50.
Liu, S., D. Krewski, Y. Shi, Y. Chen and R. T. Burnett (2003). “Association between
Gaseous Ambient Air Pollutants and Adverse Pregnancy Outcomes in Vancouver, Canada.”
Environmental Health Perspectives 111 (14): 1773–1778.
Luechinger, S. (2014). “Air Pollution and Infant Mortality: A Natural Experiment from
Power Plant Desulfurization.”Journal of Health Economics 37: 219–231.
Maisonet, M., T. J. Bush, A. Correa and J. J. K. Jaakkola (2001). “Relation between Ambient
Air Pollution and Low Birth Weight in the Northeastern United States.” Environmental
Health Perspectives 109 (Supplement 3): 351–356.
Maisonet, M., A. Correa, D. Misra and J. J. K. Jaakkola (2004). “A Review of the Literature
on the E¤ects of Ambient Air Pollution on Fetal Growth.” Environmental Research 95 (1):
106–115.
Möller, D. (2010). Chemistry of the Climate System. Berlin, DEU: Walter de Gruyter.
Mohorovic, L. (2004). “First Two Months of Pregnancy— Critical Time for Preterm Delivery
and Low Birthweight Caused by Adverse E¤ects of Coal Combustion Toxics.”Early Human
Development 80 (2): 115–123.

45

Nelson, K. B. and J. K. Grether (1997). “Cerebral Palsy in Low-Birthweight Infants: Etiology
and Strategies for Prevention.”Mental Retardation and Developmental Disabilities Research
Reviews 3 (2): 112–117.
New Jersey Department of Environmental Protection (NJDEP) (2010 a). Petitions Pursuant to Section 126 of the Clean Air Act: Unlawful Transport of Emissions from the Coal…red Portland Generating Station (“Portland Plant”or “Portland”) to New Jersey, May 12,
2010 Petition (Initial), State of New Jersey, available at http://www.state.nj.us/dep/baqp/
petition/126complete.pdf (accessed July 15, 2015).
New Jersey Department of Environmental Protection (NJDEP) (2010 b). Petitions Pursuant
to Section 126 of the Clean Air Act: Unlawful Transport of Emissions from the Coal-…red
Portland Generating Station (“Portland Plant” or “Portland”) to New Jersey, September
13, 2010 Supplemental Petition, State of New Jersey, available at http://www.state.nj.us/
dep/baqp/petition/Complete126-suppltr.pdf (accessed July 15, 2015).
Noss, A. (2013). “Household Income: 2012.”American Community Survey Briefs, September
2013, U.S. Department of Commerce, Economics and Statistics Administration, U.S. Census
Bureau, available at http://www.census.gov/prod/2013pubs/acsbr12-02.pdf (accessed July
15, 2015).
Renzo, G. C. D., A. Rosati, R. D. Sarti, L. Cruciani and A. M. Cutuli (2007). “Does Fetal
Sex A¤ect Pregnancy Outcome?”Gender Medicine 4 (1): 19–30.
Ritz, B. and M. Wilhelm (2008). “Air Pollution Impacts on Infants and Children. Southern
California Environmental Report Card –Fall 2008.”Report. Los Angeles, CA: UCLA Institute of the Environment and Sustainability, available at http://www.environment.ucla.edu/
reportcard/article1700.html (accessed July 15, 2015).
Schneider, C. and J. Bank (2010). “The Toll from Coal: An Updated Assessment of Death
and Disease from America’s Dirtiest Energy Source.” Report. Boston, MA: Clean Air Task
46

Force, available at http://www.catf.us/resources/publications/…les/The_Toll_from_Coal.
pdf (accessed July 15, 2015).
Seinfeld J. H. and S. N. Pandis (1998). Atmospheric Chemistry and Physics, from Air Pollution to Climate Change. John Wiley & Sons, Inc.
Selevan, S. G., C. A. Kimmel and P. Mendola (2000). “Identifying Critical Windows of
Exposure for Children’s Health.” Environmental Health Perspectives 108 (Supplement 3):
451–455.
Slama, R., L. Darrow, J. Parker, T. J. Woodru¤, M. Strickland, M. Nieuwenhuijsen, S.
Glinianaia, K. J. Hoggatt, S. Kannan, F. Hurley, J. Kalinka, R. Šrám, M. Brauer, M.
Wilhelm, J. Heinrich, and B. Ritz. (2008). “Meeting Report: Atmospheric Pollution and
Human Reproduction.”Environmental Health Perspectives 116 (6): 791–798.
United States Court of Appeals for the Third Circuit (Opinion Filed: July 12, 2013).
No. 12–1022. GenOn REMA, LLC, Petitioner v. United States Environmental Protection Agency, Respondent. On Petition for Review of Final Agency Action of the United
States Environmental Protection Agency (EPA-HQ-OAR-2011-0081), available at http:
//www2.ca3.uscourts.gov/opinarch/121022p.pdf (accessed July 15, 2015).
Wang, X., H. Ding, L. Ryan, X. Xu, X. Wang, H. Ding, L. Ryan and X. Xu (1997). “Association between Air Pollution and Low Birth Weight: A Community-Based Study.”Environmental Health Perspectives 105 (5): 514–520.
Wilcox, A. J. (2001). “On the Importance— and the Unimportance— of Birthweight.”International Journal of Epidemiology 30 (6): 1233–1241.
Wiles, N. J., T. J. Peters, D. A. Leon and G. Lewis (2005). “Birth Weight and Psychological
Distress at Age 45-51 Years: Results from the Aberdeen Children of the 1950s Cohort Study.”
British Journal of Psychiatry 187 (1): 21–28.

47

Yoshida, S., N. Unno, H. Kagawa, N. Shinozuka, S. Kozuma and Y. Taketani (2000). “Prenatal Detection of a High-Risk Group for Intrauterine Growth Restriction Based on Sonographic Fetal Biometry.”International Journal of Gynecology & Obstetrics 68 (3): 225–232.

48

Figure 1: Location of the Portland Generating Station
Note: The address of the Portland Generating Station is 40897 River Road, Portland, PA 18351.

49

Figure 2: Coal-Fired Power Plants in New Jersey and the Nearby Region
Note: This map is obtained through the ArcGIS Online from the U.S. Environmental Protection Agency, the Office
of Enforcement and Compliance Assurance, and the Office of Compliance.

50

Figure 3: New Jersey Counties
Note: The four highlighted counties (Hunterdon, Morris, Sussex and Warren) are the impacted area identified by
the two petitions of the New Jersey Department of Environmental Protection filed with the U.S. Environmental
Protection Agency in 2010.

51

Panel A: Direction towards Which the Wind Blows near the PGS
0 = North; 90 = East; 180 = South; 270 = West

wind vector azimuth (in degrees)

200
180
160
140
120

1
01
/2
01

0
01
/2
07

0
01
/2
01

9
00
/2
07

9
00
/2
01

8
07

/2

00

8
01

/2

00

7
07

/2

00

7
01

/2

00

6
07

/2

00

6
01

/2

00

5
07

/2

00

5
01

/2

00

4
00
/2
07

01

/2

00

4

100

01/2004 - 12/2010

Panel B: Monthly Emissions from the PGS

Monthly emissions

4

3

2

1

1
01
/2
01

0
01
/2
07

0
01
/2
01

9
00
/2
07

9
00
/2
01

8
00
07

/2

8
01

/2

00

7
00
/2
07

7
00
/2
01

6
00
/2
07

6
00
/2
01

5
00
/2
07

5
00
/2
01

4
00
/2
07

01

/2

00

4

0

01/2014 - 12/2010
SO2 emissions (in 1,000 tons)

NOx emissions (in 1,000 tons)

Figure 4: Monthly Sulfur Dioxide and Nitrogen Oxides Emissions from the Portland Generating Station (PGS) and the Monthly
Average Wind Directions near the PGS
Note: The power plant’s emission data are from the EPA’s Air Markets Program Data (AMPD). The wind direction data are purchased from
weathersource.com. The sample period is January 2004–December 2010.

52

Panel B: Hunterdon County

3

3

3

1

0

01

01

/2

01

0

/2
07

9

01

/2

01

9

00

00

/2

07

8

/2

01

8

00
/2

07

7

00

00

/2

1
01

0
01

/2

01

0

/2
07

9

01

/2

01

00

9
00

/2
07

8

/2

01

8

00

/2

07

00

7
00

/2
01

7

/2

07

6

00

/2

01

6

00
/2

07

5

00

/2

01

00

5
00

/2
07

/2

01

4
01

/2

00

1
01

0

/2

01

0

01

/2

07

01

9
00

/2
01

9

/2

07

8

00
/2

01

00

8
00

/2

07

7

/2

01

7

00
/2

07

6

00

/2

01

00

/2

07

00

00

/2
01

/2

07

00
/2

01

00

00

/2

07

6

-1

5

-1

5

0

4

0

4

1

/2

1

2

07

2

00

Monthly emissions

3

4

Monthly emissions

4

/2

direction-adjusted SO2 emissions (in 1,000 tons)

Panel D: Sussex County

Panel C: Morris County

01

01

7

SO2 emissions (in 1,000 tons)

direction-adjusted SO2 emissions (in 1,000 tons)

4

01/2014 - 12/2010

01/2014 - 12/2010
SO2 emissions (in 1,000 tons)

/2

01/2014 - 12/2010

01/2014 - 12/2010
SO2 emissions (in 1,000 tons)

07

6

00

/2

01

6

00

/2

07

5

00

/2

01

5

00

00

/2

07

/2
01

4
01

/2

00

1
01

0

/2

01

0

01
/2

07

9

01

00

/2

01

9

/2

07

8

00
/2

01

8

00

00

/2

07

7

/2
01

7

00

/2

07

6

00

/2

01

6

00

/2

07

00

00

/2

01

/2

07

00
/2

01

00

/2

07

/2
01

5

-1

5

-1

4

0

4

0

4

1

/2

1

2

07

2

00

Monthly emissions

4

00

Monthly emissions

Panel A: Warren County
4

SO2 emissions (in 1,000 tons)

direction-adjusted SO2 emissions (in 1,000 tons)

direction-adjusted SO2 emissions (in 1,000 tons)

Figure 5: Monthly Sulfur Dioxide Emissions from the Portland Generating Station (PGS) Adjusted by the Wind Direction near
the PGS for the Four New Jersey Counties
Note: The power plant’s emission data are from the EPA’s Air Markets Program Data (AMPD). The wind direction data are purchased from
weathersource.com. The sample period is January 2004–December 2010. The four highlighted counties (Hunterdon, Morris, Sussex and Warren) are
the impacted area identified by the two petitions of the New Jersey Department of Environmental Protection filed with the U.S. Environmental
Protection Agency in 2010.

53

0

24

3

15
12
hour

18

21

6

9

15
12
hour

18

21

24

smoothed SO2 emissions at each hour of a day

9000
Hourly SO2 emissions (in pounds)
7000
6000
5000
4000

6

9

15
12
hour

18

21

2010

Hourly SO2 emissions (in pounds)
6000
7000
3

6

9

12
15
hour

18

21

3

0

24

3

6

9

15
12
hour

18

21

24

smoothed SO2 emissions at each hour of a day

smoothed SO2 emissions at each hour of a day

6

9

15
12
hour

18

21

24

smoothed SO2 emissions at each hour of a day

smoothed SO2 emissions at each hour of a day

5000
0

0

24

4000

5000
4000
3

3

8000

9000

2009

Hourly SO2 emissions (in pounds)
6000
7000

8000
Hourly SO2 emissions (in pounds)
6000
7000
5000
4000
0

0

24

8000

9000

9

smoothed SO2 emissions at each hour of a day

smoothed SO2 emissions at each hour of a day

2008

6

2004-2010

9000

21

8000

18

Hourly SO2 emissions (in pounds)
6000
7000

15
12
hour

5000

9

4000

6

9000

3

2007

8000

9000
Hourly SO2 emissions (in pounds)
7000
6000

4000

4000

5000

5000

Hourly SO2 emissions (in pounds)
7000
6000

8000
Hourly SO2 emissions (in pounds)
6000
7000
5000
4000
0

2006

8000

9000

2005

8000

9000

2004

0

3

6

9

15
12
hour

18

21

24

smoothed SO2 emissions at each hour of a day

Figure 6: Hourly Sulfur Dioxide Emissions from the Portland Generating Station (PGS)
Note: The power plant’s emission data are from the EPA’s Air Markets Program Data (AMPD). The hourly emissions are measured in pounds and at each hour of
a day (0:00 through 23:00). Depicted in the panels are locally weighted scatterplot smoothing (i.e., “lowess”) values with the default bandwidth 0.8 used. The
sample period is January 2004–December 2010.

54

Table 1: Summary Statistics, Part I
Panel A: Portland Generating Station (PGS), a coal-fired power plant in Pennsylvania
Power plant SO2 monthly emissions (in 1,000 tons)

2.469
(0.630)
0.806
(0.614)
0.275
(0.088)
0.092
(0.075)
151.458
(24.863)

Power plant SO2 monthly emissions (in 1,000 tons), direction-adjusted
Power plant NOx monthly emissions (in 1,000 tons)
Power plant NOx monthly emissions (in 1,000 tons), direction-adjusted
Monthly average direction (in degrees) towards which the wind near the PGS is blowing
(i.e., wind direction): 0 = North, 90 = East, 180 = South, 270 = West
Panel B: New Jersey counties included in the estimation sample
Distance (in miles) between a New Jersey zip code centroid and the PGS
Direction (in degrees) towards which a New Jersey zip code centroid is located from the
PGS (i.e., azimuth): 0 = North, 90 = East, 180 = South; 270 = West
Being downwind of the PGS, measured by the cosine function of (monthly wind direction
near the PGS - NJ zip code centroid azimuth)
Number of zip codes in the four-county estimation sample
Number of observations in the four-county estimation sample
Total number of zip codes in the four-county estimation sample
Total number of observations in the four-county estimation sample

Hunterdon
25.483
(6.055)
157.729
(12.457)
0.470
(0.120)
26
6,723

Morris
31.117
(6.174)
96.342
(9.776)
0.335
(0.188)
50
29,993

116
51,809

Sussex
26.017
(6.747)
62.039
(13.702)
0.077
(0.231)
23
8,714

Warren
12.574
(2.873)
137.229
(46.367)
0.350
(0.212)
17
6,379

Note: Means and standard deviations (in parentheses) are reported for each variable listed in this table. The power plant’s emission data are from the EPA’s Air
Markets Program Data (AMPD). The wind direction data are purchased from weathersource.com. The zip code database is purchased from http://www.zipcodes.com/zip-code-statistics.asp. The sample period is January 2004–December 2010. Azimuth is used for the determination of the wind direction near the
PGS and also the zip code direction relative to the PGS. The calculation and interpretation of azimuth are given in the text. The direction-adjusted sulfur dioxide
(or nitrogen oxides) emissions (in 1,000 tons) from the power plant are measured by first taking the product of (1) the daily sulfur dioxide (or nitrogen oxides)
emissions from the power plant and (2) the cosine function of the difference between daily wind direction (where the wind blows) near the power plant and the
New Jersey zip code centroid azimuth (relative to the power plant), and then aggregating the aforementioned product to the zip code-monthly level.

55

Table 2: Summary Statistics, Part II
Panel A: New Jersey counties
Estimation sample summary statistics
Birth weight (in grams) of full-term births
Full-term low birth weight (1/0): birth
weight < 2,500 grams and gestation ≥ 37
weeks
Female (1/0)
Mother's age
Mother is White (1/0)
Mother is Black (1/0)
Mother is Hispanic (1/0)
Mother completed a four-year college or
higher (1/0)
Mother is married (1/0)
Number of observations in the estimation
sample
Panel B: New Jersey counties
Full sample summary statistics
Birth weight (in grams)
Low birth weight (1/0): birth weight <
2,500 grams
Gestational length (in weeks)
Preterm (1/0): gestation < 37 weeks
Female (1/0)
Mother's age
Mother is White (1/0)
Mother is Black (1/0)
Mother is Hispanic (1/0)
Mother completed a four-year college or
higher (1/0)
Mother is married (1/0)
Number of observations in the full sample

Hunterdon
Mean
Std. Dev.

Morris
Mean
Std. Dev.

Sussex
Mean
Std. Dev.

Warren
Mean
Std. Dev.

All Four Counties
Mean
Std. Dev.

3,471.281

435.552

3,438.338

453.102

3,487.501

463.013

3,455.474

468.631

3,452.992

454.889

0.013

0.114

0.018

0.133

0.015

0.121

0.020

0.139

0.017

0.129

0.486
32.910
0.929
0.015
0.093

0.500
5.253
0.256
0.120
0.291

0.488
32.280
0.818
0.030
0.175

0.500
5.282
0.386
0.171
0.380

0.492
31.269
0.948
0.019
0.077

0.500
5.458
0.221
0.136
0.266

0.496
30.662
0.905
0.036
0.102

0.500
5.711
0.293
0.187
0.302

0.490
31.993
0.865
0.027
0.139

0.500
5.406
0.342
0.162
0.346

0.635

0.481

0.618

0.486

0.463

0.499

0.434

0.496

0.572

0.495

0.877

0.328

0.854

0.353

0.828

0.377

0.773

0.419

0.843

0.364

6,723

29,993

Hunterdon
Mean
Std. Dev.
3,417.529
492.484

8,714

6,379

51,809

Morris
Sussex
Warren
Mean
Std. Dev.
Mean
Std. Dev.
Mean
Std. Dev.
3,389.035
503.813 3,435.285 515.797 3,406.624 517.077

All New Jersey Counties
Mean
Std. Dev.
3,328.262
518.956

0.036

0.186

0.040

0.197

0.038

0.190

0.041

0.199

0.053

0.225

39.234
0.073
0.482
32.906
0.927
0.016
0.095

1.801
0.260
0.500
5.306
0.261
0.125
0.293

39.354
0.073
0.486
32.272
0.817
0.032
0.179

1.936
0.260
0.500
5.319
0.386
0.175
0.383

39.391
0.076
0.491
31.294
0.948
0.019
0.078

2.021
0.265
0.500
5.513
0.222
0.138
0.267

39.333
0.073
0.495
30.670
0.902
0.040
0.102

1.954
0.261
0.500
5.766
0.298
0.195
0.303

39.244
0.097
0.488
29.752
0.699
0.174
0.266

2.193
0.296
0.500
6.079
0.459
0.379
0.442

0.628

0.483

0.612

0.487

0.454

0.498

0.427

0.495

0.385

0.487

0.873

0.333

0.849

0.358

0.823

0.382

0.769

0.422

0.659

0.474

7,252

32,360

9,431

6,886

678,537

Note: Birth data are from the birth certificates provided by the New Jersey Department of Health. The sample period is January 2004–December 2010. The birth certificate
data provided to our study are recorded as repeated cross sections. The summary statistics ae based on the samples including live and singleton births (with multiple births
excluded).

56

Table 3: Impacts of Being Downwind of the Power Plant on Full-Term Low Birth Weight
New Jersey counties included:
Being downwind of the power plant:
During the birth month
During the 1st month before birth
During the 2nd month before birth
During the 3rd month before birth
During the 4th month before birth
During the 5th month before birth
During the 6th month before birth
During the 7th month before birth
During the 8th month before birth
During the month after birth
Other control variables:
Zip code fixed effects
Linear and quadratic time trend
Individual-level demographic variables
Number of zip codes
Number of observations

Hunterdon, Morris, Sussex and Warren
(1)
(2)
(3)

(4)

Hunterdon, Morris and Sussex
(5)

(6)

-0.0015
(0.0030)
-0.0014
(0.0033)
-0.0045
(0.0030)
0.0014
(0.0035)
0.0002
(0.0033)
0.0044
(0.0035)
0.0021
(0.0035)
0.0042
(0.0034)
0.0093***
(0.0033)

-0.0014
(0.0029)
-0.0011
(0.0033)
-0.0046
(0.0030)
0.0018
(0.0035)
0.0001
(0.0033)
0.0044
(0.0035)
0.0022
(0.0034)
0.0044
(0.0035)
0.0092***
(0.0032)

-0.0015
(0.0029)
-0.0011
(0.0034)
-0.0046
(0.0030)
0.0018
(0.0035)
0.0001
(0.0033)
0.0044
(0.0036)
0.0022
(0.0035)
0.0045
(0.0034)
0.0093***
(0.0034)
0.0003
(0.0043)

-0.0018
(0.0032)
-0.0023
(0.0028)
-0.0038
(0.0030)
0.0017
(0.0036)
0.0006
(0.0034)
0.0023
(0.0036)
0.0025
(0.0036)
0.0043
(0.0033)
0.0090***
(0.0032)

-0.0018
(0.0032)
-0.0022
(0.0028)
-0.0039
(0.0030)
0.0022
(0.0036)
0.0005
(0.0034)
0.0024
(0.0036)
0.0026
(0.0036)
0.0046
(0.0033)
0.0089***
(0.0031)

-0.0018
(0.0032)
-0.0023
(0.0028)
-0.0039
(0.0030)
0.0022
(0.0037)
0.0005
(0.0034)
0.0025
(0.0038)
0.0026
(0.0037)
0.0045
(0.0033)
0.0088**
(0.0034)
-0.0007
(0.0046)

Yes
Yes
No
116
51,809

Yes
Yes
Yes
116
51,809

Yes
Yes
Yes
116
51,809

Yes
Yes
No
99
45,430

Yes
Yes
Yes
99
45,430

Yes
Yes
Yes
99
45,430

Note: Birth data are from the birth certificates provided by the New Jersey Department of Health. The wind direction data are purchased from weathersource.com.
The zip code database is purchased from http://www.zip-codes.com/zip-code-statistics.asp. The sample period is January 2004–December 2010. Full-term low
birth weight is represented by a binary variable (1/0), which equals one for the babies with birth weight below 2,500 grams and gestational length greater than or
equal to 37 weeks, and zero otherwise. Being downwind of the power plant is measured by the cosine function of the difference between monthly wind direction
(where the wind blows) near the power plant and the New Jersey zip code centroid azimuth (relative to the power plant). The calculation and interpretation of
azimuth are given in the text. Linear and quadratic time trend are represented by the linear and quadratic terms of the consecutive integers generated from all yearmonth pairs (January 2004–December 2010). Individual level demographic variables controlled for are sex of the baby (1/0), mother’s age, dummy variables (1/0)
for mother’s race and ethnicity (White, Black, Hispanic), mother having completed a four-year college or higher (1/0), and mother being married (1/0). Zip code
fixed effects are used for all specifications. Standard errors (reported in parentheses) are clustered at the zip code level. * Significant at the 10% level; **
Significant at the 5% level; *** Significant at the 1% level.

57

Table 4: Impacts of Being Downwind of the Power Plant on Full-Term Low Birth Weight
New Jersey zip codes included:
Being downwind of the power plant:
During the birth month
During the 1st month before birth
During the 2nd month before birth
During the 3rd month before birth
During the 4th month before birth
During the 5th month before birth
During the 6th month before birth
During the 7th month before birth
During the 8th month before birth
During the month after birth
Other control variables:
Zip code fixed effects
Linear and quadratic time trend
Individual-level demographic variables
Number of zip codes
Number of observations

(1)

Within 40 miles of the power plant
(2)
(3)

(4)

Within 35 miles of the power plant
(5)
(6)

-0.0004
(0.0029)
-0.0018
(0.0031)
-0.0027
(0.0028)
0.0019
(0.0031)
-0.0000
(0.0027)
0.0041
(0.0030)
0.0009
(0.0032)
0.0022
(0.0030)
0.0063**
(0.0029)

-0.0004
(0.0029)
-0.0016
(0.0031)
-0.0029
(0.0028)
0.0021
(0.0031)
0.0001
(0.0027)
0.0041
(0.0030)
0.0008
(0.0031)
0.0025
(0.0030)
0.0063**
(0.0028)

-0.0006
(0.0029)
-0.0015
(0.0031)
-0.0028
(0.0028)
0.0021
(0.0031)
0.0001
(0.0027)
0.0039
(0.0031)
0.0009
(0.0033)
0.0026
(0.0030)
0.0066**
(0.0030)
0.0015
(0.0038)

0.0004
(0.0031)
-0.0001
(0.0038)
-0.0054
(0.0034)
0.0023
(0.0037)
0.0011
(0.0035)
0.0032
(0.0038)
0.0035
(0.0030)
0.0005
(0.0036)
0.0108***
(0.0032)

0.0005
(0.0031)
-0.0001
(0.0039)
-0.0054
(0.0034)
0.0026
(0.0037)
0.0012
(0.0035)
0.0032
(0.0038)
0.0034
(0.0030)
0.0007
(0.0037)
0.0107***
(0.0032)

0.0003
(0.0032)
0.0001
(0.0039)
-0.0053
(0.0034)
0.0025
(0.0037)
0.0012
(0.0036)
0.0029
(0.0039)
0.0035
(0.0031)
0.0008
(0.0036)
0.0112***
(0.0031)
0.0023
(0.0041)

Yes
Yes
No
147
77,708

Yes
Yes
Yes
147
77,708

Yes
Yes
Yes
147
77,708

Yes
Yes
No
112
48,997

Yes
Yes
Yes
112
48,997

Yes
Yes
Yes
112
48,997

Note: Birth data are from the birth certificates provided by the New Jersey Department of Health. The wind direction data are purchased from weathersource.com.
The zip code database is purchased from http://www.zip-codes.com/zip-code-statistics.asp. The sample period is January 2004–December 2010. The New Jersey
counties included in the 40-mile and 35-mile samples and the associated summary statistics are reported in Appendix Table 1. Full-term low birth weight is
represented by a binary variable (1/0), which equals one for the babies with birth weight below 2,500 grams and gestational length greater than or equal to 37
weeks, and zero otherwise. Being downwind of the power plant is measured by the cosine function of the difference between monthly wind direction (where the
wind blows) near the power plant and the New Jersey zip code centroid azimuth (relative to the power plant). The calculation and interpretation of azimuth are
given in the text. Linear and quadratic time trend are represented by the linear and quadratic terms of the consecutive integers generated from all year-month pairs
(January 2004–December 2010). Individual level demographic variables controlled for are sex of the baby (1/0), mother’s age, dummy variables (1/0) for mother’s
race and ethnicity (White, Black, Hispanic), mother having completed a four-year college or higher (1/0), and mother being married (1/0). Zip code fixed effects
are used for all specifications. Standard errors (reported in parentheses) are clustered at the zip code level. * Significant at the 10% level; ** Significant at the 5%
level; *** Significant at the 1% level.

58

Table 5: Impacts of Being Downwind of the Power Plant on Full-Term Low Birth Weight
New Jersey regions included:

Being downwind of the power plant:
During the birth month
During the 1st month before birth
During the 2nd month before birth
During the 3rd month before birth
During the 4th month before birth
During the 5th month before birth
During the 6th month before birth
During the 7th month before birth
During the 8th month before birth
Other control variables:
Zip code fixed effects
Linear and quadratic time trend
Individual-level demographic variables
Number of zip codes
Number of observations

Cape May, Hudson and Salem
Counties
(1)

Zip codes that are at least 80 miles
away from the power plant
(2)

-0.0011
(0.0036)
0.0021
(0.0046)
0.0040
(0.0055)
0.0041
(0.0046)
-0.0013
(0.0040)
-0.0038
(0.0044)
-0.0040
(0.0037)
-0.0004
(0.0059)
0.0027
(0.0039)

0.0028
(0.0056)
0.0024
(0.0050)
-0.0074
(0.0052)
-0.0054
(0.0062)
-0.0049
(0.0049)
-0.0082
(0.0054)
-0.0079
(0.0049)
-0.0024
(0.0042)
-0.0041
(0.0050)

Yes
Yes
Yes
51
56,054

Yes
Yes
Yes
121
67,573

Note: Birth data are from the birth certificates provided by the New Jersey Department of Health. The wind direction
data are purchased from weathersource.com. The zip code database is purchased from http://www.zip-codes.com/zipcode-statistics.asp. The sample period is January 2004–December 2010. Summary statistics for the two samples (used
for columns 1 and 2) are reported in Appendix Table 1. Full-term low birth weight is represented by a binary variable
(1/0), which equals one for the babies with birth weight below 2,500 grams and gestational length greater than or equal
to 37 weeks, and zero otherwise. Being downwind of the power plant is measured by the cosine function of the
difference between monthly wind direction (where the wind blows) near the power plant and the New Jersey zip code
centroid azimuth (relative to the power plant). The calculation and interpretation of azimuth are given in the text. Linear
and quadratic time trend are represented by the linear and quadratic terms of the consecutive integers generated from all
year-month pairs (January 2004–December 2010). Individual level demographic variables controlled for are sex of the
baby (1/0), mother’s age, dummy variables (1/0) for mother’s race and ethnicity (White, Black, Hispanic), mother
having completed a four-year college or higher (1/0), and mother being married (1/0). Zip code fixed effects are used
for all specifications. Standard errors (reported in parentheses) are clustered at the zip code level. * Significant at the
10% level; ** Significant at the 5% level; *** Significant at the 1% level.

59

Table 6: Falsification Checks on the Pseudo Impacts of Being Downwind of the Power Plant on FullTerm Low Birth Weight
New Jersey zip codes included:
Being downwind of the power plant:
During the 6th month after birth
During the 7th month after birth
During the 8th month after birth
During the 9th month after birth
During the 10th month after birth
During the 11th month after birth
During the 12th month after birth
Other control variables:
Zip code fixed effects
Linear and quadratic time trend
Individual-level demographic variables
Number of zip codes
Number of observations

Within 40 miles of the power plant
(1)

Within 35 miles of the power plant
(2)

-0.0025
(0.0029)
0.0031
(0.0029)
0.0009
(0.0024)
-0.0023
(0.0031)
0.0031
(0.0030)
-0.0006
(0.0029)
0.0040
(0.0027)

-0.0033
(0.0034)
0.0041
(0.0032)
0.0015
(0.0027)
-0.0045
(0.0032)
0.0021
(0.0034)
-0.0003
(0.0037)
0.0047
(0.0038)

Yes
Yes
Yes
147
77,708

Yes
Yes
Yes
112
48,997

Note: Birth data are from the birth certificates provided by the New Jersey Department of Health. The wind direction data
are purchased from weathersource.com. The zip code database is purchased from http://www.zip-codes.com/zip-codestatistics.asp. The sample period is January 2004–December 2010. Summary statistics for the two samples (used for
columns 1 and 2) are reported in Appendix Table 1. Full-term low birth weight is represented by a binary variable (1/0),
which equals one for the babies with birth weight below 2,500 grams and gestational length greater than or equal to 37
weeks, and zero otherwise. Being downwind of the power plant is measured by the cosine function of the difference
between monthly wind direction (where the wind blows) near the power plant and the New Jersey zip code centroid
azimuth (relative to the power plant). The calculation and interpretation of azimuth are given in the text. Linear and
quadratic time trend are represented by the linear and quadratic terms of the consecutive integers generated from all yearmonth pairs (January 2004–December 2010). Individual level demographic variables controlled for are sex of the baby
(1/0), mother’s age, dummy variables (1/0) for mother’s race and ethnicity (White, Black, Hispanic), mother having
completed a four-year college or higher (1/0), and mother being married (1/0). Zip code fixed effects are used for all
specifications. Standard errors (reported in parentheses) are clustered at the zip code level. * Significant at the 10% level;
** Significant at the 5% level; *** Significant at the 1% level.

60

Table 7: Impacts of Power Plant Sulfur Dioxide Emissions on Full-Term Low Birth Weight
New Jersey regions included:

Being exposed to sulfur dioxide emissions (in
1,000 tons) from the power plant, directionadjusted:
During the birth month
During the 1st month before birth
During the 2nd month before birth
During the 3rd month before birth
During the 4th month before birth
During the 5th month before birth
During the 6th month before birth
During the 7th month before birth
During the 8th month before birth

Hunterdon, Morris and
Sussex Counties
(1)
(2)

Hunterdon and Morris
Counties
(3)
(4)

-0.0002
(0.0012)
-0.0011
(0.0011)
-0.0019
(0.0012)
0.0012
(0.0013)
-0.0006
(0.0010)
0.0012
(0.0013)
0.0012
(0.0012)
0.0017
(0.0014)
0.0024**
(0.0012)

-0.0004
(0.0013)
-0.0016
(0.0013)
-0.0013
(0.0014)
0.0002
(0.0014)
-0.0001
(0.0012)
0.0016
(0.0015)
0.0010
(0.0015)
0.0010
(0.0017)
0.0025*
(0.0014)

-0.0002
(0.0012)
-0.0010
(0.0011)
-0.0019
(0.0012)
0.0014
(0.0013)
-0.0007
(0.0010)
0.0013
(0.0013)
0.0012
(0.0012)
0.0018
(0.0014)
0.0024**
(0.0012)

-0.0005
(0.0013)
-0.0016
(0.0013)
-0.0013
(0.0014)
0.0004
(0.0014)
-0.0002
(0.0012)
0.0017
(0.0015)
0.0010
(0.0014)
0.0010
(0.0017)
0.0025*
(0.0014)

Zip codes within 40 miles
of the power plant
(5)
(6)

0.0001
(0.0009)
-0.0010
(0.0011)
-0.0008
(0.0011)
0.0010
(0.0011)
-0.0001
(0.0009)
0.0010
(0.0010)
0.0003
(0.0011)
0.0005
(0.0012)
0.0017*
(0.0010)

0.0000
(0.0009)
-0.0009
(0.0011)
-0.0009
(0.0011)
0.0011
(0.0011)
-0.0001
(0.0009)
0.0010
(0.0010)
0.0002
(0.0011)
0.0006
(0.0013)
0.0017*
(0.0009)

Cape May, Hudson and
Salem Counties
(7)

-0.0005
(0.0011)
0.0014
(0.0015)
0.0022
(0.0023)
0.0005
(0.0016)
0.0003
(0.0014)
-0.0014
(0.0015)
-0.0012
(0.0012)
0.0003
(0.0019)
-0.0003
(0.0012)

Other control variables:
Zip code fixed effects
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Linear and quadratic time trend
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Individual-level demographic variables
No
Yes
No
Yes
No
Yes
Yes
Number of zip codes
99
99
76
76
147
147
51
Number of observations
45,430
45,430
36,716
36,716
77,708
77,708
56,054
Note: Birth data are from the birth certificates provided by the New Jersey Department of Health. The power plant’s emission data are from the EPA’s Air Markets
Program Data (AMPD). The wind direction data are purchased from weathersource.com. The zip code database is purchased from http://www.zip-codes.com/zipcode-statistics.asp. The sample period is January 2004–December 2010. Full-term low birth weight is represented by a binary variable (1/0), which equals one for
the babies with birth weight below 2,500 grams and gestational length greater than or equal to 37 weeks, and zero otherwise. Being exposed to sulfur dioxide
emissions (in 1,000 tons) from the power plant (direction adjusted) is measured by first taking the product of (1) the daily sulfur dioxide emissions from the power
plant and (2) the cosine function of the difference between daily wind direction (where the wind blows) near the power plant and the New Jersey zip code centroid
azimuth (relative to the power plant), and then aggregating the aforementioned product to the zip code-monthly level. The calculation and interpretation of azimuth
are given in the text. Linear and quadratic time trend are represented by the linear and quadratic terms of the consecutive integers generated from all year-month
pairs (January 2004–December 2010). Individual level demographic variables controlled for are sex of the baby (1/0), mother’s age, dummy variables (1/0) for
mother’s race and ethnicity (White, Black, Hispanic), mother having completed a four-year college or higher (1/0), and mother being married (1/0). Zip code fixed
effects are used for all specifications. Standard errors (reported in parentheses) are clustered at the zip code level. * Significant at the 10% level; ** Significant at
the 5% level; *** Significant at the 1% level.

61

Table 8: Impacts of Power Plant Nitrogen Oxides Emissions on Full-Term Low Birth Weight
New Jersey regions included:

Being exposed to nitrogen oxides emissions (in
1,000 tons) from the power plant, directionadjusted:
During the birth month
During the 1st month before birth
During the 2nd month before birth
During the 3rd month before birth
During the 4th month before birth
During the 5th month before birth
During the 6th month before birth
During the 7th month before birth
During the 8th month before birth
Other control variables:
Zip code fixed effects
Linear and quadratic time trend
Individual-level demographic variables
Number of zip codes
Number of observations

Hunterdon, Morris and
Sussex Counties
(1)
(2)

Hunterdon and Morris
Counties
(3)
(4)

Zip codes within 40 miles
of the power plant
(5)
(6)

Cape May, Hudson and
Salem Counties
(7)

0.0002
(0.0098)
-0.0009
(0.0086)
-0.0149
(0.0094)
0.0123
(0.0094)
-0.0086
(0.0084)
0.0065
(0.0096)
0.0063
(0.0096)
0.0061
(0.0124)
0.0165
(0.0102)

0.0000
(0.0097)
-0.0006
(0.0085)
-0.0152
(0.0095)
0.0138
(0.0095)
-0.0090
(0.0083)
0.0071
(0.0097)
0.0068
(0.0096)
0.0068
(0.0126)
0.0163
(0.0102)

-0.0001
(0.0111)
-0.0086
(0.0100)
-0.0086
(0.0112)
0.0024
(0.0096)
-0.0057
(0.0101)
0.0099
(0.0109)
0.0032
(0.0112)
-0.0031
(0.0145)
0.0197
(0.0122)

-0.0005
(0.0109)
-0.0083
(0.0099)
-0.0088
(0.0113)
0.0040
(0.0097)
-0.0060
(0.0100)
0.0110
(0.0110)
0.0038
(0.0112)
-0.0029
(0.0147)
0.0198
(0.0121)

0.0032
(0.0072)
-0.0030
(0.0089)
-0.0070
(0.0084)
0.0124
(0.0084)
-0.0024
(0.0070)
0.0053
(0.0077)
0.0035
(0.0079)
-0.0018
(0.0105)
0.0115
(0.0081)

0.0027
(0.0072)
-0.0026
(0.0089)
-0.0080
(0.0084)
0.0135
(0.0084)
-0.0023
(0.0070)
0.0053
(0.0077)
0.0034
(0.0079)
-0.0012
(0.0106)
0.0112
(0.0080)

-0.0082
(0.0084)
0.0091
(0.0128)
0.0096
(0.0179)
0.0035
(0.0135)
0.0019
(0.0114)
-0.0177
(0.0114)
-0.0067
(0.0084)
0.0059
(0.0167)
0.0050
(0.0100)

Yes
Yes
No
99
45,430

Yes
Yes
Yes
99
45,430

Yes
Yes
No
76
36,716

Yes
Yes
Yes
76
36,716

Yes
Yes
No
147
77,708

Yes
Yes
Yes
147
77,708

Yes
Yes
Yes
51
56,054

Note: Birth data are from the birth certificates provided by the New Jersey Department of Health. The power plant’s emission data are from the EPA’s Air Markets
Program Data (AMPD). The wind direction data are purchased from weathersource.com. The zip code database is purchased from http://www.zip-codes.com/zipcode-statistics.asp. The sample period is January 2004–December 2010. Full-term low birth weight is represented by a binary variable (1/0), which equals one for
the babies with birth weight below 2,500 grams and gestational length greater than or equal to 37 weeks, and zero otherwise. Being exposed to nitrogen oxides
emissions (in 1,000 tons) from the power plant (direction adjusted) is measured by first taking the product of (1) the daily nitrogen oxides emissions from the power
plant and (2) the cosine function of the difference between daily wind direction (where the wind blows) near the power plant and the New Jersey zip code centroid
azimuth (relative to the power plant), and then aggregating the aforementioned product to the zip code-monthly level. The calculation and interpretation of azimuth
are given in the text. Linear and quadratic time trend are represented by the linear and quadratic terms of the consecutive integers generated from all year-month
pairs (January 2004–December 2010). Individual level demographic variables controlled for are sex of the baby (1/0), mother’s age, dummy variables (1/0) for
mother’s race and ethnicity (White, Black, Hispanic), mother having completed a four-year college or higher (1/0), and mother being married (1/0). Zip code fixed
effects are used for all specifications. Standard errors (reported in parentheses) are clustered at the zip code level. * Significant at the 10% level; ** Significant at
the 5% level; *** Significant at the 1% level.

62

Table 9: Impacts of Power Plant Emissions on Local Pollution Measured at New Jersey Zip Code Level
New Jersey regions included:

Warren County

Hunterdon and
Morris Counties

Hunterdon, Morris and Zip codes that are Zip codes that are at least
within 40 miles of the 80 miles away from the
Sussex Counties
power plant
power plant

(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
Panel A: Dependent variable—SO 2 (ppb), zip code level, inverse-distance weighted, monthly average of the one-hour daily maximum levels
Power plant SO2 monthly emissions (in
1,000 tons), direction-adjusted
2.249***
1.664***
1.752***
1.587***
(0.141)
(0.110)
(0.101)
(0.111)
Number of observations
6,783
37,390
42,056
75,870

(5)

-0.033
(0.103)
59,342

Panel B: Dependent variable—PM 2.5 (μg/m 3 ), zip code level, inverse-distance weighted, monthly average of the one-hour daily maximum levels
Power plant SO2 monthly emissions (in
1,000 tons), direction-adjusted
1.034*
1.783***
1.780***
1.800***
0.179
(0.539)
(0.079)
(0.071)
(0.075)
(0.167)
Number of observations
6,788
39,891
44,816
80,289
47,060
Panel C: Dependent variable—NO 2 (ppb), zip code level, inverse-distance weighted, monthly average of the one-hour daily maximum levels
Power plant NOx monthly emissions (in
7.151**
1.169
0.335
-2.100
1,000 tons), direction-adjusted
(3.007)
(1.771)
(1.667)
(1.602)
Number of observations
6,517
39,920
44,530
78,342
Control variables used in Panels A, B and C:
Weather variables
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Linear and quadratic time trend
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Zip code fixed effects
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes

N/A
N/A
N/A
Yes
Yes
Yes

Note: Birth data are from the birth certificates provided by the New Jersey Department of Health. The power plant’s emission data are from the EPA’s Air Markets
Program Data (AMPD). The wind direction data are purchased from weathersource.com. The zip code database is purchased from http://www.zip-codes.com/zipcode-statistics.asp. The pollution data are from the EPA’s Air Quality System (AQS). The weather data are from the National Climatic Data Center (NCDC). The
sample period is January 2004–December 2010. Full-term low birth weight is represented by a binary variable (1/0), which equals one for the babies with birth
weight below 2,500 grams and gestational length greater than or equal to 37 weeks, and zero otherwise. The SO2 (or PM2.5, or NO2) concentrations are computed
using the procedures explained in the text, with a 20-mile radius used. The direction-adjusted sulfur dioxide (or nitrogen oxides) emissions (in 1,000 tons) from the
power plant are measured by first taking the product of (1) the daily sulfur dioxide (or nitrogen oxides) emissions from the power plant and (2) the cosine function
of the difference between daily wind direction (where the wind blows) near the power plant and the New Jersey zip code centroid azimuth (relative to the power
plant), and then aggregating the aforementioned product to the zip code-monthly level. The calculation and interpretation of azimuth are given in the text. Weather
variables controlled for are monthly high temperature, monthly low temperature, monthly mean temperature, monthly rainfall and monthly snowfall, which are all
measured at the zip code level using the procedures explained in the text, with a 20-mile radius used. Summary statistics of the pollution and weather variables are
reported in Appendix Table 2. Linear and quadratic time trend are represented by the linear and quadratic terms of the consecutive integers generated from all yearmonth pairs (January 2004–December 2010). Zip code fixed effects are used for all specifications. Standard errors (reported in parentheses) are clustered at the zip
code level. * Significant at the 10% level; ** Significant at the 5% level; *** Significant at the 1% level.

63

Table 10: Impacts of Being Downwind of the Power Plant on Full-Term Low Birth Weight by Sex of the Baby
New Jersey counties included:

Being downwind of the power plant:
During the birth month
During the 1st month before birth
During the 2nd month before birth
During the 3rd month before birth
During the 4th month before birth
During the 5th month before birth
During the 6th month before birth
During the 7th month before birth
During the 8th month before birth
Other control variables:
Zip code fixed effects
Linear and quadratic time trend
Individual-level demographic variables
Number of observations

Hunterdon, Morris, Sussex and Warren
Male
Female
(1)
(2)

Hunterdon, Morris and Sussex
Male
Female
(3)
(4)

Hunterdon and Morris
Male
Female
(5)
(6)

-0.0013
(0.0036)
-0.0015
(0.0051)
-0.0106**
(0.0047)
0.0040
(0.0047)
-0.0035
(0.0036)
0.0031
(0.0048)
0.0037
(0.0038)
0.0055
(0.0043)
0.0124***
(0.0043)

-0.0009
(0.0049)
-0.0006
(0.0049)
0.0019
(0.0048)
-0.0002
(0.0051)
0.0038
(0.0055)
0.0057
(0.0063)
0.0005
(0.0065)
0.0036
(0.0049)
0.0062
(0.0044)

-0.0014
(0.0039)
-0.0035
(0.0041)
-0.0091*
(0.0050)
0.0061
(0.0049)
-0.0039
(0.0031)
0.0011
(0.0048)
0.0054
(0.0041)
0.0062
(0.0044)
0.0125***
(0.0038)

-0.0016
(0.0052)
-0.0007
(0.0053)
0.0020
(0.0048)
-0.0016
(0.0052)
0.0050
(0.0060)
0.0036
(0.0065)
-0.0005
(0.0067)
0.0029
(0.0050)
0.0055
(0.0047)

0.0017
(0.0044)
-0.0032
(0.0048)
-0.0079
(0.0063)
0.0061
(0.0059)
-0.0034
(0.0037)
0.0007
(0.0057)
0.0062
(0.0050)
0.0041
(0.0053)
0.0132***
(0.0044)

-0.0074
(0.0061)
-0.0051
(0.0064)
0.0053
(0.0059)
-0.0052
(0.0061)
0.0061
(0.0076)
0.0077
(0.0068)
-0.0027
(0.0084)
0.0027
(0.0064)
0.0050
(0.0054)

Yes
Yes
Yes
26,431

Yes
Yes
Yes
25,368

Yes
Yes
Yes
23,219

Yes
Yes
Yes
22,203

Yes
Yes
Yes
18,794

Yes
Yes
Yes
17,918

Note: Birth data are from the birth certificates provided by the New Jersey Department of Health. The wind direction data are purchased from weathersource.com.
The zip code database is purchased from http://www.zip-codes.com/zip-code-statistics.asp. The sample period is January 2004–December 2010. Full-term low
birth weight is represented by a binary variable (1/0), which equals one for the babies with birth weight below 2,500 grams and gestational length greater than or
equal to 37 weeks, and zero otherwise. Being downwind of the power plant is measured by the cosine function of the difference between monthly wind direction
(where the wind blows) near the power plant and the New Jersey zip code centroid azimuth (relative to the power plant). The calculation and interpretation of
azimuth are given in the text. Linear and quadratic time trend are represented by the linear and quadratic terms of the consecutive integers generated from all yearmonth pairs (January 2004–December 2010). Individual level demographic variables controlled for are sex of the baby (1/0), mother’s age, dummy variables (1/0)
for mother’s race and ethnicity (White, Black, Hispanic), mother having completed a four-year college or higher (1/0), and mother being married (1/0). Zip code
fixed effects are used for all specifications. Standard errors (reported in parentheses) are clustered at the zip code level. * Significant at the 10% level; **
Significant at the 5% level; *** Significant at the 1% level.

64

Appendix Table 1: Summary Statistics for the Additional Estimation Samples
Hunterdon
25.483
(6.055)

Mercer
37.836
(0.000)

Middlesex
38.049
(0.224)

Morris
30.553
(5.889)

Passaic
36.153
(3.871)

Somerset
33.476
(2.995)

Sussex
26.017
(6.747)

Union
39.401
(0.577)

Warren
12.574
(2.873)

Combined
30.060
(8.225)

157.729
(12.457)

155.967
(0.000)

125.691
(1.410)

96.977
(9.679)

73.289
(2.309)

132.540
(8.310)

62.039
(13.702)

117.260
(4.590)

137.229
(46.367)

110.556
(31.451)

Number of zip codes in the estimation sample
Number of observations in the estimation sample

26
6,723

1
236

2
1,777

46
28,317

4
2,372

22
14,090

23
8,714

6
9,100

17
6,379

147
77,708

Panel B: Within 35 miles of the PGS
Distance (in miles) between a New Jersey zipcode
centroid and the PGS

Hunterdon
24.640
(5.192)

Morris
27.831
(5.010)

Passaic
31.299
(1.467)

Somerset
31.262
(1.945)

Sussex
24.851
(5.956)

Warren
12.574
(2.873)

Combined
25.561
(7.141)

157.228
(12.677)

96.620
(9.961)

72.703
(0.771)

129.861
(7.037)

62.468
(14.308)

137.229
(46.367)

109.098
(35.906)

Number of zip codes in the estimation sample
Number of observations in the estimation sample

25
6,325

35
19,697

2
878

13
7,817

20
7,901

17
6,379

112
48,997

Panel C: At least 80 miles away from the PGS
Distance (in miles) between a New Jersey zipcode
centroid and the PGS

Atlantic
105.990
(6.479)

Burlington
89.230
(5.497)

Camden
81.527
(0.504)

Cape May
126.314
(7.171)

Cumberland
103.060
(4.273)

Gloucester
85.412
(3.341)

Ocean
85.758
(5.841)

Salem
90.846
(4.617)

Combined
98.360
(13.498)

Direction (in degrees) towards which a New Jersey zip
code centroid is located from the PGS (i.e., azimuth): 0 =
North, 90 = East, 180 = South; 270 = West

165.171
(3.192)

159.131
(0.681)

175.596
(1.264)

173.475
(2.708)

180.461
(3.928)

181.022
(4.684)

147.767
(5.026)

190.110
(4.045)

169.053
(13.441)

Number of zip codes in the estimation sample
Number of observations in the estimation sample

30
20,090

2
64

4
3,802

21
5,258

21
13,431

11
7,762

20
13,629

12
3,537

121
67,573

Panel D: Three counties far away from the PGS
Distance (in miles) between a New Jersey zipcode
centroid and the PGS

Cape May
126.314
(7.171)

Hudson
54.936
(1.536)

Salem
90.846
(4.617)

Combined
63.898
(22.071)

173.475
(2.708)

101.908
(2.884)

190.110
(4.045)

114.186
(28.798)

21
5,258

18
47,259

12
3,537

51
56,054

Panel A: Within 40 miles of the PGS
Distance (in miles) between a New Jersey zipcode
centroid and the PGS
Direction (in degrees) towards which a New Jersey zip
code centroid is located from the PGS (i.e., azimuth): 0 =
North, 90 = East, 180 = South; 270 = West

Direction (in degrees) towards which a New Jersey zip
code centroid is located from the PGS (i.e., azimuth): 0 =
North, 90 = East, 180 = South; 270 = West

Direction (in degrees) towards which a New Jersey zip
code centroid is located from the PGS (i.e., azimuth): 0 =
North, 90 = East, 180 = South; 270 = West
Number of zip codes in the estimation sample
Number of observations in the estimation sample

Note: Means and standard deviations (in parentheses) are reported for each variable listed in this table. Birth data are from the birth certificates provided by the New Jersey Department of Health.
The zip code database is purchased from http://www.zip-codes.com/zip-code-statistics.asp. The sample period is January 2004–December 2010. Azimuth is used for the zip code direction relative
to the PGS. The calculation and interpretation of azimuth are given in the text.

65

Appendix Table 2: Summary Statistics for the Pollution and Weather Variables
New Jersey counties
Warren
Hunterdon, Morris and Sussex
Panel A: SO 2 (ppb), zip code level, inverse-distance weighted, monthly average of the one-hour daily maximum levels
SO2 (ppb)
12.106
8.221
(7.448)
(4.191)
Distance (in miles) between a New Jersey zip code centroid and a monitor
13.964
13.509
(3.283)
(2.725)
Number of monthly monitor readings within the 20-mile radius
1.895
2.407
(0.931)
(1.964)
Number of observations
6,783
42,056
Panel B: PM 2.5 (μg/m 3 ), zip code level, inverse-distance weighted, monthly average of the one-hour daily maximum levels
PM2.5 (μg/m3)

All New Jersey counties
9.221
(4.778)
12.386
(2.466)
5.429
(3.010)
595,524

10.871
10.532
11.727
(3.776)
(3.660)
(3.548)
Distance (in miles) between a New Jersey zip code centroid and a monitor
13.967
13.434
12.378
(3.283)
(2.707)
(2.386)
Number of monthly monitor readings within the 20-mile radius
2.203
4.327
10.096
(0.630)
(3.152)
(7.115)
Number of observations
6,788
44,816
640,995
Panel C: NO 2 (ppb), zip code level, inverse-distance weighted, monthly average of the one-hour daily maximum levels
NO2 (ppb)
18.475
23.194
33.399
(7.348)
(10.142)
(8.939)
Distance (in miles) between a New Jersey zip code centroid and a monitor
14.007
13.399
12.527
(3.340)
(2.688)
(2.195)
Number of monthly monitor readings within the 20-mile radius
1.428
2.053
4.757
(0.495)
(1.342)
(2.340)
Number of observations
6,517
44,530
550,568
Panel D: Weather variables, zip code level, inverse-distance weighted, monthly averages from weather stations
Low temperature (in Fahrenheit)
41.884
42.770
44.848
(15.131)
(15.195)
(15.315)
High temperature (in Fahrenheit)
63.369
63.257
64.490
(16.857)
(16.883)
(16.696)
Mean temperature (in Fahrenheit)
52.610
53.012
54.672
(15.923)
(15.987)
(15.945)
Rainfall (in inches)
4.414
4.080
3.972
(2.990)
(2.290)
(2.211)
Snowfall (in inches)
2.050
2.030
1.755
(4.655)
(4.380)
(4.285)
Number of observations
6,948
49,396
680,515
Note: Means and standard deviations (in parentheses) are reported for each variable listed in this table. Birth data are from the birth certificates provided by the New
Jersey Department of Health. The zip code database is purchased from http://www.zip-codes.com/zip-code-statistics.asp. The pollution data are from the EPA’s Air
Quality System (AQS). The weather data are from the National Climatic Data Center (NCDC). The sample period is January 2004–December 2010. The SO2 (or
PM2.5, or NO2) concentrations are computed using the procedures explained in the text, with a 20-mile radius used. Weather variables are all measured at the zip code
level using the procedures explained in the text, with a 20-mile radius used.
66

Appendix Table 3: Impacts of Power Plant Emissions on Local Pollution Measured at New Jersey Zip Code Level (15-mile radius used)
New Jersey regions included:

Warren County

Hunterdon and
Morris Counties

Hunterdon, Morris and Zip codes that are Zip codes that are at least
within 40 miles of the 80 miles away from the
Sussex Counties
power plant
power plant

(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
(5)
Panel A: SO 2 (ppb), zip code level, inverse-distance weighted, monthly average of the one-hour daily maximum levels, used as the dependent variable
Power plant SO2 monthly emissions (in
1,000 tons), direction-adjusted
2.963***
1.977***
1.991***
1.774***
0.014
(0.419)
(0.132)
(0.121)
(0.186)
(0.115)
Number of observations
5,772
28,384
30,364
56,428
48,637
Panel B: PM 2.5 (μg/m 3 ), zip code level, inverse-distance weighted, monthly average of the one-hour daily maximum levels, used as the dependent variable
Power plant SO2 monthly emissions (in
0.848
1.883***
1.901***
1.882***
0.284
1,000 tons), direction-adjusted
(0.765)
(0.088)
(0.084)
(0.083)
(0.238)
Number of observations
6,018
38,699
40,679
73,070
33,768
Panel C: NO 2 (ppb), zip code level, inverse-distance weighted, monthly average of the one-hour daily maximum levels, used as the dependent variable
Power plant NOx monthly emissions (in
9.850***
3.062
2.897
0.132
N/A
1,000 tons), direction-adjusted
(0.645)
(1.921)
(1.809)
(1.854)
N/A
Number of observations
4,502
31,917
33,897
64,974
N/A
Control variables used in Panels A, B and C:
Weather variables
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Linear and quadratic time trend
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Zip code fixed effects
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Note: Birth data are from the birth certificates provided by the New Jersey Department of Health. The power plant’s emission data are from the EPA’s Air Markets
Program Data (AMPD). The wind direction data are purchased from weathersource.com. The zip code database is purchased from http://www.zip-codes.com/zipcode-statistics.asp. The pollution data are from the EPA’s Air Quality System (AQS). The weather data are from the National Climatic Data Center (NCDC). The
sample period is January 2004–December 2010. Full-term low birth weight is represented by a binary variable (1/0), which equals one for the babies with birth
weight below 2,500 grams and gestational length greater than or equal to 37 weeks, and zero otherwise. The SO2 (or PM2.5, or NO2) concentrations are computed
using the procedures explained in the text, with a 15-mile radius used. The direction-adjusted sulfur dioxide (or nitrogen oxides) emissions (in 1,000 tons) from the
power plant are measured by first taking the product of (1) the daily sulfur dioxide (or nitrogen oxides) emissions from the power plant and (2) the cosine function
of the difference between daily wind direction (where the wind blows) near the power plant and the New Jersey zip code centroid azimuth (relative to the power
plant), and then aggregating the aforementioned product to the zip code-monthly level. The calculation and interpretation of azimuth are given in the text. Weather
variables controlled for are monthly high temperature, monthly low temperature, monthly mean temperature, monthly rainfall and monthly snowfall, which are all
measured at the zip code level using the procedures explained in the text, with a 15-mile radius used. Linear and quadratic time trend are represented by the linear
and quadratic terms of the consecutive integers generated from all year-month pairs (January 2004–December 2010). Zip code fixed effects are used for all
specifications. Standard errors (reported in parentheses) are clustered at the zip code level. * Significant at the 10% level; ** Significant at the 5% level; ***
Significant at the 1% level.

67

