NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

INSIDERS AND OUTSIDERS:
LOCAL ETHNIC POLITICS AND PUBLIC GOODS PROVISION
Kaivan Munshi
Mark Rosenzweig
Working Paper 21720
http://www.nber.org/papers/w21720

NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
November 2015

We are grateful to Toke Aidt and Soenje Reiche for helpful discussions. Brandon D'Souza provided
outstanding research assistance. Bruno Gasperini graciously shared the code for the threshold test.
Munshi acknowledges research support from the National Science Foundation through grant SES0617847. We are responsible for any errors that may remain. The views expressed herein are those
of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peerreviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.
© 2015 by Kaivan Munshi and Mark Rosenzweig. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to
exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including
© notice, is given to the source.

Insiders and Outsiders: Local Ethnic Politics and Public Goods Provision
Kaivan Munshi and Mark Rosenzweig
NBER Working Paper No. 21720
November 2015
JEL No. H11,H4,H41,H42,O1
ABSTRACT
We examine the role of ethnic politics at the local level in supplying public goods within a framework
that incorporates two sides to ethnic groups: an inclusionary side associated with internal cooperation
and an exclusionary side associated with the disregard for others. The inclusionary aspect of ethnic
politics results in the selection of more able political representatives who exert more effort, resulting
in an increased supply of non-excludable public goods. The exclusionary aspect of ethnic politics results
in the capture of targetable public resources by insiders; i.e. the representative's own group, at the
expense of outsiders. Using newly available Indian data, covering all the major states over three election
terms at the most local (ward) level, we provide empirical evidence that is consistent with both sides
of ethnic politics. Counterfactual simulations using structural estimates of the model are used to quantify
the impact of alternative policies that, based on our theory and the empirical results, are expected to
increase the supply of public goods.

Kaivan Munshi
Faculty of Economics
University of Cambridge
Austin Robinson Building
Cambridge
CB3 9DD
United Kingdom
munshi@econ.cam.ac.uk
Mark Rosenzweig
Department of Economics
Yale University
Box 208269
New Haven, CT 06520
and NBER
mark.rosenzweig@yale.edu

1

Introduction

There is a large and growing literature that is concerned with the negative effects of ethnic
politics on growth and development.1 Ethnic affiliation, on linguistic, tribal, or caste lines,
determines the selection of political leaders and the level and distribution of public resources
throughout the developing world. One negative consequence of ethnic politics for economic
development is that citizens tend to vote mechanically on ethnic lines when information
about candidates is limited, resulting in the selection of incompetent or corrupt leaders
(Banerjee and Pande 2010, Casey 2015). Both insiders – members of the leaders’ own
ethnic group – and outsiders are hurt, as public resources are siphoned off to the leaders
themselves. A second consequence of ethnic politics is that it distorts the allocation of public
resources. Public resources are targeted along ethnic lines, rather than by efficiency criteria,
and insiders benefit at the expense of outsiders (Besley, Pande, and Rao 2007, Bardhan and
Mookherjee 2010, Anderson et al. 2015, Burgess et al. 2015). In this paper we re-examine
ethnic politics in the context of local elections, where the standard problem of limited
information is absent. In contrast with the prior literature, we simultaneously consider both
the level and the distribution of public resources. In particular, we examine the supply of
non-excludable public goods as well as the distribution of targetable welfare transfers within
a model that incorporates ethnic affiliation and heterogeneity in self-interested politicians’
abilities.
The voluntary provision of public goods is a classic problem in political economy, famously studied by Mancur Olson (1965) in his book the Logic of Collective Action. Olson’s
insight is that individual volunteers will not internalize the benefits that other members of
the group obtain from public goods, resulting in a sub-optimal level of public good provision. This collective action problem is perhaps most acute in local governments where
non-professional politicians must volunteer for important tasks that involve the supply and
distribution of substantial public resources. There has been a worldwide trend towards
political decentralization and democratization in recent decades. Local government expenditures account for approximately 25% of total government expenditures in the United
States and Europe, and in Brazil approximately 15% of federal government revenue is disbursed to municipalities (Ferraz and Finan 2011). Local governments are responsible for
the financing and the administration of the school system in the United States, and in
rural India, the setting for our empirical analysis and home to 65% of the Indian population, local governments construct and maintain public infrastructure and identify welfare
recipients. Our analysis examines how ethnic communities reduce the potentially serious
collective action problem that is inherent in local governments.
1
This literature goes back to Easterley and Levine (1997). Recent contributions include Alesina and
La Ferrara 2005, Miguel and Gugerty 2005, Padro i Miquel 2007, Burgess et al. 2015, and Alesina et al.
forthcoming.

1

A fundamental characteristic of all ethnic communities, regardless of whether they are
defined by kinship (tribe or caste), religion, or language, is a high degree of social connectedness. This connectedness supports high levels of internal cooperation. A large and
growing literature has documented the role played by community-based networks in supporting private economic activity when markets function imperfectly.2 We assess whether
the same communities reduce the collective action problem in local democracies. The basic
idea is that social connectedness makes local political leaders internalize the benefit derived
from the public good by all members of their ethnic community – the insiders – not just
themselves. This could be because members of the local community can credibly commit to
compensate them ex post for their efforts. This results in the selection of more competent
leaders and greater effort, which leads, in turn, to greater public good provision.
A second fundamental characteristic of ethnic communities – the flip side of the in-group
solidarity described above – is their disregard for others. Political leaders elected with the
support of their ethnic group will thus ignore (fail to internalize) the benefit derived from
locally provided public goods by outsiders, resulting in a level of public goods that is less
than first-best. If public goods cannot be spatially targeted within the local constituency,
then everyone is nevertheless better off relative to the benchmark where leaders only value
their own benefit from the public good. However, local governments are often entrusted
with tasks, such as the distribution of welfare transfers, that can be targeted at specific
households. When ethnicity is salient, local political leaders will target welfare transfers to
their own group to the extent possible, leaving outsiders strictly worse off.3
The theory that we develop incorporates the role played by ethnic communities in the
selection of leaders and the supply of two types of public resources: non-excludable public
goods and publicly financed welfare transfers to households. In our theory, each political
constituency consists of multiple differently-sized ethnic groups. We begin by focusing
exclusively on the provision of a non-excludable public good whose level depends on the
amount of effort exerted by the elected representative. The cost of effort is decreasing in the
representative’s ability, but more able individuals also have superior outside options. We
allow for ex post transfers within but not between groups, so each group will put forward
as its representative the individual who maximizes its collective benefit from the public
good, net of his effort and opportunity cost. Because the representative of a larger group
2

Greif’s (1993) analysis of the Maghribi traders’ coalition and Greif, Milgrom, and Weingast’s (1994)
investigation of the medieval merchant guild highlight the role played by non-market institutions in solving
commitment problems in the pre-modern economy. In the contemporary economy, a voluminous literature
documents high levels of risk-sharing in informal mutual insurance arrangements throughout the world (e.g.,
Townsend 1994, Grimard 1997, Ligon, Thomas, and Worrall 2002, Fafchamps and Lund 2003, Mazzocco
and Saini 2012, Angelucci, Di Giorgi, and Rasul 2015).
3
Although the targeting of public goods to co-ethnics has been documented at higher levels of spatial
aggregation; e.g. Burgess et al. (2015), we show that such targeting is absent in the local constituencies
(wards) that we study. In our analysis, targeting is restricted to welfare transfers.

2

internalizes the benefit derived by a larger number of individuals, larger groups will put
forward more able representatives who, in turn, provide a higher level of the public good.
If the public good is non-excludable, it follows that everyone in the constituency wants the
representative of the largest group to be elected. However, this may not be the electoral
outcome in practice because groups can free-ride on others. In particular, if a group that
is sufficiently close in size puts forward its representative as a candidate, then the largest
group may prefer not to contest the election since it will receive a high level of public goods
without having to bear its own representative’s effort and opportunity cost. Our first
theoretical result is that the largest group will, nevertheless, put forward its representative
with certainty when its share of the population in the constituency crosses a threshold level,
and both insiders and outsiders will benefit from the increased provision of public goods.
As noted, local governments are often responsible for the distribution of welfare transfers. If the total amount of these transfers is fixed, then outsiders will be systematically
crowded out, particularly when the representative belongs to a large ethnic group. Adding
welfare transfers to our theory affects public good provision in two ways. First, the largest
group in the constituency will now be less inclined to free-ride on smaller groups. Second, the representative of the largest group may no longer be preferred by everyone if the
negative crowding-out effect associated with the welfare transfers dominates the positive
public good effect. Adding welfare transfers to the representative’s list of responsibilities
will increase the level of public goods if the largest group’s representative continues to be
preferred by everyone, by shifting down the population-share threshold at which it comes
to power with certainty. In contrast, if the negative crowding-out effect dominates, then
the largest group will only come to power, with an accompanying increase in public good
provision, when it has an absolute majority; i.e. when its share of the population exceeds
0.5. The coupling of public good provision and the distribution of welfare transfers now
reduces the level of public goods.
We test the predictions of the theory with panel data from India across three elections,
describing electoral outcomes at the most local (ward) level. This is an ideal setting in
which to test theories of ethnic politics for a number of reasons. The caste system is
arguably the most distinctive feature of Indian society. The exploitation, prejudice, and
discrimination that are associated with the hierarchical structure of the caste system are
well known and have been extensively documented. There is, however, another side to this
system, which has to do with the solidarity and social connectedness within caste groups.
Survey evidence indicates that over 95% of Indians continue to marry within their caste.
Marriage ties built over many generations result in a high degree of social connectedness
within castes, which span a wide area covering many villages.4 Within a village, castes
4

A large and growing literature has documented the role played by caste networks in supporting economic
cooperation. Mutual insurance arrangements have historically been organized, and continue to be organized,

3

tend to be spatially clustered. This increases social connectedness within castes, but also
expands the already wide social distance between castes. The insider-outsider dichotomy
that lies at the heart of our theory of ethnic politics is exemplified by caste relations within
the village.
The village governments or panchayats that we study have been responsible for the provision of local public goods and the identification of welfare-program recipients since 1991,
when a constitutional amendment devolved substantial political power to the local level.
A panchayat is typically divided into 10-15 wards, each of which comprises approximately
70 households. Political decisions are jointly made by the panchayat president and the
ward representatives and our assumption will be that the representative’s ability and effort
directly determine the level of public goods that his ward receives. The representative’s
ability and effort will, in turn, depend on the numerical strength of his caste in the ward.
Data from the 2006 Rural Economic Development Survey, which we use in the empirical
analysis, documents the importance of caste in local Indian politics. Key informants were
asked to list the various sources of financial and organizational support that the elected ward
representatives received in each of the last three elections. As described in Table 1, caste
is clearly the dominant source of support: 82 percent of the elected ward representatives
received support from their caste inside the village and 29 percent received support from
caste members outside the village. In line with these statistics, the ward representative is
always elected with the support of his caste in our theory.
Our theory describes the relationship between the population share of the most numerous caste in the ward and the supply of public goods. A ward with a numerically dominant
caste will be less heterogeneous, and there is a large literature documenting the negative
correlation between ethnic heterogeneity and the demand for public goods; e.g. Alesina
and La Ferrara (2005), Miguel and Gugerty (2005). To disentangle the effect of ethnic affiliation on the supply of public goods, which we are interested in, from this demand effect,
we take advantage of the panel nature of our data and the system of set asides in Indian
local governments that randomly reserves the ward representative’s position for historically
disadvantaged castes (and tribes) from one election to the next. This changes the set of
castes that can put forward their preferred representative, while leaving the electorate, and
the demand for public goods, fixed over time. Net of ward fixed effects, which capture all
time invariant ward characteristics, the theory predicts that there should be a discontinuous improvement in the elected representative’s ability, which we measure by his education,
around the caste in rural India (Caldwell, Reddy, and Caldwell 1986, Mazzocco and Saini 2012, Munshi and
Rosenzweig forthcoming). When urban jobs became available in the nineteenth century, with colonization
and urbanization, these castes supported the migration of their members and the subsequent formation
of urban labor market networks (Morris 1965, Chandravarker 1994, Munshi and Rosenzweig 2006). They
continue to support the movement of their members into more remunerative occupations in the contemporary
economy (Munshi 2011).

4

and an accompanying increase in public goods supplied to the ward when the population
share of the most numerous eligible caste (which changes over time) crosses a threshold.
Formal statistical tests for a structural break provide support for these predictions of the
theory.
A second key finding, based on tests of the threshold’s location, is that the most numerous eligible caste can only come to power when it has an absolute majority; i.e. when
its population share is at least 0.5, despite the fact that it supplies a substantially higher
level of public goods. This implies that the outsiders must be worse off when it comes to
power on some other dimension. Consistent with this observation, we find, using data from
multiple election terms, that a household is less likely to benefit from programs targeted at
disadvantaged households when it shifts from being an insider to an outsider; i.e. when its
ward representative belongs to another caste. This crowding out is substantially greater
when a larger group is in power and is not observed for public goods.
The improved ability of the elected representative and the increased supply of public
goods when the largest group comes to power is indicative of the positive – inclusionary –
aspect of local ethnic politics. The fact that this group can only come to power when it
has an absolute majority; i.e. at a population share of 0.5, is indicative of the negative –
exclusionary – aspect.5 It follows from the theory that decoupling public good provision
and the distribution of welfare transfers would shift the population share threshold at which
the largest group comes to power down below 0.5, with an accompanying increase in the
overall level of public goods. To quantify the benefit of this decoupling, and the efficiency
and equity consequences of the caste-based reservation system at the ward level, we estimate
the model structurally and perform counter-factual simulations. The results indicate that
a combination of policies, as opposed to a single intervention, could substantially increase
the supply of local public goods without adverse equity consequences when ethnic politics
is salient.
5
The improvement in the representative’s ability and the increase in the supply of public goods when the
largest eligible caste in the ward has an absolute majority are not implied by alternative theories of caste
politics. Banerjee and Pande’s (2010) theory, which applies to higher levels of government where voters
have limited information and vote mechanically on caste lines, would predict a decline in the elected leader’s
quality when a single caste had an absolute majority in the constituency. Anderson et al.’s (2015) theory of
clientilist politics, which like our theory is based on strong within-caste ties, is appropriate for the specific
state – Maharashtra – that they consider. However, their prediction that programs targeted at households
below the poverty line (BPL) will decline when a single caste is (numerically) dominant is rejected in our
nationally representative sample of wards. Moreover, the increase in local public goods that are valued by
all constituents, which we document when a single caste has an absolute majority in the ward, cannot be
explained by their theory.

5

2

Institutional Setting

2.1

Social Structure

The insider-outsider dichotomy is a feature of all traditional societies and is a key assumption in the literature on ethnic politics. The reason why we focus on Indian local
governments is that this dichotomy is especially pronounced in Indian society, even at the
local level, due to its special caste-based structure. For example, Figure 1 reports crosscountry results from Wave 5 of the World Values Survey (conducted between 2005 and 2009
in different countries) on questions relating to trust, and tolerance of outsiders. Restricting
the sample to countries with a population in excess of 20 million that are classified by the
World Bank as low, lower-middle, or upper-middle income (with the addition of Russia),
we see in Figure 1A that India ranks close to the top of the list with regard to trust in
neighbors. Given the spatial segregation that characterizes the Indian village (described
below) the Indian respondents are essentially reporting that they have a high degree of
trust in their fellow caste members living nearby. However, the ranking reverses when we
look at tolerance of outsiders – speaking a different language or following a different religion
– in Figures 1B and 1C, respectively. India now lies at the very bottom of the list and,
based on the preceding discussion, we would expect Indians to be similarly intolerant of
neighbors belonging to a different caste (this is certainly reflected in how they live).
Survey data confirms that caste continues to be salient in India. The basic marriage
rule in Hindu society is that individuals must match within their caste or jati. Muslims also
follow this rule, matching within biradaris which are equivalent to jatis, while converts to
Christianity continue to marry within their original jatis. Although the population census
has not collected caste information since 1931, recent rounds of nationally representative
surveys such as the 1999 Rural Economic Development Survey (REDS) and the 2005 India
Human Development Survey (IHDS) report that over 95% of Indians continue to marry
within their caste (or equivalent kinship community). Newly available genetic evidence
indicates that these patterns of endogamous marriage have been in place for over 2,000
years, dividing the Indian population into 4,000 distinct genetic groups, each of which is a
caste (Moorjani et al. 2013).
With 4,000 castes, and given India’s population of one billion, each caste comprises
250,000 members on average. Social sanctions are needed to support cooperation in such a
large group. These sanctions typically involve exclusion from social interactions, which will
only be effective when interactions within the group are sufficiently frequent and important,
and all castes are intolerant of outsiders. A single caste will thus not have a presence in
all villages in the area that it covers. It will instead cluster in select villages. This shows
up clearly in the latest, 2006, REDS round, which we use for much of the analysis in this
paper. The mean number of castes per state is 64, while the mean number of castes per
6

village is 12. With 340 households on average in a village, this implies that a caste will
have about 30 households in the select villages where it locates. This is a large enough
number to support meaningful local interactions (and accompanying social sanctions, when
required).
While the structure of Indian society results in a high degree of social connectedness
within castes, the hierarchical nature of the caste system often gives rise to adversarial
relations between castes in the village. Even where castes co-exist in relative harmony,
they rarely socialize. Figure 2 uses data from the 2006 REDS village census to describe
the distribution of castes and the nature of transactions in a sample of villages drawn from
the major Indian states. Focusing on the 91% of villages for which there is ward-level
information that can be used for the analysis of ethnic politics that follows, each caste
makes up on average 6% of the population of a village. Within the ward, which is a smaller
spatial unit, the average caste’s share of the population increases to 14%, indicative of the
spatial clustering along caste lines that characterizes the Indian village.6
The REDS village census asks each household head to list the names of three individuals
in the village that he would approach for food, in the event of a temporary shortfall, and for
a short-term loan. If these individuals were approached without regard to caste affiliation,
we would expect on average that 6% of the individuals providing food transfers and loans
would belong to the respondent’s caste. What we see in Figure 2, based on the identity
of the first listed individual, is that around 50% of food transfers and loans are from
individuals belonging to the same caste. Munshi and Rosenzweig (forthcoming) document
the importance of cross-village loans and transfers in caste-based rural insurance networks.
If we included caste loans from outside the village, which make up more than half of
caste loans, the fraction of individuals within the caste that would be approached for a
loan would increase well above 50%. Informal transactions (and social interactions) are
evidently concentrated within the caste in the Indian village.

2.2

Local Politics

The 73rd Amendment of the Indian Constitution, passed in 1991, established a three-tier
system of local governments or panchayats – at the village, block, and district level – with
all seats to be filled by direct election. The village panchayats, which often cover multiple villages, were divided into 10-15 wards. Panchayats were given substantial power and
resources, and regular elections for the position of panchayat president and for each ward
representative have been held every five years in most states. The major responsibilities
of the panchayat are to construct and maintain local infrastructure (e.g.; public buildings,
6

Castes will often live together on particular streets; indeed, streets in Indian villages are informally
referred to by caste names. If we examined spatial clustering at the neighborhood level, the proportion of
the population belonging to a single caste would likely increase much further.

7

water supply and sanitation, roads) and to identify targeted welfare recipients. Although
public goods account for the bulk of local government expenditures, publicly funded transfers to individual households, including programs for households below the poverty line
(BPL) and employment schemes account for 15% of total expenditures.7
How are panchayat expenditures allocated? The council makes decisions collectively
(the president does not have veto power) and so the level of public goods that a ward
receives will depend on its representative’s influence within the panchayat as well as his
ability to ensure that the earmarked resources reach their destination.8 In general, the
supply of public goods to a ward will depend on the representative’s ability and the effort he
puts into the job. The central premise of our theory is that the caste can avoid the collective
action problem, which arises because the representative only values his own benefit from
the public good, by ensuring that its members can credibly commit to compensating him
ex post for his efforts. These ex post transfers result in politicians appearing to be enriched
by their position. However, the important distinction between caste-based transfers and
personal corruption is that the entire constituency benefits from the increased level of public
goods generated by these transfers and public resources are not diverted for personal use.
Ex post transfers within the caste are one (second-best) solution to the collective action
problem. A second solution is to compensate the representative monetarily for his effort and
opportunity cost. Ferraz and Finan (2011) provide evidence from Brazilian municipalities
that higher wages attract wealthier and more educated candidates and increase legislative
productivity. However, local politicians are rarely (adequately) compensated. Ferraz and
Finan note that 98% of municipal legislators held a second job, and in our Indian local
governments, the president is paid 50-60 dollars per month (less than the minimum wage)
and the ward representatives earn even less. One reason why wage compensation, especially for local politicians, is not an effective solution to the collective action problem may
be because high-powered incentive schemes, rather than fixed wages, are needed to elicit
effort. It is difficult, however, to create clear and credible performance measures for many
important political tasks (Besley 2004).
A third solution to the collective action problem is long-term incumbency. The members of the representative’s caste can credibly commit to compensate him ex post for his
efforts even when he is elected for a single term because they interact with him outside the
political system on many other dimensions. If the representative could stay in office for a
sufficiently long period of time, then the standard repeated game argument tells us that
cooperation could even be sustained with socially unconnected outsiders. This solution is
7
Although panchayats raise their own revenues, through land and water usage taxes, and benefit from
specific central government programs, the state government is the major source of funding.
8
Key informants in the 2006 REDS were asked who in the panchayat decided the allocation of local revenue. Although 81% of informants reported that the president had a say, 93% said that it was, nevertheless,
a joint decision of all panchayat members.

8

infeasible in Indian local governments because reservation for women and disadvantaged
castes (and tribes) generates a high level of exogenous turnover in council seats. The rule
followed by almost all Indian states is that seats are reserved in each election for three
historically disadvantaged groups – Scheduled Castes (SC), Scheduled Tribes (ST), and
Other Backward Castes (OBC) – in proportion to their share of the population in each
district. Within each of these categories, and in constituencies open to all castes in a given
election, one-third of the seats are reserved for women. Seats are reserved randomly across
wards and, for the position of the president, randomly across panchayats from one election
to the next in each district. The only restriction is that no seat can be reserved for the
same group across consecutive elections within a constituency (Besley, Pandey, and Rao
2007).
Given the negative priors that the electorate will have about female politicians and
politicians drawn from historically disadvantaged groups, council representatives chosen in
reserved elections thus have little chance of being subsequently reelected.9 The representatives with the greatest chance for re-election are men elected in unreserved seats. However,
the probability that an unreserved election will be followed by another unreserved election
within a ward is just 0.4.10 Assuming that leaders in reserved seats are never reelected
in the subsequent election, the maximum fraction of incumbent representatives that will
be elected for an additional term is 0.16. Consistent with these low rates of re-election,
only 14.8 percent of the ward representatives in our sample had held a panchayat position
before.
Previous studies; e.g. Banerjee and Pande (2010), Casey (2015), have used limited
information about candidate-quality to explain a role for ethnic groups in politics. In our
theory of local ethnic politics, there are no agency problems associated with asymmetric
information. Voters have complete information about candidates’ abilities and correctly
predict the effort they will exert if elected. Ethnicity matters because members of ethnic
groups can cooperate with each other, while at the same time excluding outsiders. The
consequence of this insider-outsider dichotomy is that the ethnic composition of the local
constituency (ward) determines who will be elected, the effort exerted by the elected representative, the accompanying supply of non-excludable public goods, and the distribution
of targetable welfare transfers.
9

Chattopadhyay and Duflo (2004) note that not a single woman in their sample of reserved constituencies
in the state of Rajasthan was elected in the subsequent term (without female reservation). Exposure can
change these priors, but Beaman et al. (2009) find that it takes two reserved election terms before an
increase in women elected in unreserved seats can be detected.
10
In our sample of ward-terms, 60 percent were open to all castes (see Table 2 below). With one-third of
the seats in all categories reserved for women, this implies that unreserved elections would occur 40 percent
of the time.

9

3

The Theory

3.1

Ethnic Groups and Public Resources

N individuals, belonging to K ethnic groups, reside in a political constituency. Each ethnic
group k consists of Nk individuals, such that

P

k

Nk = N and the k subscript sorts groups

by size; Nk−1 < Nk , ∀k. An ethnic group is defined as a set of individuals who interact
frequently with each other but very little with outsiders. Exclusion from these interactions
is an effective sanctioning device, which allows groups to support high levels of internal
cooperation. In the context of local politics, each group can, therefore, credibly commit to
compensate its representative ex post for his effort, conditional on being elected, even if he
holds office for a single term. The representative, in turn, will internalize the benefit that all
his co-ethnics derive from the public resources he provides. In contrast, he places no weight
on the benefit derived by outsiders because they cannot credibly commit to compensating
him in the same way.
The residents of the constituency receive two types of public resources: a non-excludable
public good and a targetable welfare transfer. All individuals derive the same utility from
these public resources. The literature on ethnic politics has focused on the targeting of
public goods to co-ethnics (the insiders) at the cost of outsiders. At the local level, which
is the focus of our analysis, a large component of public goods are non-excludable. The
analysis that follows will derive the relationship between the ethnic composition of the
constituency and the ability (and effort) of the selected representative, which will, in turn,
determine the supply of public goods that benefit both insiders and outsiders. It will,
in addition, examine how these relationships change when targetable welfare transfers are
included in the representative’s list of responsibilities.

3.2

Representative’s Effort and Candidate Ability

The constituency must select an unpaid representative from among its residents for a single
term. We ignore the welfare transfers to begin with, so the representative’s sole task is to
supply the public good to his constituents. The level of the public good will depend on the
amount of effort that he exerts. When choosing his level of effort, the representative will
take account of the cost of effort, which is decreasing in his ability, and the benefit derived
from the public good by his co-ethnics residing in the constituency. A representative with
ability ω belonging to group k of size Nk , will thus choose effort, e, to maximize
Nk eβ −

e
,
ω

where eβ is the level of the public good received in the constituency. While more effort
will obviously increase the supply of the good, β > 0, we assume that the return to effort
is decreasing at the margin, β < 1. In fact, we will need to place the stronger restriction
10

that β < 1/4. We assume, in addition, that the level of the public good maps linearly
into the utility derived from its consumption by each resident. We normalize so that this
mapping is one-for-one. The representative’s optimal level of effort can then be expressed
as an increasing function of his ability and the size of his group,
1

e(ω, Nk ) = (βωNk ) 1−β .

(1)

The level of effort when ethnicity is salient is greater than the benchmark where the representative only cares about himself (Nk would be replaced by one in the preceding equation)
but less than first-best (in which case Nk would be replaced by N ).
With ex post transfers, the ethnic group effectively operates as a unitary decisionmaking unit, putting forward as its candidate the individual who maximizes its overall
benefit from the public good net of his effort cost and the cost of the outside opportunities
he foregoes, which we assume to be increasing linearly in his ability to be consistent with
the specification of the effort cost. A group of size Nk will thus put forward the individual
with ability ω that maximizes
Nk [e(ω, Nk )]β −

e(ω, Nk )
− αω.
ω

(2)

Substituting the expression for e(ω, Nk ) from equation (1) and then maximizing with respect to ω, the candidate’s ability can be expressed as an increasing function of the size of
his group,11
1

βNk 1−2β
ω(Nk ) =
.
(3)
α1−β
Substituting this expression back in equation (1), his effort (conditional on being elected)




is also increasing in the size of his group
"

(βNk )2
e(Nk ) =
α

#

1
1−2β

.

(4)

It follows that representatives of larger groups will have higher ability and supply a higher
level of the public good. Substituting the expressions for ability and effort from equations
(3) and (4) in (2), the net benefit from public good provision is
β2
α

!

β
1−2β

1

Nk1−2β (1 − 2β),

(5)

which is strictly positive. Each group would prefer to put forward its own representative
to the default with no public good provision. The analysis that follows examines which
group’s representative will be selected in equilibrium.
11

This result is independent of the ability distribution, which could vary across groups. All that we
need for an interior solution is that the optimal ability level should lie within the support of the ability
distribution in each group and that an individual with that level of ability is present in the group. This will
be true if group sizes are large and there is sufficient heterogeneity in ability within groups.

11

3.3

Representative Selection and Public Good Provision

Elections are contestable. Each ethnic group in the constituency chooses whether or not to
put its preferred candidate up for election.12 The decision to stand is accompanied by an
entry cost, which is close to zero. The only role for this entry cost is to rule out equilibria
in which candidates with no chance of winning stand for election. After all groups have
simultaneously made their entry decision, the election takes place and the candidate with
the most votes is selected to represent the constituency for a single term.
If all ethnic groups fielded their preferred representatives as candidates, then the representative of the largest group would always be elected. Once we allow groups to decide
whether or not to field a candidate, however, this outcome will not necessarily be obtained.
In particular, the largest group could free-ride on a smaller group (and avoid bearing the
effort and opportunity cost of its own representative) if the level of the public good supplied
by the other group’s representative is sufficiently large.
Our first theoretical result describes the relationship between the size of the largest
group in the constituency and the size of the elected representative’s group, which, in turn,
maps into the representative’s ability and the supply of the public good. When deriving
this result, we exogenously vary the size of the largest group, NK , holding constant the
population in the constituency, N . We assume that the size of all other groups, Nj , j 6= K,
is weakly declining as NK increases to maintain the total population at a constant level.
The analysis considers the entire range of NK , or its population share equivalent, SK ≡
starting from the case where all groups in the constituency are of equal size,

N
K,

NK
N ,

and then

increasing NK up to the point where NK → N .
Although there is a continuous and positive relationship between the size of the elected
representative’s group and both the representative’s ability and the supply of public goods,
the relationship between the size of the largest group and these outcomes is characterized
by a discontinuity:
Proposition 1.There is a discrete increase in the ability of the selected representative and
the supply of the public good when the population share of the largest group, SK , reaches a
threshold, S ∗ .
To establish this result, we first characterize the relationship between the size of the
largest group and the size of the elected representative’s group, which is an endogenous
outcome of the electoral process. Because he supplies a higher level of the public good
than any other group’s representative, the representative of the largest group will certainly
be elected if his group puts him up as a candidate. His group will choose to do so if the
12

The electoral process is the same as the citizen-candidate models of Osborne and Slivinsky (1996) and
Besley and Coate (1997), except that groups put up their preferred candidates.

12

Incentive Condition is satisfied; i.e. if it prefers him to the representative of any other
group, despite having to bear his effort and opportunity cost.
For the incentive condition to be satisfied, the largest group must prefer its own representative to the next largest group’s representative. If this is the case, then it will certainly
prefer its own representative to any other (smaller) group’s representative. The required
condition is
NK e(NK )β −

e(NK )
− αω(NK ) ≥ NK e(NK−1 )β .
ω(NK )

(6)

Substituting from equations (3) and (4), the preceding inequality can be rewritten as,
NK

β2
α

!

β
1−2β



2β
1−2β

NK

2β
1−2β

(1 − 2β) − NK−1



≥ 0.

(7)

If this condition is satisfied, there is a unique equilibrium in which the largest group puts
forward its representative for election and no other group fields a candidate.13
When will the incentive condition (IC) be satisfied? This will depend on the ethnic
composition of the constituency; in particular, the population share of the largest group.
If all groups in the constituency are of equal size, N/K, then the term in square brackets
in inequality (7) will be negative (recall that β ∈ (0, 1/4) by assumption). If the largest
group accounts for almost the entire population, NK → N and NK−1 → 0, the term in
square brackets will reverse sign. Holding constant the population of the constituency, the
assumption is that the size of all other groups, including the next largest group, will decline
∗ or, equivalently,
as NK increases. By a continuity argument, there is thus a threshold NK
∗ /N , at which the inequality is just satisfied. Above
a threshold population share, S ∗ ≡ NK

the threshold, the largest group will always put its representative up for election.
Below that threshold, inequality (7) is not satisfied and there will be multiple equilibria.
Replacing NK−1 with a smaller sized group, there will be a group k for which inequality
(7) is just satisfied. Any strategy profile in which a group of size Nk ∈ (Nk , NK ] fields its
representative, while all other groups stay out, will be an equilibrium.14 Because any of
these groups could be selected in a given election, there will be a discontinuous increase
13
(i) The strategy profile in which no one contests, and the public good is not provided, is not an
equilibrium. Any group would be better off by deviating and fielding its representative, who would generate
a positive net benefit for the group – from expression (5) – once selected. (ii) Any strategy profile with
multiple candidates is not an equilibrium. Given the cost of entry, smaller groups (who are sure to lose)
would be better off not contesting. (iii) Any single-candidate strategy profile in which a group other than
the largest group fields its representative is not an equilibrium. The largest group will always deviate
and field its candidate if inequality (7) is satisfied. (iv) The proposed strategy profile is an equilibrium.
The largest group will not deviate because it receives a positive net benefit from having its representative
selected, which exceeds the default (with no public good provision) when no group fields a candidate. No
other (smaller) group wants to deviate and put forward a candidate because it would certainly lose the
contest, while having to bear the cost of entry.
14
(i) Because inequality (7) is not satisfied for group k, the largest group, K, will not deviate from this
equilibrium and put its candidate up for election. It follows that no group that is larger than k but smaller
than K will want to deviate. (ii) No group smaller than k will deviate because it will lose the election. (iii)
Group k will not deviate because it receives a positive net benefit from the public good.

13

in the size of the elected representative’s group when the population share of the largest
group just reaches the threshold, S ∗ .
Intra-group cooperation results in a positive and continuous relationship between a
group’s size and the ability of its preferred representative, from equation (3), as well as the
amount of the public good he supplies, from equation (4). Because the size of the elected
representative’s group increases discontinuously at a population share threshold, S ∗ , this
internal cooperation results in a discontinuous increase in both the elected representative’s
ability and the level of the public good at that threshold.

3.4

Adding Welfare Transfers

Local government representatives are often entrusted with the task of distributing welfare
transfers in addition to their primary function of supplying public goods. Let each beneficiary receive one unit of the transfer, which maps into its utility equivalent θ, and let the
constituency receive a fixed T units of the transfer. Unlike public goods, which are nonexcludable at the local level, these transfers can be targeted to the elected representative’s
ethnic group.15
We assume T < N , which ensures that the welfare transfers will be rationed. In
addition, we assume that T >

N
K.

We continue to assume that the size of all other groups,
N
K to N , to maintain the total
N
(0, K
] and so the welfare transfers

Nj , j 6= K, is weakly declining as NK increases from
population at a constant level. This implies that Nj ∈

will not be completely captured by the insiders when the representative of any group other
than the largest group is elected. When the representative of the largest group is elected,
outsiders will be completely excluded from the welfare transfers for NK ∈ [T, N ).
A representative belonging to a group of size Nk < T will first ensure that each member
of his group receives the transfer, randomly allocating the remaining T − Nk units to the
N − Nk outsiders in his constituency. The probability that an outsider will receive the
welfare transfer,

T −Nk
N −Nk ,

is thus decreasing in Nk . While a larger group’s representative

supplies a higher level of public goods, the opposing force we have now introduced is that
outsiders are worse off with respect to the transfer when a large group is in power. In
the extreme case, as noted above, outsiders will be completely excluded from the welfare
transfers when the largest group is in power and NK ≥ T . A given ethnic group will
continue to put forward the same (most preferred) representative and that representative
will continue to exert the same level of effort and supply the same level of the public good
if elected. What changes is which group gets elected, and this changes the ability of the
15
In practice, the transfers are intended for economically or socially disadvantaged individuals. This
feature of the transfer mechanism could be easily incorporated in the model, without changing the results
that follow, by assuming that a fraction of non-eligible insiders receive the transfers and that the transfers
that remain are randomly allocated to eligible outsiders.

14

selected representative and the supply of the public good in equilibrium.16
When deriving Proposition 1, we noted that the largest group would want its representative to be elected if the incentive condition (IC) was satisfied. Once welfare transfers are
introduced, the incentive condition will be easier to satisfy because free-riding on a smaller
group is less attractive. As derived formally below, the population share at which the incentive condition just binds for the largest group will decline from S ∗ to a lower threshold,
S ∗∗ . While the largest group now has a greater incentive to have its representative elected,
an additional Feasibility Condition (FC) must also be satisfied to ensure that its representative is elected when his group does not have an absolute majority. For this condition to
be satisfied, the largest group’s candidate must be preferred to any other group’s candidate
by voters belonging to neither of those groups.
Without welfare transfers, the feasibility condition is always satisfied because the largest
group’s representative supplies a higher level of the non-excludable public good than any
other group’s representative. With welfare transfers, this need not be the case because
the largest group’s representative is the least preferred representative with respect to the
delivery of welfare transfers to outsiders. We show that the feasibility condition will still be
N
, N ), or its population share equivalent,
satisfied for some, but not all, values of NK ∈ [ K

SK ≡

NK
N

under conditions specified below. In particular, we show that there is a unique

S F , such that the feasibility condition is satisfied for SK ≤ S F , but not for SK > S F .
In light of the preceding discussion, adding targetable welfare transfers to the representative’s list of responsibilities will change which group gets elected, and the accompanying
supply of public goods in the following way: If the feasibility condition is satisfied for the
largest group, then the threshold at which its representative gets selected will shift down.
The reduced incentive to free-ride on other groups thus leads to an increase in the overall
supply of the public good. In contrast, if the feasibility condition is not satisfied due to
the crowding-out effect of the welfare transfers, then the representative of the largest group
will only be elected when it has an absolute majority. The threshold will now shift up,
resulting in an overall decline in the supply of the public good. We prove formally that
Proposition 2.(a) If S ∗∗ > 0.5, or if S ∗∗ < 0.5 but the feasibility condition continues to
be satisfied for the largest group; i.e. S ∗∗ < S F , then there will be a discontinuous increase
in the ability of the selected representative and the supply of the public good at a threshold
population share, S ∗∗ , which is lower than the threshold without welfare transfers, S ∗ . (b) If
S ∗∗ < 0.5 and the feasibility condition is not satisfied for the largest group; i.e. S ∗∗ > S F ,
then the discontinuous increase in the representative’s ability and the supply of the public
16
An ethnic group could put forward a candidate whose ability is higher than its most preferred representative as a way of getting elected and subsequently capturing the welfare transfers. This strategy is not
credible if other members of the group, in particular the preferred representative, can function as proxies
for the candidate once he is elected.

15

good will only occur when the largest group has an absolute majority; i.e. at a population
share of 0.5.
To prove the proposition, we begin by establishing that the population share at which
the incentive condition (IC) is just satisfied for the largest group declines when welfare
transfers are added to the representative’s list of responsibilities; i.e. S ∗∗ < S ∗ . Inequality
(7) characterizes the condition under which the IC is satisfied with respect to the next
largest group when welfare transfers are absent. The reason why we focused on the next to
largest group is because the IC condition was satisfied with respect to any other (smaller)
group if it was satisfied for that group. Once welfare transfers are introduced, this is not
necessarily true and the IC condition must be examined with respect to each group. The
largest group will prefer its representative to the representative of another group j 6= K if
NK

β2
α

!

β
1−2β



2β
1−2β

NK

2β
1−2β

(1 − 2β) − Nj

"



+ θNK

T
min 1,
NK




−

T − Nj
N − Nj

!#

≥ 0. (8)

The second term in square brackets in inequality (8) characterizes the gain to the largest
group, with respect to the welfare transfers, from having its representative selected. When
its representative is selected, each member of the largest group receives the transfer with
probability one when NK ≤ T and probability

T
NK

when NK > T . When the representative

belongs to another group j, the probability that a member of the largest group receives
a transfer,

T −Nj
N −Nj ,

is less than

T
N,

which, in turn, is less than

T 17
NK .

The second term in

square brackets is thus always positive.
Applying the same argument that we used to prove Proposition 1, the first term in
square brackets is negative when all groups are of equal size, NK = Nj =

N
K,

positive

when NK → N and Nj → 0, and increasing in NK (as Nj declines). This implies that
∗ (N ) at which the first term in square brackets is exactly zero.
there is a group size NK
j

With welfare transfers, once the positive second term in square brackets is introduced, it
∗∗ (N ), must be less
follows that the group size at which inequality (8) is just satisfied, NK
j
∗ (N ), ∀j. The incentive condition must be satisfied for all j; N ∗ = max N ∗ (N ),
than NK
j
j K
j
K
∗∗ = max N ∗∗ (N ). It follows that N ∗∗ < N ∗ .18 In terms of the equivalent population
NK
j K
j
K
K

shares, this implies that S ∗∗ < S ∗ .
If S ∗∗ ≥ 0.5, the feasibility condition is irrelevant. The representative of the largest
group will be selected, regardless of his outside support, when its population share reaches
S ∗∗ because it has an absolute majority. If S ∗∗ < 0.5, then the feasibility condition must
17

Note that group j never captures all of the transfers, unlike group K, because we have assumed that
N
N
and Nj ∈ (0, K
].
K
18
Without transfers, the incentive condition for the largest group is most difficult to satisfy with respect
∗
∗
to the next largest group; maxj NK
(Nj ) = NK
(NK−1 ). With welfare transfers, the additional second term
∗∗
∗∗
in square brackets in inequality (8) is increasing in Nj and so maxj NK
(Nj ) is not necessarily NK
(NK−1 ).
∗∗
∗
∗∗
∗
Nevertheless, as long as NK
(Nj ) < NK
(Nj ), ∀j, it follows that maxj NK
(Nj ) < maxj NK
(Nj ).

T >

16

also be satisfied to ensure that the representative of the largest group is elected. The
required condition is that the representative of the largest group must be preferred to the
representative of any other group, j 6= K, by an individual belonging to neither of those
groups,

 ( "
! β

#)
2β
2β 
 β 2 1−2β 
T − NK
T − Nj
1−2β
1−2β
NK
− max
,0
≥ 0.
− Nj
− θ

 α
N − Nj
N − NK

(9)

The first term in curly brackets in the preceding inequality, which we denote by P G,
characterizes the advantage of selecting the largest group’s representative with respect to
the supply of public goods. P G is always positive because representatives of larger groups
supply more public goods. The second term in curly brackets, which we denote by W T ,
characterizes the accompanying disadvantage with respect to the receipt of welfare transfers.
The probability that an outsider will receive a transfer when group j’s representative is in
power,

T −Nj
N −Nj ,

is decreasing in Nj . It follows that W T is always positive because Nj < NK ,

∀j.19
If P G ≥ W T , then the feasibility condition is satisfied. The discussion that follows
examines this condition as the size of the largest group, NK , varies from

N
K

to N . We retain

the assumption that the size of all other groups, Nj , j 6= K, declines as NK increases, to
keep the population N constant. It is straightforward to verify, from inequality (9), that
P G = W T = 0 when all groups are of equal size; i.e. NK = Nj =

N
K.

As shown in

the Appendix, both P G and W T are monotonically increasing in NK (Nj ). Given the
assumption that β ∈ (0, 1/4), we show that P G is initially a concave function of NK (Nj )
and, subsequently, past a point of inflexion N I (Nj ), a convex function of NK (Nj ). In
contrast, W T is a convex function of NK (Nj ) for NK ≤ T and a concave function of
NK (Nj ) for NK > T . The following conditions ensure that the two functions cross at least
once.
C1. P G0 (NK (Nj )) > W T 0 (NK (Nj )) as NK (Nj ) →

N
K.

C2. W T (NK (Nj ) > P G(NK (Nj ) as NK (Nj ) → N .
We can establish, in addition, that there is a unique point of intersection, N F (Nj ).
The proof of uniqueness is by contradiction. Suppose that there are multiple points of
intersection. Given that the P G function starts above the W T function as NK (Nj ) →

N
K

and ends below it at NK (Nj ) → N , there must then be at least three points of intersection.
This implies that there must be at least three values of NK (Nj ) for which P G0 (NK (Nj )) =
W T 0 (NK (Nj )). Given the properties of the P G and W T functions, as described above,
P G0 (NK (Nj )) is monotonically decreasing in NK (Nj ) for NK (Nj ) ≤ N I (Nj ) and monotonically increasing in NK (Nj ) for NK (Nj ) > N I (Nj ). In contrast, W T 0 (NK (Nj )) is mono19

For NK ≥ T , outsiders receive no transfers when the representative belongs to the largest group. In
T −N
that case, W T = θ N −Njj > 0.

17

tonically increasing in NK (Nj ) for NK (Nj ) ≤ T and monotonically decreasing in NK (Nj )
for NK (Nj ) > T . Based on this characterization of P G0 (NK (Nj )), W T 0 (NK (Nj )), it is
evident that these functions can intersect at most twice; i.e. there are at most two values
of NK (Nj ) for which P G0 (NK (Nj )) = W T 0 (NK (Nj )), which is a contradiction.
Based on the preceding discussion, P G ≥ W T and the feasibility condition is satisfied for NK (Nj ) ≤ N F (Nj ). P G < W T and the feasibility condition is not satisfied for
NK (Nj ) > N F (Nj ). The feasibility condition must be satisfied with respect to all j, hence,
N F = minj N F (Nj ). The equivalent population share threshold is S F ≡

NF
N

. If S ∗∗ < S F ,

then the threshold at which the representative’s ability and the supply of public goods
increase discontinuously is located at S ∗∗ . If S ∗∗ > S F , then the threshold will be located
at 0.5; i.e. only when the largest group has an absolute majority, because the feasibility
condition (for all j) will not be satisfied for any SK > S F .
The theory incorporates the positive and the negative aspects of ethnic politics. If the
threshold at which there is a discontinuous increase in the elected representative’s ability
and the supply of the public good is located at 0.5, this will allow us to empirically identify
both these aspects. As noted, the discontinuous gain when the population share of the
largest group crosses a threshold is indicative of underlying cooperation within groups.
The fact that the largest group’s representative is only elected when it has an absolute
majority, despite the fact that he will provide a higher level of the non-excludable public
good, is indicative of targeting (of welfare transfers) to insiders, at the expense of outsiders.

4

The Data

The data that we use are unique in their geographic scope and detail. They are from
the 2006 Rural Economic and Development Survey (REDS), the most recent round of a
nationally representative survey of rural Indian households first carried out in 1968. The
2006 REDS covers 242 of the original 259 villages in 17 major states of India. We make
use of three components of the survey data - the village census, the village inventory, and
the household survey - for 13 states in which there were ward-based elections and complete
data in all components.20 The census obtained information on all households in each of the
sampled villages, by ward. This enables us to measure the population share of each caste
in each ward.21 The village inventory was designed, in part, to specifically assess models
20

The states are Andhra Pradesh, Bihar, Chhattisgarh, Gujarat, Haryana, Himachal Pradesh, Karnataka,
Kerala, Madhya Pradesh, Maharashtra, Orissa, Rajastan, Tamil Nadu, Uttar Pradesh, and West Bengal.
Punjab and Jharkhand did not have any ward-based elections and the election data are not available for
Gujarat and Kerala.
21
A caste group is any set of households within a village reporting the same (sub) caste name. Christian
households provided their original caste names and Muslim households provided their equivalent biradari
affiliation. Most Christians continue to marry within their original caste group. We counted Muslim
households within a village that were without a formal biradari name as a unique caste. On average, there
are seven wards per village, 67 households per ward, and six castes per ward.

18

of public goods delivery, collecting information on the characteristics of the elected ward
representatives and public good provision, at the street level, in each ward in each of the
last three panchayat election terms prior to the survey. The household survey, administered
to a sample of households in each REDS village, records participation in programs intended
for households below the poverty line (BPL) in each of the last three election terms.
The theory relates the ethnic composition of the constituency, which we measure by
the caste composition of the ward, to the supply of public goods. However, ethnic (caste)
composition could also determine the demand for public goods. To disentangle the supply effect from the demand effect, we take advantage of the panel data on elections and
randomized caste reservation in Indian local governments, which exogenously changes the
composition of castes that are eligible to stand for election in the ward from one election to
the next. This variation in the (eligible) caste composition over time allows us to subsume
all permanent characteristics of the ward, including the demand for public goods by the
electorate, in a fixed effect.22
The specific prediction of the theory is that there will be a discontinuous increase in the
ability of elected representatives and the supply of the public good when the population
share of the largest ethnic group (caste) crosses a threshold level. Once we include ward
fixed effects, the prediction is that this discontinuous change will occur when the population
share of the most numerous eligible caste crossed a threshold level. To implement this test,
there needs to be sufficient variation in the population share statistic within wards over
election terms. As noted, ward elections are reserved for Scheduled Castes (SC), Scheduled
Tribes (ST), and Other Backward Castes (OBC) in proportion to the share of these groups
in the population at the district level. Among the ward-terms in our sample, 11 percent
were reserved for Scheduled Castes, 6 percent were reserved for Scheduled Tribes, and
23 percent were reserved for Other Backward Castes. Panel A of Table 2 describes the
share of the most numerous eligible caste in the ward by type of election. These shares
are generally quite large, even in reserved elections, reflecting the fact that neighborhoods
in rural India are often dominated by a single caste. Nevertheless, there is substantial
variation in population shares within and across reservation categories.
Panel B of Table 2 displays the fraction of ward-terms in which the share of the most
numerous eligible caste exceeds alternative pre-specified cutoffs, by the type of reservation.
Matching the descriptive statistics in Panel A, the proportion of elections in which the
cutoff is exceeded is largest for unreserved elections, followed by elections in which the
22

The implicit assumption when we include the ward fixed effect is that the population of the ward, or the
electorate, remains essentially unchanged over time. This is a reasonable assumption given the unusually low
spatial mobility that is characteristic of rural India. Munshi and Rosenzweig (forthcoming), for example,
report that permanent migration rates of men aged 20-30 out of their origin villages were as low as 8.7
percent in 1999. The corresponding rates for entire households would be much lower. Indeed, the census
listing data indicate that since 1991 when the local electoral system was put in place, less than 3 percent of
new households had migrated into the sample villages.

19

ward candidates are restricted to ST, OBC, and SC in that order, regardless of the cutoff
that is specified. Just as the likelihood that any pre-specified cutoff is crossed varies across
different reservation schemes in Table 2, there will be variation in the likelihood that the
threshold will be crossed from one term to the next within a ward as the type of reservation
changes. It is possible that the pool of potential candidates will be weaker in reserved
(lower caste) elections. All the regression specifications in this paper consequently include
a full set of reservation dummies in addition to ward fixed effects.
The village inventory obtained information on whether new construction or maintenance
of specific public goods actually took place on each street in the village for each term.
These local public goods include drinking water, sanitation, improved roads, electricity,
street lights, and public telephones as well as schools, health and family planning centers,
and irrigation facilities. The survey was designed to permit the mapping of street-level
information into wards so that public goods expenditures can be allocated to each ward, and
its constituents, for each election term. Ninety-five percent of the wards have information
for at least two election terms. Our analysis focuses on six goods for which the benefits
have a significant local and spatial component; i.e., goods for which placement in the ward
is desirable. The goods are: drinking water, sanitation, improved roads, electricity, street
lights, and public telephones.23 These six goods account for 15.2 percent of all local public
spending, which is four times the amount spent on schools and health facilities.24 Appendix
Table A1 reports the fraction of households in the ward that received each public good,
averaged across wards and election terms, by type of reservation. It is apparent that a large
fraction of households benefited directly from expenditures on water, roads, and sanitation,
while a much smaller fraction benefited, in any term, from expenditures on electricity, street
lights, and public telephones. Our measure of overall public good provision at the street
level will be the fraction of the six major public goods that are received in a given election
term. The corresponding ward statistic, which we use to test the theory, will be the
population-weighted average of the street-level statistic.
The ability of the elected ward representative is measured by his years of schooling.
Education provides many of the skills that are associated with political competence and
is likely to be positively correlated with innate ability to the extent that there is positive
selection into schooling. The village inventory includes a special module that collected
information on the education of the elected representative from each ward in each of the
last three election terms. Educational attainment of the elected ward representative is
23

Public irrigation investments or school buildings, for example, are valued local public goods whose
placement within the ward (defined by place of residence) may not be desirable.
24
Key informants in the village were asked to rank 12 issues, by importance, that came under the purview
of the elected panchayat. Inadequate roads and drinking water were ranked 1 and 2, followed by health,
schooling, sanitation, street lights and electrification. Note that the low spending on health and education
and the relatively low level of importance assigned to these goods by the key informants reflects the fact
that they are largely allocated at the state level and so fall outside the purview of the village panchayat.

20

measured in four categories – illiterate, primary graduate, secondary graduate, and postsecondary graduate – which we convert into years of schooling.25 The theory predicts that
representatives will be positively selected on ability, particularly when they belong to larger
groups. Table 3 provides preliminary evidence of this selection by comparing the average
educational attainment of elected representatives and representative (median) individuals
in the ward, separately by reservation category. The median education of household heads
in each ward, by reservation category, is computed from the household census and then
averaged across wards. Since 95% of household heads are male, we report average educational attainment separately for male and female representatives. Male representatives
have substantially higher schooling than the median household head in all reservation categories. Highlighting the positive selection that we document, even female representatives
have higher schooling than the median household head in SC and OBC elections, despite
the fact that female education is much lower than male education in rural India.26

5

Testing the Theory

5.1

Descriptive Evidence

The theory indicates that the elected representative’s ability and the supply of the public
good will increase discontinuously when the population share of the largest eligible caste
in the ward crosses a threshold level. We semi-parametrically examine the relationship between the population share and each of the outcomes by estimating the following equation:
yjt = φ(Sjt ) + Xjt γ + ζjt ,

(10)

where Sjt is the population share of the largest eligible caste in ward j and election term
t; yjt is either the elected representative’s ability, measured by educational attainment, or
the supply of public goods, measured by the fraction of the six major public goods received
by the ward in that term; Xjt is a vector of additional regressors including a full set of
ward and reservation dummies, election-term dummies, and the election year; and ζjt is a
mean-zero disturbance term.
We estimate the relationship between yjt and Sjt in two steps. In the first step, we
partial out the additional regressors, Xjt , by estimating an equation that replaces the φ(Sjt )
function with a vector of dummy variables. There are five dummy variables, partitioning
Sjt ∈ [0, 1] into six intervals, in the benchmark specification.27 We discuss the robustness
25

Years of schooling are imputed by assigning 4 years of schooling to primary graduates, 10 years of
schooling to secondary graduates, and 14 years of schooling to post-secondary graduates.
26
We do not distinguish between male and female representatives when testing the theory below. Female
reservation is independent of the reservation by caste that generates variation in the size of the largest
eligible caste over time, and thus can be ignored in the analysis.
27
The dummy variables, D1jt − D5jt are indicator variables that take the value one if Sjt ∈
(0.2, 0.35], (0.35, 0.5], (0.5, 0.65], (0.8, 1.0], respectively. The reference category is Sjt ∈ [0, 0.2].

21

of the results to alternative specifications of the φ(Sjt ) function below.
The estimated γ vector from the first step can be used to construct the conditional
outcome, ỹjt ≡ yjt − (Xjt − X jt )γ̂, where the sample average of each additional regressor,
X jt , is included to preserve the mean of the outcome. In the second step, ỹjt is regressed
nonparametrically on Sjt :
ỹjt = φ(Sjt ) + ζjt .

(11)

Figure 3 reports nonparametric estimates of equation (11), using the two-step procedure,
with the elected representative’s education and the fraction of the six major public goods
received in each ward-term as outcomes.28 The representative’s education and public good
provision both increase (discontinuously) at a population share of 0.4, and continue to
increase till 0.6, in Figure 3. Although the increase at the threshold is very steep, it is not
vertical. We will see momentarily that this is an artifact of the estimation procedure, which
uses a local polynomial smoother. Notice that the two variables track closely over the entire
range of population shares, highlighting the close relationship between the representative’s
ability and public good provision that is an important feature of our theory.

5.2

Locating a Threshold

The descriptive evidence indicates that there is a discontinuous increase in the representative’s ability and the supply of the public good when the population share of the most
numerous caste reaches a threshold level. We now proceed to formally test for the presence of a threshold, place statistical bounds on its location, and estimate the gain in the
representative’s ability and the supply of public goods at the threshold. The gain at a
threshold population share is most parsimoniously described by a threshold function. We
thus follow standard practice; e.g. Hansen (1999), to estimate the following equation at
different hypothesized thresholds, S:
ỹjt = π1 + π2 Djt + jt ,

(12)

where ỹjt is the conditional outcome in ward j in term t; Djt is an indicator variable that
takes the value one if the population share of the largest eligible caste exceeds S; and jt
is a mean-zero disturbance term.
Suppose that the data-generating process for ỹjt is characterized by a step function,
as in equation (12), with the true threshold at S. If we use Least Squares to estimate
equation (12), and the range of hypothesized thresholds, S ∈ [Smin , Smax ], is wide enough
28

These estimates, and the tests of the theory that follow, restrict the sample of wards to those with more
than one caste and more than one street (this will allow us to test, and reject, the spatial targeting of public
goods below). Outlying ward-terms in the top 1% of the public goods expenditure distribution are also
excluded. The theory implicitly assumes that there is a large number of individuals in each ethnic group,
which allows it to select its optimal representative. Because the theory is consequently more accurately
tested in large wards, we weight both the first-step and the second-step regressions by the ward population.

22

to cover the true threshold, then the Residual Sum of Squares (RSS) will be minimized
when the hypothesized threshold is precisely S. However, when testing our theory, we are
also interesting in determining whether or not the data-generating process is characterized
by a threshold (step function). As described below, this can be done by examining the
pattern of the Residual Sum of Squares across the entire range of hypothesized thresholds.
When the data generating process is characterized by a step function, the RSS will increase
steeply as the hypothesized threshold moves away from the value at which the RSS is
minimized (this will be the true threshold). If the data generating process is characterized
by a smoothly increasing function instead, there will still be a hypothesized threshold at
which the RSS is minimized. However, the RSS will now change relatively little with other
hypothesized thresholds.
Hansen (1999) formalizes this argument by constructing a likelihood ratio statistic,
LR(S) =

RSS(S) − RSS(Ŝ)
RSS(Ŝ)

· N,

which is simply a normalization of the Residual Sum of Squares statistic, RSS(S), based
on its minimum value, RSS(Ŝ), and the number of observations, N . The advantage of this
statistic is that its asymptotic distribution can be derived. Thus, while the LR statistic will
attain its minimum value, which is zero by construction, at the same assumed threshold, Ŝ,
where the RSS statistic is minimized, the additional advantage is that we can place bounds
on the location of the true threshold with any pre-specified level of statistical confidence,
say 95% or 99%. If the bounds are tight, the data generating process is likely to be
characterized by a discontinuity at a threshold.
To illustrate how Hansen’s LR statistic can be used to both identify the presence of
a threshold and to pin down its location, we generated a data set that consists of three
variables: the population share of the largest eligible caste in our ward-terms, a variable,
VS , that is constructed to be consistent with equation (12), with the threshold set at
0.5, and a variable, VL , that is increasing linearly in the population share. The variables
are constructed to have the same mean and we add a mean-zero noise term (with the
same variance) to both variables. Figure 4 nonparametrically estimates the relationship
between each variable and the population share. The VS variable, which is constructed to
increase discontinuously (and vertically) at a population share of 0.5, actually exhibits an
increase from around 0.4 that continues until 0.6. This is precisely what we observed for
the conditional outcomes in Figure 3, and is due to the local polynomial smoother that we
use for the estimation and the noise we have added to the VS variable. Nevertheless, there
is clearly a discontinuous relationship between this variable and the population share that
contrasts with the VL variable, which is increasing continuously in the population share.
The test that we describe below will pin down the threshold for the VS variable at precisely
0.5.
23

Figure 5 plots the LR(S) statistic for hypothesized thresholds, S ∈ [0.25, 0.75] in increments of 0.001.29 This statistic reaches its minimum value, which we noted is zero by
construction, when the hypothesized threshold, S is equal to 0.5 with the VS variable. It
increases steeply as the hypothesized threshold moves away (on either side) from 0.5. In
contrast, the LR(S) statistic for the VL variable changes very little over the entire range of
hypothesized thresholds. The horizontal line in Figure 5, which is the 1% Critical Value,
allows us to bound the location of the threshold for each variable with 99% confidence.
Consistent with the preceding discussion, the bounds are very tight for the VS variable,
whereas the LR(S) statistic always lies below the Critical Value line for the VL variable.
We now proceed to apply the same procedure to the REDS data. We test formally
for the presence of a threshold with the two outcomes – the representative’s education
and public good provision – after partialling out the additional regressors, as before. The
benchmark specification uses equation (12) to locate a threshold, with the hypothesized
thresholds ranging from 0.25 to 0.75 (in increments of 0.001). The Likelihood Ratio (LR)
statistic corresponding to each hypothesized threshold is plotted in Figure 6, separately for
each outcome. The LR statistic reaches its minimum value, which is zero by construction,
at a hypothesized threshold of 0.5 for both outcomes. Variation in the LR statistic across
the range of hypothesized thresholds in Figure 6 matches closely with the pattern for
the VS variable in Figure 5, which was constructed to increase vertically at a population
share of 0.5. The Critical Value (CV) line bounds the location of the threshold, and as in
Figure 5, the true threshold is located very close to 0.5 with 99% confidence for both the
representative’s education and public good provision.
Recall that the φ(Sjt ) function in equation (10) is approximated by a vector of five
dummy variables in step one of the two-step procedure (where we partial out the additional regressors in the equation). Figures 7 and 8 assess the robustness of the results to
alternative specifications of the φ(Sjt ) function. One alternative specification approximates
the φ(Sjt ) function by a vector of 13 dummy variables, partitioning Sjt ∈ [0, 1] more finely
into 14 intervals. A second specification approximates the φ(Sjt ) function by a quintic
polynomial in Sjt . Partialling out the additional regressors in the first step, using each
of these alternative specifications, Figure 7 reports the corresponding second-step relationships between (conditional) public good provision and the population share of the largest
eligible caste. The estimated relationships are very similar to what we obtained with the
benchmark specification for the φ(Sjt ) function in Figure 3. Threshold tests, reported in
Figure 8, locate the threshold close to 0.5, with a high degree of precision, particularly for
the specification where Sjt is partitioned more finely.
Although the theory indicates that there will be a discontinuous increase in the repre29

Andrews (1993) shows that the search for a minimum value must be restricted to a subset of the unit
interval for tests of a structural break to have sufficient power.

24

sentative’s ability and the supply of public goods at a threshold, it is not informative about
the relationship between these outcomes and the population share of the largest eligible
group below the threshold (where there are multiple equilibria). When we specify a step
function in equation (12) to test for a threshold, we are implicitly assuming that there
is no relationship between either outcome and the population share below the threshold.
We are also ignoring the possibility that both the representative’s ability and the supply
of public goods could be increasing in population share above the threshold (where the
largest group is always in power). Figure 9 assesses the robustness of the threshold test
to a flexible specification of equation (12) that allows for a linear relationship between the
outcome and the population share below the threshold, a mean-shift at the threshold, and a
linear relationship (with a possibly different slope and sign) above the threshold. Including
the benchmark test based on equation (12) for comparison, we see in Figure 9 that greater
flexibility increases the precision of the threshold test, while maintaining the estimated
location of the threshold at 0.5.

5.3

Gain at the Threshold

In our theory, intra-group cooperation generates a continuous and positive relationship
between the size of the elected representative’s group and both the representative’s ability
and the supply of public goods he would provide. This translates into a discontinuous
increase in both outcomes at a threshold when the relationship is derived, instead, in
terms of the population share of the largest (eligible) group. Having precisely located the
threshold at 0.5 for both the representative’s ability (education) and the supply of public
goods, we proceed to estimate the following equation for each outcome:
yjt = λ1 + λ2 Djt + Xjt γ + ζjt ,

(13)

where Djt is an indicator variable that takes the value one if the population share of the
largest eligible caste exceeds 0.5 and the remaining variables were defined earlier in equation
(10).
Ward representatives operate independently in our theory. In practice, the level of
public goods received in a ward is determined by a collective decision-making process that
involves all the ward representatives and the panchayat president. Although the political
equilibrium in the ward; i.e. whether Djt is equal to zero or one, continues to matter, the
equilibrium in other wards, D−jt , will also be relevant to the extent that there is a fixed
component to the total resources available in the panchayat. Note, however, that random
and independent reservation in elections across wards and for the president’s position implies that changes in Djt will be orthogonal to changes in D−jt . Because ward fixed effects
are included in Xjt , this implies that D−jt can be subsumed in the ζjt term in equation

25

(13) without affecting the consistency of the λ2 estimate.30
Table 4 reports estimation results with the supply of public goods and the elected
representative’s education as dependent variables. The mean-shift coefficient, λ2 , is positive
and significant for each outcome. Our estimates indicate that there is a 13 percent increase
in the supply of the public good and a 54 percent increase in the educational attainment of
the elected representative at the threshold. As noted, this increase at a threshold population
share is indicative of the internal cooperation that characterizes one side of our theory of
local ethnic politics.31
In our theory, larger ethnic groups select more competent representatives, measured by
their educational attainment, because a larger number of co-ethnics benefit from the nonexcludable public good. An alternative explanation for the increase in the representative’s
ability when the largest group has an absolute majority is that larger groups are more
educated on average. We assess the validity of this explanation by separately estimating
the relationship between the 25th , 50th , and 75th percentiles of the education distribution
for each caste in each ward, obtained from the household census, on the size of the caste in
the ward. Nonparametric estimates of these relationships, reported in Figure 10, indicate
that there is a mild decline in educational attainment with group size. Moreover, there is no
evidence of a threshold in Figure 11. The sharp increase in the educational attainment of the
ward representative that we observe in Figure 3, and formally identify as a structural break
at a threshold population share in Figure 6, is evidently due to the systematic selection of
more competent representatives by larger groups (castes).

5.4

Targeting

The location of the threshold at 0.5, despite the fact that the representative of the largest
group delivers a substantially higher level of the public good to the ward, is indicative of
the exclusionary side of ethnic politics. Our theory highlights how the ability to target welfare transfers reduces the attractiveness of candidates from larger groups. To test directly
for the existence of targeting, we examine the receipt of Below the Poverty Line (BPL)
transfers by households in our sample villages. These transfers are meant to be received
by economically disadvantaged households, but it is well known and well documented (for
example, by Besley, Pande, and Rao 2007, and Bardhan and Mookherjee 2010) that ineligible households who are politically connected can also benefit from them. Information on
whether a household received a BPL transfer, in each of the last three election terms, is
30

We must still account for the correlation in ζjt across wards in a given election term (due to the overlap
in D−jt across wards) and we do this by clustering the residuals in equation (13) at the panchayat-term
level.
31
It is highly unlikely that ward representatives are operating on behalf of a small elite in their caste,
rather than the entire group, as we assume. If that were the case, the education of the representative and
the supply of public goods would not increase discontinuously when the population share of the entire caste
crossed a threshold.

26

obtained from the detailed survey that is administered to a sample of households in each
REDS village.
In our theory, there is a fixed amount of transfer resources, which the representative
allocates first to his own group (the insiders) and then to outsiders. If the total amount of
transfers is fixed, as assumed, then we should observe no relationship between the fraction
of the ward that receives BPL transfers and the population share of the largest eligible
caste. Figure 12 uses the two-step procedure described above to show the relationship
between the population share of the largest eligible caste and both BPL transfers and
public good provision at the ward-term level (as a basis for comparison). We see in the
figure that there is no relationship between BPL transfers and the population share in the
range where the transfers could affect the supply of public goods; i.e. up to the point where
the largest group has an absolute majority and comes to power with certainty. Formal tests
for a threshold in Figure 13, moreover, find no evidence of a threshold for BPL transfers,
in contrast to what we observe for public goods.
Is there evidence of BPL targeting in the ward along caste lines? To answer this
question, we estimate the following equation using the survey data:
BP Lijt = η1 RCijt + η2 RNjt + Zijt δ + ξijt ,

(14)

where the dependent variable is an indicator that takes the value one if household i receives
a BPL transfer in ward j in term t; RCijt is a binary variable indicating whether or not
the ward representative in that term belongs to the household’s caste; RNjt measures the
number of households belonging to the representative’s caste in the ward; Zijt is a vector of
additional regressors that includes household fixed effects, reservation dummies, electionterm dummies, and the election year; and ξijt is a mean-zero disturbance term. The sample
is restricted to the 35% of ward-terms for which information on the ward representative’s
caste is available from the village inventory and can be matched to castes in the ward
(based on the village census).
The conditional (fixed effects) logit model is used to estimate equation (14) because the
mean of the dependent variable is far from 0.5.32 The coefficient on the representative’s
caste in Table 5, Column 1 is positive and significant. Because household fixed effects are
included in the regression, the interpretation of this result is that a household is more likely
to receive a BPL transfer when it shifts from being an outsider to an insider; i.e. when
the ward representative belongs to its own caste. This is directly indicative of targeting to
insiders, at the expense of outsiders. However, the probability of receiving a BPL transfer
does not appear to depend on the size of the representative’s caste.33
32

As with the ward-level regressions, the sample is restricted to wards with more than one caste and more
than one street. Outlying ward-terms in the top 1 % of the public goods expenditure distribution are also
excluded. Standard errors are clustered at the ward level.
33
This result is consistent with our theory. Let the number of insiders be NI and the number of outsiders be

27

A major virtue of the threshold test implemented above, and our estimates of the meanshift at the estimated threshold, is that they are based on the population share of the largest
eligible caste. This share changes exogenously within the ward across election terms due to
random caste reservation. In contrast, the caste identity of the elected representative and
the size of his group, which we include as regressors in Table 5 are endogenous outcomes of
the electoral process. Once household fixed effects are included, the threat to identification
is that RCijt and RNjt proxy for unobserved changes in the household’s BPL status.
Suppose, for example, that castes with a greater fraction of households below the poverty
line put more effort into getting their representative elected. Then belonging to the representative’s caste is an indicator of adverse economic circumstances, and the η1 coefficient
will be biased upward if current economic conditions are omitted from the regression. Note
that the over-representation of poorer castes will not be observed if there is no targeting
to begin with, since the caste would not benefit from having its own representative elected.
Thus, a spurious correlation will not be generated if there is no targeting. We are primarily
interested in identifying the presence of caste-based targeting, and this is still accomplished
by testing (and rejecting) the hypothesis that η1 = 0 in equation (14).
If the entire ward faces a negative economic shock, then the demand for BPL transfers
will increase in the electorate. The representative of a large group will be relatively unpopular in this environment because his group crowds out other castes. Representatives of
large castes are thus less likely to be elected when (unobserved) economic conditions are
unfavorable, biasing the η2 coefficient downward. This explains the negative coefficient on
the RNjt variable in equation (14), although it is not statistically significant at conventional
levels.
Our theory indicates that for outsiders the larger the size of the representative’s caste,
the lower should be the probability of receiving BPL transfers. To test this, we allow the
size of the representative’s caste to affect insiders and outsiders separately by adding an
interaction term to equation (14):
BP Lijt = η1 RCijt + η2 RNjt + η3 RCijt ∗ RNjt + Zijt δ + ξijt .

(15)

The η2 coefficient now provides an estimate of how the size of the representative’s caste
affects outsiders and is expected to be negative. Consistent with the theory, and directly
indicative of targeting to insiders at the expense of outsiders, this coefficient in Table 5,
Column 2 is negative and significant (at the 10 percent level). The point estimates indicate
that for every increase in the size of the representative’s caste by 10 households, there is
a decrease in the probability that an outsider receives the BPL transfer by 6 percentage
NO , where the total population of the ward, N = NI + NO . Assume that NI < T , the total transfers, so the
−NI
T
= N
,
outsiders are not crowded out completely. Then the probability of receiving a transfer, NNI ·1+ NNO TN
O
which is independent of NI .

28

points (25 percent). At the mean size of the representative’s caste (37 households), being
an insider increases the probability of receiving the transfer by 4 percentage points.
Unlike welfare transfers, the theory assumes that public goods are not targetable at the
local level (within the ward). To test this assumption, we replace access to BPL transfers
with public good provision as the dependent variable in equations (14) and (15). Public
good provision is measured by the fraction of the six major public goods that is received
on the household’s street in a given election term. Because the value of the dependent
variable is the same for all households on a street, we test for targeting across streets
rather than across households. The variable indicating whether the representative belongs
to the household’s caste is thus replaced by the fraction of households on the street that
belong to the representative’s caste. The specification of the regression equation and the
sample that we use for estimation are otherwise unchanged.34 In contrast with what we
observe for BPL transfers in Columns 1-2, there is no evidence that public goods are being
targeted in Columns 3-4.

5.5

Structural Estimation and Counter-Factual Simulations

Having found evidence consistent with both the positive and the negative aspects of ethnic
politics as incorporated in the model, we proceed to estimate its structural parameters.
The structural estimates are used to (i) validate the assumption that 0 < β < 1/4, (ii)
quantify the increase in the supply of public goods due to the internal cooperation within
castes, and (iii) assess the impact of specific policy interventions that, based on our theory,
are expected to increase the supply of public goods.
From equation (4), the supply of public goods, G ≡ eβ , can be expressed as:
"

(βRN )2
G=
α

#

β
1−2β

,

(16)

where RN is the number of households in the representative’s caste.
When estimating the parameters, α and β, we attempt to stay as close to the structure of
the model as possible. However, one obvious dimension where the theory and data diverge
is the assumption that all households in the ward receive the same supply of public goods.
In the data, as noted, public good provision is measured at the street level and varies across
streets in a ward. We account for this feature of the data in the structural estimation by
34

If we continued to use the binary variable indicating whether the representative belonged to the household’s caste to measure targeting, then this variable would vary across households on the street, whereas
the dependent variable measuring public good provision would remain the same. This would bias the coefficient on the indicator variable towards zero. Once the appropriate measure of targeting – the fraction
of households on the street belonging to the representative’s caste – is included as a regressor, there is no
household-level variation within a street in the dependent variable or any of the regressors. We continue to
estimate the public goods regressions in Columns 3-4 at the household level, with household fixed effects,
to be consistent with the BPL regressions in Columns 1-2. Street-level regression results, with street fixed
effects, provide qualitatively similar estimates (available from the authors).

29

assuming that the same effort by the elected representative translates into different levels of
public good provision on the ground, across streets and over time.35 Public good provision
on street, s, in ward, j, and term, t, is thus denoted by Gsjt = Fsjt · Gjt , where Fsjt maps
ward-level effort into street-level public goods.
Taking logs, and substituting the expression for Gsjt in equation (16), with appropriate
subscripts,
β
log
log(Gsjt ) =
1 − 2β

β2
α

!

2β
log(RNjt ) + fsj + νsjt ,
1 − 2β

+

(17)

where the Fsjt term is decomposed into a street-ward fixed effect, fsj , and a mean-zero
disturbance term, νsjt .
The structural parameters, α and β, are evidently identified in the preceding equation
and can be estimated using Nonlinear Least Squares.36 The point estimates are reported in
Table 6. Providing support for the parametric assumptions, we reject that β < 0 and that
β > 1/4 with a high degree of statistical confidence. Consistent with the implication of our
theory that larger groups supply more public goods, we can also reject that the coefficient
on the size of the representative’s caste,

2β
1−2β ,

is equal to zero at conventional levels. Based

on the point estimate of the β parameter, the elasticity of public goods with respect to the
size of the representative’s caste is 0.32. The α parameter, which measures the increase in
outside options with ability, is also positive as expected, but less precisely estimated.
We use the structural estimates to conduct two counter-factual experiments. The first
counter-factual experiment compares the benchmark supply of public goods with what
would be obtained if (i) the caste was unable to ameliorate the collective action problem,
and (ii) this problem was solved completely. To implement the first scenario, we replace
the size of the representative’s caste in the ward, RNjt , by one (the representative), and
then predict the supply of public goods from equation (17). In the second scenario, we
replace RNjt by the number of households in the ward. We plot the predicted supply for
each counter-factual scenario, together with the benchmark (where the predicted supply is
based on RNjt ) against the size of the representative’s group in Figure 14. The estimates
indicate that internal cooperation within the caste substantially increases the supply of
public goods, and when a large caste is present in the ward, brings the supply close to
first-best.
Our second counter-factual experiment quantifies the impact of specific policy interventions that we expect will increase the supply of public goods. The structural estimates and
35
Note that we found no evidence that street-level differences in the supply of public goods reflects
targeting.
36
As with all the preceding regressions, we restrict the sample to wards with more than one caste and
more than one street. Outlying ward-terms in the top 1 % of the public goods expenditure distribution are
also excluded. We weight by the number of households on the street to allow for heteroscedasticity in the
residual term, νsjt . Standard errors are clustered at the ward level.

30

Figure 14 show that there is a sizeable gain in the supply of non-excludable public goods
when the representative of a larger caste-group is elected. The negative crowding-out effect
associated with the welfare transfers must, therefore, be substantial to explain why the
representative of the largest caste is only elected when his group has an absolute majority.
The obvious policy solution to this problem would be to decouple public good provision
and the distribution of welfare transfers, in which case the population share threshold at
which the representative of the largest caste is surely elected would shift down.
In our data, the representative of the largest eligible caste is elected 90% of the time
when it has an absolute majority and 63% of the time below the estimated population share
threshold. When predicting the supply of public goods in the benchmark scenario for our
policy experiment, we thus assume that the representative of the largest eligible caste is
elected with certainty when his caste has an absolute majority. For ward-terms in which
no caste has an absolute majority, the data indicate that the winning caste is 0.8 times the
size of the largest caste on average. We use this fraction in the counter-factual simulations
when the population share of the largest caste is below the relevant threshold. Given the
predicted size of the elected representative’s caste in each ward-term, the associated supply
of public goods is obtained from equation (17).
In the decoupled scenario, the representative of the largest caste will be elected, regardless of whether or not it has an absolute majority, if the following condition is satisfied from
equation (7):


NK
NK−1





≥

1
1 − 2β

 1−2β
2β

.

Based on the point estimate of the β parameter, the term on the right hand side of the preceding inequality is 2.38. To map this value into the corresponding value for the threshold
NK
N

and

terms. Based on the estimated relationship, a value of 2.38 for

NK
NK−1

population share, we estimated the relationship between
of 0.37 for

NK
N .

NK
NK−1

across all ward-

corresponds to a value

This is the value that we use for the population share threshold in the

counter-factual decoupled scenario. The predicted supply of public goods is the same as in
the benchmark scenario for all ward-terms where the population share of the largest eligible
caste is less than 0.37 or greater than 0.5. The only change is in the 15% of ward-terms
where the population share is in the 0.37-0.5 range, where the largest eligible caste is now
predicted to be in power.
Although the elasticity of public goods with respect to the size of the representative’s
caste is quite large, we note that decoupling only increases the average size of the elected
representative’s caste, by 20%, in 15% of the ward-terms that are affected by the decoupling.
We thus do not expect the impact of this policy intervention to be dramatic. A policy that
could potentially have a bigger overall impact on the supply of public goods would be to roll
back the current system of caste-based reservation at the ward level (but not necessarily at
31

other levels). By restricting the set of caste-groups that are eligible to stand for election,
reservation mechanically lowers the size of the largest caste that can put up a candidate
for election. In our data, as shown in Table 2, the decline in the average size of the largest
eligible caste due to reservation is substantial.
In a system where ward representatives are responsible for the distribution of welfare
transfers, caste-based reservation is equity enhancing because it ensures that groups who
tend to be relatively small, and who would otherwise be excluded from the welfare transfers,
have access to them in at least a fraction of ward-terms. Because representatives of small
groups capture a smaller fraction of the total transfers, they would also be preferred from
a social welfare perspective. This advantage of the reservation system must be weighed
against the reduced supply of public goods due to the reduction in the average caste-size of
elected representatives. To quantify this reduction, we replace the set of eligible castes in
each ward-term with the full set of castes in the ward (who would be eligible in the absence
of reservation). We then repeat the simulations described above, with the benchmark
scenario and the decoupled scenario.
The simulated distribution of public goods is reported in Figure 15 for the benchmark
case and for three counter-factual scenarios: (i) with reservation, but decoupled; (ii) without
reservation, but retaining the dual role for the representative; and (iii) with reservation and
decoupled. It is evident that the biggest increase in the supply of public goods is achieved
by de-reservation. For example, 39% of wards across all elections receive less than one-third
of total public goods in the benchmark simulation in which caste reservation is in place
and representatives serve the dual role of supplying public goods and distributing welfare
transfers. This fraction of under-served wards declines to 35% when welfare transfers are
removed from the representative’s list of responsibilities. The fraction of under-served
wards declines further to 26% and 20%, respectively, when caste reservation is removed,
with and without the coupling of public goods and welfare transfers. The advantage of
the decoupling is that it is relatively simple to implement, while generating a sizeable 9
percent decrease in the fraction of under-served wards, when the reservation system is in
place. The advantage of the de-reservation is that the effects are much larger. However,
there are equity consequences if the decoupling policy is not applied simultaneously.

6

Conclusion

The undersupply of public goods is a hallmark of underdevelopment. A large and growing
literature has taken the position that ethnic politics plays a major role in both limiting
the supply of public goods and distorting their allocation in many developing countries. In
our theory of local ethnic politics, there are two aspects to ethnic groups: an inclusionary
aspect associated with internal cooperation and an exclusionary aspect associated with the

32

disregard for outsiders. The inclusionary aspect of ethnic politics results in the selection
of more able political representatives who exert more effort, resulting in an increased supply of public goods that are non-excludable at the local level. This inclusionary effect is
hypothesized to be particularly strong in large groups because their representatives will internalize the benefits derived from the public goods by a larger number of individuals. The
exclusionary aspect of ethnic politics, in contrast, results in the capture of targetable public
resources by insiders; i.e. the representative’s own group, at the expense of outsiders. This
crowding out will be especially severe when the representative belongs to a large group.
Given the two aspects of ethnic politics, our theory shows how the availability of public
resources that can be targeted to individual households by politicians affects the equilibrium
level of non-excludable public goods. On the one hand, all groups, including the largest
group that might not otherwise put up a candidate, have a greater incentive to have their
own representatives elected. On the other hand, representatives from larger ethnic groups
may, despite providing a greater supply of non-excludable goods, attract less electoral
support from outsiders who are crowded out of the targetable resources. If the former
effect dominates, representatives from the largest group will be more likely to be elected,
resulting in an increase in the supply of public goods. If the latter effect dominates, these
representatives will only be elected if they have a majority share of the population, reducing
the overall supply of public goods.
Using newly available Indian data, covering all the major states over three election
terms at the most local (ward) level, we provide empirical evidence that is consistent with
the existence of both sides of ethnic politics. Ward representatives are responsible for
the supply of non-excludable public goods, as well as the distribution of welfare transfers
that can be targeted to specific households. We show that there is a positive relationship
between the size of the representative’s caste – the relevant ethnic group in India – and the
supply of public goods, which is consistent with the inclusionary aspect of ethnic politics.
Nevertheless, we find that the representative of the largest caste in the ward is only elected
when his group has an absolute majority. Based on the discussion above, the exclusion of
outsiders from the welfare transfers apparently dominates the benefit they derive from the
increased supply of public goods when that individual is elected. Additional analysis using
panel data from a representative sample of households over three election terms finds that
ward representatives do indeed target welfare transfers to their own group, at the expense
of outsiders. And, consistent with the theory, this crowding out is especially severe when
the representative belongs to a large group.
Our theory and empirical findings imply that the supply of local public goods in rural
India could be increased by decoupling public good provision and the distribution of welfare
transfers. This would result in more competent representatives drawn from larger castes

33

being elected even when their caste groups do not have an absolute majority. The supply
of public goods could also be increased by rolling back the caste-based reservation system
at the ward level. This would result in an increase in the size distribution of eligible castes
and, therefore, an increase in the average size of the elected representative’s caste. However,
de-reservation, without decoupling public good provision and the distribution of welfare
transfers, will have adverse equity consequences because outsiders will be disproportionately
excluded from receiving welfare transfers when the representative belongs to a larger caste.
Counter-factual simulations based on structural estimates of the model indicate that the
gains in the supply of public goods from decoupling are modest, whereas the gains from
removing the reservation system are more substantial. The preferred policy in rural India,
with regard to both the supply of public goods and the distribution of welfare transfers,
would thus be de-reservation together with decoupling. However, in other contexts, as
emphasized by the theory, decoupling could lead to a decline in the supply of public goods.

34

7

Appendix: The Feasibility Condition

For the feasibility condition to be satisfied, the representative of the largest group, K, must
be preferred to the representative of any other group, j 6= K, by an individual belonging
to neither of those groups,

 ( "
! β

#)
2β
2β 
 β 2 1−2β 
T − Nj
T − NK
1−2β
1−2β
NK
− Nj
− θ
− max
,0
≥ 0.

 α
N − Nj
N − NK

Denote the first term in curly brackets by P G and the second term in curly brackets by
WT.

dNj
dNK

dN

< 0 and −Σj dNKj = 1 to keep the total population, N , constant as NK varies.

The properties of the P G and W T functions can then be derived as follows:
P G0 (NK (Nj )) =

P G00 (NK (Nj )) = −

β2
α

β2
α
!

!

β
1−2β

β
1−2β




2β  1
1 − 2β
NK

 1−4β
1−2β

1
Nj

−

! 1−4β
1−2β



 2(1−3β)
1−2β
1 − 4β  1
−


2β
1 − 2β 1 − 2β

! 2(1−3β) 
1−2β

 1−2β



P G00 (NK (Nj )) ≤ 0 f or

1
Nj

NK

NK
−1
≤  dNj 
Nj

1−3β

dNK

 1−2β



P G00 (NK (Nj )) > 0 f or

NK
−1
>  dNj 
Nj

1−3β

dNK

For NK ≤ T :


W T 0 (NK (Nj )) = θ(N − T ) 



dNj
dNK

1
>0
−
(N − NK )2 (N − Nj )2



W T 00 (NK (Nj )) = 2θ(N − T ) 




dNj
dNK

2 

1

−
>0
(N − NK )3 (N − Nj )3

For NK > T :
W T 0 (NK (Nj )) = −θ(N − T )

dNj
dNK

(N − Nj )2


W T 00 (NK (Nj )) = −2θ(N − T )

35

dNj
dNK

>0

2

(N − Nj )3

< 0.



dNj 
>0
dNK
dNj
dNK

2





References
[1] Alesina, Alberto and Eliana La Ferrara. 2005. “Ethnic Diversity and Economic Peformance,” Journal of Economic Literature 43(3): 762-800.
[2] Alesina, Alberto, Stelios Michalopoulos, and Elias Papaioannou. Forthcoming. “Ethnic
Inequality,” Journal of Political Economy.
[3] Anderson, Siwan, Patrick Francois, and Ashok Kotwal. 2015. “Clientilism in Indian
Villages,” American Economic Review 105(6): 1780-1816.
[4] Andrews, Donald W.K. 1993. “Tests for Parameter Instability and Structural Change
with Unknown Change Point,” Econometrica 61(4): 821-856.
[5] Angelucci, Manuela, Giacomo De Giorgi, and Imran Rasul. 2015. “Resource Pooling
within Family Networks: Insurance and Investment,” University of Michigan, typescript.
[6] Banerjee, Abhijit and Rohini Pande. 2010. “Parochial Politics: Ethnic Preferences
and Politician Corruption,” Harvard University, Kennedy School of Government, typescript.
[7] Bardhan, Pranab, Dilip Mookherjee, and Monica Parra Torrado. 2010. “Impact of
Political Reservations in West Bengal Local Governments on Anti-Poverty Targeting,”
Journal of Globalization and Development 1(1): 1-36.
[8] Beaman, Lori, Raghabendra Chattopadhyay, Esther Duflo, Rohini Pande, and Petia
Topalova. 2009. “Powerful Women: Does Exposure Reduce Prejudice?” Quarterly
Journal of Economics 124(4): 1497-1540.
[9] Besley, Timothy. 2004. “Paying Politicians: Theory and Evidence,” Journal of the
European Economic Association 2(2-3): 193-215.
[10] Besley, Timothy and Stephen Coate. 1997. “An Economic Model of Representative
Democracy,” Quarterly Journal of Economics 112(1): 85-114.
[11] Besley, Timothy, Rohini Pande, and Vijayendra Rao. 2007. “Just Rewards? Local
Politics and Public Resource Allocation in South India,” Harvard University, Kennedy
School of Government, typescript.
[12] Burgess, Robin, Remi Jedwab, Edward Miguel, Ameet Morjaria, and Gerard Padro
i Miquel. 2015. “The Value of Democracy: Evidence from Road Building in Kenya,”
American Economic Review 105(6): 1817-1851.

36

[13] Caldwell, John C., P.H. Reddy, Pat Caldwell. 1986. “Periodic High Risk as a Cause of
Fertility Decline in a Changing Rural Environment: Survival Strategies in the 19801983 South Indian Drought,” Economic Development and Cultural Change pp. 677-701.
[14] Casey, Katherine. 2015. “Crossing Party Lines: The Effects of Information on Redistributive Politics,” American Economic Review 105(8): 2410-2448.
[15] Chandavarkar, Rajnarayan. 1994. The Origins of Industrial Capitalism in India: Business strategies and the working classes in Bombay, 1900-1940. Cambridge: Cambridge
University Press.
[16] Chattopadhyay, Raghabendra and Esther Duflo. 2004. “Women as Policy Makers:
Evidence from a Randomized Policy Experiment in India,” Econometrica 72(5): 14091443.
[17] Easterley, William and Ross Levine. 1997. “Africa’s Growth Tragedy: Policies and
Ethnic Divisions,” Quarterly Journal of Economics 112(4): 1203-1250.
[18] Fafchamps, Marcel and Susan Lund. 2003. “Risk Sharing Networks in Rural Philippines,” Journal of Development Economics 71: 261-287.
[19] Ferraz, Claudio and Frederico Finan. 2011. “Electoral Accountability and Corruption:
Evidence from the Audit Reports of Local Governments, ” American Economic Review,
101: 1274-1311.
[20] Greif, Avner. 1993. “Contract Enforceability and Economic Institutions in Early Trade:
the Maghribi Traders’ Coalition,” American Economic Review 83(3)525-48.
[21] Greif, Avner, Paul Milgrom, and Barry R. Weingast. 1994. “Coordination, Commitment, and Enforcement: The Case of the Merchant Guild,” Journal of Political Economy 102(4): 745-776.
[22] Grimard, Franque. 1997. “Household Consumption Smoothing through Ethnic Ties:
Evidence from Cote d’Ivoire,” Journal of Development Economics 53(3): 319-422.
[23] Hansen, Bruce E. 1999. “Threshold effects in non-dynamic panels: Estimation, testing,
and inference,” Journal of Econometrics 93: 345-368.
[24] Ligon, Ethan, Jonathan P. Thomas and Tim Worrall. 2002. “Informal Insurance Arrangements with Limited Commitment: Theory and Evidence from Village
Economies,” Review of Economic Studies 69: 209-244.
[25] Mazzocco, Maurizio and Shiv Saini. 2012. “Testing Efficient Risk-Sharing with Heterogeneous Risk Preferences,” American Economic Review 102(1): 428-468.
37

[26] Miguel, Edward and Mary Kay Gugerty. 2005. “Ethnic Diversity, Social Sanctions,
and Public Goods in Kenya,” Journal of Public Economics 89: 2325-2368.
[27] Moorjani, Priya, Kumarasamy Thangaraj, Nick Patterson, Mark Lipson, Po-Ru Loh,
Periyasamy Govindaraj, Bonnie Berger, David Reich, and Laiji Singh. 2013. “Genetic
Evidence for Recent Population Mixture in India,” American Journal of Human Genetics 93(3):422-438.
[28] Morris, Morris David. 1965. The Emergence of an Industrial Labor Force in India:
A Study of the Bombay Cotton Mills, 1854-1947. Berkeley: University of California
Press.
[29] Munshi, Kaivan and Mark Rosenzweig. 2006. “Traditional Institutions Meet the Modern World: Caste, Gender and Schooling Choice in a Globalizing Economy,” American
Economic Review 96(4):1225-1252.
[30] Munshi, Kaivan. 2011. “Strength in Numbers: Networks as a Solution to Occupational
Traps,” Review of Economic Studies 78:1069-1101.
[31] Munshi, Kaivan and Mark Rosenzweig. Forthcoming. “Networks and Misallocation:
Insurance, Migration, and the Rural-Urban Wage Gap,” American Economic Review.
[32] Olson, Mancur. 1965. The Logic of Collective Action: Public Goods and the Theory of
Groups, Cambridge, Massachusetts: Harvard University Press.
[33] Osborne, Martin and Al Slivinski. 1996. “A Model of Political Competition with
Citizen-Candidates,” Quarterly Journal of Economics 111(1): 65-96.
[34] Padro i Miquel, Gerard. 2007. “The Control of Politicians in Divided Societies: The
Politics of Fear,” Review of Economic Studies 74(4): 1259-1274.
[35] Townsend, Robert. 1994. “Risk and Insurance in Village India,” Econometrica 62(3):
171-84.

38

Figure 1A: Percentage of Respondents Who Trust People in their Neighborhood,
by Country (World Values Survey, Wave 5)
100
90
80
70
60
50
40
30
20
10

Eg
yp
t

tn
am

In
di
a

Vi
e

Ch
in
a

bi
a
G
ha
na
Ru
ss
ia
Ar
ge
nt
in
So
a
ut
h
Af
ric
a
Uk
ra
in
e
Tu
rk
ey
Th
ai
la
nd
In
do
ne
sia
Et
hi
op
ia
M
al
ay
sia
M
or
oc
co

om

il
Co
l

Br
az

ico
M
ex

Pe

ru

0

Figure 1B: Percentage of Respondents Who Do Not Have a Problem with Their Neighbors
Speaking a Different Language, by Country (World Values Survey, Wave 5)
100
90
80
70
60
50
40
30
20
10

en
tin
a

Pe

ru

Ar
g

a

il
Br
az

Af
ric

ne

ico

So
ut
h

M
ex

Uk
ra
i

Ch
in
a

Ru
ss
ia
Et
hi
op
ia

G
ha
na
Th
ai
la
nd
M
al
ay
sia

In
do
ne
sia
M
or
oc
co
Tu
rk
ey

tn
am
Vi
e

In
di
a

0

Figure 1C: Percentage of Respondents Who are Fine with their Neighbors
Following a Different Religion, by Country (World Values Survey, Wave 5)
100
90
80
70
60
50
40
30
20
10

il
Af
ric
a
Ar
ge
nt
in
a

So
ut
h

ru

Br
az

Pe

G
ha
na
M
al
ay
sia
Ch
in
a
Ru
ss
ia
Et
hi
op
ia
M
ex
ico
Uk
ra
in
e
Co
lo
m
bi
a

Tu
rk
ey
In
do
ne
si
Th a
ai
la
nd

tn
am

Vi
e

o

Ir
aq

oc
c

Ir
an

M
or

In
di
a

0

Figure 2: The Importance of Caste within the Village

0.6
0.5
0.4
0.3
0.2
0.1
0
Average caste's
share of village
population

Average caste's
Share of food
share of ward transferred from
population
a caste member

Share of loans
from a caste
member

Figure 3: Public Goods and the Elected Representative’s Schooling (Years),
by the Population Share of the Largest Eligible Caste
7.5

0.4

7

0.39
Representative's years of schooling

6.5

0.38

Public goods (fraction of total)

6
0.37
5.5
0.36
5
0.35
4.5
0.34

4

0.33

3.5
3

0.32
0

0.1

0.2

0.3

0.4

0.5

0.6

0.7

0.8

0.9

1

Figure 4: Simulated Variables VS and VL, by the Population Share of the Largest Castes
0.38
0.375
Linear function

0.37

Step function

0.365
0.36
0.355
0.35
0.345
0.34
0.335
0.33
0

0.1

0.2

0.3

0.4

0.5

0.6

0.7

0.8

0.9

1

Figure 5: Threshold Tests on Simulated Data: Step versus Linear Function
Likelihood Ratio by Hypothesized Threshold
120

Step function with 0.5 share threshold
Linear function
100

1% Critical value

80

60

40

20

0
0.25

0.3

0.35

0.4

0.45

0.5

0.55

0.6

0.65

0.7

0.75

Figure 6: Threshold Tests: Public Goods and the Elected Representative’s Schooling
Likelihood Ratio by Hypothesized Threshold
140

140
Level of public goods
1% Critical value
Representative's schooling

120

120

100

100

80

80

60

60

40

40

20

20

0

0

0.25

0.3

0.35

0.4

0.45

0.5

0.55

0.6

0.65

0.7

0.75

Figure 7: Public Goods, by the Population Share of the Largest Caste:
Alternative First-Stage Specifications

0.4
0.39
0.38

Polynomial in population share

0.37

Finer partition of population share

0.36
0.35
0.34
0.33
0.32
0

0.1

0.2

0.3

0.4

0.5

0.6

0.7

0.8

0.9

1

Figure 8: Threshold Tests: Alternative First-Stage Specifications
Likelihood Ratio by Hypothesized Threshold
80

Polynomial in population
share
Finer partition of population
share
1% Critical value

70

60

50

40

30

20

10

0
0.25

0.3

0.35

0.4

0.45

0.5

0.55

0.6

0.65

0.7

0.75

Figure 9: Threshold Tests: Alternative Threshold Functions
Likelihood Ratio by Hypothesized Threshold
90
80

Piecewise-linear regression
Step function

70

1% Critical value
60
50
40
30
20
10
0
0.25

0.3

0.35

0.4

0.45

0.5

0.55

0.6

0.65

0.7

0.75

Figure 10: Caste Population Schooling (Years) Distribution, by Caste Population Share
8
7
50th Percentile

6

25th Percentile
75th Percentile

5
4
3
2
1
0
0

0.1

0.2

0.3

0.4

0.5

0.6

0.7

Population Share of Caste in the Ward

0.8

0.9

1

Figure 11: Threshold Tests: Education Distribution in the Caste
Likelihood Ratio by Hypothesized Threshold
12

10

8

6

75th Percentile
25th Percentile

4

1% Critical value

2

0
0.25

0.3

0.35

0.4

0.45

0.5

0.55

0.6

0.65

0.7

0.75

Figure 12: Public Goods and the Share of Households Receiving BPL Transfers,
by the Population Share of the Largest Eligible Caste
1

0.4

0.9

0.39

0.8

0.38

Share of households receiving BPL

0.7

Public goods (fraction of total)

0.37

0.6
0.36

0.5
0.35

0.4
0.34

0.3

0.33

0.2
0.1

0.32

0

0.1

0.2

0.3

0.4

0.5

0.6

0.7

0.8

0.9

1

Figure 13: Threshold Tests: Public Goods and Welfare Transfers (BPL)
Likelihood Ratio by Hypothesized Threshold
60

60

50

50

40

40

30

1% Critical value
Level of public goods
Welfare transfers (BPL)

30

20

20

10

10

0

0

0.25

0.3

0.35

0.4

0.45

0.5

0.55

0.6

0.65

0.7

0.75

Figure 14: Public Goods Level, by the Size of the Elected Caste
Relative to Two Benchmarks
1.1
1
0.9
0.8
Self-interested representative

0.7

First-best (ward population)
Caste politician

0.6
0.5
0.4
0.3
0

50

100

150
200
Size of Elected Caste

250

300

350

Figure 15: Counterfactual-Simulation Cumulative Distributions:
Fraction of Public Goods Received by a Ward
1
0.9
0.8
0.7
Baseline: Reservations and welfare transfers

0.6
Reservations, no welfare transfers

0.5
No reservations and welfare transfers

0.4
No reservations, no welfare transfers

0.3
0.2
0.1
0
0.2

0.3

0.4

0.5

0.6

0.7

0.8

0.9

1

Table 1: Sources of Support for Ward Representatives
Within
village
(1)

Outside
village
(2)

From caste

82

29

From religion

28

13

From wealthy individuals

38

--

From a political party

--

41

Source of support (%):

Source: Rural Economic Development Survey, 2006.
The statistics are computed over the last three election terms in each ward.
Each statistic reflects the percent of representatives who received support from a given
source.

Table 2: Population Share of the Largest Eligible Caste, by Election Type

Type of election:

Open
(1)

SC
(2)

ST
(3)

OBC
(4)

25 percentile

0.42

0.14

0.16

0.20

50 percentile

0.60

0.33

0.57

0.41

75 percentile

0.85

0.65

0.95

0.69

0.25

0.97

0.48

0.64

0.69

0.5

0.66

0.29

0.50

0.44

0.75

0.36

0.18

0.41

0.21

0.60

0.11

0.06

0.23

Panel A: Distribution of shares

Panel B: Fraction of ward-terms where
largest share exceeds

Fraction of ward-terms

SC=scheduled caste, ST=scheduled tribe, OBC=other backward caste.
Population shares are measured in each ward-term.
Information on reservation status and population shares in each ward are obtained over three election terms.

Table 3: Mean Years of Schooling of Elected Representatives and Median Household
Heads in the Wards, by Type of Election

Election type:

Open
(1)

SC
(2)

ST
(3)

OBC
(4)

Median household head

4.46
(3.76)

3.53
(3.59)

3.30
(3.65)

4.03
(3.36)

Male representatives

7.42
(4.43)

6.01
(4.49)

5.30
(3.99)

7.05
(4.30)

3.23
(3.83)

5.78
(4.39)

2.22
(2.05)

4.72
(4.17)

Female
representatives

Median household schooling, by reservation category in each ward, is computed from the village household census.
The mean (standard deviation) across all wards is reported in the table.
Representative's education is obtained for the last three terms in each ward.
Gender reservation is independent of caste reservation.

Table 4: Change in Public Goods Levels and Representative's Schooling at the
Population Share Threshold of 0.5

Dependent variable

Mean-shift at threshold

Threshold location
Mean of dependent variable below the threshold

N

Public goods
(1)

Representative's
schooling
(years)
(2)

0.042**
(0.021)

2.264***
(0.802)

0.50

0.50

0.335
[0.081]

4.157
[3.034]

1666

1591

* p < 0.1, ** p < 0.05, *** p <0.01.
All specifications include ward fixed effects, reservation dummies, term dummies, and election year.
Public goods are measured as the fraction of the six major goods that were received in each ward-term.
Each regression is estimated at the population share threshold derived from the Likelihood Ratio test.
Standard errors are clustered at the village/term level.

Table 5: Household Fixed Effects Estimates: Targeting of Public Resources

Dependent variable

Household belongs to the
representative's caste
Fraction of households belonging
to representative’s caste on street

Size of representative's caste

Interactiona

Mean of dependent variable

N

Household receives BPL
transfers
(1)
(2)
1.377**

0.213

(0.577)

(0.752)

-

-

Public goods placed on
household’s street
(3)
(4)
--

--

-0.00915

-0.0451

(0.0573)

(0.106)

-0.0192
(0.0190)

-0.0308*
(0.0158)

0.000463
(0.000957)

-0.000268
(0.00152)

--

0.053***
(0.0201)

--

0.00151
(0.00264)

0.258
(0.438)

0.258
(0.438)

0.343
(0.228)

0.343
(0.228)

1387

1387

1387

1387

* p < 0.1, ** p < 0.05, *** p <0.01.
Mean size of representative's caste is 37; standard deviation is 41.
Public goods are measured by the fraction of the six major public goods received on the household’s street in
each election term.
All specifications include household fixed effects, reservation dummies, term dummies, and election year.
a
In column two the interaction variable is the representative’s caste size X household belongs to the
representative’s caste. In column four the interaction variable is representative’s caste size X the fraction of
households in the representative’s caste on the household’s street.
Columns 1 and 2 are estimated using conditional logit.
Standard errors are clustered at the ward level.

Table 6: Structural Parameter Estimates

Dependent variable
Parameter

Log public goods

α

0.0148
(0.0128)

β

0.122***
(0.0450)

H0: β < 0, p

.004

H0: β > 0.25, p

.000

H0: 2β/(1 - 2β) = 0, p

.041

N

1957

* p < 0.1, ** p < 0.05, *** p <0.01.
Public goods measured by the log of the fraction of the six major public goods
received on the household's street in each election term
Standard errors clustered at the ward level.

Appendix Table A1: Fraction of Households Receiving Public Goods Each Term
Type of election:

Open

SC

ST

OBC

(1)

(2)

(3)

(4)

Water

0.69
(0.40)

0.73
(0.39)

0.78
(0.71)

0.72
(0.39)

Sanitation

0.42
(0.46)

0.42
(0.46)

0.55
(0.47)

0.42
(0.46)

Roads

0.69
(0.41)

0.72
(0.40)

0.74
(0.41)

0.73
(0.39)

Telephones

0.07
(0.24)

0.12
(0.30)

0.08
(0.25)

0.10
(0.28)

Electricity

0.14
(0.34)

0.20
(0.38)

0.17
(0.36)

0.20
(0.38)

Street lighting

0.16
(0.36)

0.19
(0.38)

0.19
(0.39)

0.22
(0.40)

Means and standard deviations (in parentheses).
SC=scheduled caste, ST=scheduled tribe, OBC=other backward caste.
Statistics are based on the last three terms in each ward.

