                             NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                GENTRIFICATION AND THE RISING RETURNS TO SKILL

                                        Lena Edlund
                                     Cecilia Machado
                                   Maria Micaela Sviatschi

                                     Working Paper 21729
                             http://www.nber.org/papers/w21729


                    NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                             1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                               Cambridge, MA 02138
                         November 2015, Revised January 2019


Formerly circulated under the title: “Bright Minds, Big Rent: Gentrification and the Rising
Returns to Skill.” We have benefitted from discussions with Joe Altonji, Nathan Baum-Snow, V.
V. Chari, Julie Cullen, David Deming, Jonathan Fisher, Jonathan Heathcote, Matthew Kahn,
Jeanne Lafortune, Shirley Liu, Douglas Lucius, Chris Mayer, Enrico Moretti, Marcelo Moreira,
Jordan Rappaport, Bernard Salanie, Aloysius Siow, seminar participants at the Minneapolis
Federal Reserve, the Barcelona Graduate Summer School 2015, The Econometric Society World
Congress August 2015, 2016 Research Symposium on Gentrification and Neighborhood Change
at the Federal Reserve Bank of Philadelphia, 2016 Canadian Women Economists Network
Luncheon, 31st European Economic Association Annual Congress 2016, Lacea 2016, 2016 mini
conference on family/labor/development economics at CUHK, Simon Fraser University and
seminar participants in USP, PUC-Rio and Insper. We thank the New York Federal Statistical
Research Data Centers, Baruch, Center for Economic Studies, U.S. Census Bureau. Any opinions
and conclusions expressed herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily represent the
views of the U.S. Census Bureau. All results have been reviewed to ensure that no confidential
information is disclosed. The views expressed herein are those of the authors and do not
necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.

© 2015 by Lena Edlund, Cecilia Machado, and Maria Micaela Sviatschi. All rights reserved.
Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission
provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
Gentrification and the Rising Returns to Skill
Lena Edlund, Cecilia Machado, and Maria Micaela Sviatschi
NBER Working Paper No. 21729
November 2015, Revised January 2019
JEL No. R21,R30

                                         ABSTRACT

In 1980, housing prices in large US cities rose with distance from the city center. By 2010, that
relationship had reversed. We propose that the inversion can be traced to more hours worked by
the skilled. Scarce non-market time downgrades the importance of residential space and upgrades
that of proximity to work, factors favoring the central-city location. Geo- coded census micro
data covering the 27 largest US cities and the period 1980-2010 support our hypothesis: full-time
skilled workers are more likely to locate in the city center and their growth can account for the
observed price changes.

Lena Edlund                                     Maria Micaela Sviatschi
Department of Economics                         Princeton University
Columbia University                             msviatschi@princeton.edu
1002A IAB, MC 3308
420 West 118th Street
New York, NY 10027
and NBER
le93@columbia.edu

Cecilia Machado
Getulio Vargas Foundation (EPGE-FGV)
cecilia.machado@fgv.br
      I know things will get better
      You’ll find work and I’ll get promoted
      We’ll move out of the shelter
      Buy a bigger house and live in the suburbs


      Tracy Chapman, Fast Car, 1988


      The truth is that we are living at a moment in which the massive outward migration
      of the aﬄuent that characterized the second half of the twentieth is coming to an end.


      Ehrenhalt, The Great Inversion, 2013



1     Introduction
In 1980, 2-3 bedroom, single-family residences in major US cities were more expensive outside
than inside the 10-mile radius ring, reflecting the then dominant urban pattern – aﬄuent sub-
urbs alongside struggling inner cities. Fast forward to 2010 and the price-distance relationship
is the reverse (Figure 1). The ascendancy of housing prices in the city center forms the set
piece of what is loosely referred to as gentrification.
    At the same time, educated Americans work more. Among the college educated, full-time
employment has risen, as has the share working a 50+ hour week (or “long hours” to use the
terminology of Kuhn and Lozano [2006]). The increase held for both men and women, mirroring
the rise of dual earner households.1
    Greater labor supply by the skilled, we propose, has revived the city center for the following
three reasons. First, skilled jobs remain concentrated in the city center. Second, more hours
at work means more precious non-work hours, a fact that boosts the attractiveness of the
city center: the commute can be shorter, the high density environment allows for the easy
availability of services demanded by the time starved (restaurants, bars, etc.), the suburban
space advantage may be less important with little time spent at home.2 Third, the skilled
are important housing-market actors because they can typically outbid the competition – a
generalization strengthened by several decades of rising returns to skill.
    Longer hours by the skilled is not an inevitability. Higher wages paired with shorter hours
   1 In 1970, about 40 percent of college women living with children under age 18 were in traditional housewife-

breadwinner households. By 2010, that number had halved [DVera Cohn and Wang, 2014].
   2 The suburban space advantage extends beyond the home but with longer work hours and less leisure [Aguiar

and Hurst, 2009] there may be less time to enjoy space-intensive activities such as golf (which incidentally is
also time consuming, “Why golf is in decline in America,” April 2nd 2015, The Economist).



                                                       2
for the better part of the 20th century [Costa, 2000]. Rapid technological change may lie behind
this sea change [Katz and Murphy, 1992, Juhn et al., 1993, Autor et al., 2008]. For instance,
skills may depreciate faster in skilled jobs and especially so at times of technological change;
there may be a high training component to work in skilled jobs; and/or, the returns to even
more skills may be progressively higher. Interestingly, long hours appear disproportionately
rewarded [Goldin, 2014].
   Our hypothesis relates housing prices to the presence of full-time skilled workers but causal
inference based on the correlation of the two is open to criticism. Full-time skilled workers saw
healthy income growth which could have made central-city amenities more attractive [Glaeser
et al., 2001, Gyourko et al., 2013, Couture and Handbury, 2015]. City real estate could have
reached the end of its life cycle, making replacement economical [Brueckner and Rosenthal,
2009]. It could be a cultural reaction against the ubiquity of subdivisions and cul-de-sacs (e.g.,
Gallagher [2014]). Reverse causality is also a possibility; higher rents may elicit greater labor
supply [Johnson, 2012].
   Therefore, we turn to a Bartik-type demand shifter [Bartik, 1991] to generate arguably
exogenous variation in labor supply (following a number of recent papers, e.g., ?Moretti [2013]).
This demand shifter uses a location’s employment composition in a base year and national
employment trends excluding the locality in question to generate a predicted labor demand.
   Our principal data set uses restricted-use micro data from the decennial censuses and the
American Community Surveys (ACS), and covers the period 1980-2010. With 1970 as our base
year, 1980 is the first decennial census year for which we have a Bartik shifter. The last year,
2010, is dictated by data availability. To obtain suﬃcient sample size, we use the pooled 5-year
ACS sample 2008-2012. We include top-20 cities (by population size) in either 1970 or 2010,
27 cities in total.
   We aggregate the micro data to the census tract, and our key dependent variable is the
median (owner reported) price for 2-to-3 bedroom homes (single family houses or apartments)
in the tract. To measure the presence of full-time skilled workers, we consider two work-hour
cut-oﬀs: 40 or 50 hours per week; and two skill cut-oﬀs: four-year college or advanced degree.
Further, we limit our sample to the prime working age population (25-55).
   Recognizing the role of the IT-revolution in driving spatial variation in demand for skilled
labor [Beaudry et al., 2010], we construct the demand shifter from the 1970 city-level employ-
ment composition and national growth trends. We interact the city-year demand shifter with a
flexible function of distance from the central business district (CBD), thus allowing the shock
to propagate diﬀerentially through space.
   We start by showing that the Bartik shifter correlates positively with the fraction of the



                                                3
population that is skilled and works full time. Other tract demographics such as race, income,
or marital status, moved with the Bartik shifter and in the expected direction. However, we
view these movements as incidental, derived from the primary relationship linking the Bartik
shifter to the full-time and skilled demographics.
   We then turn to the relationship between the Bartik demand shifter and housing prices,
using a specification that includes city-year and city-distance fixed eﬀects. City-year fixed
eﬀects absorb any city-wide changes, for instance city-level labor demand shifts, public safety
policies, or credit expansion,3 as well as any city fixed eﬀects, such as topography, climate,
or historically fixed factors such a history of racial tension or the quantity and quality of pre-
existing infrastructure, monuments, or cultural institutions. City-distance fixed eﬀects proxies
for tract fixed eﬀects. (As a robustness check, we also cross walk tracts to allow for tract fixed
eﬀects.) Our most demanding specification includes distance-year fixed eﬀects, which absorb
any changes over time to the overall price-distance relationship.
   Results indicate that the Bartik demand shifter is associated with an increase in housing
prices, and this relationship is stronger closer to the CBD. As the demand shifter prompts
an exogenous shift in labor supply, both the reduced form and IV regressions support our
hypothesis that the rise in full-time skilled workers has driven gentrification. Further, the IV
predictions are in line with observed price changes.
   We then turn to address alternative interpretations to the found results. First, we argue
that the Bartik demand shifter operates through an increase in hours worked of the skilled, and
does not represent a demand shock that uniformly aﬀects the local labor market. We find no
eﬀects of the Bartik shifter on the labor supply of the unskilled, as well as do not find evidence
of increased presence of skilled workers that do not work long hours in the CBD.
   Second, we divide our sample to examine the role of various factors that arguably contributed
to central city revival. Violent crime has fallen markedly, a development that benefited the
central city disproportionately. However, it is not until the early 1990s that crime falls, crime
was high in the 1980s. Therefore we separate the years 1980 and 1990 from 2000 and 2010. We
also separate the cities that had large declines in crime from those that saw modest or even
increases in crime.
   Population growth is another dimension of interest. While the sample cities grew on average,
about 1/3rd shrank. The role of road congestion, foreign demand, or limitations on developable
land is presumably limited in cities with shrinking populations, such as Detroit, St. Louis,
Cleveland, or Baltimore.
   It may also be that results are driven by the singular experience of one large city, viz. New
  3 For   recent papers on the role of the latter, see Glaeser et al. [2010], Favara and Imbs [2015].




                                                          4
York City. Therefore, as a robustness check, we drop New York City.
    Throughout above subsamples, we find the Bartik demand shifter to tilt the housing-price
profile in favor of the center, suggesting that found eﬀects are not confounded.
    Third, yet another possibility is that gentrification is driven by the growing number of high-
income households [Glaeser et al., 2001, Gyourko et al., 2013, Couture and Handbury, 2015],
the central city being particularly attractive to such households.4 To separate our hours-based
explanation from an income focussed one is challenging considering the high overlap between
the two demographics of interest.
    While we would like to control for income in our analysis, we lack independent exogenous
variation of a second instrument. Alternatively, we can gauge the importance of this competing
hypothesis by looking at residential location patterns according to fine income bands. We
find that, holding income constant, households in which the head and spouse (if applicable)
were skilled, full-time workers clearly favored centrality. This was true both in 1980 and 2010.
What changed was the prevalence of such households. In 1980, at all income points, they were
a minority. In 2010, beyond the 80th percentile, such households constituted the majority
(Figures 8-14).
    To sum up, this paper points to gentrification stemming from high-income households work-
ing more and therefore favoring living close to work. The city center, long the home of skilled
jobs, has thus come to also house its workers. The fact that the city can oﬀer a plethora of other
amenities within easy reach enhances its appeal, but is second order to the jobs-location and
hours explanation. The distinction may seem academic but a local-amenities based explanation
leaves unanswered why country clubs or high-end restaurants could not anchor suburbs.
    The remainder of the paper is organized as follows. The balance of this section shows
how longer work hours shift the balance in favor of centrality in the standard land-use model.
Section 2 describes our empirical strategy and the data. Section 3 presents our results. Section
4 concludes.


1.1       Conceptual framework
This section adapts the canonical land-use model [Mieszkowski and Mills, 1993, Rappaport,
2014, 2016] to examine the role of hours worked, an exercise which ties us closely to an earlier
literature which anticipated the centralizing power of a broadside entry of women into labor
force [Oi, 1976, White, 1977, Madden, 1980].5 It also relates us to LeRoy and Sonstelie [1983].
Their model turns on rising income making commuting by car increasingly aﬀordable. Once
  4 The very top of the income distribution never entirely left for the suburbs [Baum-Snow and Hartley, 2016].
  5 Women’s   greater familial responsibilities may make them more adverse to commuting. Another margin of
adjustment is of course labor supply [Black et al., 2014].


                                                      5
even the poor can aﬀord a car, gentrification results. This is because added demand by the
poor raises suburban housing prices.6 By contrast, our model focuses on the location choices
of the rich once leisure is more scarce. Readers familiar with the above body of literature can
skip this section without loss of context.
   We assume two types of workers, skilled and unskilled; the skilled earn higher wages than
the unskilled. Further, wages and hours are assumed such that the skilled have higher income
than the unskilled so that for residential location patterns, we can limit our attention to the
preferred location choice of the skilled.
   There are two locations city and suburb, indicated by subscripts i = c(ity) and i = s(uburb),
respectively.
   The upshot is that if the skilled are required to work long hours, then they prefer to live in
the city, whereas if hours are shorter, then the suburb may be preferred. Housing in the location
preferred by the skilled commands the higher price – when the skilled prefer the suburb, prices
rise with distance to the city center, and vice versa.
   All jobs are located in the city whereas residential housing can be in either location. Since
all jobs are in the city, suburban location comes with a commute. For simplicity we assume
that                                            
                                                
                                                ts > 0      if i = s,
                                           t=
                                                
                                                0           otherwise.

   For concreteness, we let half the population be skilled and command a high wage w, and
the remainder unskilled and command a low wage (we do not need a notation for their wage).
Workers have 16 hours per day at their disposal. Time can be used in three ways: work, h,
commuting, t, and leisure, l. In order to focus on the role of longer hours on location choice,
hours are exogenously determined and the same for everybody.
   Construction costs are such that only the skilled can aﬀord to build durable housing. The
unskilled either live in pre-existing housing or in cheap non-durable housing. Since the latter
can be ignored in the analysis, for the purpose of this section, housing will refer to the durable
type. Housing accumulate as location specific housing stock, si ≥ 0, i = c, s which rents at
ri , i = c, s per square foot. Cost of maintenance serves as a floor on rents and for simplicity, it
is assumed the same in the city and the suburb, mc = ms = m > 0.7
   Initially, only the city is developed. If aggregate demand by the skilled, di (ri ), at rent
ri = m, exceeds the available housing stock, then housing is built to meet demand.
   In the suburb, land is assumed in infinite supply. Thus, the marginal cost of new construc-
  6 The   aﬀordability of the suburb has if anything increased, Figure 1.
  7 Qualitatively similar, but amplified, results are obtained if the housing stock is fixed.



                                                         6
tion consists of labor and material, both which are elastically supplied. Thus, the marginal
cost of construction is a constant cs > m. In the city, land is scarce and we model this
by letting the marginal cost of construction depend positively on the existing housing stock
cc (sc ), cc (0) = cs > m, c′c () > 0.8
    Skilled workers rent ai square feet at the rental price ri , in one and one location only. The
rent is
                                                 
                                                 
                                                 m if di (mi ) ≤ si ,
                                          ri =
                                                 
                                                 ci    otherwise, i = c, s;

where the suburban construction cost, cs , is a constant whereas the city construction cost, cc ,
varies positively with the existing housing stock.9
    Workers derive utility from living space, a, leisure, l, and a numeraire consumption good,
x. We let utility be of the following form:


                                            u = xα aβ lγ , α, β, γ > 0.

The budget constraints are:
                                                   x + ri ai ≤ w h,

and
                                                   l = 16 − h − t.

    The optimization problem is a two-stage process: first determine maximal utility in each
location, home size chosen optimally at the implied rental price; then pick location. In other
words, to pin down the urban location (price) pattern, we need to know where the skilled obtain
the highest utility: the city or the suburb? Let a∗i denote the utility maximizing home size in
locality i at the implied rental price ri . The city gives higher utility if

                              (                  )α (         )β       (                 )γ
                                  wh − rc a∗c           a∗c                16 − h − ts
                                                                   >                          .               (1)
                                  wh − rs a∗s           a∗s                  16 − h
    Note that if suburban homes are relatively large (low a∗c /a∗s ), for instance from abundance
of undeveloped land and high wages for the skilled, then the choice tilts in favor of the suburbs
(possibly contributing reasons for why the US post-WWII suburbanization pattern did not
   8 Land scarcity and regulations [Glaeser and Gyourko, 2005, Ortalo-Magne and Prat, 2014], as well as higher

cost of vertical construction contribute to making construction costlier in more densely built areas.
   9 Strictly speaking, there is an intermediate case where demand at the cost of maintenance exceeds the existing

housing stock but demand is not strong enough to elicit new construction. In that case, rent is indeterminate
in the range (m, ci ). This possibility does not change our qualitative results.




                                                              7
extend to Western Europe).
    Our key question is how longer hours aﬀect the location decisions. The right hand side of
inequality 1 goes to 0 as h → 16 − ts . The left hand side has two components: the city-suburb
                                                                                            wh−r a∗      x∗
consumption ratio, which under our functional form assumption is a constant ( wh−rsc ac∗ =                c
                                                                                                         x∗ )   =
                                                                                                   s      s
                                                            a∗
1, and the city-suburb optimal housing size ratio,           c
                                                            a∗ .
                                                             s

    The ratio of city to suburban home sizes decreases with higher hours because hours raise
income and with higher income, more money is spent on housing and the suburbs have more
elastic housing supply.10 But, for the suburb to be favored at hours close to 16 − ts , the left
            a∗
hand side    c
            a∗   would have to be close to zero, an unrealistic scenario. Thus, higher hours favor
             s

the city, at least for hours close to 16 − ts .
    For the same reason, a higher skilled wage reduces the left-hand side of inequality 1, and
thus makes it more likely that for any given number of hours worked, the suburban location
is favored. However, once the right-hand side is close to zero, the city will be the location of
choice for the skilled regardless of the wage.
    Thus, our model adds a return-to-the city epilogue to the well-known urban narrative of a
pre-automobile city in which the skilled and unskilled live side-by-side followed by an automobile
enabled phase of suburbanization in which the skilled move to the suburb. Our model highlights
the role of moderate work hours in underpinning that suburbanization phase. Longer work
hours bring about a third phase of return to the city by the skilled.
    We now turn to the data.



2     Data
Our primary data set is drawn from the decennial censuses of 1980, 1990 and 2000, and the
American Community Survey’s (ACS) pooled 5-year sample for 2010 (years 2008-2012). Our
housing-price measure is based on owner-occupied 2-to-3 bedroom single family residences.11
For home prices, we use owner-provided estimates of value. On the assumption that owners of
more recently transacted units would be more knowledgeable about the going market price, we
use households ten years or less in their current residence.12
    We focus on the prime working ages, 25-55.13 For full time, we consider two cut-oﬀs, 40
or 50 hours per week. Likewise, we consider two skill cut-oﬀs, four-year college or graduate
  10 The optimal housing size, a is given by the implied housing stock from the purchasing power of skilled
                                  i
households, divided by their numbers.
  11 Two and three bedroom homes are modal, for new construction see https://www.census.gov/

construction/chars/pdf/soldbedrooms.pdf
  12 Including all households yields similar results.
  13 These ages, after college completion but before retirement concerns, are also a key home-buying demographic

[National Association of Realtors, 2014].



                                                       8
degree.
    We aggregate the micro data to the census tract and use the tract centroid for the distance
calculation.14
    Further details on data set and variable construction are in the Data Appendix.


2.1       Sample cities
We limit our sample to cities that were in the top-20 (population wise) either in 1970 or 2010.
There were 27 such cities which for simplicity we will refer to as “top-20.” The list was topped
by New York City, Los Angeles and Chicago in both years. The number 20 spot was taken by
Phoenix and Memphis in 1970 and 2010 respectively.
    Top-20 was chosen because it includes all large cities and a good number of medium sized
cities. While the same could be said for say the top-30, we settled for top-20 for reasons
of convenience, as expanding the list beyond top 20 brings in a number of similarly sized
cities.15 The restriction to large and mid-size cities is deliberate, however. In addition to their
quantitative importance, the agglomeration economies and congestion costs at work behind
gentrification are not those of small towns.
    Whether administratively part of the city or not, we include tracts within 35 miles of the
CBD. (Appendix Table A1 lists the cities and their respective CBDs). This restriction is
arbitrary but arguably delineates a commutable area, the outer reaches of which would be
about a one-hour commute to the CBD. We have about 65 thousand tract-year observations,
or an average of 600 tracts per city and year.16


2.2       Bartik-type skilled labor demand shifter
We use the public use version of the decennial censuses (IPUMS) to calculate a city-specific
demand shifter for skilled employment from the national growth rates of employment of college
workers in industry h, excluding the city in question, −j, weighted by each industry’s 1970
employment share in city j.
   14 “Census tracts generally have a population size between 1,200 and 8,000 people, with an optimum size of

4,000 people.” http://www.census.gov/geo/reference/gtc/gtc_ct.html
   15 The reasons are two-fold. First, the US population is mobile, resulting in substantial population changes.

Second, while the population gap between cities at the top were sizable enough to maintain the ranking (the
largest city, New York, is about twice the size of the runner up, Los Angeles, a diﬀerence of four million people),
the gap narrows as one moves down the list (as predicted by Zipf’s law). For instance, the population diﬀerence
between number 19 (El Paso, population 649,121) and number 20 (Memphis, population 646,889) on the 2010
list was less than 3,000 – small enough to invite substantial rank mobility. Seattle, Denver, Minneapolis are
some of the mid-size cities that were just outside the list, excluded not because we think they are diﬀerent than
some included, similarly sized cities. In fact, one reason for a top-20 cut oﬀ rather than say a top-30 is that the
cities around that seam were quite similar. In other words, one way to view chosen cities is that we include all
the largest cities and a sample of the mid-sized ones.
   16 For disclosure reasons, these numbers are rounded.




                                                        9
   The base year 1970 was chosen because of the role of the IT-revolution in raising the returns
to skill and the shift away from manufacturing to high human capital services with significant
economies of agglomeration.
   Specifically, focusing on ages 25-55, we construct our Bartik demand shifter for skilled labor
demand for city j and year t as:



                                  1       ∑
                                          41
                        Zjt =                  nh,j,1970 × (ln nh,−j,t − ln nh,−j,1970 ),    (2)
                                Nj,1970
                                          h

where
Nj,t is the number of workers in city j and year t = 1980, 1990, 2000, 2010;
nh,j,t is the number of college educated workers in industry h, city j, year t; and
nh,−j,t is the number of college workers in industry h and year t, excluding city j.
   In words, Zjt is the predicted skilled employment growth in city j calculated as the weighted
sum of college employment growth nationally, excluding city j, in 41 industries where each
industry is weighted according to the number of college workers employed in the industry in
the city in 1970.
   Zjt is book-ended by San Antonio and Washington DC. In 1980, San Antonio’s predicted
growth of college educated workers was 9 percent; the number for DC was 23 percent. In 2010,
those numbers were 18 and 46 percent respectively (Table A1).
   The Bartik shifter is city specific.17 To allow the demand shifter to propagate diﬀerentially
throughout the city we interact it with a measure of the tract distance from the CBD. We
expect the demand shifter to operate more strongly in tracts close to the CBD (where skilled
jobs are concentrated, see e.g., Figure 2).


2.3     Descriptives
Descriptive statistics (means) of the variables are presented in Table 1 by year and four dis-
tance intervals: 0-3, 3-10, 10-20, and 20-35 (miles from the CBD). We also present smoothed
polynomials based on 1-mile distance intervals in a series of graphs.
   We employ the following notation: BA-, less than four-year college; BA, four-year college
but no advanced degree; MA+, advanced degree; and BA+ refers to BA and MA+ combined.
Further, we let F T (h, e) denote the fraction of adults 25-55 with education e, e = BA+, M A+
and work weeks exceeding h, h = 40, 50 hours.
   Throughout, housing prices are expressed in 1980 constant dollars.
 17 Except   Dallas-Fort Worth, coded as one city in the IPUMS.



                                                        10
Home prices          Between 1980 and 2010, the median price for 2-to-3 bedroom one-family resi-
dences in the top-20 cities rose by 30 percent from $92.5 to $120.5 thousand and the increase
was greater the more centrally located the tract. In the core (0-3 miles), prices more than
doubled. In tracts 3-10 miles out, prices rose by 60 percent, whereas price increases were a
mere 10 and 6 percent in tracts 10-20 and 20-35 miles out, respectively – changes large enough
to flip the price-distance profile. In 1980, prices in the periphery were 50 percent higher than in
the center. By 2010, prices in the center were higher than in the periphery by some 40 percent
(Table 1 and Figure 1).


Location of jobs, distance from the CBD Our hypothesis is premised on increasing
demand for skilled workers combined with skilled jobs clustering in the city center. Figure 2
shows the fraction of jobs held by a given education group (BA-, BA, BA+, MA+) by distance
from the CBD (among all jobs held by adults 25-55 within 35 miles from the CBD in a given
year). We see an overall reduction in unskilled jobs and the erosion is particularly pronounced
in the city center. In 1980, both skilled and unskilled jobs were concentrated in the city core.
By 2010, unskilled jobs had declined markedly inside the 10-mile ring; whereas skilled jobs
maintained their concentration in the CBD, and this was particularly pronounced for jobs held
by workers with graduate degrees.


Full-time skilled workers Over the study period, the center became more full-time and
skilled. In 1980, F T (40, BA+) was higher outside than inside the 10-mile perimeter. By 2010,
F T (40, BA+) had risen markedly in the city core (0-3 miles), making up a third of its prime
working age population. The shift towards the city center was even more pronounced among
those working long (50+) hours (Table 1).18
   Breakdown by gender reveals that full-time skilled women consistently favored the city core,
and more so the longer the hours and the higher the education attained (Figure 3). Over time,
however, this group grew substantially.
   Full-time skilled men were more willing to live away from the CBD and this was partic-
ularly pronounced at the lower hour and skill cutoﬀs (Figure 4). Over time, however, men,
in particular F T (50, M A+) men, approached women’s proclivity for the central city (possibly
because increasingly they were matched to women with similar education and hours, cf. Costa
and Kahn [2000]).19
   Since the genders exhibited similar location patterns, we will abstract from gender in the
regression analysis.
 18 Meanwhile,    unskilled full-time workers moved away from the center, Figure A7.
 19 This   pattern also held nationally (Figures A1, A2, A3, and A4).



                                                      11
Age composition            Our focus on ages 25-55 may leave out important age groups, e.g., empty
nesters.
      Table 1 reports the population shares by age group and distance category and we see that
the shares of the old and the young have declined overall, whereas the prime working age group
increased by 13 percent (from 40 to 45 percent). Furthermore, the increase was concentrated
in the 0-3 mile core, where their share went from 39 to 50 percent over the study period. These
patterns are further shown in Figure 5. In 1980, the 25-55 age group’s representation was
j-shaped, bottoming out around 4 miles from the CBD. In 2010, the j had fallen on its back
– the prime working ages dominated the city center, decreased with distance for the first 10
miles, to flatline beyond that point.
      While young adults, 19 to 24 years old, have long favored the central city, their presence
declined. Thus, this demographic does not seem to be a prime driver of gentrification, perhaps
unsurprising considering their limited purchasing power.
      As for ages 56 and up, this age group has grown overall but the growth was concentrated
outside the 10 mile perimeter. Within 10 miles of the CBD, there was a decrease. This was
true of both the 56-65 and the 66+ age groups, albeit more pronounced for the latter (Table
1).
      Considering the role of public-school quality in the middle-class urban flight narrative,
school-age children is an age group of particular interest. In 1980, 6-18 year olds made up
about 9 percent of the population in the city core, by 2010 that number was down by a third
(Table 1). In other words, the childlessness that characterized early gentrifiers (e.g., yuppies
and gays [Black et al., 2002]) remains.


Other demographics             Over the period, mean incomes rose by 25 percent and the gains were
concentrated in tracts close to the CBD.20 In the 0-3 mile core, incomes rose by almost 80
percent. Overall, the percent non-Hispanic white declined (12 percentage points), whereas the
percent black held constant. In the central city, however, the pattern was reversed: the percent
black declined while the percent non-Hispanic white was steady. As for marital status, marriage
declined overall; in percentage terms the decline was steeper within 10 miles of the city center
(Table 1).
 20 Total   personal income, constant dollars.




                                                  12
3     Analysis
This section has four parts. First, we show the direct eﬀect of the skilled-labor demand shock
on housing prices. The relationship is positive and greater the closer to the CBD, and holds for
a number of cuts of the data suggesting that it is not exclusive to a particular period or cities.
    Second, we show that the skilled demand shock raises the share of the population that was
full-time and skilled, as would be expected, and the eﬀect was greater the closer to the CBD.
Furthermore, and reassuringly, the eﬀect did not extend to the full-time but unskilled, and was
substantially weaker (and statistically insignificant) for just the skilled (no hours requirement).
    Third, we present OLS and IV results for the relationship between housing prices and skilled
labor supply, where we employ the skilled-labor demand shifter as our instrument.
    Fourth, we discuss higher incomes as an alternative explanation. While the full-time and
skilled group overlaps with “the rich,” the two groups are not identical allowing for some
daylight between them.


3.1     Housing prices and skilled-labor demand shifter
For the reduced form eﬀect of the skilled-labor demand shock on housing prices we estimate a
regression of the following form:

                                         ′
                P RICEijdt = β0 × Zjt + Fijdt β1 × Zjt + αj + αd + αt + ϵijdt ,                (3)

where P RICEijdt is the housing price in tract i at distance d from the CBD of city j in year
t, Zjt is the exogenous labor demand shock in city j in year t (see equation 2) and Fijdt is an
m × 1 vector with functions of tract distance from the CBD, distijdt , and β1 is the conformable
                                                                                ′
vector of parameters. We allow for distance diﬀerential impacts of Zjt through Fijdt β1 × Zjt .
The coeﬃcient vector of interest is β1 and we hypothesize that the eﬀect of Zjt is greater
close to the CBD. To capture this distance diﬀerential eﬀect, we consider three specifications
of Fijdt :
                                
                                
                                
                                                           ′
                                 D3d = (d1d , d2d , d3d )     (m = 3)    or;
                      Fijdt =       d1d ,                      (m = 1)    or;
                                
                                
                                
                                    (distijdt , dist2ijdt )′   (m = 2),

where dkd , k = 1, 2, 3 indicates the 0-3 mile core, the 3-10 mile ring, and the 10-20 mile ring
respectively (the 20-35 mile ring is the reference category). These rings were chosen based on
preliminary inspection of the data. In the third specification, the distance diﬀerential eﬀect is
modelled as a quadratic function of distance.


                                                     13
      City, distance and year fixed eﬀects are captured by αj , αd and αt . Distance fixed eﬀects
control for factors that vary systematically with distance, viz. housing density and land rents.
We discretize the distance fixed eﬀects by using the three distance dummies in D3d . We also
consider two-by-two interactions, city-year (αjt ), city-distance (αjd ), and distance-year (αdt ).
      City-year fixed eﬀects parcel out time eﬀects common to a city, for instance, city-wide
changes to law-and-order or lending policies.
      Distance-year fixed eﬀect allow for the overall price-distance relationship to change over
time. Parsimony guided our choice of D3d , the chosen intervals captured shared price dynam-
ics.21
      Ideally, we would like to control for time-invariant tract characteristics but tracts were
not constant between the censuses. While there are cross-walk files, the process introduces
measurement error. Therefore, in the main analysis, we favor the repeated cross-sectional data
where in lieu of tract fixed eﬀects we include city-specific distance fixed eﬀects (successive 1-
mile radius indicators for the first 20 miles). As a robustness exercise, we cross walk tracts and
the results were robust to the inclusion of tract fixed eﬀects.
      The inclusion of the full set of fixed eﬀects means that much of the city-year-distance level
variation is absorbed – leaving little, but more exogenous, residual variation for recovering our
main parameter vector of interest β1 .
      Throughout, we cluster standard errors at the city level and weigh tracts by population
size.22
      Table 2, column 1, shows the results from regressing P RICEijdt on the demand shifter Zjt ,
city, distance, and year fixed eﬀects. We see that a higher Zjt is associated with higher housing
prices: 1 unit of Zjt is associated with an additional $522k. The average change in Z was 0.128
and thus the implied price change is about $70k (out of an observed diﬀerence of $88k, Table
1).
      The average eﬀect of the demand shifter Zjt masks substantial heterogeneity (column 2).
The eﬀect in the 0-3 mile core is more than twice as large as the eﬀect in the 3-10 mile ring
(588.9/234.5=2.51), and more than six times the eﬀect in the 10-20 mile ring. As for the 20-35
mile ring, the eﬀect is positive but not statistically significant (the coeﬃcient on Zjt ).
      Columns 3-5 sequentially introduce city-year, city-distance and distance-year fixed eﬀects.
These fixed eﬀects partial out confounders which correlate with the demand shock and vary
at the corresponding level. Column 3 replaces the city- and year fixed eﬀects with the more
flexible city-year fixed eﬀects (the main eﬀect of Zjt can no longer be recovered since it varies
  21 Results were similar for finer distance-year fixed eﬀects, therefore the more parsimonious specification was

chosen.
  22 Ages 35-55. Regression results not using weights were similar.




                                                       14
at the city-year level). Column 4 replaces distance fixed eﬀects by city-distance fixed eﬀects.
The results remain similar.
    Column 5 adds distance-year fixed eﬀects, which strengthens the city-core (d1) eﬀect. How-
ever, the coeﬃcient on the demand shock in the next ring (3-10 miles) becomes statistically
insignificant (but not statistically diﬀerent from the eﬀect in the 10-20 mile ring (d3)). There-
fore, in column 6, we drop the d2 and d3 interactions but keep the full set of fixed eﬀects – the
core eﬀect remains.
    Columns 7-9 let a square polynomial capture the distance-diﬀerential eﬀect of Zjt and
sequentially introduces city-year, city-distance and distance-year fixed eﬀects. As expected,
the demand-shock eﬀect decreases with distance, at a decreasing rate. The introduction of
more demanding fixed eﬀects reduces the coeﬃcient estimates, but they remain statistically
significant throughout.
    As a robustness check, we also estimate the above specifications using logged housing prices
(Appendix Table A2).23 We see similar results, except that once distance-year fixed eﬀects
are included, result only survive in the specification using a square polynomial to capture the
distance-diﬀerential eﬀect (column 9).
    Overall, results remain qualitatively similar in the face of diﬀerent fixed eﬀects – reassur-
ing evidence that the demand shock is largely unrelated to other city-year, city-distance and
distance-year varying characteristics. Results are also robust to alternative distance-diﬀerential
eﬀects in Fijdt . Henceforth, we focus on a parsimonious-spline modelling of the distance-
diﬀerential eﬀects, that is, Fijdt is either (d1d , d2d , d3d ) or d1d .
    Before turning to our hypothesized mechanism – longer hours raising the salience of cen-
trality – we investigate possible confounders.


Time-invariant tract characteristics To account for time-invariant tract eﬀects, we use
cross-walk files to construct a panel data set.24 The procedure results in loss of fidelity, however.
With this caveat in mind, column 1 of Table 3, Panels A and B, shows the results from adding
tract fixed eﬀects.25 Results are quite similar to those found in the cross-sectional data set
(cf. column 4 and 5, Table 2), suggesting that city-distance fixed eﬀects serve as passable
substitutes.


Lower crime? High crime rates arguably contributed to urban flight [Cullen and Levitt,
1999]. It stands to reason that the drastic decline in crime since the early 1990s would have
  23 Arguably, for owner-occupied homes the primary driver of willingness to pay is the user value rather than

the return on investment, one reason to favor prices in levels.
  24 From US2010, http://www.s4.brown.edu/us2010/Researcher/Bridging.htm
  25 City-distance fixed eﬀects are absorbed by the tract fixed eﬀects.




                                                     15
the reverse eﬀect.26 But crime is also a potential left-hand side variable. A better educated
and more employed demographic presumably reduces crime rates (e.g., they may be more law
abiding and/or have higher demand for law and order).
    That notwithstanding, European cities did not experience inner-city crime anywhere near
US levels but have seen similar, core-centered urban renewal, e.g., Carpenter and Lees [1995],
Boterman et al. [2010]. Further, Ellen and O’Regan [2010] extended Cullen and Levitt’s analysis
through the 1990s, thus studying periods of both rising and declining crime. They found
only a limited role for crime, consistent with the pattern seen in Figure 1: the price-distance
relationship pivoted already in the 1980s, years before the decline in violent crime.
    Limiting our sample to 1980 and 1990, we find that eﬀects for the years of rising crime
are similar to those for the whole period (Table 3, column 2). Results remain statistically
significant through the inclusion of city-year and city-distance fixed eﬀects (Panel A). However,
once once distance-year fixed eﬀects are added (Panel B) the results for the later period are
stronger (column 3). In fact, the results for years 1980 and 1990 lose significance (column 2).27
    We also split the sample into a high and a low decline group.28 Qualitatively, results hold
in both groups (Table 3, columns 4 and 5).
    Some of the cities with the steepest housing price increases saw the largest reductions in
crime, New York City being a case in point. Excluding New York City, the eﬀects remain
(Table 3, column 6).29
    In sum, while lower crime has made the central city more livable, the sources of gentrification
may lie elsewhere.


Population growth Overall, our sample cities grew over the study period, but 10 of the
27 cities lost population. On average, shrinking cities lost 29% of their population (Appendix
Table A8).
    Grouping of cities by population growth is interesting for a number of reasons. First, growth
in the number of rich households may be one reason prices have risen in the central city. Cities
that lost population presumably had less crowding of the rich. Second, real estate is durable
  26 The origins of the rise and fall of crime are debated. A non-exhaustive list includes the removal of school

prayers, abortion legalization [Donohue and Levitt, 2001, Foote and Goetz, 2008], more aggressive and targeted
policing, greater incarceration rates, electronic surveillance, ATMs and credit cards, the crack epidemic, and
environmental factors such as lead exposure [Reyes, 2007].
  27 Since the analysis breaks the sample by only two consecutive years (which are likely similar) adding the

very demanding specification with both city-year and distance-year fixed eﬀects absorbs most of the variation
of the instrument.
  28 The grouping was done with a view to split the sample in terms of number tracts (Table A7). The decline

was measured over the period 1985-2012, the years for which crime statistics are readily available. http:
//www.ucrdatatool.gov/Search/Crime/Local/TrendsInOneVarLarge.cfm
  29 Other reasons to exclude New York City is its population size. Its prominence in finance, business, and

culture may also make its real estate market singular.



                                                      16
and it is possible that results are driven by the bottom falling out of the real estate market in
cities with shrinking populations. While still a story of the center holding, it would be a more
narrow one than that of gentrification. Third, road congestion reduces the time and convenience
advantage of automobile travel and thus part of the suburban appeal [Glaeser et al., 2008]).30
Congestion presumably eased or at least increased less in cities that shrunk. Fourth, sub-
par economic performance and predominant location in the rust belt suggest limited presence
of foreign buyers in cities that shrunk. Fifth, zoning and other restrictions on construction
presumably has a limited role in cities that shrunk.
   Table 3, shows the results from splitting the sample by population growth (column 7, neg-
ative, column 8, positive). We see that the results are quite similar in the two subsamples,
corroborating similar price-distance patterns (Appendix Figures A5 and A6). The inclusion of
distance-year fixed eﬀects (Panel B) aﬀects the magnitude of the coeﬃcient estimates but not
the qualitative results. Population loss, however, resulted in lower overall price pressure. By
contrast, in cities that grew, the demand shock propagated throughout the city (while being
substantially stronger in the 0-3 mile core).


3.2       Full-time skilled work and the demand shifter
We now examine the first order eﬀect of the Bartik shock on labor supply. Table 4, panel
A shows the results for F T (40, BA+): full-time workers with a college degree or more. The
specifications are those of Table 2 (except its column 2, omitted for brevity).
   We see that the demand shock has a positive, but insignificant eﬀect on F T (40, BA+)
(column 1), but there is important heterogeneity by distance: most of the eﬀect is concentrated
in the 0-3 mile core (column 2) and this result strengthens as fixed eﬀects are added (columns 3
and 4). We also see that inclusion of the full set of fixed eﬀects does not leave enough variation
to identify eﬀects outside the 0-3 mile core (column 4). Therefore, we drop the ring interaction
terms to focus on the 0-3 mile core (column 5). The coeﬃcient estimate implies an increase in
F T (40, BA+) of 16.5 (129.4×0.128) percentage points, or 3/4 of the observed price increase in
the 0-3 mile core.
   The results for full-time workers with a graduate degree or more, F T (40, M A+), are in panel
B. The implied change in F T (40, M A+) in the 0-3 mile core is 7.4 (57.52×0.128) percentage
points, or 80% of the observed change (column 5).
   Results using F T (50, BA+) and F T (50, M A+) yielded similar results (Appendix Table
A3).
   So far, we have looked at the intersection of skills and hours. We believe the intersection
 30 The   daily commuting time has rise by about eight minutes since 1980 [McKenzie and Rapino, 2011].



                                                     17
of skills and hours is important for two reasons. First, skilled workers have high wages and
can thus outbid the competition and resulting in upward pressure on prices in their location of
choice. Second, long hours downgrade the importance of spacious residential quarters in favor
of proximity to work.
   However, gentrification could be driven by full-time unskilled workers or skilled workers
regardless of hours. Table 5, column 1 substitutes F T (40, BA−) for the dependent variable.
The estimated eﬀect of the skilled demand shock is negative (and borderline significant) in
the city core while a positive eﬀect can be found in the third ring (10-20 miles out). Thus it
appears that although the skilled-demand shock could have raised demand for unskilled labor
as well (e.g., due to complementarities or spill-overs), F T (40, BA−) did not increase in the
CBD, consistent with their being priced out. As for the skilled, unconditional on hours worked,
we find a weaker centralizing eﬀect of the demand shifter (column 2). Working fewer hours,
their willingness to live away from the CBD may be higher.
   The remainder of Table 5 presents results for other tract characteristics that plausibly
changed with the Bartik demand shifter: percent black, white (non-Hispanic), married, and
average personal income. We shall return to the role of income in Section 3.4, but for now
note that since these variables correlate with F T (40, BA+), we expect to find a relationship.
Indeed, a higher demand shifter is linked to the city center being whiter, more married, and
higher income. The reason we favor F T (40, BA+) over these other demographics is its direct
and causal link to growth in skill-intensive industries – race, income, or marital status we view
as incidental to this primary relationship.


3.3    Housing prices and full-time skilled work
We now turn to our hypothesis: more hours worked by the skilled is behind the ascendancy of
centrality. Omitted variables that vary across space and time in a way that correlates with both
housing prices and tract demographics would bias results in a simple OLS regression. To guard
against such confounding, we use the Bartik-type demand shifter for skilled labor. Under the
assumptions that the demand shifter aﬀects housing prices only through the posited channel and
is orthogonal to any unobservable tract-by-year characteristics in the housing price equation,
we can instrument the full-time skilled measure by the Bartik demand shifter in equation 4.
   This identification strategy handles changes in other demographic characteristics that follow
from an increase in the full-time skilled population, as long as these characteristics do not enter
directly into the housing-price equation. “Permissible” indirect eﬀects include changes to the
retail landscape, level of law and order, quality of public schools, etc. that stem from the social,
economic or political clout of a skilled, steadily employed population.


                                                18
   More worrying would be if demand growth for skilled labor aﬀected factors that moved
housing prices. For instance, a higher Bartik may result in higher tax revenues, allowing for
better policing, infrastructure, or civic initiatives that improved quality of life, generally, but
more so closer to the city center.
   Another possible threat to our identification strategy is that a higher Bartik may signal
greater demand for oﬃce space in the center – higher home prices in this scenario could be the
result of dwindling supply of residential real estate. Demand-induced new construction would
work against such an eﬀect. Also, the anecdotal evidence contained in the term “residential
conversion” is born out by permitting statistics [Thomas, 2009, 2010, Ramsey, 2012] and pop-
ulation statistics paint a similar picture. Between 2000 and 2010, the central city population
grew, reversing decades of population loss [Baum-Snow and Hartley, 2016]. Still, the IV results
should be interpreted with these caveats in mind.
   Our regression is of the following form:


 P RICEijdt = α1 F T (h, e)ijdt + α2 distijdt F T (h, e)ijdt + α3 distijdt + αjt + αjd + αdt + ϵijdt , (4)


where the interaction term captures diﬀerential eﬀects of F T on housing prices by tract distance
from the CBD, and αjt , αjd and αdt are the previously defined city-year, city-distance, and
distance-year fixed eﬀects.
   Table 6, column 1, shows the OLS results from estimating equation 4 with F T alone. Panel
A shows the results for F T (40, BA+) and the estimated coeﬃcient implies an average increase
in housing prices by $21k (1.829×12.57). Column 2 adds distance-year fixed eﬀects and the
result remains virtually unchanged. Columns 3 and 4 allow for a distance-diﬀerential eﬀect
of F T and we see that while of the expected sign and statistically significant (column 3),
this distance diﬀerential eﬀect wanes once distance-year fixed eﬀects are included (column 4),
bringing the estimated eﬀect of full-time skilled workers close to that obtained without the
interaction term (column 2). Panel B shows the results for F T (40, M A+) and we see similar
results (results using F T (50, BA+) and F T (50, M A+) were also similar, see Appendix Table
A4).
   Since the OLS results could be biased, we now turn to the IV regression. However, the
full set of fixed eﬀects leaves little residual variation for the demand shock exploited in our
IV strategy. This is particularly problematic when instrumenting more than one endogenous
variable.
   Therefore, we present two types of IV specifications. Ones where we instrument F T only
and ones where we allow the eﬀect of F T to vary with distance. In the latter case, we need
more than one instrument. To that end, we interact the Bartik shifter Z with the three distance


                                                   19
dummies. However, the strength of the instruments vary inversely with distance and is further
weakened once the full set of fixed eﬀects are included. Therefore, we also present a specification
where we include only city-year and city-distance fixed eﬀects.
   Table 7 presents the results, Panel A for F T (40, BA+) and Panel B for F T (40, M A+). In
column 1, F T is instrumented by (d1d , d2d , d3d ) × Zjt . We see a statistically significant positive
eﬀect, similar in magnitude to the OLS results. However, statistical significance is lost once
distance-year fixed eﬀects are included (column 2). In this specification, the FIRST STAGE
eﬀect of the demand shock on F T is confined to the first distance ring (cf. Table 4, column 4);
the test for weak instruments also points in this direction (the test statistics indicate that the
2SLS bias could be as large as 30%). This is perhaps unsurprising given that the fixed eﬀects
absorb much of the variation in the instruments.
   To maintain a strong first stage while including the full set of fixed eﬀects, we restrict the
instrument list to d1d × Zjt (cf. Table 4, column 5); the resulting IV estimate is twice the size
of the OLS estimate, and statistically significant (Table 7, column 3).
   Columns 4 and 5 allow the eﬀect of F T to vary with distance to the CBD. The inclusion
of two potentially endogenous variables necessitates more than one instrument and we revert
to using (d1d , d2d , d3d ) × Zjt . In line with expectations, we find evidence of the eﬀect of F T
being strongest closer to the CBD, and the negative coeﬃcient on the interaction term remains
statistically significant also when the full set of fixed eﬀects is included (unlike the OLS results).
Unsurprisingly, however, the inclusion of the full set of instruments weakens the instruments
(column 5).
   In sum, Table 7 shows that whenever the full set of fixed eﬀects are included and weak
instruments are a concern (columns 2 and 5), the IV results line up in magnitude with the OLS
results. However, when instruments are strong (columns 3 and 4), the IV results are larger in
magnitude.
   We take these findings as evidence that the causal eﬀect of F T on housing prices exceeds
the OLS estimates. New construction is a candidate reason why OLS would underestimate the
causal eﬀect of F T . While the bulk of residential construction is greenfield development, since
the early 1990s there has been a marked shift towards brownfield development [Thomas, 2009,
2010, Ramsey, 2012].31
   Figures 6 and 7 show the results from our two favored specifications. Figure 6 shows the
predicted price changes from the Table 7, column 3 specification, favored because of its strong
first stage. We see that the model does well close to the CBD but over predicts price changes
away from the CBD, suggestive of the presence of a distance diﬀerential eﬀect possibly from
 31 We   present the IV results for the alternative specifications and samples of Table 3 in the Appendix.




                                                       20
distance-varying housing supply elasticity.
   Figure 7 shows the implied price changes from the Table 7, column 4 specification, and we
see that the predicted changes track the observed ones closely. The stronger first stage is our
reason for favoring this specification, a strength that comes at the price of its only including
city-year and city-distance fixed eﬀects.


3.4       Why is this not just about more rich people?
Since 1980, the US population has grown by almost 100 million, and incomes have risen espe-
cially in the right tail of the distribution [Kopczuk et al., 2010].32 Thus, the last decades’ rich
are both richer and more numerous than in the post-WWII period, which could account for
rebound of the central city [Gyourko et al., 2013].
   This alternative story emphasizes higher income rather than hours and turns on the central
city having an advantage in providing high-end amenities. We now discuss this possibility,
starting with the city as provider of consumption amenities and then turning to the hours vs.
income distinction.


Consumption amenities Historically significant or diﬃcult-to-repurpose real estate, or fa-
cilities with particular space demands have a measure of exogeneity; once in place, there is a
strong presumption in favor of their continued existence. Examples include historical buildings,
museums, parks, or golf courses. Gentrification could be explained by a shift in tastes from
activities where the suburbs have an advantage (e.g., golf) to ones where the central city has
an advantage (e.g., museums) [Couture and Handbury, 2015]. However, such an explanation
leaves the taste shift unaccounted for.
   The city center may also be a natural home for consumption amenities prized by high-income
individuals, for instance, restaurants and bars [Glaeser et al., 2001]. Greater demand for such
amenities could be one reason for gentrification. But is it truly the case that the central city
has an advantage in providing consumption amenities? Restaurants of all stripes can be found
outside of city centers.33 While it may be the case that restaurant oﬀerings in the city-center
have improved, that could be the outcome rather than the driver of gentrification [Albouy and
Lue, 2015, Hwang and Lin, forthcoming].
   The “spreading” through space – one location’s good amenities boosting the attractiveness
of nearby areas – suggests a handle on endogeneity [Guerrieri et al., 2013]. However, the
question of ground zero remains.
 32 See   Davis and Heathcote [2007] for the rising share of land rent in housing values.
 33 The   Michelin restaurant guide was conjured up as a marketing ploy by the eponymous tire maker.




                                                     21
    Reverse commuting has been taken as evidence that urban revival is driven by centrally
located consumption amenities [Glaeser et al., 2001, Couture and Handbury, 2015]. Reverse
commuting is also consistent with our proposed explanation. Once the center attracts a more
aﬄuent demographic, we would expect local amenities to follow suit and to generate their own
gravitational field.
    Reverse commuters in our hypothesis increasingly have to compete with a high income
demographic who in addition to access to local amenities can enjoy living close to work. There-
fore, we expect reverse commuting to be modest in size, a conjecture confirmed in our data.
Defining reverse commuting as living inside the 3 mile radius core but working outside of it,
we found reverse commuters to be a small (about 3 percent) and dwindling share of the prime
working age in the 27 cities analyzed and this held whether conditioning on education level and
full-time work.34


Hours vs. Income          The reason we have focused on the full-time and skilled rather than just
the rich is the role of leisure scarcity in the location decision. However, the substantial overlap
between the two groups makes separation diﬃcult. Ideally, we would like to control for income
in the housing price equation, but for that we would need an additional instrument.
    Wanting that, we take households of a given income but diﬀerent F T (40, BA+) status and
compare location patterns. Since for the topic at hand, high income households are of particular
importance, we focus on the top of the income distribution.
    To avoid having the income distribution being mechanically aﬀected by the share of house-
holds headed by singles (which has increased), we consider the individual income distribution.35
Singles are simply assigned their total personal income. For couples, we assume income pooling
and each spouse is assigned half of the couple’s combined total personal income.36
    The income distribution is computed separately for each city and year, the underlying
assumption being that competition for housing is local to the city. We restrict the sample to
household heads and spouses as applicable.37 For disclosure reasons, we present descriptives
by 20-quantiles (ventiles), but results were similar using percentile bins (not reported).
    We classify householders as “high” or “low” depending on their F T (40, BA+) status. Singles
  34 The  numbers for no-college, just college, and graduate degree was 3.4, 3.1 and 4.2 percent respectively in
1980, and 1.8, 2.6 and 3.6 in 2010. Conditioning on working full time (40 hours per week or more), the numbers
were 3.5, 3 and 4 percent in 1980, and 1.8, 2.8 and 3.8 in 2010.
  35 The distinction between households and individuals becomes less important with positive assortative match-

ing [Juhn and Murphy, 1997, Heim, 2007, DiCecio et al., 2008, McGrattan and Rogerson, 2008, Schwartz, 2010],
lower degree of intra-household specialization, and more singles.
  36 In the preliminary analysis, we considered alternative ways to compute income for individuals in couples,

such as the sum of incomes divided by factors other than 2. Our findings were not sensitive to these alternative
calculations.
  37 This restriction is only made for in this section where we analyze location by income.




                                                      22
are high if they have four-year college and work more than 40 hours per week, and low otherwise.
For couples, to be in the high group, we require both spouses to have the above attributes.
    Figure 8 shows the 1980 and 2010 distance distributions of individuals in the 20-quantiles
starting at percentile 50, 75, 85, and 95 respectively. We see that higher income indeed increased
the probability of locating in the city center. While there is a pronounced ‘suburban hump’ for
lower incomes, it is much attenuated at top incomes. Interestingly, the tendency of ‘the rich’
to located close to the city center has not increased despite considerable income growth at the
top of the distribution.
    To study how the income distribution varies by distance to the CBD, we divide the popu-
lation into four income groups (0-50, 50-75, 75-95, and 95-100th percentile), and look at their
representation in each 1-mile distance ring from the CBD (Figure 9). Focusing on the very
first mile, we see that top-5 percent’s representation actually shrunk somewhat between 1980
and 2010; this first mile became richer however, thanks to healthy growth of the 50-95 income
percentile segment.
    For our purposes, however, the most interesting change is that within each income group,
high types gained on low types, and the growth was stronger the higher the income group and
the closer to the CBD.
    To show these changes more clearly, we diﬀerence the two years and scale by group size (5
in the case of the 95-100 group, 20 in the case of the 75-95 group, etc.). Figure 10, left panel,
shows the changes and we see a clear income divide. The change is most striking for the near
suburbs (5-15 miles) where above-median income groups reduced their presence. This change
is mirrored near the CBD, with increased representation of the 50-95 percentiles. The right
panel breaks out high and low types in each income group and we see that the pattern is driven
by the overall growth of high-income high types and their favoring of the center.38
    So far we have ignored the diﬀerences between couples and single. The last decades have
seen a growing corps of professional singles, a group who may have particular aﬃnity for city
life. Figure 11 shows the same series as Figure 8, but separates couples and singles. We see
that neither group increased their propensity to locate in the city center. As for the high/low
distinction, Figure 12 shows that for both years, high-type couples are more likely to locate
in or near the city center and the gap becomes more pronounced a higher incomes. Figure 13
shows the analogous series for singles and a similar pattern is evident. High-type singles are
much more prone to locate centrally.
    As a final piece of descriptives, Figure 14 shows the composition of heads and spouses, by
  38 Figure 10 is also suggestive of why price developments in exclusive suburbs have been much more muted.

For instance, while real estate prices in Manhattan rose by 33% in the last 10 years, they shrunk in suburbs such
as White Plains and Chappaqua, aﬄuent towns in the NYC metro area, http://www.neighborhoodscout.com/.



                                                       23
type (high/low) and marital status (single/couple) by income percentile (20-quantiles, centered
on the marker point). We see substantial growth of high types, particularly towards the top
of the distribution. In 1980, the majority of individuals were in low-type households and this
was true throughout the income distribution. In 2010, past the 80th percentile, high types
constitute the majority.
    Thus, we find that full-time skilled households increased over our study period and the
increase was greater towards the top of the income distribution. Further, while single households
increased, high-type couple households dominated growth at the top. For both singles and
couples, and throughout the income distribution39 high-type households were more likely to
locate in or close to the CBD relative to their low-type counterpart. This was true both in 1980
and 2010. Looking at the income and type distribution by distance to the CBD, two things
stand out: (i) the growth of higher income groups in the CBD was broad based, extending
beyond the very rich; and (ii) the gain was driven by full-time skilled workers.



4     Discussion
Suburbanization and central-city decline dominated the US urban landscape for most of the
20th Century. As the century drew to a close, however, change was clearly underway. Today,
gentrification has outgrown its erstwhile niche status and headlines a broad-based revival of the
central city.
    The underlying factor, we have proposed, can be found in high-income households spending
more time at work and less at home, as exemplified by the decline of the traditional breadwinner-
housewife household in favor of dual earner couples and singles at the top of the income distri-
bution.
    That this development favors central city over suburban location follows from standard
models of land and time use – suburban living oﬀers space against a commute. Less non-
market time reduces the enjoyment of the former and heightens the burden of the latter. To
the best of our knowledge, however, this is the first paper to emphasize dwindling non-market
time of high-income households as the driver of gentrification.
    The empirical analysis has pooled men and women, despite the importance of women’s entry
into the labor force for reducing high-income households’ non-market time. In the preliminary
analysis we looked at men and women separately but did not find gender diﬀerential eﬀects of
note, possibly because the expansion of hours has been qualitatively similar for skilled men and
women. A counter factual worth considering, however, is whether gentrification would have
 39 Except   at the very bottom, not reported.




                                                 24
grown out of its niche status if married women had stayed home.
   Gentrification is not unique to the US, but decades of suburbanization lends it a distinct
character, e.g., Saint-Paul [2015]. US cities’ lacking in historically significant real estate has
been pointed to as one explanation for the diﬀerent starting points [Hohenberg and Lees, 1995,
Brueckner et al., 1999]. Our paper suggests another: the greater purchasing power of the US
middle class. Circa 1850, US overtook Western Europe in terms of GDP per capita, and by
1950 the latter was a mere half of the former.40 In other words, the limited purchasing power of
the European middle class post WWII may have contributed to their favoring existing city-core
real estate over new construction, leaving the latter for low-cost or public housing.
   In future, the current trend of long hours among “the rich” may stall or reverse. If so,
another wave of urban flight may be in the cards as the aﬄuent find time to golf and garden.
In the meantime, however, a combination of high density housing and mass transit can help
keep the city not just productive, but also aﬀordable and livable.




 40 The   Maddison-Project http://www.ggdc.net/maddison/maddison-project/home.htm


                                                 25
References
Mark Aguiar and Erik Hurst. The Increase in Leisure Inequality 1965-2005. The AEI Press,
 2009.
David Albouy and Bert Lue. Driving to opportunity: Local rents, wages, commuting, and
 sub-metropolitan quality of life. Journal of Urban Economics, 89:74 – 92, 2015.
David H. Autor, Lawrence F. Katz, and Melissa S. Kearney. Trends in U.S. wage inequality:
 Revising the revisionists. The Review of Economics and Statistics, 90(2):300–323, May 2008.
Timothy J. Bartik. Who Benefits from State and Local Economic Development Policies? W.E.
  Upjohn Institute for Employment Research, Kalamazoo, MI, 1991.
C. F. Baum. Enhanced routines for instrumental variables/generalized method of moments
  estimation and testing. Stata Journal, 7(4):465–506, 2007.
Nathaniel Baum-Snow and Daniel Hartley. Causes and consequences of central neighborhood
 change, 1970-2010. May 2016.
Paul Beaudry, Mark Doms, and Ethan Lewis. Should the Personal Computer Be Considered
  a Technological Revolution? Evidence from US Metropolitan Areas. Journal of Political
  Economy, 118(5):988–1036, October 2010.
Dan Black, Gary Gates, Seth Sanders, and Lowell Taylor. Why do gay men live in San Fran-
 cisco? Journal of Urban Economics, 51(1):54 – 76, 2002.
Dan A. Black, Natalia A. Kolesnikova, and Lowell J. Taylor. Why do so few women work in
 New York (and so many in Minneapolis)? labor supply of married women across U.S. cities.
 Journal of Urban Economics, 79(January):59–71, 2014.
Willem R. Boterman, Lia Karsten, and Sako Musterd. Gentrifiers settling down? patterns and
 trends of residential location of middle-class families in Amsterdam. Housing Studies, 25(5):
 693 – 714, 2010.
Jan K. Brueckner and Stuart S. Rosenthal. Gentrification and neighborhood housing cycles:
  will America’s future downtowns be rich? Review of Economics and Statistics, 91(4):725–743,
  November 2009.
Jan K. Brueckner, Jacques-Francois Thisse, and Yves Zenou. Why is central Paris rich and
  downtown Detroit poor?: An amenity-based theory. European Economic Review, 43(1):91 –
  107, 1999.
Juliet Carpenter and Loretta Lees. Gentrification in New York, London and Paris: an in-
  ternational comparison. International Journal of Urban and Regional Research, 19(2):286,
  1995.
Dora Costa and Matthew E. Kahn. Power couples: Changes in the locational choice of the
 college educated, 1940-1990. Quarterly Journal of Economics, 115(4):1287–1315, November
 2000.
Dora L. Costa. The wage and the length of the work day: From the 1890s to 1991. Journal of
 Labor Economics, 18(1):156–181, 2000.
Victor Couture and Jessie Handbury. Urban revival in America, 2000 to 2010. November 2015.

                                             26
Julie B. Cullen and Steven D. Levitt. Crime, urban flight, and the consequences for cities.
  Review of Economics and Statistics, 81(2):159–169, May 1999.

Morris A. Davis and Jonathan Heathcote. The price and quantity of residential land in the
 United States. Journal of Monetary Economics, 54(8):2595 – 2620, 2007.
Riccardo DiCecio, Kristie M. Engemann, Michael T. Owyang, and Christopher H. Wheeler.
  Changing trends in the labor force: A survey. Federal Reserve Bank of St. Louis Review, 90
  (1), January/February 2008.

John J. III Donohue and Steven D. Levitt. The impact of legalized abortion on crime. Quarterly
  Journal of Economics, 116(2):379–420, May 2001.
Gretchen Livingston DVera Cohn and Wendy Wang. After decades of decline, a rise in stay-
  at-home mothers. Social & demographic trends, Pew Research Center, April 2014.
Lena Edlund, Cecilia Machado, and Maria Sviatschi. Bright minds, big rent: Gentrification
  and the rising returns to skill. Working Paper 21729, National Bureau of Economic Research,
  November 2015.
Ingrid Gould Ellen and Katherine O’Regan. Crime and urban flight revisited: The eﬀect of the
  1990s drop in crime on cities. Journal of Urban Economics, 68(3):247 – 259, 2010.
Giovanni Favara and Jean Imbs. Credit supply and the price of housing. American Economic
  Review, 105(3):958–92, 2015.
Christopher Foote and Christopher Goetz. The impact of legalized abortion on crime: Com-
 ment. Quarterly Journal of Economics, 123(1), February 2008.
Leigh Gallagher. The End of the Suburbs: Where the American Dream Is Moving. Portfo-
  lio/Penguin, 2014.
Edward L. Glaeser and Joseph Gyourko. Urban decline and durable housing. Journal of
  Political Economy, 113(2):pp. 345–000, 2005.
Edward L. Glaeser, Jed Kolko, and Albert Saiz. Consumer city. Journal of Economic Geography,
  1(1):27–50, 2001.
Edward L. Glaeser, Matthew E. Kahn, and Jordan Rappaport. Why do the poor live in cities?
  the role of public transportation. Journal of Urban Economics, 63(1):1 – 24, 2008.
Edward L. Glaeser, Joshua D. Gottlieb, and Joseph Gyourko. Can cheap credit explain the
  housing boom. Technical report, Harvard University and Wharton, 2010.
Claudia Goldin. A grand gender convergence: Its last chapter. American Economic Review,
  104(4):1091–1119, 2014.
Veronica Guerrieri, Daniel Hartley, and Erik Hurst. Endogenous gentrifcation and housing
  price dynamics. Journal of Public Economics, 100:45–60, 2013.

Joseph Gyourko, Christopher Mayer, and Todd Sinai. Superstar cities. American Economic
  Journal: Economic Policy, 5(4):167–99, 2013.
Bradley T. Heim. The incredible shrinking elasticities: Married female labor supply, 1978-2002.
  The Journal of Human Resources, 42(4):pp. 881–918, 2007.


                                              27
Paul M. Hohenberg and Lynn Hollen Lees. The making of urban Europe, 1000-1994. Harvard
  University Press, Cambridge, MA, 1995.

Jackelyn Hwang and Jeﬀrey Lin. What have we learned about the causes of recent gentrifica-
  tion? Cityscape, forthcoming.
William R. Johnson. House prices and female labor force participation. University of Virginia,
 January 2012.
Chinhui Juhn and Kevin M. Murphy. Wage inequality and family labor supply. Journal of
 Labor Economics, 15(1):72–97, January 1997.
Chinhui Juhn, Kevin M. Murphy, and Brooks Pierce. Wage inequality and the rise in returns
 to skill. Journal of Political Economy, 101(3):410–442, June 1993.
Lawrence F. Katz and Kevin M. Murphy. Changes in the relative wages, 1963-87: supply and
  demand factors. Quarterly Journal of Economics, 107(1):35–78, February 1992.
Wojciech Kopczuk, Emmanuel Saez, and Jae Song. Earnings inequality and mobility in the
 united states: Evidence from social security data since 1937. Quarterly Journal of Economics,
 125(1):91 – 128, 2010.
Peter J. Kuhn and Fernando A. Lozano. The expanding workweek? understanding trends in
  long work hours among U.S. men, 1979-2004. Discussion Paper 1924, IZA, 2006.
Stephen F LeRoy and Jon Sonstelie. Paradise lost and regained: Transportation innovation,
  income, and residential location. Journal of Urban Economics, 13(1):67–83, 1983.
Janice Fanning Madden. Consequences of the growth of the two-earner family urban land use
  and the growth in two-earner households. American Economic Review, 70(2):191–197, 1980.
Ellen McGrattan and Richard Rogerson. Changes in the distribution of family hours worked
  since 1950. Research Department Staﬀ Report 397, Federal Reserve Bank of Minneapolis,
  2008.
Brian McKenzie and Melanie Rapino. Commuting in the United States, 2009. American
  Community Survey Reports ACS-15, Census Bureau, Washington, DC, 2011.
Peter Mieszkowski and Edwin S. Mills. The causes of metropolitan suburbanization. Journal
  of Economic Perspectives, 7(3):135–147, Sum 1993.
Enrico Moretti. Real wage inequality. American Economic Journal-Applied Economics, 5(1):
  65–103, Jan 2013.
National Association of Realtors. Home buyer and seller generational trends. Technical report,
 2014. http://www.realtor.org/sites/default/files/reports/2014/2014-home-buyer-and-seller-
 generational-trends-report-full.pdf.
Walter Oi. Residential location and labor supply. Journal of Political Economy, 84(4):S221–
 S238, 1976.
Francois Ortalo-Magne and Andrea Prat. On the political economy of urban growth: Home-
  ownership versus aﬀordability. American Economic Journal: Microeconomics, 6(1):154–81,
  2014.



                                             28
Kevin Ramsey. Residential construction trends in Americas metropolitan regions. Technical
 report, U.S. Environmental Protection Agency, 2012.

Jordan Rappaport. Monocentric city redux. Research Working Paper 14-09, The Federal
  Reserve Bank of Kansas City, 2014.
Jordan Rappaport. Productivity, congested commuting, and metro size. Research Working
  Paper 16-03, The Federal Reserve Bank of Kansas City, 2016.
Jessica Wolpaw Reyes. Environmental policy as social policy? The impact of childhood lead
  exposure on crime. B E Journal of Economic Analysis & Policy, 7(1), 2007.
Gilles Saint-Paul. Bobos in paradise: Urban politics and the new economy. Discussion Paper
  10879, Centre for Economic Policy Research, 2015.
Christine R. Schwartz. Earnings inequality and the changing association between spouses
 earnings. American Journal of Sociology, 115(5):pp. 1524–1557, 2010.
James H. Stock and Motohiro Yogo. Testing for weak instruments in linear iv regression.
  In Donald W. K. Andrews and James H. Stock, editors, Identification and Inference for
  Econometric Models: Essays in Honor of Thomas Rothenberg. Cambridge University Press,
  2005.
John Thomas. Residential construction trends in Americas metropolitan regions. Technical
  report, U.S. Environmental Protection Agency, 2009.
John Thomas. Residential construction trends in Americas metropolitan regions. Technical
  report, U.S. Environmental Protection Agency, 2010.
Michelle J. White. A model of residential location choice and commuting by men and women
 workers. Journal of Regional Science, 17(1):41–51, 1977.




                                           29
Graphs

                       Figure 1: Home prices by distance from the CBD
          250
          200
   1980USD (000)
    100    150
          50
          0




                   0              5                      10                     15                     20
                                                  Miles from CBD

                             1980                  1990                                         2000
                             2010                  2010−1980 Difference

Source: 1980, 1990, 2000 census and 5-year sample for 2010 American Community Survey,
restricted use data. The sample corresponds to tracts in our top-20 US cities (27 in all, see
table A1), within 35 miles of the CBD.
Notes: The figure shows the median home price in tract by the tract’s distance from the CBD,
for each census year. Home prices (in 1980 dollars) are for owner occupied, 2-3 bedrooms, and
one-family units. 20 miles includes 20-35 miles. See the Appendix for further variable and
sample construction details.




                                             30
                         Figure 2: Skill and distance distribution of jobs


                              BA−                                                     BA
      8




                                                                2
                                                                1.5
      6
    %




                                                            %
    4




                                                            1   .5
      2
      0




                                                                0
          0         10          20      30           40               0      10          20      30   40
                         Miles from CBD                                           Miles from CBD


                              BA+                                                    MA+
      4




                                                                1.5
      3




                                                                1
    %




                                                            %
    2




                                                                .5
      1
      0




                                                                0




          0         10          20      30           40               0      10          20      30   40
                         Miles from CBD                                           Miles from CBD


                         1980                    1990                     2000                2010

Source: 1980, 1990, 2000 census and 5-year sample for 2010 American Community Survey,
restricted use data. The sample corresponds to tracts in our top-20 US cities (27 in all, see
table A1), within 35 miles of the CBD.
Notes: The figure shows the percent of jobs held by individuals (ages 25-55) with education
e = BA−, BA, BA+, M A+ by job location (tract) distance from the CBD, and census year.
BA+ corresponds to a four-year college degree or more; BA- is its complement. BA corresponds
to a four-year college degree only; MA+ corresponds to an advanced degree. Each line integrates
to the fraction of jobs help by an education group in a given year. For example, in 2010 about
1.8×35=60% of all jobs within 35 miles were held by individuals with less than a BA degree.
See the Appendix for further variable and sample construction details.




                                                31
                    Figure 3: % Full time and skilled by distance from the CBD, women 25-55


                                   40h, BA                                              50h, BA




                                                                     8 10
    10 15 20 25




                                                                     6
        %




                                                                 %
                                                                     4
                                                                     2
           5




                                                                     0
                    0         5          10      15        20               0      5          10      15   20
                                  Miles from CBD                                       Miles from CBD


                                  40h, MA+                                             50h, MA+
    5 10 15 20 25




                                                                  6  8 10
        %




                                                                 %
                                                                     4
                                                                     2
           0




                                                                     0




                    0         5          10      15        20               0      5          10      15   20
                                  Miles from CBD                                       Miles from CBD


                                  1980                 1990                     2000               2010

Source: 1980, 1990, 2000 census and 5-year sample for 2010 American Community Survey,
restricted use data. The sample corresponds to tracts in our top-20 US cities (27 in all, see
table A1), within 35 miles of the CBD.
Notes: The figure shows the percent of women (25-55) that work more than h = 40, 50
hours/week and have education e = BA, M A+ by tract distance from the CBD and census
year. Values at distance 20 gives the average for the distance interval 20-35 miles.
BA corresponds to a four-year college degree and MA+ corresponds to an advanced degree or
more.
For example, in 2010, around 26% of women (25-55) living in the CBD (miles from CBD=0)
had a BA degree and worked 40 hours/week or more. See the Appendix for further variable
and sample construction details.




                                                      32
                     Figure 4: % Full time and skilled by distance from the CBD, men 25-55


                                   40h, BA                                            50h, BA




                                                                     15
    10 15 20 25 30




                                                                     10
          %




                                                                 %
                                                                     5
                                                                     0
                     0        5          10      15        20             0      5          10      15   20
                                  Miles from CBD                                     Miles from CBD


                                  40h, MA+                                           50h, MA+
                                                                     15
           25
           20




                                                                     10
    15
    %




                                                                 %
                                                                     5
           10
           5




                                                                     0




                     0        5          10      15        20             0      5          10      15   20
                                  Miles from CBD                                     Miles from CBD


                                  1980                 1990                   2000               2010

Source: 1980, 1990, 2000 census and 5-year sample for 2010 American Community Survey,
restricted use data. The sample corresponds to tracts in our top-20 US cities (27 in all, see
table A1), within 35 miles of the CBD.
Notes: The figure shows the percent of men (25-55) that work more than h = 40, 50 hours/week
and have education e = BA, M A+ by tract distance from the CBD and census year. Values at
distance 20 gives the average for the distance interval 20-35 miles.
BA corresponds to a four-year college degree and MA+ corresponds to an advanced degree or
more.
For example, in 2010 around 30% of men (25-55) living in the CBD (miles from CBD=0) had
a BA degree and worked 40 hours/week or more.
See the Appendix for further variable and sample construction details.




                                                      33
                        Figure 5: Age distribution by residence location


                             0−18                                                19−24
      30




                                                              12
      25




                                                              10
    20
    %




                                                          %
                                                              8
      15
      10




                                                              6
           0        5           10      15         20              0       5          10      15   20
                         Miles from CBD                                        Miles from CBD


                            25−55                                                  56+
      60




                                                              24
      55




                                                              22
    50




                                                          20
    %




                                                          %
      45




                                                              18
      40




                                                              16




           0        5          10        15        20              0       5        10       15    20


                         1980                  1990                    2000                2010

Source: 1980, 1990, 2000 census and 5-year sample for 2010 American Community Survey,
restricted use data. The sample corresponds to tracts in our top-20 US cities (27 in all, see
table A1), within 35 miles of the CBD.

Notes: The figure shows the (tract) population age distribution by tract distance to the CBD.
Values at distance 20 gives the average for the distance interval 20-35 miles.
For example, in 2010 about 12% of individuals living in the CBD (miles from CBD=0) belonged
to age group 0-18. See the Appendix for further variable and sample construction details.




                                              34
                          Figure 6: Predicted v. Actual Price increase, ‘000 1980$
        150 100
 1980USD (000)
 50     0




                  0      5              10          15                20
                                 Miles from CBD

                      Observed         ft(40,BA+)        ft(40,MA+)
                                       ft(50,BA+)        ft(50,MA+)


Notes: The figure shows the predicted price change using the regression results from Table 7,
column 3 and observed changes in the explanatory variable F T (h, e) by distance to the CDB.
Values at distance 20 gives the average for the distance interval 20-35 miles.




                          Figure 7: Predicted v. Actual Price increase, ‘000 1980$
        150 100
 1980USD (000)
 50     0




                  0      5              10          15                20
                                 Miles from CBD

                      Observed         ft(40,BA+)        ft(40,MA+)
                                       ft(50,BA+)        ft(50,MA+)


Notes: The figure shows the predicted price change using the regression results from Table 7,
column 4 and observed changes in the explanatory variable F T (h, e) by distance to the CDB.
Values at distance 20 gives the average for the distance interval 20-35 miles.




                                                         35
             Figure 8: Location by distance to the CBD, income ventile and year

                                                All
                      Percentile 50                                    Percentile 75
     6




                                                        6
     4




                                                        4
 %




                                                    %
     2




                                                        2
     0




                                                        0
         0       10         20        30       40           0     10         20        30       40
                         Distance                                         Distance
                      Percentile 85                                    Percentile 95
     6




                                                        6
     4




                                                        4
 %




                                                    %
     2




                                                        2
     0




                                                        0




         0       10         20        30       40           0     10         20        30       40
                         Distance                                         Distance

                                           1980                 2010

Source: 1980 decennial census and 5-year sample for 2010 American Community Survey, re-
stricted use data. Notes: The sample is restricted to heads and spouses, 25-55 years old.
The income distribution is the individual income distribution where income for singles is total
personal income. For couples, each person is assigned half of the spouses’ combined total
personal incomes. The income distribution is computed separately for each city and year.
Example: In 1980, 2 percent of individuals in the 75-80 ventile lived within 1 mile of the CBD,
whereas almost 4 percent of the top 5 percentiles did so. The numbers for 2010 were similar
with a slight decrease in the fraction of individuals in the 95-100 percentile who lived within 1
mile of the CBD.




                                               36
                     Figure 9: Income distribution by distance to the CBD, by year
        80 100
    40 60
      1980
       %
        20
        0

                 0

                      1

                          2

                              3

                                  4

                                      5

                                          6

                                              7

                                                  8

                                                      9
                                                          10

                                                               11

                                                                    12

                                                                         13

                                                                              14

                                                                                   15

                                                                                        16

                                                                                             17

                                                                                                  18

                                                                                                       19

                                                                                                            20

                                                                                                                 21

                                                                                                                      22

                                                                                                                           23

                                                                                                                                24

                                                                                                                                     25

                                                                                                                                          26

                                                                                                                                               27

                                                                                                                                                    28

                                                                                                                                                         29

                                                                                                                                                              30

                                                                                                                                                                   31

                                                                                                                                                                        32

                                                                                                                                                                             33

                                                                                                                                                                                  34
        80 100
    40 60
      2010
       %
        20
        0

                 0

                      1

                          2

                              3

                                  4

                                      5

                                          6

                                              7

                                                  8

                                                      9
                                                          10

                                                               11

                                                                    12

                                                                         13

                                                                              14

                                                                                   15

                                                                                        16

                                                                                             17

                                                                                                  18

                                                                                                       19

                                                                                                            20

                                                                                                                 21

                                                                                                                      22

                                                                                                                           23

                                                                                                                                24

                                                                                                                                     25

                                                                                                                                          26

                                                                                                                                               27

                                                                                                                                                    28

                                                                                                                                                         29

                                                                                                                                                              30

                                                                                                                                                                   31

                                                                                                                                                                        32

                                                                                                                                                                             33

                                                                                                                                                                                  34
                 00−50 low                                     50−75 low                                     75−95 low                                         95−100 low
                 00−50 high                                    50−75 low                                     75−95 high                                        95−100 high

Source: 1980 decennial census and 2010 5-year sample American Community Survey, restricted
use data. Notes: The sample is restricted to heads and spouses, 25-55 years old.
The income distribution is the individual income distribution where income for singles is total
personal income. For couples, each person is assigned half of the spouses’ combined total
personal incomes. The income distribution is computed separately for each city and year.
High – works 40 hours a week or more and have a four-year college degree, if part of a couple,
these requirements need to be fulfilled by both spouses.
Low – not high.
Example: The bar labeled 0 on the x-axis shows that within the first mile of the CBD center
point, in 1980, 14.3 percent had incomes in the 95-100th percentile, about half of whom were
of the high type. In 2010, the 95-100th percentile’s fraction had fallen to 11.9 percent, and the
group was overwhelmingly of the high type.




                                                                     37
                         Figure 10: 1980-2010 Changes in income groups by distance to the CBD


                                           All                                                           High/low




                                                                                1
             .5




                                                                                        .5
    %−age point change




                                                                     %−age point change
                                                                            0
           0




                                                                                −.5
                                                                                −1
             −.5




                         0       10        20       30        40                             0      10       20       30      40
                                        Distance                                                          Distance


                                                           Percentiles:
                                   00−50                 50−75                                   75−95               95−100

Source: 1980 decennial census and 2010 5-year sample American Community Survey, restricted
use data.
Notes: The sample is restricted to heads and spouses, 25-55 years old.
The income distribution is the individual income distribution where income for singles is total
personal income. For couples, each person is assigned half of the spouses’ combined total
personal incomes. The income distribution is computed separately for each city and year.
This graph illustrates the change in income groups’ representation, the diﬀerence between the
panels in Figure 9, scaled by the group size.
Left panel:
Income groups, without regard for whether high or low.
Right panel:
High – Solid line. Works 40 hours a week or more and have a four-year college degree, if part
of a couple, these requirements need to be fulfilled by both spouses.
Low – Dashed line. Not high.
Example: The left panel shows the change from 14.3 to 11.9 percent in the 0-1 mile (from the
CBD) for the 95-100th percentile group seen in Figure 9 as -0.5 (≈-2.4/5). The right panel
shows that this decline in the top income group was driven by low-types.


                                                         38
   Figure 11: Location by distance to the CBD, by marital status, income ventile and year

                                    Couples and Singles
                      Percentile 50                                      Percentile 75
    8




                                                      8
    6




                                                      6
  %




                                                      %
  4




                                                      4
    2




                                                      2
    0




                                                      0
        0        10         20        30         40       0         10         20        30        40
                         Distance                                           Distance
                      Percentile 85                                      Percentile 95
    8




                                                      8
    6




                                                      6
  %




                                                      %
  4




                                                      4
    2




                                                      2
    0




                                                      0




        0        10         20        30         40       0         10         20        30        40
                         Distance                                           Distance

             Single 1980             Single 2010              Couple 1980              Couple 2010

Source: 1980 decennial census and 2010 5-year sample American Community Survey, restricted
use data. Notes: The sample is restricted to heads and spouses, 25-55 years old.
The income distribution is the individual income distribution where income for singles is total
personal income. For couples, each person is assigned half of the spouses’ combined total
personal incomes. The income distribution is computed separately for each city and year. The
income percentile indicates the ventile’s starting percentile, i.e., percentile 50 indicates incomes
in the 50-55th percentile range.
Example: The top right panel shows that among those with incomes in the 75-80th percentile,
in both years, about two percent lived within one mile of the CBD center point.




                                                39
Figure 12: Location by distance to the CBD, couples by high/low status, income ventile and
year

                                          Couples
                     Percentile 50                                    Percentile 75
     6




                                                       6
     4




                                                       4
 %




                                                   %
     2




                                                       2
     0




         0      10         20        30       40       0   0     10          20       30      40
                        Distance                                          Distance
                     Percentile 85                                    Percentile 95
     6




                                                       6
     4




                                                       4
 %




                                                   %
     2




                                                       2
     0




                                                       0




         0      10         20        30       40           0     10          20       30      40
                        Distance                                          Distance

             Low 1980                High 1980                 Low 2010               High 2010

Source: 1980 decennial census and 2010 5-year sample American Community Survey, restricted
use data. Notes: The sample is restricted to heads and spouses, 25-55 years old.
The income distribution is the individual income distribution where for couples, each person
is assigned half of the spouses’ combined total personal incomes. The income distribution
is computed separately for each city and year. The income percentile indicates the ventile’s
starting percentile, i.e., percentile 50 indicates incomes in the 50-55th percentile range.
Couple-high – both spouses work 40 hours a week or more and have four-year college degrees.
Couple-low – couple, not high.
Example: The top right panel shows that among couples whose income fell within the 75-80th
percentile, two percent of high types and about one percent of low types lived within one mile
of the CBD center point in 1980 and 2010.




                                             40
Figure 13: Location by distance to the CBD, singles by high/low status, income ventile and
year

                                             Singles
                      Percentile 50                                      Percentile 75
    8




                                                      8
    6




                                                      6
  %




                                                      %
  4




                                                      4
    2




                                                      2
    0




        0        10         20        30         40   0   0         10         20        30        40
                         Distance                                           Distance
                      Percentile 85                                      Percentile 95
    8




                                                      8
    6




                                                      6
  %




                                                      %
  4




                                                      4
    2




                                                      2
    0




                                                      0




        0        10         20        30         40       0         10         20        30        40
                         Distance                                           Distance

              Low 1980                High 1980                Low 2010                  High 2010

Source: 1980 decennial census and 2010 5-year sample American Community Survey, restricted
use data. Notes: The sample is restricted to heads and spouses, 25-55 years old.
The income distribution is the individual income distribution where income is total personal
incomes. The income distribution is computed separately for each city and year. The income
percentile indicates the ventile’s starting percentile, i.e., percentile 50 indicates incomes in the
50-55th percentile range.
Single-high – works 40 hours a week or more and has four-year college degree.
Single-low – single, not high.
Example: The top right panel shows that among couples whose income fell within the 75-80th
percentile, two percent of high types and about one percent of low types lived within one mile
of the CBD center point in 1980 and 2010.




                                                41
                 Figure 14: Demographic composition by income percentile and year
        80
        60
 1980


        40
  %

        20
        0




             0                20              40                 60          80               100
                                                Income percentile
        80
        60
 2010


        40
  %

        20
        0




             0                20              40                 60          80               100
                                                Income percentile

                 Single−low          Single−high              Couple−low            Couple−high

Source: 1940-2010 Decennial censuses, Integrated Public Use Microdata Series (IPUMS).
Notes: The sample is restricted to heads and spouses, 25-55 years old.
The income distribution is the individual income distribution where income for singles is total
personal income. For couples, each person is assigned half of the spouses’ combined total
personal incomes. The income distribution is computed separately for each city and year.
Single-high – works 40 hours a week or more and has four-year college degree.
Single-low – single, not high.
Couple-high – both spouses work 40 hours a week or more and have four-year college degrees.
Couple-low – couple, not high.
The demographic composition is computed for each 20-quantiles (ventiles), with markers at the
ventile midpoint.
Example: In 1980, 20 percent of individuals in the 95-100 ventile were high-type couples, in
2010, that figure had risen to almost 50 percent.




                                                42
Tables
Unless otherwise specified, the analysis is based on the decennial censuses and the American
Community Survey, restricted use data. Throughout, sample sizes have been rounded to nearest
1000 for disclosure reasons. The repeated cross section has 65 thousand tract-years (53 thousand
excluding New York); and the panel data set has 48 thousand tract-years.


                                Table 1: Summary Statistics
                           (1)        (2)          (3)         (4)            (5)
                                      Distance to the CBD (miles)
 Variable        Year    d1=[0,3] d2=(3,10] d3=(10,20] d4=(20,35)            [0,35)

 Home price      1980      66.64       79.16        108.23       114.06       92.5
 (’000 1980$)    2010     154.77      115.07        119.22       120.5       120.54
                 ∆         88.13      35.91         10.99         6.44       28.04

 FT(40,BA+)      1980     13.78       12.92         15.19         15.05      14.05
                 2010     35.13       23.15         27.22         28.29      26.62
                 ∆        21.35       10.23         12.03         13.24      12.57

 FT(40,MA+)      1980      6.37        5.42          6.12          5.64       5.77
                 2010      15.5        8.92          10.1         10.35      10.13
                 ∆         9.13         3.5          3.98          4.71       4.36

 FT(50,BA+)      1980      4.03        3.43           4.3         4.44        3.92
                 2010     14.32        7.25          8.81         9.69        8.86
                 ∆        10.29        3.82          4.51         5.25        4.94

 FT(50,MA+)      1980      2.29        1.82          2.06         1.93        1.96
                 2010      7.28         3.4           3.8         4.02        3.95
                 ∆         4.99        1.58          1.74         2.09        1.99

 Income          1980     10.53       12.06         14.25          14.3      12.94
 (’000 1980$)    2010     17.98       13.99         17.22         18.77      16.53
                 ∆         7.45        1.93          2.97          4.47       3.59

 White           1980     48.99        62.43        75.61        85.73        68.87
                 2010     44.97        38.81        53.91        66.37        51.06
                 ∆        -4.02       -23.62        -21.7        -19.36      -17.81

 Black           1980     32.89       23.61         13.41         6.78        18.7
                 2010      25         27.22         15.43         7.49       18.25
                 ∆        -7.89        3.61          2.02         0.71       -0.45




                                               43
                           Table 1: Summary Statistics, continued
                      (1)         (2)          (3)          (4)       (5)
                                  Distance to the CBD (miles)
 Variable   Year   d1=[0,3] d2=(3,10] d3=(10,20] d4=(20,35)          [0,35)
 Married    1980     46.29       62.67        72.22        77.35     66.32
            2010     36.13       48.25        60.72        66.59     56.14
            ∆       -10.16      -14.42        -11.5       -10.76     -10.18
 Ages:
   0-5      1980     8.03        7.85        7.51         8.23        7.82
            2010     6.99        8.32        8.04         8.12        8.08
            ∆        -1.04       0.47        0.53         -0.11       0.26

    6-12    1980     9.04       9.56         10.09        11.02       9.9
            2010     6.58       9.02         9.63         10.12      9.33
            ∆        -2.46      -0.54        -0.46         -0.9      -0.57

    13-18   1980     8.97       9.66         10.62        11.35      10.16
            2010     6.05       8.12         8.64          8.83       8.33
            ∆        -2.92      -1.54        -1.98        -2.52      -1.83

    19-24   1980     12.45      11.21        10.41        10.46      10.97
            2010     10.31      8.58         7.36         6.77        7.84
            ∆        -2.14      -2.63        -3.05        -3.69      -3.13

    25-55   1980      39         38.7        40.52        40.81      39.63
            2010     50.45      45.53        44.64        44.63      45.34
            ∆        11.45       6.83         4.12         3.82       5.71

    56-65   1980     9.74       10.86        10.67         9.21      10.42
            2010     9.67        9.88        10.7         10.88      10.39
            ∆        -0.07      -0.98         0.03         1.67      -0.03

    66-     1980     12.76       12.16        10.18         8.93       11.09
            2010      9.95       10.55        10.99        10.64       10.68
            ∆        -2.81       -1.61         0.81         1.71       -0.41
Note: percent unless otherwise indicated. Income is total personal income. Source: Decennial
censuses and the American Community Survey, restricted use data.




                                            44
                  Table 2: Eﬀects of Bartik-type demand shock on housing values
                     (1)       (2)        (3)          (4)        (5)       (6)        (7)          (8)         (9)
                                                Dependent Variable: Home price (’000) 1980$

  Z                522.0*      425.7
                   [278.0]    [264.1]
  Z×
    d1                       588.9***   580.7***     633.1***   777.4***   561.7**
                              [168.6]    [169.1]      [123.1]    [264.1]   [259.7]

      d2                     234.5***   249.7***     285.2***    235.6
                              [52.21]    [49.95]      [54.47]   [144.8]

      d3                     88.25***   98.22***     153.8***   319.5*
                              [18.25]    [18.49]      [41.01]   [173.0]
  Z×
    dist                                                                             -50.30***   -47.79***   -42.65***
                                                                                       [13.92]     [7.843]     [9.668]

      dist2                                                                          1.053***    0.928***    0.819***
                                                                                      [0.307]     [0.156]     [0.150]

  R2                0.317     0.333      0.362        0.400      0.401      0.401      0.353       0.401       0.402
  Fixed eﬀects:
  City               !          !
  Year               !          !
  City-Year                               !               !       !          !          !           !           !
  City-Distance                                           !       !          !                      !           !
  Distance-Year                                                   !          !                                  !
Regressions 1-3 include distance controls d1, d2, d3; regressions 7-9 include linear and square
continuous distance controls (dist, dist2 ).
Z is the Bartik demand shifter, see Equation 2, also Table A1. d1, d2, and d3 indicate distance
intervals 0-3, 3-10, 10-20 miles from the CBD, respectively.
The unit of observation is a tract and each regression has 65-thousand tract-years.
Significance levels: *** – 0.01; ** – 0.05; * – 0.1. Standard errors are clustered at the city level;
tracts are weighted by population size (ages 25-55).
Source: Decennial censuses and the American Community Survey, restricted use data.




                                                     45
        Table 3: Eﬀects of Bartik-type demand shock on housing values – robustness
         (1)         (2)           (3)            (4)         (5)       (6)       (7)       (8)
                               Dependent Variable: Home price (’000) 1980$
                                                   Sample:
                                                      Cross Section:
                           Years:                 Crime decline:                   Population:
        Panel     1980/1990 2000/2010            High        Low     not NYC   Shrunk      Grew
                                  Panel A. City-year and City-distance FE
 Z×

 d1    655.5***    752.3***       1164.2***      728.6***     511.2***   493.3***   596.9***     661.3***
        [169.4]     [143.5]        [179.5]        [187.8]      [92.62]    [62.16]    [88.75]      [190.4]

 d2    299.7***    449.8***        531.4**       285.2***     290.3**    266.7***   352.6***     241.0***
        [60.29]     [112.4]        [228.5]        [43.39]     [114.6]     [71.79]    [100.7]      [66.12]

 d3     125.2*     298.7***        175.8**          99.77**   241.4***   150.1**    239.9**      102.8**
        [61.03]     [107.0]        [79.86]          [37.41]    [70.42]   [57.38]    [77.41]      [41.01]

 R2      0.591       0.188          0.613            0.356     0.346      0.408        0.241      0.436

                             Panel B. City-year, City-distance, and Distance-year FE
 Z×

 d1     856.2**      533.2        2464.4***          998.3    565.7***   591.8***   622.2***     1190.0**
        [375.1]     [454.2]        [635.1]          [618.4]    [108.0]    [111.3]    [148.9]      [514.0]

 d2       271       -146.3          1489.6           359.5    244.8**     225.1*        264.2    552.3**
        [194.1]     [444.8]        [1000.5]         [231.5]   [112.0]     [125.3]      [149.0]   [223.9]

 d3     431.6*       456.6          280.2        473.6***     398.3***    325.8*    474.6***     354.8**
         [251]      [552.0]        [180.3]        [120.5]      [117.2]    [170.1]    [146.7]     [151.3]

  R2       0.562       0.188       0.613           0.356      0.348      0.409       0.244      0.436
Column 1 includes tract fixed eﬀects.
Z is the Bartik demand shifter, see Equation 2, also Table A1. d1, d2, and d3 indicate distance
0-3, 3-10, 10-20 miles from the CBD, respectively.
The unit of observation is a tract and sample sizes are as follows: column 1: 48 thousand;
columns 2-5, 7-8: about 65/2 thousand; column 6: 53 thousand tract-years.
Significance levels: *** – 0.01; ** – 0.05; * – 0.1. Standard errors are clustered at the city
level; tracts are weighted by population size (ages 25-55). Source: Decennial censuses and the
American Community Survey, restricted use data.




                                               46
           Table 4: Eﬀects of Bartik-type demand shock on full-time skilled workers
                    (1)        (2)          (3)      (4)       (5)
                                   Dependent Variable:
                                    A. F T (40, BA+)
 Z                 11.56
                  [13.91]
 Z×
   d1                        97.27***      33.10**     120.6*    129.4***
                              [12.58]      [13.43]     [59.46]    [39.51]

      d2                       16.94      -31.30***     24.02
                              [14.58]       [8.369]    [44.49]

      d3                       6.977        -16.11*    -54.85*
                              [16.93]       [8.549]    [29.14]

 R2                0.185       0.203        0.318       0.320      0.320

                                       B. F T (40, M A+)
 Z                11.73**
                  [4.520]
 Z×
   d1                        52.17***      14.22***    52.46**   57.52***
                              [6.621]       [4.024]    [21.24]    [16.07]

      d2                       12.34      -15.66***     6.307
                              [10.97]       [3.892]    [17.57]

      d3                       8.080        -7.354     -22.21
                              [10.78]       [4.823]    [15.33]

 R2                0.167       0.185        0.283       0.285      0.284

  Fixed eﬀects:
  city                !
  year                !
  city-year                      !            !          !          !
  city-distance                               !          !          !
  distance-year                                          !          !
Regressions 1-2 include distance controls d1, d2, d3.
Z is the Bartik demand shifter, see Equation 2, also Table A1. d1, d2, and d3 indicate distance
0-3, 3-10, 10-20 miles from the CBD, respectively.
The unit of observation is a tract and each regression has 65-thousand tract-years.
Significance levels: *** – 0.01; ** – 0.05; * – 0.1. Standard errors are clustered at the city level;
tracts are weighted by population size (ages 25-55).
Source: Decennial censuses and the American Community Survey, restricted use data.



                                                  47
            Table 5: Eﬀects of Bartik-type demand shock on other demographics
               (1)         (2)       (3)      (4)        (5)          (6)
                                  Dependent Variable:
                                    %                            (’000) 1980$
         F T (40, BA−)    BA+       Black    White    Married       Income
 Z×
   d1         -0.62        85.72    -92.67    268.2***   103.9***      63.70*
             [0.376]      [55.53]   [67.05]    [49.59]    [24.01]      [34.16]

    d2        0.029        14.69    -52.56    141.7**    70.97**        9.523
             [0.314]      [59.31]   [52.06]   [58.50]    [27.07]       [14.24]

    d3       0.516*       -76.31*    -17.5      63.12    51.39**       -5.304
             [0.284]      [39.51]   [51.28]    [58.72]   [18.62]       [13.84]

  R2            0.261        0.291     0.279      0.444     0.477         0.295
All regressions include city-year, city-distance and distance-year fixed eﬀects.
Z is the Bartik demand shifter, see Equation 2, also Table A1. d1, d2, and d3 indicate distance
intervals 0-3, 3-10, 10-20 miles from the CBD, respectively.
The unit of observation is a tract and each regression has 65-thousand tract-years.
Significance levels: *** – 0.01; ** – 0.05; * – 0.1. Standard errors are clustered at the city
level; tracts are weighted by population size (ages 25-55). Source: Decennial censuses and the
American Community Survey, restricted use data.




                                              48
       Table 6: The relationship between full-time skilled workers and housing prices
                    (1)        (2)         (3)           (4)
                 Dependent Variable: Home price (’000) 1980$
                               A. F T (40, BA+)
 FT              1.829*** 1.831*** 2.037***          1.838***
                  [0.167]    [0.167]     [0.164]      [0.147]

 F T × dist                             -0.0170**    -0.000484
                                        [0.00686]    [0.00501]

 R2                0.475       0.482      0.475        0.482

                                B. F T (40, M A+)
 FT               3.502***   3.507*** 3.635***        3.334***
                   [0.340]    [0.342]      [0.335]     [0.309]

 F T × dist                              -0.0115       0.0144
                                         [0.0163]     [0.0130]

  R2                 0.475      0.482       0.475        0.482
  Fixed eﬀects:
  City-Year            !          !           !            !
  City-Distance        !          !           !            !
  Distance-Year                   !                        !
Regressions 3-4 include continuous distance control, dist.
The unit of observation is a tract and each regression has 65-thousand tract-years.
Significance levels: *** – 0.01; ** – 0.05; * – 0.1. Standard errors are clustered at the city
level; tracts are weighted by population size (ages 25-55). Source: Decennial censuses and the
American Community Survey, restricted use data.




                                             49
          Table 7: Eﬀects of full-time skilled workers on housing values – IV results
                    (1)             (2)            (3)         (4)           (5)
                                Dependent Variable: Home price (’000) 1980$
                                               A. F T (40, BA+)
 FT                 2.007*          1.71           4.341***    5.026***      3.429**
                    [1.201]         [1.363]        [1.215]     [1.049]       [1.508]

 F T × dist                                                       -0.194***       -0.401**
                                                                  [0.0185]        [0.166]

 K-P LM test (p)     0.00615         0.0353          0.00704      0.0024          0.03
 C-D W ald stat.     77.35(b5,s10)   32.45(b5,s10)   53.9(b10)    76.86(b5,s10)   12.49(b5,s15)
 K-P W ald stat.     20(b5,s10)      6.007(b30)      10.82(b10)   18.99(b5,s10)   3.023
 Overid. test (p)    0.0456          0.105           .            0.228           0.29

                                                B. F T (40, M A+)
 FT                  3.212           4.595          9.765***    11.11***          5.943
                     [2.605]         [3.232]        [2.759]     [2.408]           [4.049]

 F T × dist                                                       -0.499***       -0.666**
                                                                  [0.0541]        [0.320]

 K-P LM test (p) 0.00438             0.0233          0.0053       0.0018          0.0589
 C-D W ald stat.    63.02(b5,s10)    20.08(b5,s10)   38.88(b10)   62.22(b5,s10)   9.431(b5,s15)
 K-P W ald stat.    30.01(b5,s10)    4.68            12.92(b10)   20.62(b5,s10)   1.54
 Overid. test (p)   0.0589           0.149           .            0.195           0.219
 Fixed eﬀects:
 City-Year          !                !               !            !               !
 City-Distance      !                !               !            !               !
 Distance-Year                       !               !                            !
 Instruments:
 Z × (d1, d2, d3)   !                !                            !               !
 Z × d1                                              !
Notes on separate page.




                                                50
    Notes to Table 7.
    All specifications include city-year, city-distance and distance-year fixed eﬀects.
    Regressions 4-5 include continuous distance control, dist.
    Z is the Bartik demand shifter, see Equation 2, also Table A1. dist is distance in miles
from the CBD, d1, d2, and d3 indicate distance intervals 0-3, 3-10, 10-20 miles from the CBD,
respectively.
    The unit of observation is a tract and each regression has 65-thousand tract-years.
    Significance levels: *** – 0.01; ** – 0.05; * – 0.1. Standard errors are clustered at the city
level; tracts are weighted by population size (ages 25-55). Source: Decennial censuses and the
American Community Survey, restricted use data.
    K-P LM test (p) corresponds to the p-value of the Kleinbergen-Paap LM test. The null
hypothesis is that the structural equation is under identified (i.e., the rank condition fails).
    C-D W ald stat and K-P W ald statistics are the Cragg-Donald and Kleibergen-Paap Wald
statistics for testing weak identification. In both cases, the critical values are the Stock and
Yogo [2005] critical values initially tabulated for the C-D W ald stat, see Table 8. We follow
Baum [2007] and also apply the Stock and Yogo critical values to the K-P W ald stat (critical
values for the K-P W ald stat do not exist). In each case, we specify whether the test statistics
rejects the null hypothesis (at the 5% level) that the bias of of the IV estimates exceeds the
OLS bias by 5, 10, 20 and 30 percent (b5, b10, b20, b30), and whether test statistics rejects
the null hypothesis (at the 5% level) that the size of the test is greater than 10, 15, 20 and
25 percent (s20, s15, s20, s25). C-D W ald stat and K-P W ald statistics reduce to the the
standard non-robust and heteroscedasticity robust first-stage F -statistics, respectively. The
critical values for the relative bias test cannot be computed for the case of 2 endogenous and 3
instruments and we use the more conservative critical values for the case of 2 endogenous and
4 instruments, see Stock and Yogo [2005] and Table 8.
    Overid. test (p) corresponds to the p-value of the test of the overidentifying restrictions.
The null hypothesis is that the instruments are valid instruments.
    Source: Decennial censuses and the American Community Survey, restricted use data.




                                               51
       Table 8: Threshold values for Cragg-Donald and Kleibergen-Paap W ald statistics
                            (1)     (2)
  Number of variables:
  Endogenous                 1       2
  Exogenous                  3      4a
  Stock-Yogo 2SLS Bias
  0.05                     13.91 11.04
  0.10                      9.08   7.56
  0.20                      6.46   5.57
  0.30                      5.39   4.73
  Stock-Yogo 2SLS Size
  0.10                     22.30 13.43
  0.15                     12.83 8.18
  0.20                      9.54   6.40
  0.25                      7.80   5.45
a
  – used for our case of 2 endogenous and 3 exogenous (more conservative).
Source: Stock and Yogo [2005, table 5.1 and 5.2].




                                            52
Appendix
Figures


                       Figure A1: % Full time, 40+h/week, 1940-2010
      90
      80
      70
      60
  %
      50
      40
      30
      20




           1940     1950        1960        1970       1980        1990        2000        2010

                                       Men & BA−                 Men & BA+
                                       Women & BA−               Women & BA+


Source: 1940-2010 decennial censuses, Integrated Public Use Microdata Series (IPUMS).
Notes: The figure shows the percent of individuals (25-55) that worked more than 40 hours/week
by census year, by sex and education. BA+ corresponds to a four-year college degree or more,
BA- is the complement. See the Appendix for further variable and sample construction details.




                                              53
                       Figure A2: % Full time, 50+h/week, 1940-2010
      50
      40
      30
  %
      20
      10
      0




           1940     1950        1960        1970       1980        1990        2000        2010

                                       Men & BA−                 Men & BA+
                                       Women & BA−               Women & BA+


Source: 1940-2010 decennial censuses, Integrated Public Use Microdata Series (IPUMS).
Notes: The figure shows the percent of individuals (25-55) that worked more than 50 hours/week
by census year, by sex and education. BA+ corresponds to a four-year college degree or more,
BA- is the complement. See the Appendix for further variable and sample construction details.




                                              54
                        Figure A3: Full time, 40+h/week, 1980-2014
      90
      80
      70
      60
  %
      50
      40
      30
      20




           1980     1985        1990        1995        2000        2005        2010      2014

                      Men & BA−                    Men & BA                    Men & MA+
                      Women & BA−                  Women & BA                  Women & MA+


Note: Men and women ages 25-55.
Sources: Decennial data: Decennial censuses, integrated public use micro data series (IPUMS).
Annual data: The Current Population Surveys (CPS).




                                             55
                        Figure A4: Full time, 50+h/week, 1980-2014
      50
      40
      30
  %
      20
      10
      0




           1980     1985        1990        1995        2000        2005        2010      2014

                      Men & BA−                    Men & BA                    Men & MA+
                      Women & BA−                  Women & BA                  Women & MA+


Note: Men and women ages 25-55.
Sources: Decennial data: Decennial censuses, integrated public use micro data series (IPUMS).
Annual data: The Current Population Surveys (CPS).




                                             56
           160
           140          Figure A5: Home prices by distance from the CBD, cities that lost population
 1980USD (000)
   100    120
           80
           60




                       0               5           10               15          20
                                            Miles from CBD

                                1980         1990            2000        2010


Notes: The figure shows the median price (1980$) for owner-occupied, 2-3 bedroom, one-family
homes in our top-20 US cities, by distance from the CBD. See the Appendix for further details
on variable and sample construction, especially Table A8. 20 miles includes 20-35 miles.

Source: Decennial censuses and the American Community Survey, restricted use data.


                       Figure A6: Home prices by distance from the CBD, cities that gained population
           300   250
   1980USD (000)
 150    200100




                       0               5           10               15          20
                                            Miles from CBD

                                1980         1990            2000        2010


Notes: The figure shows the median price (1980$) for owner-occupied, 2-3 bedroom, one-family
homes in our top-20 US cities, by distance from the CBD. See the Appendix for further details
on variable and sample construction, especially Table A8. 20 miles includes 20-35 miles.

Source: Decennial censuses and the American Community Survey, restricted use data.


                                                                57
                  Figure A7: % adults 25-55, unskilled and full time, by distance from the CBD


                                  Women: 40h                                          Women: 50h
    15 20 25 30 35 40




                                                                      5
                                                                      4
            %




                                                                  %
                                                                      3
                                                                      2
                        0     5          10      15        20              0      5          10      15   20
                                  Miles from CBD                                      Miles from CBD


                                   Men: 40h                                            Men: 50h
             60




                                                                      20
             50




                                                                      15
    40
    %




                                                                  %
                                                                      10
             30
             20




                                                                      5




                        0     5          10      15        20              0      5          10      15   20
                                  Miles from CBD                                      Miles from CBD


                                  1980                 1990                    2000               2010

Notes: 40h(50h) denotes working 40(50) hours or more per week.
Source: Decennial censuses and the American Community Survey, restricted use data.




                                                      58
Bartik
We group industries into 41 categories using the 1990 industry classification available in IPUMS
(see IPUMS website or Edlund et al. [2015]. In the preliminary analysis we also used a more
aggregate grouping into seven industries, the results were very similar, but we favor the more
disaggregate grouping because of the reduction in within-group industry heterogeneity.


                              Table   A1: Bartik, Base Year 1970
 City                1980    1990      2000 2010 Central Business District (CBD)
 Austin              0.169   0.259     0.320 0.350 Texas Capitol
 Baltimore           0.110   0.169     0.206 0.223 W. Lexington × Park Ave.
 Boston              0.144   0.226     0.277 0.298 South Station
 Charlotte           0.102   0.162     0.192 0.206 Charlotte Convention Center
 Chicago             0.110   0.175     0.214 0.229 LaSalle × W. Congress Parkway
 Cleveland           0.102   0.162     0.196 0.212 Soldiers’ and Sailors’ Monument
 Columbus            0.126   0.197     0.242 0.262 E. Long Street × Route 3
 Dallas              0.122   0.196     0.232 0.251 Dallas Convention center
 Detroit             0.090   0.145     0.171 0.186 Grand Circus Park
 El Paso             0.112   0.170     0.211 0.230 El Paso Art Institute
 Fort Worth          0.122   0.196     0.232 0.251 Fort Worth Convention Center
 Houston             0.137   0.209     0.243 0.266 Houston Center
 Indianapolis        0.093   0.147     0.177 0.191 Monument Circle
 Jacksonville        0.094   0.148     0.178 0.194 Bank of America Tower
 Los Angeles         0.126   0.200     0.242 0.260 Pershing Square
 Memphis             0.091   0.144     0.176 0.190 Beale St. × Riverside Drive
 Milwaukee           0.102   0.159     0.192 0.207 Milwaukee County Court House
 New Orleans         0.112   0.169     0.196 0.216 New Orleans Morial Convention Center
 New York            0.136   0.217     0.266 0.286 Rockefeller Center
 Philadelphia        0.105   0.165     0.202 0.218 City Hall
 Phoenix             0.116   0.183     0.221 0.237 Phoenix Convention Center
 Saint Louis         0.103   0.163     0.197 0.213 Federal Reserve
 San Antonio         0.089   0.138     0.166 0.180 Tower of the Americas
 San Diego           0.125   0.196     0.240 0.259 Horton Plaza
 San Francisco       0.172   0.273     0.332 0.362 Transamerica Pyramid
 San Jose            0.163   0.253     0.312 0.330 1 Infinity Loop (Apple Inc. headquarters)
 Washington D.C.     0.229   0.344     0.426 0.461 White House




                                              59
Tables




         60
         Table A2: The Eﬀects of Demand Shock on Housing Values (’000) 1980$, logged
                    (1)       (2)        (3)       (4)       (5)      (6)         (7)            (8)          (9)
                                         Dependent Variable: Home price (’000) 1980$, Logged
 Z                 1.995      1.212
                  [1.585]    [1.622]
 Z×
   d1                       4.988***   5.031***   3.618***   -1.148    -2.363**
                             [1.157]    [1.172]    [0.581]   [1.438]    [1.009]

     d2                     2.442***   2.588***   1.798***    1.386
                             [0.605]    [0.602]    [0.529]   [1.501]

     d3                     0.626***   0.682***   0.720***   1.725*
                             [0.188]    [0.182]    [0.259]   [0.860]
 Z×
 dist                                                                             -0.532***   -0.335***    -0.246***
                                                                                    [0.122]    [0.0506]     [0.0833]

 dist2                                                                            0.0116***   0.00703***   0.00526***
                                                                                  [0.00270]    [0.00119]    [0.00144]

 R2                0.479     0.498      0.528      0.591     0.592      0.592       0.528       0.592        0.593
 Fixed eﬀects:
 City                 !        !
 Year                 !        !
 City-Year                               !             !       !         !           !           !            !
 City-Distance                                         !       !         !                       !            !
 Distance-Year                                                 !         !                                    !
Notes, see Table 2.




                                                  61
           Table A3: Eﬀects of Bartik-type demand shock on full-time skilled workers
                     (1)        (2)         (3)       (4)       (5)
                                  Dependent Variable:
                                     F T (50, BA+)
 Z                  11.73
                   [8.483]
 Z×
   d1                        54.97***       35.51**      103.3**   95.50**
                              [11.44]       [14.73]      [44.69]   [42.18]

      d2                       8.181       -14.00***     25.65*
                              [7.638]        [3.863]     [14.84]

      d3                       2.720        -8.558**     -9.807
                              [7.520]        [4.119]     [13.34]

 R2                 0.145      0.167         0.294        0.296     0.296

                                        F T (50, M A+)
 Z                8.160***
                   [1.981]

      d1                     29.22***      16.79***      43.35**   40.07**
                              [4.266]       [5.363]      [17.56]   [17.98]

      d2                       6.175       -6.297***      10.76
                              [5.229]        [2.014]     [7.386]

      d3                       3.229        -3.270       -4.061
                              [4.468]       [2.224]      [6.950]

 R2                 0.128      0.147         0.253        0.255     0.254
 Fixed eﬀects:
 city                !
 year                !
 city-year                      !             !            !         !
 city-distance                                !            !         !
 distance-year                                             !         !
Notes, see Table 4.




                                                  62
       Table A4: The relationship between full-time skilled workers and housing prices
                    (1)        (2)          (3)        (4)
                                F T (50, BA+)
 FT              4.003*** 3.995*** 4.320*** 3.964***
                  [0.371]    [0.371]      [0.325]    [0.322]

 F T × dist                             -0.0260**   0.00227
                                         [0.0124]   [0.0118]

 R2                0.488      0.494       0.488       0.494

                                F T (50, M A+)
 FT               6.732***   6.708*** 6.740***      6.210***
                   [0.651]    [0.654]     [0.625]    [0.587]

 F T × dist                             -0.00124     0.0422
                                        [0.0320]    [0.0283]

 R2                 0.480     0.486       0.480       0.486
 Fixed eﬀects:
 City-Year           !          !          !           !
 City-Distance       !          !          !           !
 Distance-Year                  !                      !
Notes, see Table 6.




                                             63
         Table A5: Eﬀects of full-time skilled workers on housing values – IV results
                       (1)          (2)        (3)         (4)        (5)
                         Dependent Variable: Home price (’000) 1980$
                                         F T (50, BA+)
 FT                 6.017*** 4.328*** 5.882*** 7.067*** 6.887***
                     [0.889]     [1.325]     [1.047]     [0.801]    [2.613]

 F T × dist                                              -0.401***   -1.483
                                                          [0.0430]   [1.136]

 K-P LM test (p)       0.0163     0.0174      0.00521     0.00677     0.177
 C-D W ald stat.        169.4       53         121.8       147.9      2.511
 K-P W ald stat.        7.615      4.755        5.17       8.768      1.982
 Overid. test (p)      0.0299     0.405           .        0.328      0.91

                                            F T (50, M A+)
 FT                   13.15***   10.34***      14.02*** 15.28***     10.37**
                       [1.973]    [3.234]       [2.421]    [1.787]   [5.090]

 F T × dist                                              -0.915***   -2.401
                                                           [0.107]   [2.362]

 K-P LM test (p)       0.0164     0.0142      0.00437     0.0025      0.199
 C-D W ald stat.        111.2      28.59       65.86       96.59      2.211
 K-P W ald stat.        10.05      4.506       5.008       11.44      0.907
 Overid. test (p)      0.0406     0.378          .        0.336       0.463
 Fixed eﬀects:
 City-Year              !          !             !          !          !
 City-Distance          !          !             !          !          !
 Distance-Year                     !             !                     !
 Instruments:
 Z × (d1, d2, d3)       !          !                        !          !
 Z × d1                                          !
Notes, see Table 7.




                                                64
  Table A6: Eﬀects of full-time skilled workers on housing values – IV results, robustness
                      (1)          (2)            (3)          (4)         (5)         (6)          (7)        (8)
                                             Dependent Variable: Home price (’000) 1980$
                                                                Sample:
                                                                   Cross Section:
                                         Years:                Crime decline:                        Population:
                     Panel     1980/1990 2000/2010            High        Low      not NYC        Shrunk     Grew
                                                            F T (40, BA+)
 FT               4.132***        5.267        6.339**      3.767***     3.477*     3.402***      4.266***   4.473***
                    [1.407]      [3.768]        [2.599]      [0.793]     [1.943]     [0.671]       [1.379]    [1.647]

 K-P LM test (p)      0.0037      0.0444        0.146          0.128      0.0337      0.0496       0.172      0.017
 C-D W ald stat.       436.7       6.407        6.727          13.13       40.27       36.78       11.37      43.02
 K-P LM test (p)      10.23       12.68         9.509          22.64       22.84       13.03       23.63      31.48

                                                             F T (40, M A+)
 FT                  9.750***      8.132      8.083***       7.075***    8.704*      7.570***     8.175***   11.39***
                      [2.687]     [5.489]      [2.142]        [2.258]    [4.796]      [1.612]      [2.787]    [4.037]

 K-P LM test (p)      0.0028      0.0692       0.0943          0.092      0.0318      0.0349       0.183      0.0112
 C-D W ald stat.       240.4       10.27        14.87          13.88       22.91       27.74       10.03       26.71
 K-P LM test (p)      8.121       6.568        27.51           11.08       16.78       18.36       27.4       15.52

                                                             F T (50, BA+)
 FT                  5.306***     5.203*       15.67**       7.124*** 4.487***       5.326***     7.154***   5.756***
                      [1.182]     [2.977]      [7.663]        [1.345]    [1.572]      [1.197]      [1.622]    [1.145]

 K-P LM test (p)     0.00436      0.0212        0.132          0.141      0.0193      0.0542       0.114     0.00663
 C-D W ald stat.      720.1        35.13        4.338           16.2      94.37        65.25       17.15      106.3
 K-P LM test (p)      5.354       8.844         6.511          22.75       6.095       8.368       13.83      9.061

                                                             F T (50, M A+)
 FT                  12.69***     8.600*      19.72***       15.77*** 10.92***       12.72***     15.65***   14.55***
                      [2.379]     [4.846]      [5.624]        [4.675]    [3.563]      [2.897]      [3.431]    [2.749]

  K-P LM test (p) 0.00548           0.0278        0.0862         0.0993      0.0183   0.0399       0.102     0.00676
  C-D W ald stat.       347.8        37.95         8.411          10.14       48.88    35.46       9.747      56.16
  K-P LM test (p)       4.376        7.545         20.72          11.22       5.489     8.8        12.24      7.126
The instrument is Z × d1, corresponding to column 3, Table 7.
For cities in columns 4 and 5, see Appendix Table A7.
For cities in columns 7 and 8, see Appendix Table A8.
All specifications include city-year, city-distance and distance-year fixed eﬀects.
Z is the Bartik demand shifter, see Equation 2, also Table A1. d1, d2, and d3 indicate distance
0-3, 3-10, 10-20 miles from the CBD, respectively.
The unit of observation is a tract and sample sizes are as follows: column 1: 48 thousand;
columns 2-5, 7-8: about 65/2 thousand; column 6: 53 thousand tract-years.
Significance levels: *** – 0.01; ** – 0.05; * – 0.1. Standard errors are clustered at the city
level; tracts are weighted by population size (ages 25-55). Source: Decennial censuses and the
American Community Survey, restricted use data.
See Table 7 for further notes.
                                                 65
                       Table A7: Change in Violent Crime 1986-2012
  High Crime Reduction Cities
  New Orleans                     -.64
  New York City                   -.60
  Boston                          -.55
  Los Angeles County              -.54
  Detroit                         -.42
  Baltimore City                  -.41
  Dallas                          -.41
  San Francisco                   -.39
  Low Crime Reduction Cities
  St. Louis                       -.34
  Jacksonville                    -.28
  City Of Fort Worth              -.28
  Washington Metropolitan         -.26
  San Diego County Sheriﬀ         -.18
  El Paso County Sheriﬀ           -.18
  Cleveland                       -.17
  San Jose                        .02
  Philadelphia                    .10
  Columbus∗                       .18
  Memphis                         .18
  Phoenix                         .25
  San Antonio                     .28
  Houston                         .31
  Austin                          .44
  Milwaukee                       .91
  Indianapolis                    1.15
  Chicago                         n.a.
  Charlotte                       n.a
∗
   The entry for Columbus is for the period 1986-2011.
Violent crimes include murder, rape, robbery, aggravated assault. For a detailed description,
see http://www.ucrdatatool.gov/offenses.cfm.
Source:     Uniform Crime Report http://www.ucrdatatool.gov/Search/Crime/Local/
TrendsInOneVarLarge.cfm




                                             66
                              Table A8: Population Change
                      Population
 City                 1970        2010     Change % Change
                                    Shrunk
 Detroit         1,511,482     713,777    -797,705        -53
 St. Louis         622,236     319,294    -302,942        -49
 Cleveland         750,903     396,815    -354,088        -47
 New Orleans       593,471     343,829    -249,642        -42
 Baltimore         905,759     620,961    -284,798        -31
 Philadelphia    1,948,609   1,526,006    -422,603        -22
 DC                756,510     601,723    -154,787        -20
 Chicago         3,366,957   2,695,598    -671,359        -20
 Milwaukee         717,099     594,833    -122,266        -17
 Boston            641,071     617,594     -23,477         -4
 Sum            11,814,097   8,430,430 -3,383,667         -29

                                      Grew
 New York       7,894,862     8,175,133     280,271        4
 Memphis           623,530      646,889      23,359        4
 Indianapolis      744,624      820,445      75,821       10
 SF                715,674      805,235      89,561       13
 LA             2,816,061     3,792,621     976,560       35
 Columbus          539,677      787,033     247,356       46
 Jacksonville      528,865      821,784     292,919       55
 Dallas-FW      1,237,877     1,939,012     701,135       57
 Houston        1,232,802     2,100,263     867,461       70
 San Diego         696,769    1,307,402     610,633       88
 El Paso           322,261      649,121     326,860      101
 San Antonio       654,153    1,327,407     673,254      103
 San Jose          445,779      945,942     500,163      112
 Phoenix           581,562    1,445,632     864,070      149
 Charlotte         241,178      731,424     490,246      203
 Austin            251,808      790,390     538,582      214
 Sum           19,527,482    27,085,733   7,558,251       39
Source: US Census.




                                            67
Variable construction
P RICE 2-3 Bedroom single-family home The decennial censuses and the ACS ask the
     owner of owner-occupied single-family homes the estimated value of the value of their
     home. While self-reported assessments of values, we will refer to them as housing prices.
     In order to obtain numbers that are close to market prices, we restrict the sample to those
     who moved in within the last ten years, on the assumption that homes that owners of more
     recently bought and sold units would be more knowledgeable about price developments
     than those with longer tenure.
     To obtain a price that refers to comparable units while preserving sample size, we focus
     on two or three bedroom single-family homes. Housing prices are given in intervals and
     the bracket values vary across the years. Therefore, we focus on the median bracket value.
     For tracts where the median bracket is the top code, we assign the dollar value that would
     be the mean if the top bracket had had the same range as the penultimate bracket. For
     instance, if the penultimate bracket ranged from 800 thousand to 1 million, and 1 million
     and above were the top bracket, we would give houses in the top bracket a 1.1 million
     dollar valuation. We chose this rule because it is conservative and if anything result in
     an underestimate of the price increases close to the CBD.
     We focus on the median home price in the tract. Top coding is our reason for focusing
     on the median rather than a more selective percentile.
     In our main specification, we impute a value that is the same distance from the top-code
     threshold as the immediately preceding midpoint value. For instance, if the top bracket
     is 800-1000, and values above 1000 are top coded, we assign the value 1100 to the top
     code. This method is conservative if the housing price distribution, like the wealth and
     income distributions, is right skewed.
     We also tried alternative top codings, including simply imputing the threshold value. Our
     qualitative results were not sensitive to these variations.
     For the study period 1980-2010, our measure shows a 30 percent increase in constant
     dollars, a rise largely inline with the Case-Shiller national index’s rise of 26 percent.
     The Case-Shiller national index went from 43.44 to 145.0, and the CPI from 100 to 264,
                                                                         145
     yielding a constant dollar housing price increase of 26 percent (= 43.44 × 100
                                                                                264 − 1).
     Another benchmark is oﬀered by the Census Bureau’s constant price index for new-
     family homes sold rose from $72 to $272 thousand, current dollars. In constant dollars,
                                    76 × 264 − 1). https://www.census.gov/const/www/
     the increase was 30 percent (= 261   100

     constpriceindex_excel.html
     We use the Consumer Price Index (CPI) to deflate housing prices. A theoretical concern
     is that housing accounts for some 40 percent of the CPI and therefore a price index that
     excluded housing would be preferable, for instance the food price index. Conveniently,
     the food price index moved very closely with the CPI and on those grounds we use the
     CPI despite its theoretical shortcomings.

Center point, Central Business District (CBD) For each city we identified the center
    with the help of Google maps. All cities had a clear central area identifiable from the
    convergence of roads, the presence of a main railway station, clusters of hotels with the
    national chain name prefixed by “down town” and a concentration of signature institutions
    and monuments. We used the thus identified area to designate a city center, with one
    exception. For San Jose, we placed downtown in Silicon Valley.


                                              68
     The only city with more than one clear center was New York City, where both midtown
     and downtown can claim that title. We picked the midtown center but locating the center
     downtown resulted in similar results. Because of this ambiguity, in a robustness test we
     exclude the New York metropolitan area and results are robust to this exclusion (Table
     A6, column 3).
     Within each center we picked a center point, a salient building or monument, and obtained
     its latitude and longitude from iTouchMap.com. For instance, for Washington DC, the
     CBD is given by the White House and for San Jose, Apple Inc. Headquarters. While
     clearly there are alternative points, but most contenders would be within a mile or two
     of the points picked, listed in Table A1.
Distance to the CBD (dist) From tract shape files, we have generated latitude and longi-
     tude for the (population weighted) centroid of the tract, allowing us to calculate the
     distance between a tract and the CBD. We restrict our sample to tracts that are within
     35 miles of the CBD.
     In the preliminary analysis, we found our variables of interest to exhibit a pronounced
     j-shape with respect to distance from the CBD, the minimum located somewhere in the
     3-7 mile range. Therefore we grouped distance from the CBD as follows:
     d1 0-3 miles
     d2 3-10 miles
     d3 10-20 miles
     d4 20-35 miles, reference category.
F T Full Time F T (h, e) denotes the fraction of adults 25-55 who worked more that h, h =
     40, 50 hours per week and had education e, e = BA+, M A+.
Z Metropolitan Area Demand Shifter for Skilled Workers See description in Section
    2.2

IV.1     Panel data set construction
We use US2010 cross-walk files to create a tract-level panel data set, where for each tract in
2010 we construct its equivalent in previous years using cross-walk files from http://www.s4.
brown.edu/us2010/Researcher/Bridging.htm. These files provide a mapping of tracts in a
census year and 2010, as well as weights. For example, if there were a new tract B in 2010 that
was the result of combining blocks from year 2000 tracts B1 and B2, then we would create a
year 2000 tract B as a weighted average of B1 and B2. Thus, the ability to include tract fixed
eﬀects comes at the cost of data quality, and the problem worsens with the number of years to
2010 (more time allows for more changes to tracts). In order to explore the role of race, we are
interested in parsing the sample by initial fraction blacks. Therefore, we restrict the sample to
tracts for which we have an observation in 1980 and also remove tracts for which we only have
one observation. We are left with a sample of about 48 thousand tracts.




                                               69
