                              NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                       THE OPTION VALUE OF HUMAN CAPITAL:
                     HIGHER EDUCATION AND WAGE INEQUALITY

                                         Sang Yoon Lee
                                         Yongseok Shin
                                         Donghoon Lee

                                       Working Paper 21724
                               http://www.nber.org/papers/w21724


                     NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                              1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                Cambridge, MA 02138
                                   November 2015




The views expressed herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the
National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.

© 2015 by Sang Yoon Lee, Yongseok Shin, and Donghoon Lee. All rights reserved. Short sections
of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full
credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
The Option Value of Human Capital: Higher Education and Wage Inequality
Sang Yoon Lee, Yongseok Shin, and Donghoon Lee
NBER Working Paper No. 21724
November 2015
JEL No. E24,I24,J24

                                              ABSTRACT

Going to college is a risky investment in human capital. However, we highlight two options inherently
embedded in college education that mitigate this risk: (i) college students can quit without completing
four-year degrees after learning about their post-graduation wages and (ii) college graduates can take
jobs that do not require four-year degrees (i.e., underemployment). These options reduce the chances
of falling in the lower end of the wage distribution as a college graduate, rendering standard mean-variance
calculations misleading. We show that the interaction between these options and the rising wage dispersion,
especially among college graduates, is key to understanding the muted response of college enrollment
and graduation rates to the substantial increase in the college wage premium in the United States since
1980. Furthermore, we find that subsidies inducing marginal students to attend colleges will have a
negligible net benefit: Such students are far more likely to drop out of college or become underemployed
even with a four-year degree, implying only small wage gains from college education.


Sang Yoon Lee                                        Donghoon Lee
University of Mannheim                               Federal Reserve Bank of New York
sylee.tim@uni-mannheim.de                            33 Liberty Street
                                                     New York, NY 10045
Yongseok Shin                                        donghoon.lee@ny.frb.org
Department of Economics
Washington University in St. Louis
One Brookings Drive
St. Louis, MO 63130
and NBER
yshin@wustl.edu
1     Introduction
In the early 1980s, American men with at least four years of college education earned
about 40 percent more on average than those whose education ended with high school.
By 2005, this college wage premium rose to above 90 percent. During the same time pe-
riod, the fraction of men with a four-year college degree in the working-age population
all but remained constant. This masks a slight increase in the fraction of high school
graduates who enter college (enrollment rate) being offset by a decrease in the fraction
of college enrollees who eventually earn a four-year degree (graduation rate). Also dur-
ing the same period, overall wage inequality increased substantially, even among men
with the same level of education. This rise in within-education-group wage dispersion
was sharpest among college graduates, a fact rarely noted in the literature.
    This paper develops a quantitative model of educational choice to explain why the
enrollment and graduation rates were unresponsive to the rising college wage premium.
In the model, individuals differ in their returns to college—the wage gains from com-
pleting four-year college education—and make sequential decisions: first, whether or
not to enroll in college, and then whether or not to graduate with a four-year degree.
The individual returns are not fully known to students until they enter labor markets,
making both college enrollment and graduation risky investments.
    However, we emphasize two real options inherent in college education that render
standard mean-variance trade-off calculations misleading. First, college enrollees may
choose not to complete a four-year degree after learning more about their individual
returns while in college. In the data, this would include students explicitly dropping out
of colleges (more commonly two-year colleges), as well as those who complete a two-year
college but do not transfer to a four-year college. We will refer to them collectively as
“some-college” or “college dropouts.” The second option is underemployment: college
graduates may take jobs that do not require a four-year degree. This operationalizes
the idea that the wage distribution faced by a college graduate stochastically dominates
the one he would have faced without a four-year degree.
    We find that an increase in the dispersion of the returns-to-college distribution
and how it interacts with the two options above are important for understanding the
education and labor market outcomes in 1980 and 2005. A mean-preserving spread
of the returns-to-college distribution does not shift the realized wage distribution of
college graduates symmetrically because of the options. Those with higher returns
to college do graduate and pull the observed college wage premium higher. However,
those who learn that their own returns are lower than expected either quit college (and
hence fall out of the calculation for the college premium) or become underemployed
upon graduation (truncating the left tail of the college wage distribution). This results



                                            2
in a higher college wage premium ex post.
   This explains why the fraction of college graduates (among men) did not increase in
2005, despite the much higher college wage premium. An across-the-board increase in
the returns to college would have resulted in a substantial rise in both enrollment and
graduation, contrary to the data. Indeed in our calibration, the population mean of
the returns-to-college distribution does not rise nearly as much (only by 12 percentage
points) as the observed college wage premium (by 57 percentage points) between 1980
and 2005. We find that more than half of the rise in the observed college wage premium
is driven by a mean-preserving increase in the variance of the returns to college (both
in terms of individual heterogeneity and risk—although the two work through different
economic mechanisms). In contrast, only one-fifth of the college premium increase
is explained by a higher population mean return to college. At the same time, the
larger returns-to-college dispersion makes college education a riskier investment ex
ante, counteracting the positive effect on college enrollment and graduation rates from
the 12-percentage-point increase in the mean returns to college.
   The distinctive features of our model—sequential college enrollment-graduation
decisions and underemployment options—are also consistent with several empirical
facts largely neglected in the literature. While the college wage premium increased
from 36 percent to 93 percent between 1980 and 2005, the wage premium of those who
have some college education but no four-year degree (i.e., some-college wage premium
over the high-school-only group) only increased from 6 percent to 21 percent. Over the
same period, even among college graduates, the wage premium of those underemployed
increased from 11 to 46 percent. In other words, the headline increase in the college
wage premium is primarily driven by the wage increase among college graduates with
jobs that do require four-year degrees (from 44 to 116 percent over the same period).
   Our model also provides a new perspective on the debate of whether too few or too
many students are going to college.
   For marginal high school graduates in our model who are indifferent between en-
rolling in college or not, the expected wage gains from enrollment are small. If we nudge
such marginal students to go to college, using 2005 figures, 95 percent of them would
quit college, consequently raising their wage by only 15 percent on average compared to
what they would have earned without enrolling. Even the other five percent who would
eventually graduate from colleges only earn a wage premium of 33 percent—roughly
one-third of the college premium in the overall population. As a consequence, the
marginal students’ wage gains from college enrollment are only 16 percent on average.
   The low wage gains are not surprising once we realize that marginal students do not
go to college because they have realistic, low expectations of their returns to college
in the first place. We note that our result is much smaller than the estimates in the


                                            3
empirical literature, e.g. Card (1999). The main reason for this discrepancy is that we
explicitly account for the “selection on gains” that arises when students decide whether
or not to graduate from colleges, based on signals of their post-graduation returns.
Although much of the literature addresses positive selection into college enrollment
following Heckman et al. (2006) and others, typically the next stage of selection—
whether a marginal college student will graduate or not—is not explicitly addressed,
likely biasing upward the returns-to-college estimates, e.g., Carneiro et al. (2011).
   Extending this exercise, we find that college tuition subsidies designed to push more
students into colleges will only have a negligible net benefit. If we make the first two
years of college free in the 2005 benchmark, the enrollment rate increases by almost 10
percentage points (from 65 to 75 percent). Those whose enrollment decision is changed
by the subsidies (“switchers”) are mostly marginal students, and the model predicts
that 97 percent of them will quit college before completing a four-year degree. As a
consequence, the average wage gains from the subsidized college enrollment are only
13 percent. In addition, while more switchers come from poorer backgrounds, rich
switchers see larger wage gains than poor switchers, mainly because initial (family)
wealth is positively correlated with the individual returns.
   In a related analysis, we find that subsidizing college graduation rather than enroll-
ment generates even smaller benefits. The explanation is that selection on individual
returns is sharper at the graduation stage than at the enrollment stage, because stu-
dents learn about their individual returns while they are in college.
   Finally, on the opposite end of the debate, our model shows that the existence of
underemployed college graduates does not necessarily mean that too many students
are going to (and graduating from) college. Underemployment is a natural outcome of
the real option inherent in the risky human capital investment of college education.

Contribution to the Literature This paper analyzes the linkage between the ris-
ing within-education-group wage dispersion and the changes in educational attainment
over time, which has been hitherto unexplored in the literature. The existing papers on
trends in educational attainment typically focus on between-education-group inequal-
ity (i.e., college premium). We find that the second moments of the individual returns
to college (in terms of both heterogeneity and risk) are important for understanding
the trends in educational attainment and college premium.
   Our model departs from the college vs. high school dichotomy, and incorporates
college dropouts and underemployment. The assumption that college students decide
whether or not to graduate after learning more about their post-graduation wages
separates our model from the few existing papers on college dropouts, in which students
quit college for reasons that are orthogonal to their wage gains from college education


                                            4
(e.g., preference shocks). Underemployment is a modeling element we are introducing
to the literature, although the notion itself is not entirely new.
   By explicitly modeling these two real options, we add to the literature in three ways.
First, by interacting the options and the rising wage dispersion (most conspicuously
among college graduates), we show that standard mean-variance trade-off calculations
may be misleading. In particular, a large part of the rise in the observed college
premium is a direct result of a mean-preserving spread in individual heterogeneity and
risk. Second, we quantify how strong the positive selection into college graduation
is, and show that this margin is important for computing the hypothetical gains to
college education of marginal high-school graduates. Finally, we draw attention to a
few trends in the data that are often overlooked: changes over time in some-college
premium, underemployment premium, and wage inequality within education groups.
   The trends in college premium and college enrollment are analyzed in Heckman et al.
(1998) and Lee and Wolpin (2006). They focus on the schooling response to an increase
in the mean difference between high- and low-skilled workers, but do not distinguish
between college enrollment and completion. However, Bailey and Dynarski (2011)
and Bound and Turner (2011), for example, emphasize that college graduation rates
decreased while enrollment rates increased between 1980 and 2000. This fact defies a
simple explanation based on population-wide increases in education premia, and calls
for an explicit modeling of the college completion as well as enrollment decisions.
   In Heckman and Urzua (2009), Stange (2012) and Stinebrickner and Stinebrickner
(2012), college students decide whether or not to graduate from college after obtaining
new information. The key difference from ours is that the decision is not directly linked
to post-graduation labor market outcomes: These are micro studies that primarily rely
on data on students who are still in college. In addition, they do not consider the
interaction between this option and the second moment of the payoff distribution.
Another paper that features college dropouts is Athreya and Eberly (2013), which
emphasizes “failure shocks” that exogenously oust students from college, even those
who stand to command high returns from college education. This contrasts with the
assumption in our model (and also in the above papers) that dropping out is a voluntary
decision negatively correlated with the expected gains from college. Our modeling
choice is more in line with the empirical evidence on the predictability and selection
in dropout/graduation decisions—e.g., Altonji (1993), Bowen et al. (2009), Bound and
Turner (2011), and Stinebrickner and Stinebrickner (2014).
   On underemployment, there is only a nascent empirical literature, in which the same
phenomenon is typically viewed as skill mismatch and accordingly labeled “overeduca-
tion,” e.g., Leuven and Oosterbeek (2011) and Clark et al. (2015).
   On the empirical side, Lemieux (2010) documents that much of the rise in wage dis-


                                            5
       persion coincides with the rise in the college premium and that much of the increasing
       dispersion originates from more educated workers. Autor et al. (2008) focuses on the
       difference in residual wage inequality at different income percentiles. While suggestive
       of the increasing dispersion in the returns to college, these empirically-oriented papers
       do not consider its effect on the college enrollment and graduation decisions.1
           Finally, our model allows us to decompose the wage distribution into ex ante het-
       erogeneity vs. ex post risk, which is the focus of Cunha et al. (2005) and Chen (2008).
       Our decomposition results are consistent with their finding that much of the wage
       dispersion among more educated workers is predictable from individual heterogeneity.


       2     Empirical Facts
       Our primary data source is the Integrated Public Use Microdata Series of the Cur-
       rent Population Survey March supplement (CPS). One challenge in making consistent
       comparisons over time is that the CPS has continuously revised variable definitions.
       To address this problem, we closely follow the procedure of Autor et al. (2008) (AKK
       hereafter) as described in Appendix A.1.
           Our data analysis is based only on white, male, full-time, full-year workers aged
       26–50, and does not make any meaningful distinction between wages and earnings.


       2.1     Educational Attainment
       Figure 1(a) shows the fraction of our sample in each educational attainment category
       from 1965 to 2007. People are sorted into bins based on their highest levels of education:
       high school dropouts (HSD), high school graduates (HSG), some college but no four-
       year degree (SMC), four-year college degree (CLG), and at least some graduate school
       education (GTC for “greater than college”). While there is a clear increasing trend
       for both high school and higher categories until the early 1980s, all categories have
       remained remarkably stable since the late 1980s.2
           Throughout the observed period, almost half of those who enroll in college do not
       obtain a four-year degree: the fraction in SMC divided by the sum of SMC, CLG,
       and GTC. Prior to 1993, it is not possible to break SMC further down into those
       with a two-year degree and those who drop out of two- of four-year institutions in
       the CPS. For recent years, by combining disparate data sources—CPS, NLSY97, and
       National Student Clearinghouse Research Center (2012)—we find that over 60 percent
   1
      Brown et al. (2015) computes the risk-adjusted college wage premium over time. However, it does not
delve into individual education decisions or selection based on return heterogeneity.
    2
      The discontinuity at the HSG–SMC margin between 1991 and 1992 reflects a change in the coding
convention. Prior to 1992, the CPS only recorded the respondent’s completed years of schooling, with no
information of whether a degree was obtained.


                                                   6
                                                                                                                100
                100




                                                                                                                         80
                80




                                                                                                     Earnings Premia (%)
                                                                                                                 60
                60
  Percent (%)




                                                                                                         40
                40




                                                                                                                20
                20




                                                                                                                0
                0




                      1965   1970   1975   1980     1985      1990   1995         2000   2005                                 1965   1970   1975   1980     1985    1990    1995   2000   2005
                                                  Survey Year                                                                                             Survey year
                              HSD          HSG             SMC              CLG            GTC                                                 SMC Premium                 CLP Premium



                             (a) Education Attainment                                                                                 (b) College Wage Premia

                                             Fig. 1: Educational Attainment and Wage Premia
White males, ages 26-50. HSD: high school dropout, HSG: high school graduate, SMC: some college, CLG:
four-year-degree but no graduate school, GTC: graduate school, CLP: college graduates (CLG+GTC). Wage
premia are relative to HSG.


                      of those in SMC are dropouts from two-year institutions. Another observation is that a
                      significant portion of those earning a four-year college degree continue on to graduate
                      school (GTC divided by the sum of CLG and GTC). All in all, we emphasize that
                      those who enroll in colleges do finish with very different education outcomes.3


                      2.2           Education Wage Premia
                      In Figure 1(b), we plot the wage premia for some-college (SMC) and college-graduates
                      (the union of CLG and GTC, which we denote CLP for “college-plus”) from 1965 to
                      2007. The wage premium is defined as the relative difference in the (age-composition-
                      adjusted) average wage between a higher-education group and high school graduates.
                      The two premia show different trends. The some-college group earns a modest pre-
                      mium, about 20 percent in the 1960s and 2000s with a low of 5 percent around 1980.
                      The college premium is significantly higher, and increased almost linearly between 1980
                      and 2005 (from about 40 to 90 percent).
                             In a simple model in which individuals choose their education level to maximize
                      labor income, the steep rise in the college premium is difficult to reconcile with the
                      constant fraction of college graduates. This has been the subject of much debate,
                      and most of the earlier literature focused on non-market factors such as the minimum
                      wage (Card and DiNardo, 2002) or canonical supply-demand frameworks (Katz and
                      Murphy, 1992; Autor et al., 2008). We further point out that any proposed explanation

                3
    For the female counterpart of 1(a), see Figure 7 in Appendix E. The fractions of women in CLG and
GTC categories have steadily increased throughout the observed period. This differential trend suggests
gender-specific changes in higher education and in labor markets, which are beyond the scope of this paper.


                                                                                                 7
              2.5




                                                                                                                .4     .35
  Residual Earnings Ratios




                                                                                                      Log Earnings Var
                    2




                                                                                                       .25      .3
     1.5




                                                                                                                .2
                                                                                                                .15
              1




                             1965    1970   1975   1980     1985    1990   1995    2000   2005                               1965   1970   1975    1980     1985    1990   1995     2000   2005
                                                          Survey year                                                                                     Survey year

                                               90/10            90/50             50/10                                                           HSG            SMC              CLP




                                    (a) Residual Earnings Ratios                                                                    (b) Log Earnings Variance

                                                                                     Fig. 2: Wage Inequality
White males, ages 26-50. HSG: high school graduate, SMC: some college, CLP: college graduate. 90-10,
90-50 and 50-10 in Figure 2(a) are the percentile residual earnings ratios controlling for education and age.


                              would run into another (hitherto neglected) challenge: reconciling the flat some-college
                              premium with the rise in the fraction of the some-college group.


                              2.3           Residual Wage Dispersion
                              Recent studies—e.g., Taber (2001), Lemieux (2010), and AKK—focus more on residual
                              wage inequality than wage differences attributable to observables such as education and
                              demographic variables. In Taber (2001), the rise in residual wage inequality is explained
                              as an increase in the heterogeneity of unobserved skill. AKK does not explicitly offer
                              an explanation, but shows that the rise is skewed: The 90-10 ratio (the 90th percentile
                              residual wage divided by the 10th percentile) rose throughout their sample period,
                              but most of this is due to a rise in the 90-50 ratio, with the 50-10 ratio all but flat.
                              Figure 2(a) shows the 90-10, 90-50 and 50-10 residual wage ratios in our sample, where
                              residual wage is computed by controlling only for education and age. Despite the fewer
                              number of controls, our findings are consistent with AKK.
                                     Since individuals in higher wage quantiles tend to be more educated, the skewed
                              rise in wage dispersion is concentrated among workers with more education (Lemieux,
                              2010). In Figure 2(b), we show the variance of log wages by educational attainment.
                              While the some-college wage variance closely tracks that of high school graduates, the
                              college-graduate (CLP) wage variance is not only larger but also increases faster.4
                                     We do not provide a structural explanation of the rising residual wage inequality,
                              and the model takes it as given. Instead, we are proposing a mechanism (the sequential

                 4
     This is also confirmed by the Theil index decomposition in Table 11 (Appendix E). Most of inequality
is explained by within-group (rather than between-group) inequality, and in turn, most of within-group
inequality comes from the college and above groups, and more so in 2005 than in 1980.


                                                                                                 8
                                                                                                          150
                    100
                    80




                                                                                                Earnings Premia (%)
                                                                                                               100
                    60
  Percent (%)

                    40




                                                                                                 50
                    20




                                                                                                          0
                    0




                          1980      1985    1990            1995         2000       2005                              1980    1985         1990        1995      2000        2005
                                                   Survey Year                                                                                 Survey year
                                      HSG          SMC             CUE            CLJ                                        SMC Premium           CUE Premium          CLJ Premium




 (a) Graduation and Underemployment Rates                                                                              (b) Underemployed Wage Premia

                                                                                Fig. 3: Underemployment
White males, ages 26-50. HSG: high school graduate, SMC: some college, CUE: underemployed college
graduate, CLJ: college graduate with college job.


                          option to continue college or not, and the underemployment option) that can turn a
                          symmetric spread in heterogeneity into a skewed wage dispersion increase concentrated
                          among college graduates and especially at the top.


                          2.4        Underemployment
                          If a college graduate has difficulty finding a job that requires a college degree or realizes
                          that the available jobs in his field pay poorly, he can instead find a job that has a lower
                          education requirement. The opposite is not true. That is, even if labor markets are
                          segregated by education—as assumed by many in the literature—the higher educated
                          always have access to the lower educated’s markets, but not the other way around.
                                 We label the phenomenon of college graduates working in jobs for which a four-
                          year degree is not required “underemployment.”5 We look at training and education
                          requirements by detailed occupation, tabulated by the Employment Projection (EP)
                          program of the Bureau of Labor Statistics (BLS). By matching the education levels
                          and occupations of workers in the CPS to the requirements table, we can identify
                          underemployed college graduates.6
                                 In Figure 3(a), we show educational attainment from 1979 onward, now separating
                          underemployed college graduates (CUE) from those with college jobs (CLJ). The sum
                          of CUE and CLJ are the fraction of college graduates in the sample (also the sum of
                5
      Conceptually, other types of underemployment exist—e.g., some-college workers in jobs requiring only a
high-school degree. The availability of reliable data restricts us to the underemployment of college graduates.
    6
      The EP publishes the requirements table biennially for detailed occupations to the three-digit level, with
projections for 10 years out. Both the CPS and EP have changed their occupational coding conventions
year-to-year, and we use BLS-provided crosswalks to be consistent across time and datasets. We use the
1998 requirements table, the earliest one requiring the fewest crosswalks. Appendix A.2 has more details.


                                                                                           9
CLG and GTC in previous figures). To the small extent that the fraction of college
graduates increased in the economy, most of the increase is actually coming from the
underemployed category.
    As shown in Figure 3(b), underemployed college graduates do earn more than high
school graduates, and increasingly so over time (by 11 percent in 1980 and 46 percent
in 2005). However, this underemployment premium is much closer, both in growth and
levels, to the some-college premium than to the wage premium commanded by college
graduates with college-degree-requiring jobs.


3     Individual Choice Model
We now develop a model of college enrollment and graduation decisions, where the
decisions are made before students fully learn their individual returns to college.
    Individual i’s return to college is denoted by zi , which is fixed throughout his
lifetime. This may capture the ability and human capital acquired from early childhood
through high school, the quality of the college one can be admitted to, the match quality
between the college and the student, and so on.
    A period in the model is two years. At the age of 19 (or period s = 1), high school
graduates start their lives with financial assets a1i and a prior about their zi . We
assume that individuals may borrow up to a natural limit defined by a minimum wage.
In our calibration (Section 4.2), it is feasible for even the poorest students to enroll in
and graduate from colleges, even when college costs are high. However, initial wealth is
a determinant of college enrollment and graduation, because college is a risky, discrete
investment (i.e., a real option): Poorer students are less likely to take this risk.
    If they immediately enter the labor market, they draw a wage from a high-school
wage distribution. If they enroll in college, they pay a two-year college cost and receive
a signal ẑi about their true zi at the end of period s = 1. If they choose to quit college
at the beginning of s = 2 (age 21) and enter the labor market, their zi is revealed and
they draw a wage from a some-college wage distribution Gd (wi |zi ). If they continue
and graduate, they pay the college cost for the final two years, observe their true zi ,
and draw a wage from a college wage distribution Gc (wi |zi ) at the beginning of period
s = 3 (age 23). The underemployment option is built into the distribution functions
Gd and Gc , as we explain in Section 3.2.
    In our model, college education plays three roles. First, colleges provide students
with information on their individual-specific returns to college, consistent with the
view that colleges are experience goods. Second, we also assume a human capital
accumulation aspect: If a student does not attend or complete college, he will be
compensated for only a fraction of zi in the labor market. Third, college education


                                            10
gives students certification or qualification that allows them to look for jobs in the
segments of the labor market that require at least some college education.
   The first role warrants additional discussion. Betts (1996) and Arcidiacono et al.
(2010) find that students learn about their individual labor market returns while in
school, especially in their senior year. Recent papers including Stange (2012) and
Stinebrickner and Stinebrickner (2012) provide detailed evidence that college students
learn about their likely academic performance over time. Another literature, e.g.,
Altonji et al. (2015), studies how undergraduate students switch majors while in college.
If we combine the idea that students learn about which major fits them best with the
fact that different majors lead to different wage distributions, they are consistent with
our assumption that students learn about their own returns to college.
   Another point worth clarifying is that, in our model, we think of those who enroll
in college but quit without earning a four-year degree as exercising an exit option. This
sounds natural from the point of view of those enrolling in a four-year institution. In the
U.S., this is not inaccurate for those starting in two-year institutions either. According
to a report from the National Center for Education Statistics for 1994–2009, more than
80 percent of community college freshmen say that their ultimate goal is a bachelor’s
or higher degree (Horn and Skomsvold, 2011). The National Student Clearinghouse
Research Center reports that between 2005 and 2008, about 20 percent of two-year
college students did transfer prior to their fifth year, and about 60 percent of them
obtained a bachelor’s degree within four years of transfer (70 percent if transferring
with an associate’s degree). This conditional-on-transfer graduation rate is virtually
the same as the graduation rate of students who begin in four-year institutions. In this
context, we think of the completion of four-year-degrees as the default outcome, and
college quits or not transferring to a four-year institution as the exit option. Our choice
is even more compelling given that the majority of some-college workers are those who
drop out of two-year institutions (Section 2.1).


3.1     Heterogeneous Returns and Signals
Individuals’ returns, zi , are assumed to be distributed normally in the population.

                      σz2 2
                            
      zi ∼ N µz − , σz                                                               (1)
                      2

The variance parameter captures the degree of return heterogeneity in the population.
Since we use zi to denote the returns in log-point differences, the mean is shifted by
one-half the variance to keep the level mean constant when the variance changes.
   Individual i is assumed to have a normal prior on zi at s = 1 (age 19): N µz1i , σz21i .
                                                                                         

We further assume that σz21i is identical across individuals—that is, σz21i = σz21 for all


                                            11
       i.7 If an individual enrolls in college, he receives a signal ẑi at the end of s = 1:

                                i ∼ N 0, σ2 ,
                                             
             ẑi = zi + i ,                                                                      (2)

       where i is independent of zi and also i.i.d. across individuals. Those in college use
       Bayesian updating to form a posterior on zi which is N µz2i , σz22 , where
                                                                         


                      σ2 µz1i + σz21 ẑi                  σz21 σ2
             µz2i ≡                         and σz22 ≡              .                             (3)
                          σz21 + σ2                     σz21 + σ2

       Because (σz21 , σ2 ) are assumed to be the same for everyone, so is σz22 .


       3.2     Constructing Education Specific Wage Distributions
       Let ($h , $d , $c ) denote auxiliary random variables such that
                             2                     2                2    
                               σh 2                     σd 2             σc 2
             $h ∼ log N − , σh , $d ∼ log N − , σd , $c ∼ log N − , σc , (4)
                               2                        2                2

       and denote the c.d.f.’s by Fh , Fd , and Fc , respectively. We denote high school, some-
       college, and college graduate wages by the random variables (wh , wd , wc ) with associ-
       ated c.d.f.’s Gh (wh ), Gd (wd |z), and Gc (wc |z), which we construct below. To clarify, the
       G distributions are the representations of the actual wage distribution as perceived by
       an individual in the respective education group (conditional on z). On the other hand,
       the F distributions are the underlying distributions of the pure luck component. The
       G distributions for a given individual return to college (z) will be constructed from the
       F distributions and the underemployment option. Note that Gd and Gc depend on
       z, but not Gh . In particular, we assume Gh = Fh , which means that wage dispersion
       among high school graduates is entirely explained by luck or risk.8
          We assume that some-college wages are formed by

             wd = max {md exp(z)$d , md $h } ,

       so the resulting some-college wage distribution Gd (wd |z) is the maximum of two log-
       normal random variables. In other words, a some-college worker draws $d from Fd ,
       which transforms into a potential wage of md exp(z)$d . The fact that high school jobs
       are always available to him is captured by assuming he also makes an independent draw
       of $h from Fh , which becomes a potential wage of md $h . He then takes the larger of
       the two. The factor md , if less than one, reflects a partial return for the incomplete
   7
      We also worked out versions of the model in which individuals’ prior variances were heterogeneous, but
there was virtually no effect on our moments of interest for a wide range of parameterizations.
    8
      Cunha and Heckman (2007) finds that most of the increase in wage dispersion among high school
graduates comes from the increased variance of the unpredictable component, so ours is not an unreasonable
assumption in the context of the rise in overall wage dispersion. We discuss this further in Appendix D.


                                                         12
       college education. Figure 8 in Appendix E visualizes how the individual-specific some-
       college wage distribution Gd is constructed from Fh and Fd , for two different values of
       z.9 Because the eventual some-college wage distribution for a given z is the maximum
       of two random variables, the Gd distribution is right-skewed, and more so for higher z.
          Similarly, we assume that college graduates’ wages are formed by

             wc = max {exp(z)$c , mu wd } ≡ max {exp(z)$c , mu md exp(z)$d , mu md $h } ,

       so the resulting college graduate wage distribution Gc (wc |z) is essentially the maximum
       of three log-normal random variables. From Fc a college graduate draws $c , which
       transforms into a college-job wage exp(z)$c . He then draws wd from the some-college
       wage distribution above, Gd (wd |z), which itself is constructed as the maximum of two
       independent random variables. He takes the larger of exp(z)$c and mu wd . If he takes
       the latter (a some-college or high-school job), he is underemployed, and mu ≤ 1 will
       capture any wage loss from being underemployed. Figure 9 in Appendix E visualizes
       the individual-specific college graduate wage distribution Gc for two different values
       of z. Because the eventual college-wage distribution for a given z is the maximum of
       three random variables, the Gc (wc |z) distribution is even more right-skewed than the
       some-college wage distribution Gd (wd |z), and again more so for higher z.
          The G distributions constructed in this section are the distributions from which
       workers of a given education level and z draw their wages. The resulting education-
       specific wage distributions in the population will depend on the joint distribution of
       z and educational attainment in the population. Figure 10 in Appendix E shows how
       educational attainment varies probabilistically with z.


       3.3     Individual’s Problem
       A high-school graduate i at s = 1 (age 19) makes decisions based on his state (a1i , µz1i ),
       his initial assets and the mean of his prior distribution on his own returns to college.
       While individuals differ in their true zi , it is unknown and hence their prior on zi enters
       the problem instead. Also, one’s normal prior has both mean (µz1i ) and variance (σz21i ),
       but we assume that the variance of the prior distribution is the same for everybody
       (Section 3.1). For our formulation, the vector (a1i , µz1i ) suffices as the state variables
       at age 19. We suppress the index i below.
          The high-school graduate chooses whether or not to enroll in college. If he does
       not, he immediately enters the labor market as a high-school graduate, drawing a wage
       from Gh (wh ). If he enrolls, he must pay the expenses x1 (potentially subsidized) for
       the first period (two years) of college, and chooses consumption and next period assets
   9
    If an individual chooses the wage from Fh , he is an underemployed some-college worker. In our empirical
and quantitative analysis, we ignore such some-college underemployment because the data is too noisy.


                                                    13
       (a2 ). He may borrow up to a natural debt limit defined by a minimum wage, and in
       our calibration (Section 4.2) college is in the budget set of even the poorest students.10
       Still, initial wealth is a determinant of college enrollment, because college is a risky,
       discrete investment. We express his value at s = 1 recursively:
                                   (
             V1 (a1 , µz1 ) =      max           Vh (a1 ),                                                    (5)
                                work,school
                                                                      Z                                        )
             max u((1 + r)a1 − a2 − x1 (1 − v(a1 ))) + β                   V2 (v(a1 ), a2 , µz2 )dF1 (µz2 |µz1 ) .
              a2

       The mean of the updated prior distribution in period s = 2, µz2 , evolves according to
       the Bayesian updating formula (3), and F1 (·|µz1 ) is the c.d.f. of µz2 conditional on µz1 ,
       which is determined by the distribution of the signal ẑ. More explicitly, F1 is a normal
                                                4 /(σ 2 + σ 2 ). As can be seen, the in-college
       distribution with mean µz1 and variance σz1        z1
       signal variance σ2 directly affects the enrollment decision.
          The terminal value Vh (a1 ) is the expected value for a high school graduate who
       begins working with assets a1 , which we characterize in the next section. The con-
       tinuation value V2 (v(a1 ), a2 , µz2 ) is the value at the beginning of the next period if
       he enrolls. We assume that a fraction of tuition costs will be paid for by grants and
       subsidies, and the rate subsidized declines with the student’s initial wealth, a1 . This
       grant function v(a1 ) is a step function with three possible values,
                     
                     v1
                               if a1 ≤ ā1
             v(a1 ) = v2        if ā1 < a1 ≤ ā2
                     
                       v3       if ā2 < a1 ,
                     

       where 0 < v3 < v2 < v1 < 1, implying that in fact all students receive a positive
       amount of grants. Note that v(·) only depends on the student’s initial (s = 1) level of
       assets, and is fixed throughout college—if he stays in college. This is why v(a1 ) enters
       the continuation value function V2 below. Problem (5) induces the optimal policies

             χE (a1 , µz1 )     and a∗2 (a1 , µz1 ),                                                          (6)

       where χE = 1 if the individual decides to enroll in college and 0 otherwise, and a∗2 (·)
       is the optimal savings function if he chooses to enroll. Once in college, he receives the
       signal ẑ and begins the second period (s = 2) with assets a2 = a∗2 (a1 , µz1 ). Based on
       the updated prior (µz2 ) and assets (a2 ), he decides whether to complete college. If he
       continues, he pays the expenses for the second period x2 —with the grants covering a
       fraction v(a1 )—and chooses next period assets a3 . His value is
                                     (Z
             V2 (v, a2 , µz2 ) =     max               Vd (a2 , z)dF2 (z|µz2 ),                               (7)
                                   work,school

  10
     Many studies, in particular Lochner and Monge-Naranjo (2011), find little evidence of binding borrowing
constraints for college education during our observation periods.


                                                              14
                                                               Z                       )
                          max u((1 + r)a2 − a3 − x2 (1 − v)) + β Vc (a3 , z)dF2 (z|µz2 ) ,
                           a3


where the distribution function F2 (·|µz2 ) is the posterior c.d.f. of an individual’s z
formed from (µz1 , ẑ) according to the Bayesian updating in (3). The values Vd (a2 , z)
and Vc (a3 , z) are the expected values for a some-college worker and a college graduate
who joins the labor market with assets a2 and a3 , respectively. We assume that his true
return z is revealed upon his entry into the labor market. These two value functions
are characterized in the next section.
   We are assuming that entering the labor market is an absorbing state. If re-
enrollment were allowed, high-school and some-college workers with low wage realiza-
tions or revelations of higher-than-expected z’s would return to college. However, while
there is evidence of delayed college enrollment and re-enrollment (more so in NLSY97
than in NLSY79), for more than 95 percent of the population, their educational at-
tainment is finalized by age 25. In addition, if we make an alternative assumption that
workers learn their true z slowly over time, rather than instantly upon entering the
labor market, this “no re-enrollment” constraint will not be as binding. We do not
expect that abstracting from this dimension would have a large quantitative impact on
ex-post outcomes, which we re-visit in Appendix D.


3.4     Terminal Values
The values of entering the labor market at s = 1 (as a high school graduate), s = 2 (as
a some-college worker), and s = 3 (as a college graduate) with assets a are, respectively,

                    Z
        Vh (a) =        V (s = 1, a, w)dGh (w)                                       (8a)
                    Z
      Vd (a, z) =       V (s = 2, a, w)dGd (w|z)                                     (8b)
                    Z
      Vc (a, z) =       V (s = 3, a, w)dGc (w|z).                                    (8c)

When an individual starts working for the first time, he draws a wage w from his
education-specific distribution: Gh (w) Gd (w|z), or Gc (w|z). With the realization of
w, all uncertainties are resolved, and he solves a deterministic consumption-saving
problem for the rest of his life. He can borrow and save at a given interest rate subject
only to the natural lifetime borrowing constraint aT +1 ≥ 0. Given a constant (two-
year) interest rate r and discount factor β, we can derive the continuation utility of
a worker who starts working at s ∈ {1, 2, 3} (ages 19, 21 or 23), works until period




                                                 15
R = 24 (age 65) and lives until period T = 29 (age 75):
                                       
                       X T             
     V (s, a, w) = max      β j−s u(cj )
                                       
                                j=s
subject to
       T
      X           cj
                         = (1 + r)a + max {w · eh (s), w · er (s)} ,                      (9)
              (1 + r)j−s
        j=s
where
                   R                                 R
                   X        yh (j)                   X         1
        eh (s) ≡                      and er (s) ≡                                       (10)
                         (1 + r)j−s                        (1 + r)j−s
                   j=s                               j=s

and yh (j), j = 1, · · · , 24, is the average age-earnings profile of a high school graduate.
We normalize the first year average earnings of a high-school worker to yh (1) = 1. We
assume a minimum wage w that applies equally to all workers, putting a lower bound
on their lifetime income. The functions eh (s) and er (s) transform the hourly wage w
into a present-discounted sum of lifetime earnings, evaluated at period s. Assuming
iso-elastic utility u(c) = c1−γ /(1 − γ), we can solve for V (s, a, w) in closed form.
    With the assumption that the wage shock realization is once-and-for-all upon labor
market entry, we may be exaggerating the risk in the actual earnings process: Fixing
the same ex-ante probabilistic wage distribution, if wages move stochastically over time,
workers can partly self-insure through saving and borrowing. However, the magnitude
of this overestimate is likely small, since it is known that more of the inequality in
lifetime earnings is accounted for by differences in workers’ initial conditions (i.e.,
earnings in their early to mid twenties) than by differences in idiosyncratic shocks over
their working life (Keane and Wolpin, 1997; Huggett et al., 2011; Guvenen et al., 2015).
    However, we need more discussion on our assumption that underemployment is
a permanent state. In the NLSY, underemployment is a temporary yet persistent
phenomenon. For those in the sample who are underemployed for at least one period,
almost half their working life is spent in underemployment on average, broken into
multiple spells, with each spell on average lasting six years. Furthermore, Clark et al.
(2015) finds an enduring negative wage effect from underemployment: Those who exit
underemployment after a spell of at least four years experience a wage penalty of 2–5
percent, controlling for observables including occupation. In sum, for college-graduates
experiencing underemployment, it is a persistent state, both in duration and in impact.


4       Calibration
We calibrate the model to the 1980 U.S. as a benchmark, and then separately to 2005
as a comparison. We consider the 1980 and 2005 cross-sections as two different steady

                                                16
       states. They are sufficiently removed from each other, and no cohort in our data
       straddle them. (We are only considering 26–50 year olds in each cross-section.) The
       steady-state assumption implies that all trends are attributed to time effects.11


       4.1     Population Distribution
       We first make assumptions on the population distribution over which we aggregate
       individual choices and outcomes. At the beginning of s = 1, each individual i in our
       model is fully described by the trivariate vector

             (log a1i , µz1i , zi ) ∼ F0 ,

       where log a1i is log initial wealth, µz1i is the mean of individual i’s prior on his own
       return to college, zi is his true return to college (as yet unobserved), and F0 is the joint
       population distribution. We assume that F0 is trivariate-normal. Since we already
       assumed that the marginal distribution of zi is normal in (1), this adds seven additional
       parameters: the population means and variances of log a1i and µz1i , and the three
       pairwise correlations among log a1i , µz1i , and zi , which we denote by ρaz1 (between
       log a1i and µz1i ), ρaz (between log a1i and zi ), and ρzz1 (between zi and µz1i ). The
       marginal distributions of initial assets a1i and individuals’ prior means µz1i in the
       population are:

                             σa2 2                                        σ2
                                                                                     
             log a1i ∼ N µa − , σa           and µz1i ∼ N        bz + µz − z , σµ2 z        ,
                             2                                             2        1



       where bz captures potential biases in beliefs compared to the actual population mean
       of zi (which is µz ). If bz > 0, students are optimistic on average; otherwise they are
       pessimistic. The population variance σµ2 z , which describes the dispersion of individual
                                                  1
       µz1i ’s in the population, is not to be confused with the variance of the individual priors,
       σz21 , which describes how certain individuals are of their beliefs.
          Further clarification is warranted. Individual i makes college enrollment decisions
       based on his normal prior distribution on his zi . The mean and variance of his normal
       prior are µz1i and σz21 . We already assumed that everyone has the same prior variance,
       σz21 . The prior mean µz1i has a non-degenerate distribution across individuals, and
       is assumed to be correlated with their true returns zi according to the correlation
       coefficient ρzz1 . Above, we introduced bz to allow the distributions of zi and µz1i to have
       different cross-sectional means. We have bz not because it is necessary for calibration,
       but because we are interested in measuring the average optimism or pessimism in the
       data. As for the cross-sectional variances of zi and µz1i , respectively σz2 and σµ2 z , we
                                                                                                1


  11
     We also worked out an alternative calibration exercise, in which we targeted time-averaged moments
for 1978–82 and, separately, 2003–07. The quantitative results remained more or less intact.


                                                      17
             Parameter                                         Value           Description
                                                           2            2
             (β, γ, r)                               (0.96 ,2,(1.04) -1)       Standard values
                                                       1980            2005
                               
                                   σh2
                                                                              average HSG starting salary
             wh ∼ log N −                2
                                    2 , σh
                                                     σh2 =0.201        0.259
                                                                                µh normalized to 1
                        
                                       σa2
                                             2
                                                    µa =0.937         1.035   Gale and Scholz (1994)
             a1i ∼ log N µa −           2 , σa
                                                         σa2= 0.804            NLSY97
             σz2 = σµ2 z1 = (1 − ρ2az1 )σz21           See Section 4.3         Only σz2 calibrated within model
             x1                                        0.234           0.323   first 2-year college cost
             x2                                        0.630           0.873   last 2-year college cost
                                                                                                        2
                                                                                                             
                                                                                            log a−(µa −σa /2)
                                                     [fa (ā1 ), fa (ā2 )]    fa (a) = Φ          σa           ,
             (ā1 , ā2 )
                                                              =(0.20,0.55)       Φ is standard normal c.d.f.
                                                                               fraction of college costs
             (v1 , v2 , v3 )                         (0.326,0.077,0.017)
                                                                                 covered by public grants
             w                                         0.643           0.448   2-year PDV minimum wage

                            Table 1: Parameters Taken Directly from the Data


       impose the assumption that they are the same: σz2 = σµ2 z .12 In a similar context, we
                                                                                       1
       impose an assumption on σz21 , the variance of individuals’ priors. It is unlikely that the
       degree of uncertainty of one’s belief, σz21 (which is same for everyone), is as large as the
       actual dispersion of true returns zi in the population. In the model, individuals utilize
       the fact that their initial wealth and true zi are correlated. We set σz21 = (1−ρ2az1 )σµ2 z :
                                                                                                                    1
       That is, the uncertainty over one’s beliefs is only so great as the population variance of
       the means of beliefs conditional on one’s assets. In summary, with the two restrictions
       on the variances of the three distributions, we forgo two degrees of freedom in our
       calibration. We do this mainly because there is no usable survey data (especially for
       1980) that is informative about the dispersion of the prior mean in the population or
       the variance of an individual’s prior distribution.


       4.2        Parameters Taken Directly from the Data
       For each steady state, we need to calibrate 26 parameters, of which 15 can be directly
       pinned down by their data counterparts or the literature. All dollar values are de-
       flated to 2000 dollars using the chain-weighted (implicit) price deflator for personal
       consumption expenditures published by the BEA.
          The discount factor and relative risk aversion coefficient, (β, γ), are fixed to standard
       values of (0.962 , 2), and the interest rate to r = 1.042 − 1. The discount factor and

  12
     We have tried alternative quantitative exercises relaxing this assumption, but the main results remain
the same, except when σµ2 z1 is extremely large or small.


                                                                   18
                             Type of Institution   1980     2005
                             Two-year public         789    1,965
                             Four-year public      1,641    4,925
                             Four-year private     7,170   19,046

                      Table 2: College Costs (in 2000 dollars)


interest rate are compounded since one period is two years.
   In the model, mean high school graduate wages at s = 1 are normalized to 1. Since
a period in the model is two years, we use average wages of 19–20 year-olds to normalize
all wages in the data. Specifically, the average two-year present discounted value wage
for high school graduates at age 19 is
                                   1
      w̄h = w̄h19 + w̄h20 (1 + r)− 2 ,                                                (11)

where w̄ha is the mean wage for a-year-old high school graduates. This value is $19.13
in 1980 and $19.23 in 2005, both in 2000 dollars. Since these are hourly rates and we
assume that all individuals work full time, we not only normalize annual earnings by
w̄h but further divide them by 1,400 hours (35 hours per week times 40 weeks). The
log wage variance for high school graduates, σh2 , is 0.201 and 0.259 in 1980 and 2005.
   Initial assets in the model would mainly capture heterogeneity in economic support
from students’ parents. We assume a natural borrowing constraint, and front-load all
possible transfers received from parents into initial assets.
   To obtain the mean of log assets µa , we refer to Gale and Scholz (1994), which
reports that average net worth in the 1986 Survey of Consumer Finances was $144,393
per household in 1985 dollars, and 63.4 percent of total net worth comes from intergen-
erational transfers. Assuming a two-person household with two children, this amounts
to $68,382 of asset transfers per child in 2000 dollars. For 2005, we multiply this value
by the ratio of the average present discounted value of lifetime earnings for the entire
population in 1980 and 2005, leading to $75,780. To compute σa2 , we compare the
mean and median annual inter vivos transfers among young adults aged 16-22. These
values were $1,227 and $486, respectively, in the NLSY97. This implies a positive skew-
ness partially justifying our choice of a lognormal distribution for initial assets, with
σa2 = 2 log(1227/486), from the formula for mean and median of normal distributions.
   We refer to Trends in College Pricing, published annually by the College Board,
to construct the college costs parameters (x1 , x2 ). We exclude room and board and
only include tuition and fees, since all individuals would incur living costs regardless of
college attendance. We make the first two years of college cheaper than the latter two
years, by setting x1 as the average cost of attending a two-year public, four-year public
or four-year private institution, and x2 as the average cost of attending a four-year


                                             19
       public or private institution.13 These costs are shown in Table 2. Clearly, the cost of
       college has been rising over time: from 1980 to 2005, average annual costs increased
       from $3,200 to $8,645 for the first two years of college, and from $4,406 to $11,986 for
       the latter two years, all in 2000 dollars.
          Grants are modeled as a decreasing function of students’ initial wealth (Section 3.3).
       In particular, we assume that the fraction of college costs subsidized is a declining three-
       step function of initial wealth, a1i . According to the 2000 Guide to U.S. Department of
       Education Programs, students with family income below $30,000 received an average of
       $2,820 in public grants; above $30,000 but below $80,000 received an average of $668;
       and above $80,000 an average of $143. These family income thresholds correspond to
       approximately the 20th and 55th percentiles of the 2000 family income distribution.
       Moreover, Trends in Student Financing of Undergraduate Education, published by the
       National Center for Education Statistics, does not show any systematic changes across
       family income quartiles in the fraction of college costs covered by federal or state grants
       between 1995 and 2008. Hence, we fix the grant function for both years 1980 and 2005
       in our model to match the 2000 numbers.14 Since we assume that initial wealth is log
       normal, we choose the thresholds ā1 and ā2 such that
                 log ā1 − (µa − σa2 /2)                   log ā2 − (µa − σa2 /2)
                                                                                
            Φ                              = 0.20 and Φ                              = 0.55,
                            σa                                        σa
       separately for the µa and σa2 in 1980 and 2005, where Φ is the standard normal c.d.f.
       For the three groups divided by the thresholds, the parameters v1 , v2 , and v3 are fixed
       to the average amount of grants received within each group as a fraction of the average
       costs in 2005 for the first two years of college: i.e., (v1 , v2 , v3 ) = (2820, 668, 143)/8645.
          The minimum wages in 1980 and 2005 were, respectively, $6.27 and $4.39, corre-
       sponding to two-year present discounted values of $12.29 and $8.62. Our assumption
       of the natural borrowing limit and minimum wages implies that college attendance and
       graduation are in even the poorest student’s budget set.

       4.3     Parameters That Are Jointly Calibrated
       We determine the remaining 11 parameters through minimum-distance calibration:

             Θ̂ = arg min [M (Θ) − Md ] [M (Θ) − Md ]0                                            (12)
                        Θ

       where Θ is the vector of parameters, M (Θ) the simulated moments from the model
       given Θ, and Md the empirical moments reported in Table 3, most of which were shown
  13
       This makes enrolling financially easier than graduating, and is intended to capture the fact that
four-year institutions are more expensive than community colleges. While these costs clearly differ across
individuals and institutions, there is evidence that they do not vary much across family income groups, see
for example Johnson (2013) and Abbott et al. (2014).
   14
      Neither data dates as far back as 1980—the U.S. Department of Education was only created in 1980.


                                                     20
      Moment                                                1980                   2005
      Enrollment rate                                       0.577                  0.646
      Discontinuation rate                                  0.393                  0.451
      Underemployment rate                                  0.237                  0.326
      College wage premium                                  0.361                  0.934
      Some-college premium                                  0.057                  0.214
      Underemployment premium                               0.110                  0.467
      High school log wage variance (from Table 1)          0.201                  0.259
      College graduate log wage variance                    0.272                  0.405
      Some-college log wage variance                        0.201                  0.262
      Log corr. family income and own earnings              0.178                 [0.185]
      Enrollment by family income quartile∗                 0.409                  0.421
      College attainment by earnings quartile∗∗             0.292                  0.402
      ∗
          Difference in enrollment rates of the first and fourth quartiles by parental income.
      ∗∗
           Difference in fraction of college graduates of the first and fourth quartiles by own earnings.

                                        Table 3: Target Moments
All moments are for white males, ages 26–50 in 1980 and 2005 CPS, except the correlation among family
income, own earnings, and enrollment rates. These correlations are from the NLSY79/97, except for the
2005 correlation between family income and own earnings for which data does not yet exist—we instead
show the corresponding simulated moment in brackets.



      in various figures of Section 2. For this joint calibration, we have as many parameters
      as there are target moments. For numerical details, refer to Appendix C.
            We have a fully parameterized model, and the identification of heterogeneity, be-
      liefs, and risk is through distributional assumptions. Still, the key idea in the joint
      calibration is that the heterogeneous returns (z) are closely correlated with realized
      wages (differentially for some-college, underemployed, and non-underemployed college
      graduates), and the beliefs µz1 with the decision to enroll in and graduate from college.
            In constructing the target moments, we first compute the relevant moments for
      each age (from 26 to 50), and then equally weight the age-specific moments. Because
      our model assumes a uniform age distribution and deterministic age-wage profiles, it
      is straightforward to construct the model counterparts.
            We now explain in more detail how we discipline the correlation parameters of the
      initial distribution of wealth, prior mean, and true return, F0 . Of the 12 parameters
      completely characterizing the trivariate-normal F0 , nine were set directly by available
      data in Section 4.2. The remaining three correlation parameters are ρaz , ρzz1 , and ρaz1 .
            Initial assets in the model represent family income in the data. True return z in the
      model is the key determinant of lifetime earnings, and µz1 , an individual’s prior mean,
      governs whether he decides to enroll and graduate. Hence we target (i) the correlation
      between family income and present discounted value of own lifetime earnings in the
      NLSY79, which is informative about ρaz ; (ii) the difference in enrollment rates of the


                                                       21
            80




                                                                                          60
            60




                                                                                               40
       Percent (%)




                                                                                    Percent (%)
          40




                                                                                          20
            20
            0




                                                                                          0
                       quartile 1   quartile 2   quartile 3      quartile 4                         quartile 1   quartile 2   quartile 3        quartile 4

                                        NLSY79          NLSY97                                                    1980 CPS           2005 CPS



       (a) Enrollment by Family Income Quartiles                                   (b) College Graduation by Earnings Quartiles

                                    Fig. 4: Enrollment and Graduation by Quartiles
Left: white males, NLSY79 and 97. Right: white males, ages 26–50, 1980 and 2005 CPS. Earnings are first
controlled for age then ordered into quartiles.


       first and fourth family income quartiles in the NLSY79/97, which is informative about
       ρaz1 ; and (iii) the difference in the fraction of college graduates of the first and fourth
       (own) earnings quartiles in the CPS, which informs us on ρzz1 .15 Despite (ii), it should
       be noted that ρaz1 is not the main driver of the correlation between family income and
       enrollment in the model. Initial assets are an important determinant of enrollment
       because college is a risky discrete investment: All else equal (including µz1 ), richer
       students are more likely to enroll in college.
                     Family (i.e., parental) income in the NLSY79 is taken as the mean of the reported
       values when the student is 16 and 17 years old. To compute the present discounted value
       of lifetime earnings, we impute missing wage observations by linearly interpolating log
       wages in adjacent years, and then use an annual discount rate of four percent. We
       cannot do the same for the NLSY97, because the surveyed youths were 12–16 years
       old at the end of 1996 and we lack their wage data for later in life. Consequently,
       for our calibration of 2005, we fix ρaz to its estimate from the 1980 calibration. The
       simulated correlation in 2005 between family income and own lifetime earnings (in
       square brackets in Table 3) is slightly higher than its value in the 1980 data.16
                     Lastly, we go back to the CPS to compute what fraction within each earnings
       quartile has a four-year college degree. This is the converse of the college premium


  15
      Family background information is not in the CPS, and lifetime earnings realizations are not yet available
for the NLSY97 cohort. We keep all multiracial white individuals in the NLSY in addition to whites.
   16
      As described in Appendix A.2, we follow Lochner and Monge-Naranjo (2011) for the definition of family
income and enrollment. That paper stresses that the difference in enrollment rates by family income quantiles
has become larger in recent years. While there is some evidence of this in our Figure 4(a), the change from
1980 to 2005 is not large. This is because we are only looking at white males, who are more likely to fall in
the higher family income quantiles of the entire NLSY sample.


                                                                              22
                       Parameters                                          1980      2005
                       bz (“optimism”)                                     0.242    0.290
                       σ2 (noise variance)                                0.308    0.692
                       σz2 (pop. variance of z)                            0.188    0.308
                       µz (pop. mean college returns)                      -0.055   0.066
                       md (partial return, some-college)                   0.870    0.898
                       mu (partial return, underemp.)                      0.577    0.617
                       σc2 (var. of log residual college wage; Fc )        0.231    0.395
                       σd2 (var. of log residual some-college wage; Fd )   0.383    0.460
                       ρaz ≡ ρ(a, z)                                       0.448    [0.448]
                       ρaz1 ≡ ρ(a, µz1 )                                   0.402     0.453
                       ρzz1 ≡ ρ(z, µz1 )                                   0.644     0.764

                          Table 4: Calibrated Parameters, 1980 and 2005
All paramaters are calibrated to the moments in Table 3, except for ρ(a, z) for 2005 which we fix to its 1980
value as we lack the corresponding target moment in 2005.


        construction that first groups people by education. We form earnings quartiles after
        first subtracting age-specific wage means for each year. Figure 4(b) shows that a larger
        part of earnings inequality is attributable to education levels in 2005 than in 1980.


        5      Results
        We first report the jointly calibrated parameter values in Table 4, for the two separate
        steady states of 1980 and 2005. Because we have the same number of parameters
        and target moments in the joint calibration, our model can perfectly replicate all the
        target moments of Table 3. While looking at the parameter values themselves is not as
        informative as a systematic decomposition exercise, we first describe which parameter
        values changed more significantly between 1980 and 2005.
            Both the mean and the variance of log college returns in the population (µz , σz2 )
        are larger in 2005, while the residual wage variance for jobs requiring a college degree,
        σc2 , almost doubled between the two periods. These are qualitatively consistent with
        the observed rises in college premia and wage dispersion among college graduates.
            We also see a slight increase in the bias or optimism parameter bz , and a substantial
        rise in the in-college signal noise variance σ2 .17 These findings call for more thinking.
        In a simpler framework, one would need more pessimism (i.e., a large drop in bz ) to
        reconcile the modest rise in enrollment with the large rise in the college premium. In
        our model, however, enrollment does not rise despite students being more optimistic on
        average. Similarly, to have an even higher college dropout rate, one would require more
        precise in-college signals. In our model, relative to 1980, students in 2005 expect the

  17
       One can interpret the sizable optimism bz alternatively as the consumption value of college.


                                                       23
                                                                 (1)      (2)     (3)     (4)
       Moment                                           1980                                       2005
                                                                 µz       σz2     σc2     mu
       Enrollment rate                                  0.577   0.952   0.424    0.536   0.601     0.646
       Discontinuation rate                             0.393   0.215   0.517    0.598   0.287     0.451
       Underemployment rate                             0.237   0.193   0.210    0.326   0.326     0.326
       College wage premium                             0.361   0.934   0.963    0.557   0.353     0.934
       Some-college premium                             0.057   0.162   0.075    0.099   0.030     0.214
       Underemployment premium                          0.110   0.637   0.573    0.063   0.169     0.467
       College graduate log wage variance               0.272   0.318   0.405    0.405   0.257     0.405
       Some-college log wage variance                   0.201   0.223   0.224    0.209   0.197     0.262
       Log corr. family income and own earnings         0.178   0.286   0.242    0.141   0.192    [0.185]
       Enrollment by family income quartile∗            0.409   0.097   0.412    0.417   0.407     0.421
       College attainment by earnings quartile∗∗        0.292   0.417   0.380    0.204   0.328     0.402
       ∗
           Difference in enrollment rates of the first and fourth family income quartiles.
       ∗∗
            Difference in fraction of college graduates of the first and fourth quartiles by own earnings.

                                      Table 5: Comparative Statics
Starting from the 1980 economy, we only increase the population mean µz to match the 2005 college
premium in column (1), the population variance σz2 and college wage uncertainty σc2 to match the 2005
college wage variance in (2) and (3) respectively, and the partial underemployment return mu to match the
2005 underemployment rate in (4).


       mean college return to have risen even more than it actually did, and do not learn more
       about themselves in college, but nonetheless do not enroll nor graduate as much.18
             The correlation between one’s true return and prior mean, ρzz1 , increases from 0.64
       in 1980 to 0.76 in 2005, implying that students in 2005 have a better idea of their true
       returns at the enrollment stage. This is consistent with the findings that more recent
       cohorts base their education decisions more on expected returns than other factors,
       such as distance to school (Hoxby, 2009) and a private taste for schooling (Hendricks
       and Schoellman, 2014). However, when we hold fixed ρzz1 between 1980 and 2005,
       we see only small changes in our target moments, although the qualitative effects are
       generally in the expected direction. (This exercise is not reported in the paper.)


       5.1        Comparative Statics
       In Table 5, we start with the calibrated parameters from 1980 and then change key
       parameters one at a time. We pair each chosen parameter with the empirical moment
       that is most directly related to it. We then choose a new value for the parameter,
       holding all else fixed, so that the new model outcome exactly matches the paired
       empirical target moment in 2005. (Naturally, the model will not match any other 2005

  18
     The signal-to-noise ratio is somewhat higher in 1980. The ratio is 1 + σz2 /σ2 , since we assume that the
variance of the initial prior is equal to the population variance of z. The values for 1980 and 2005 are 1.61
and 1.45, implying that the in-college signal in 1980 had relatively more information content than in 2005.


                                                        24
       moment.) We reproduce the empirical moments for 1980 and 2005 from Table 3 in the
       far left and right sides of Table 5.
          We begin with the population mean of returns, µz , in column (1), which is raised
       from its 1980 value of -0.055 to 0.497 to exactly match the observed college premium
       in 2005 (0.934, underlined). This represents a substantial across-the-board increase
       in returns to college. As a consequence, the enrollment rate reaches an unrealisti-
       cally high 95 percent, and among those who enroll, only 22 percent quit college before
       earning a four-year degree. Since we assume that some-college workers and underem-
       ployed college graduates also enjoy some partial returns, both the some-college and
       underemployment premia also increase.
          This exercise shows that a model that relies only on changes in the population mean
       returns µz to explain the rising college premium between 1980 and 2005, even with the
       some-college category and underemployment, would be amiss on educational attain-
       ment trends unless significant pessimism or negative preference shocks are invoked. It
       would also predict that few students would become underemployed, and even then,
       earn a large premium. Furthermore, with the across-the-board increase in returns to
       college, family income is less of a factor for enrollment. This contrasts with the data:
       The difference in enrollment rates between the top and bottom family income quartiles
       is larger in 2005 than 1980. In sum, this exercise suggests that a model abstracting
       from changes in second (or higher) moments cannot resolve the tension between rising
       college premia and stagnant college enrollment and graduation rates.
          In columns (2) and (3) of Table 5, we respectively increase σz2 (from 0.188 to 0.523)
       and σc2 (from 0.231 to 0.512) to match the college wage variance in the 2005 data
       (0.405, underlined), fixing all other parameters at their 1980 values. In the model,
       college graduates’ wages have two parts: the individual-specific return z, about which
       students have priors and also learn while in college, and pure luck ($c for college jobs,
       and $d or $h if underemployed). If we only increase σz2 , students’ decision rules are
       not affected—it only changes how individuals are distributed.19 An increase in σc2 on
       the other hand directly affects students’ decision rules, since it alters the riskiness of
       the labor market for college graduates. In either case, the increase is a mean-preserving
       spread, because of the way we parameterized the distributions in (1) and (4).
          We highlight that a (mean-preserving) increase in either variance results in a large
       increase in the college premium, from 0.361 to 0.963 (σz2 ) or to 0.557 (σc2 ). In both cases,
       enrollment rates drop and college dropout rates rise. However, the underemployment
       rates for college graduates move in opposite directions in the two cases.
          College graduates’ wage premium increases because of the optionality embedded in

  19
     When increasing σz2 , we only change the population variance of z but keep constant the variance of
individual priors (σz21 ) and the population variance of the mean of individual priors (σµ2 z1 ).


                                                    25
       college enrollment and graduation. With the options, a mean-preserving spread of the
       returns-to-college and residual college wage distributions does not shift the realized
       wage distribution of college graduates symmetrically. Those with higher returns to
       college and good realizations of college labor market wages pull the observed college
       wage premium higher. However, those who learn that their own returns to college are
       lower than expected are more likely to either discontinue college (and hence fall out of
       the calculation for the college premium) or become underemployed upon graduation
       (which truncates the left tail of the college wage distribution). As a result, we have a
       higher college premium ex post. This mechanism cautions against applying standard
       mean-variance trade-off calculations to college enrollment and graduation decisions.
          The decrease in the enrollment and graduation rates in response to the higher σz2
       is merely a result of the larger heterogeneity shifting masses across the thresholds
       for enrollment and graduation decisions in the space of wealth and (updated) prior
       means, since individual decision rules are not affected.20 The same applies to the lower
       underemployment rate and higher underemployment premium.
          On the other hand, the higher σc2 increases the probability of underemployment,
       and in turn, raises the thresholds for enrollment and graduation decisions—i.e., a lower
       enrollment rate and a higher college dropout rate. The thresholds move in a way
       that makes wealth a more important determinant of the enrollment and graduation
       decisions. With the higher σc2 , first there is the direct effect that it is more likely
       to draw wages below a given threshold (which will result in underemployment). This
       direct effect is reinforced by the weaker selection on individual returns—since students’
       wealth plays a more important role in enrollment and graduation decisions. As a result,
       we have a higher underemployment rate and a lower underemployment premium.21
       Consistent with this last explanation, the enrollment difference between the top and
       bottom family income quartiles is slightly larger (i.e., wealth is more important in
       the enrollment decision) and the correlation between realized labor income and college
       graduation is weaker (i.e., individual z is less important in the graduation decision).
          What we emphasize in these comparative static exercises is that the observed in-
       crease in the college wage premium needs to be thought of not only in terms of a higher
       population mean of the returns-to-college distribution, but also in terms of a higher
       variance, be it heterogeneity or risk. A modest increase in the mean and a stronger
       increase in heterogeneity and risk are shown to result in a much higher college pre-
       mium, a slightly higher enrollment rate, and a stagnant fraction of college graduates
       in the population. In addition, the exercises suggest that the various elements can

  20
     See Figure 5 in Section 5.3 for a visual representation of the thresholds.
  21
     Consistent with the weaker selection on z at the graduation decision stage, the some-college premium
is actually higher with the higher σc2 .


                                                   26
       be identified or disciplined by such often-overlooked empirical moments as the college
       dropout and underemployment rates, the some-college and underemployment premia,
       and the correlation among family background, college enrollment, and eventual labor
       market outcomes. We delve into this deeper in the next section.22


       5.2     Decomposition of the Change in Target Moments
       In this section we conduct the converse exercise as an attempt to isolate the contribution
       of each model element to the changes in education and labor market outcomes between
       1980 and 2005. To be more specific, we start from the 2005 economy, and replace a
       chosen parameter’s 2005 value with its calibrated value in 1980. All other parameters
       are left at their 2005 values. The resulting model-generated moments, now deviating
       from the perfectly matched 2005 data in all dimensions, are reported in Table 6.
          Column (1) shows the change in moments when only the population mean return
       to college µz in 2005 (0.066) is replaced with its 1980 calibrated value (-0.055). This
       is exactly the reverse of what was in column (1) of Table 5. Since the 1980 µz is
       smaller, both the college wage premium and enrollment rates decline from the 2005
       levels. However, all the education wage premia are still closer to their 2005 values than
       their 1980 values. We interpret this as evidence that the main role of the increase in µz
       was to encourage more students to enroll, rather than to increase the college premium.
          Replacing either variance parameter, σz2 or σc2 , with its lower 1980 value, shown in
       columns (2) and (3) of Table 6, reduces the college premium—actually by more than in
       column (1)—but raises the enrollment rate.23 Put differently, without the increase in
       either variance between 1980 and 2005, the resulting enrollment rate already overshoots
       its level in the 2005 data (0.718 or 0.659 vs. 0.646), although the corresponding
       college premium is not as high as the 2005 data (0.739 or 0.791 vs. 0.934). This
       is another way of highlighting the tension between the higher college premium and
       the stagnant enrollment/graduation rate in a model that relies only on the population
       mean—column (1) of Table 5. However, the two variances have different implications
       on underemployment rates and premia. Columns (2) and (3) together show that,
       from 1980 to 2005, the larger σz2 is more responsible for the higher underemployment
       premium and the larger σc2 for the higher underemployment rate. These results are a


  22
      Column (4) of Table 5 shows the comparative statics of only increasing mu (the partial return to z when
underemployed) from its 1980 calibrated value of 0.577 to 0.673 in order to match the 2005 underemployment
rate (0.326, underlined). A higher mu directly raises the value of the underemployment option, and attracts
lower-z students into college enrollment and graduation. Such negative selection reduces the some-college
and college wage premia, even though the underemployment premium rises. This suggests that the observed
increase in the underemployment rate and premium between 1980 and 2005 is due to a combined increase
in heterogeneity and risk, rather than underemployment itself becoming a more attractive option.
   23
      When replacing σz2 with its 1980 estimate we leave σz21 and σµ2 z1 at their 2005 values.


                                                     27
                                                                   (1)     (2)     (3)           (4)
       Moment                                            2005
                                                                   µz      σz2     σc2         σz2 , σc2
       Enrollment rate                                   0.646    0.542   0.718   0.659        0.730
       Discontinuation rate                              0.451    0.459   0.447   0.349        0.359
       Underemployment rate                              0.326    0.336   0.330   0.277        0.279
       College wage premium                              0.934    0.809   0.739   0.791        0.637
       Some-college premium                              0.214    0.191   0.219   0.186        0.198
       Underemployment premium                           0.467    0.367   0.346   0.517        0.418
       College graduate log wage variance                0.405    0.391   0.353   0.329        0.276
       Some-college log wage variance                    0.262    0.257   0.253   0.256        0.250
       Log corr. family income and own earnings         [0.185]   0.163   0.164   0.206        0.186
       Enrollment by family income quartile∗             0.421    0.455   0.373   0.414        0.360
       College attainment by earnings quartile∗∗         0.402    0.335   0.346   0.442        0.388
       ∗
           Difference in enrollment rates of the first and fourth family income quartiles.
       ∗∗
            Difference in fraction of college graduates of the first and fourth quartiles by own earnings.

                   Table 6: Decomposing the Change between 1980 and 2005
Holding all other parameters at their 2005 values, we replace a chosen parameter with its value in the 1980
calibration. The chosen parameters are, respectively: the population mean of z in column (1); the population
variance of z, σz2 in (2); log residual college wage variance, σc2 , in (3); and both σz2 and σc2 in (4).


      mirror image of the comparative statics in columns (2) and (3) of Table 5.
             In column (4), we replace both σz2 and σc2 with their respective 1980 values. The
      college premium is then only 0.637. From this number, we calculate that, of the 57
      percentage point increase in college premium in the data, 30 percentage points (or
      more than half of the increase) come from the increased dispersion of heterogeneity
      and risk in individual returns to college. By comparison, column (1) shows that only
      12 percentage points of the college premium increase (or one-fifth of the increase) come
      from the increased population mean of the return-to-college distribution.
             Through the lens of our model, the changes between 1980 and 2005 in education
      outcomes and education-specific labor market outcomes can be accounted for in the
      following way. The modest increase in college enrollment can be mostly attributed to
      the higher population mean return to college. While it also raises education premia,
      a larger part of the higher college premium in 2005 comes from a higher variance of
      the college return distribution, which also has the effect of lowering college enrollment.
      These two together could potentially lead to a big increase in the underemployment
      premium as well, but they are counterbalanced by the higher residual college wage
      variance, which instead leads to a higher underemployment rate among college gradu-
      ates. The intermediate steps of college education—i.e., discontinuing college education
      or becoming underemployed—are important not only because they are conspicuous
      features of the data that aid identification, but also because they generate downside
      risk that does not bring down the college premia with it.


                                                        28
                                                             0.5
                       0.06                                                                                      0.06
                                                0.6
                       0.04          0.7                                                                         0.04

                       0.02                                                                                      0.02
                               0.9                                                                                                                              0.6
                         0                                                                                         0
      Initial Prior




                                                                                                Initial Prior
                      −0.02                                                                                     −0.02                              0.7
                      −0.04                                                                                     −0.04
                                                                                                                              0.9
                      −0.06                                                                                     −0.06

                      −0.08                                                                                     −0.08

                       −0.1                                                                                      −0.1

                      −0.12                                                                                     −0.12

                      −0.14                                                                                     −0.14
                           0               10         20           30       40   50   60                             0   10         20        30          40   50     60
                                                           Initial Assets                                                                Initial Assets

                                                      (a) 1980                                                                      (b) 2005

                                                      Fig. 5: Probability of Dropping Out of College
Horizontal axis: initial assets (a1 ) as multiples of the average high-school worker’s two-year (ages 19 and
20) earnings; vertical axis: mean of initial prior (µz1 ). The shaded region represents college enrollment. For
those who enroll, ex-ante probabilities of not completing a four-year degree are shown in contour plots.


              5.3                    Option to Discontinue College Education
              In our model, those who enroll in college defer college graduation decisions until the
              arrival of new information while in college, the signal at s = 2. The additional infor-
              mation on individual returns after enrollment implies that the graduation margin is
              more selective than the enrollment margin.
                         In Figure 5, we show the enrollment decision and the college dropout probabilities in
              our calibrated economies of 1980 and 2005. The horizontal and vertical axes show the
              individual states a1 (normalized by the average high-school worker’s two-year earnings
              from age 19 to 20) and µz1 , respectively. The shaded areas represent those who would
              choose to enroll in college. The different shades correspond to different probabilities
              with which they will discontinue college education before earning a four-year degree.
              Marginal enrollees, in the darker areas, are more likely to drop out of college than those
              who are wealthier or have higher prior means.
                         When we make the education choice a static decision—i.e., one has to decide and
              commit to being a high-school-only, some-college, or college-graduate worker before
              observing the in-college signal on his own returns—the enrollment threshold shifts to
              the northeast. One incentive to enroll in college is to obtain information on individual
              returns. The loss of this incentive is enough to push those near the enrollment thresh-
              old away from colleges. Those near the northeast corner will choose to be a college
              graduate, and those near the new threshold will choose to be a some-college worker.
              The mass of the latter depends on the cost of college during the first two years relative
              to the final two years and also the some-college partial return parameter (md ).



                                                                                           29
                      Moment                          1980    1980(0)    2005    2005(0)
                      Enrollment rate                0.577     0.450    0.646     0.573
                      Discontinuation rate           0.393     0.001    0.451     0.263
                      Underemployment rate           0.237     0.263    0.326     0.341
                      College wage premium           0.361     0.259    0.934     0.823
                      Some-college premium           0.057     0.104    0.214     0.228
                      Underemployment premium        0.110     0.011    0.467     0.375

                               Table 7: Information Value of College
Effects of removing the in-college signal of one’s own returns in 1980 and 2005. We set the noise variance σ
to infinity, holding all other parameters at their respective 1980 and 2005 values. The results are in columns
1980(0) and 2005(0).


           We implement this exercise by making the in-college signal completely worthless—
       that is, we send the noise variance σ to infinity. For each year, we hold all other
       parameters at their respective calibrated values, and only increase the noise variance.
       The resulting moments are shown in columns 1980(0) and 2005(0) of Table 7.
           With the information value of college enrollment gone, those who were close to the
       original enrollment threshold now do not enroll, lowering the enrollment rate (by 13
       and 7 percentage points for 1980 and 2005 respectively). In addition, because we have
       fewer marginal students and also there is no learning about one’s returns in college
       (in particular, no correction of over-optimism), the college dropout rate is lower too
       (by 39 percentage points for 1980 and 19 percentage points for 2005)—in fact, there
       would be virtually no some-college worker in 1980. Overall, the fraction of people with
       a four-year college degree goes up. This implies more selection at enrollment, but less
       at graduation. Hence, while it must be the case that the some-college wage premium
       goes up, whether the college graduates’ wage premium goes up or down depends on the
       relative magnitudes of the more positive selection at enrollment and the less positive
       selection at graduation. The quantitative result shows that the latter prevails: The
       resulting college premium is lower compared to the 1980 and 2005 benchmarks, by
       10 and 11 percentage points, respectively. The less positive selection into graduation
       is also consistent with the drop in the underemployment premium, even though the
       underemployment rates are only slightly higher than in the benchmark for both years.24


       6     Counterfactual Analysis
       As summarized in Card (1999), there is a large empirical literature using instrumental
       variables to estimate the average marginal returns to college, or local average treatment

  24
     If we modify the timing of the signal so that students receive a signal on their true returns in s = 1 but
not in s = 2, both college enrollment and college dropout rates fall, since the information value of college
enrollment is now gone. All the moments of interest move in the same direction as in Table 7 (not reported).


                                                      30
       effect of sending a marginal student to college. Many of these studies find that the
       marginal returns to college are close to or even higher than the population average.
       Heckman et al. (2006) emphasizes the difficulty of controlling for “selection on gains”
       with instruments, and Carneiro et al. (2011) estimates the average marginal returns to
       college relaxing parametric assumptions. These approaches still find sizable returns to
       college for marginal students, though smaller than the population average.
          What is different in our approach is that we not only explicitly model selection
       at the enrollment margin but also at the next stage in which college students decide
       whether or not to complete a four-year degree. Selection is based on students’ (updated)
       priors on their own returns to college. In particular, selection at the graduation stage
       implies that returns to college are nonlinear in years in college: Given the selection
       into graduation based on individuals’ own returns, the average college premium of those
       who complete a four-year college degree is more than double the average some-college
       premium of those who quit college after two years, even though they look identical at
       the enrollment stage.25 If we had only looked at the wages of marginal enrollees who
       eventually graduate with a four-year degree, or assumed that returns to college are
       linear in years in college, or assumed exogenous college dropouts—as is not uncommon
       in the literature—the estimated marginal returns to college would be biased upward.26


       6.1     Marginal Enrollees
       Using our fully structural model, we compute the wage premium that high-school
       graduates who are indifferent to college enrollment (i.e., those along the enrollment
       threshold shown in Figure 5) can expect upon college enrollment. We will highlight
       the roles of return heterogeneity and of the option to discontinue college education.
          The marginal enrollees in this exercise are defined as those whose state variables
       (a1 , µz1 ) lie close to the enrollment threshold in Figure 5. Using the enrollment indicator
       function χE (a1 , µz1 ) in (6), we define

             χ (a1 , µz1 ) = χE (a1 , µz1 ) − χE (a1 − a , µz1 − µ ),                        (13)

       which is also an indicator function by construction. We set  such that the mass of
                       R
       marginal agents χ dF0 is one percent of the population. We then force all individuals
       with χ = 1 to enroll in college.
  25
       Such a nonlinearity is documented especially for more recent cohorts—e.g. Heckman et al. (2006).
Previously it was emphasized in the literature on “sheepskin” effects, e.g. Kane and Rouse (1995)—the idea
is that college degrees are signals of worker quality to potential employers. In our model, the nonlinearity
reflects selection into graduation based on individual returns. Lange and Topel (2006) had a similar view.
    26
       In the estimation of empirical ordered-choice models, one would need as many instruments as there are
stages. In our context, one set of instruments are necessary for the college enrollment decision, and then
another for the college graduation decision. This is a serious challenge in practice, and many researchers
tend to focus only on the enrollment decision.


                                                        31
                                                         1980                        2005
              Moment                          Population        Marginal   Population       Marginal
              Enrollment premium                 0.242           0.067       0.609           0.159
              College wage premium               0.361           0.232       0.934           0.329
              Discontinuation rate               0.393           0.824       0.451           0.952
              Some-college premium               0.057           0.031       0.214           0.151
              Underemployment rate               0.237           0.303       0.326           0.414
              Underemployment premium            0.110           0.046       0.467           0.319

                Table 8: Population vs. Marginal Enrollees, 1980 and 2005.
Marginal enrollees are one percent of the population along the enrollment threshold. We force all of them
to enroll and compute the moments (the “Marginal” columns).


          The relevant moments for the population and the marginal enrollees are compared
       in Table 8, separately for 1980 and 2005. We first define “enrollment premium.” After
       enrollment, some will quit college as a some-college worker and others enter the labor
       market as a college graduate, with significant wage differentials between the two groups.
       Enrollment premium is the average of some-college premium and college-graduate wage
       premium, weighted by the college dropout and graduation rates.
          In both years, the enrollment premium for marginal enrollees is far below the
       population average, and by much more in 2005. The premium is driven down by
       the fact that around 90 percent of the marginal enrollees will quit college and become
       some-college workers, as shown in the college dropout probabilities in Figure 5.27 Some-
       college workers as a group enjoy a much smaller wage premium than college graduates.
          While the correlation between one’s true return z and prior mean µz1 (ρzz1 ) is not
       perfect—0.64 in 1980 and 0.76 in 2005, it is strong enough to generate meaningful
       positive selection in terms of z at the enrollment margin. Put differently, the fact that
       a marginal student decided not to enroll based on low µz1 implies that he likely has a
       lower true return than those who chose to enroll.28 A low true return implies a high
       probability of quitting college midway, even after enrollment. If he were one of the
       few in the marginal group who turn out to have been too pessimistic about their own
       z, he will graduate from college. However, he still has a higher probability of being
       underemployed than other college graduates, because his true return is likely lower
       than the graduate average. In addition, even conditioning on education attainment or
       underemployment status, he is expected to earn less than others in the same category,
       again because his true return is likely lower than the group average.

  27
      This is consistent with the evidence that most college dropouts are from two-year or lower-tier four-year
public institutions (Bound and Turner, 2011). A marginal student will likely attend such institutions.
   28
      This is consistent with the finding in Carneiro and Heckman (2002) and Cameron and Taber (2004)
that students at the enrollment stage are sufficiently well-informed and financially unconstrained.


                                                      32
                                                  Population                    Switchers
                 Moment
                                                 Before After        All         Poor         Rich
                                                                            ∗            ∗
                 Enrollment rate                  0.646    0.752   [0.106]      [0.029]      [0.016]∗
                 Enrollment premium               0.609    0.511    0.130        0.090         0.163
                 College wage premium             0.934    0.916    0.361        0.340        0.312
                 Discontinuation rate             0.451    0.511    0.974        0.985        0.943
                 Some-college wage premium        0.214    0.192    0.124        0.086        0.154
                 Underemployment rate             0.326    0.328    0.373        0.462        0.370
                 Underemployment premium          0.467    0.458    0.098        0.152        0.121
                 ∗
                     Fraction of those who enroll because of the subsidy (percent of population).

         Table 9: Subsidizing Enrollment: Free College for First Two Years (2005)
First column moments are from the benchmark 2005 calibration. Second column (“After”) is the population
moments after the subsidies are implemented. Third column (“All”) shows the moments for those who enroll
because of the subsidy, or “switchers.” The last two columns are for two sub-groups of switchers: “Poor” for
those in the bottom quartile of the initial population wealth distribution and “Rich” for the top quartile.


        6.2      Tuition Support for First Two Years of College
        Our results indicate that, to a large extent, college enrollment and graduation positively
        select students in terms of their true returns. In particular, those near the enrollment
        threshold may have little to gain by going to college, because the realized large returns
        to college come from those who graduate, but most marginal enrollees would quit college
        following an information update. Having said that, especially for 2005, initial wealth
        (captured by family income) is an important determinant of college enrollment (Table
        3 and Figure 5). We now ask whether financial intervention, such as college tuition
        subsidies, may be justified by a simple cost-benefit analysis. In this section, motivated
        by the proposals by leading politicians including President Obama, we quantitatively
        assess the impact of a policy that makes the first two years of college education free.
            Specifically, starting from our calibrated 2005 economy, we make the first two years
        of college free for all individuals, i.e., x1 = 0 in the individual’s problem (5). We call
        those individuals who change their enrollment decision (from no to yes) because of the
        subsidy “switchers.”29 We re-compute the population moments (“After”) and compare
        them with the 2005 benchmark (“Before”) in Table 9. We also compute the moments
        for all switchers (“All”), and then separately look at the switchers from the bottom
        (“Poor”) and top (“Rich”) quartiles of the initial population wealth distribution.
            With the subsidy, the college enrollment rate rises by 11 percentage points. How-
        ever, as in Section 6.1, the switchers are by construction marginal enrollees, and their
        true returns are lower on average than the returns of those who would enroll regard-
        less of the subsidy. Most of the switchers (97 percent) quit college before earning a
        four-year degree. Even those who graduate are more likely to be underemployed than
  29
       This switcher group includes all the marginal enrollees with χ = 1 in (13).


                                                          33
other college graduates. In addition, even after conditioning on education and under-
employment, they earn less on average than others in the same group. Their average
enrollment premium is only 13 percent, a small fraction of the 61-percent enrollment
premium enjoyed by those who would enroll regardless of the subsidy. For the economy
as a whole, they raise the college dropout rate and the underemployment rate—only
slightly, since so few become college graduates—and depress all the education premia.
   Since the motivation for real-world proposals of this kind is to give poor students
opportunities to get ahead, we explore whether poor and rich switchers are affected
differently. In terms of enrollment, as expected, the policy positively affects the poor
more than the rich. Of the 11-percentage-point increase in the enrollment rate, 3
percentage points come from the bottom quartile of initial wealth, while only 1.6
percentage points come from the top quartile.
   However, the poor switchers gain on average much less than the rich switchers in
terms of education premium. One reason is that they are more likely to quit college
midway than the rich switchers. Although the policy covers the first two years’ college
costs (x1 ), those who wish to transfer to or continue in a four-year institution now
have to pay x2 (net of existing grants). Similar to the enrollment threshold in Figure
5, although not shown in the paper, the graduation threshold level of the updated prior
mean µz2 in (7) declines with wealth: that is, for a given updated prior mean, those
with assets below a threshold quit college, and those above complete four-year degrees.
Because the some-college premium is much lower than the college premium, the higher
dropout probability of the poor switchers implies that their enrollment premium is
lower than the rich switchers’.
   The other reason is that the poor switchers’ some-college premium is lower than the
rich switchers’. This requires more explanation. At a glance, this sounds contradictory
to the first reason: Because the threshold µz2 decreases in wealth, the poor switchers
who quit college must have a higher µz2 on average than the richer switchers who drop
out. If µz2 is correlated with true returns z, shouldn’t we see a higher some-college
premium among the poor switchers than the rich ones? The answer is that we also have
to consider the correlation between initial wealth and true returns, or ρaz in Table 4.
For a given level of a prior mean, the rich are more likely to have a higher true return
z than the poor, because initial wealth and true returns are positively correlated. The
lower some-college premium of poor switchers implies that the correlation between
initial wealth and true returns dominates the correlation between the updated prior
mean and true returns for the switcher group.
   We now ask whether this subsidy program is justified by a hypothetical cost-benefit
analysis: We compare the increase in the present discounted value of lifetime earnings
of switchers with the cost of the government paying the two-year college tuition x1


                                          34
       only for them. This analysis presupposes that the program can perfectly target the
       switchers. It is an upper bound on the net benefit per switcher of the program, since
       any tuition subsidy paid to those who would have enrolled even without it will have a
       much lower net benefit.30 At the same time, this thought experiment is closer to real-
       world proposals, which will subsidize only the cost of attending community colleges
       and lower-tier public universities.
          On average, a switcher makes $19,036 more in lifetime earnings, discounted to age
       19. The two-year subsidy costs the government $16,958 per switcher. In addition,
       while the program only covers the first two years of college, after which most of the
       switchers quit, the few switchers that decide to complete a four-year degree will claim
       a fraction of their final two-year college cost, v(a1 )x2 , from the pre-existing grants
       program. This expected additional cost is $41 per switcher. Subtracting the total
       cost per switcher of $16,999 from the benefit of $19,036, we arrive at a positive but
       negligible net benefit of $2,037. To put things in perspective, this would require that
       90 percent of the increased earnings be taxed for the program to break even.


       6.3     Tuition Support for Final Two Years of College
       In the previous section, even among the marginal students who enroll because of the
       subsidy, the realized college premium for the few who eventually graduate from college
       is significantly higher than the some-college premium for those who quit college midway.
       This observation, combined with the fact that the final two years of college are more
       expensive than the first two (i.e., x2 > x1 ), leads us to another policy experiment:
       making the last two years of college free. Here we analyze the “short-run” effect by
       focusing on the first cohort to benefit unexpectedly from this policy—that is, their
       enrollment decisions are not affected by the anticipation of receiving such subsidies.31
          The results are show in Table 10. In the context of this backloaded subsidy, “switch-
       ers” are those who graduate from college instead of dropping out because of the subsidy.
       In the first column are the moments from the benchmark 2005 calibration. The second
       column is the outcome for this cohort as a whole, after the policy implementation. The
       third column (“All”) shows the moments for all switchers in the cohort. The remain-
       ing two columns are for two sub-groups of switchers: “Poor” for those in the bottom


  30
      There are two model details that we want to clarify. First, if we make two years of college free for
everyone, even the lifetime earnings of those who would have enrolled anyway increase on average: Because
they now have more assets after the first two years of college (i.e, a2 ), more of them choose to graduate from
college and earn higher wages on average. Second, paying such a student’s two years of college tuition costs
less than x1 because he was already paid grants v(a1 )x1 . The new subsidy is picking up (1 − v(a1 ))x1 .
   31
      We also worked out the effect on younger cohorts who know of the subsidy when making enrollment
decisions. We find only minor quantitative effects—for example, enrollment rates increase by less than one
percentage point—and accordingly omit this result from the paper.


                                                      35
                                                 Population                       Switchers
               Moment
                                                Before After           All         Poor         Rich
                                                                              ∗            ∗
               Discontinuation rate             0.451        0.306   [0.094]      [0.023]      [0.032]∗
               Some-college wage premium        0.214        0.176       -            -            -
               College wage premium             0.934        0.810    0.342        0.360        0.328
               Underemployment rate             0.326        0.340    0.393        0.399        0.398
               Underemployment premium          0.467        0.369    0.058        0.061        0.044
               ∗
                   Fraction continuing college because of the subsidy (percent of population).

      Table 10: Subsidizing Graduation: Free Final Two Years of College (2005)
Here “switchers” are those who graduate from college (instead of dropping out) because of the subsidy. The
result is for the first cohort to benefit unexpectedly from the new subsidy program—i.e., the subsidy did not
affect their enrollment decision. First column moments are from the benchmark 2005 calibration. Second
column (“After”) is the outcome for this cohort as a whole. Third column (“All”) is for all switchers in the
cohort. The last two columns are for two sub-groups of switchers: “Poor” for those in the bottom quartile
of the initial population wealth distribution and “Rich” for the top quartile.


      quartile of the initial population wealth distribution and “Rich” for those in the top
      quartile. By definition, none of the switchers quits college.
          The policy has a strong positive impact on the fraction of college graduates in
      the cohort—it rises from 35 percent in the 2005 benchmark to 45 percent, as the
      college dropout rate falls from 45 to 31 percent. However, the switchers’ college wage
      premium is well below the other college graduates’: as college graduates, switchers earn
      on average 34 percent more than high-school workers, while the figure is 93 percent
      for the other graduates. Part of the reason is that the switchers are more likely to be
      underemployed (39 vs. 33 percent). However, whether they are underemployed or not,
      they earn much less than the other college graduates. The real reason is similar to
      what we found when subsidizing the first two years: The decision to quit or complete
      college is largely based on students’ updated beliefs on their true returns to college,
      and the beliefs at this stage are even more consistent with the true returns than at
      the enrollment stage. The switchers on average have low true returns than those who
      would graduate from college regardless of the subsidy, as is demonstrated by their
      post-graduation wages. We find that the results are broadly similar across switchers
      of different initial wealth levels.
          We can calculate that the switchers on average would have earned a some-college
      wage premium of 29 percent had they not graduated from college. With the subsidy,
      their average wage gain is 5 percent of the average high-school wage (34 minus 29 as
      percent of the average high-school wage), which is even smaller than the average wage
      gain from subsidizing the first two years. To the extent that students learn about
      their individual returns while in college, selection on returns should be sharper at the
      graduation stage than at the enrollment stage, and it makes sense that the wage gains



                                                        36
       from subsidized graduation are smaller.32
           With the smaller wage gain and the larger cost of subsidizing the last two years
       (i.e., x2 > x1 ), a cost-benefit analysis as in the previous section finds a negative net
       benefit. That is, even if we were to tax 100 percent of the realized wage gains, we
       cannot recoup the cost of the subsidy program.33


       7     Concluding Remarks
       Our model broadens the standard education choice model by considering the college
       completion decision and the possibility of underemployment as a college graduate.
       These options interact with rising returns-to-college heterogeneity and risk in a way
       that reconciles the stagnant college enrollment and graduation rates with the rising
       college wage premium.
           Extending the analysis, we find that policies encouraging college enrollment of
       marginal students would only lead to small wage gains: Such students are highly likely
       to quit college without earning a four-year degree, and the some-college wage premium
       is only a fraction of college-graduate premium. That is, one should not point to the
       rising headline college wage premium and jump to the conclusion that too few are
       going to college. On the other hand, some commentators think of underemployment
       as proof that too many people are going to (and finishing) college. In our model,
       underemployment is a natural outcome of the real option inherent in the risky human
       capital investment of college education. In fact, it is part of what makes a college
       degree valuable ex ante, protecting graduates from the left-tail risk in the college-
       graduate labor market.
           The one important question this paper sidestepped is what determines the individ-
       ual return to college (or z). We took its distribution in the population as given, and
       conjectured that it may capture one’s innate ability, human capital acquired from early
       childhood through high school, the quality of colleges one can be admitted to, and so
       on. When we have a better understanding of what determines z and also through what
       mechanism, we will have productive debates about what policy interventions will be
       most effective in terms of wage gains. Still, in relating it to educational attainment
       and education wage premia, it will be important to explicitly take into account the
       endogenous selection at the college enrollment and completion stages.

  32
      This is much smaller than the regression discontinuity estimate in Zimmerman (2014), which finds that
the marginal students admitted to the flagship public university in Florida typically graduate and earn 20
percent more than those comparable but not admitted, many of whom become some-college workers.
   33
      In relation to the literature—e.g., Bowen et al. (2009) and many others reviewed in Bound and Turner
(2011)—that emphasizes policy interventions at the college completion margin rather than the enrollment
margin, our result suggests that unconditional tuition subsidies may not be the most effective policy tool.


                                                    37
References
Abbott, B., G. Gallipoli, C. Meghir, and G. L. Violante (2014). Education policy and
  intergenerational transfers in equilibrium. Working Paper 18782, NBER.

Altonji, J. G. (1993). The demand for and return to education when education out-
  comes are uncertain. Journal of Labor Economics 11 (1), 48–83.

Altonji, J. G., P. Arcidiacono, and A. Maurel (2015). The analysis of field choice in
  college and graduate school: Determinants and wage effects. Manuscript.

Arcidiacono, P., P. Bayer, and A. Hizmo (2010). Beyond Signaling and Human Capital:
  Education and the Revelation of Ability. American Economic Journal: Applied
  Economics 2 (4), 76–104.

Athreya, K. and J. C. Eberly (2013). The supply of college-educated workers: The roles
  of college premia, college costs, and risk. Working Paper 13-02, Federal Reserve Bank
  of Richmond.

Autor, D. H., L. F. Katz, and M. S. Kearney (2008). Trends in U.S. wage inequality:
  Revising the revisionists. Review of Economics and Statistics 90 (2), 300–323.

Bailey, M. J. and S. M. Dynarski (2011). Gains and gaps: Changing inequality in u.s.
  college entry and completion. Working Paper 17633, NBER.

Betts, J. R. (1996). What do students know about wages? evidence from a survey of
  undergraduates. Journal of Human Resources 31 (1), 27–56.

Bound, J. and S. Turner (2011). Dropouts and diplomas: The divergence in collegiate
  outcomes. In E. A. Hanushek, S. Machin, and L. Woessmann (Eds.), Handbook of
  the Economics of Education, Volume 4, pp. 573–613. Amsterdam: Elsevier.

Bowen, W. G., M. M. Chingos, and M. S. McPherson (2009). Crossing the Finish Line:
  Completing College at America’s Public Universities. Princeton University Press.

Brown, J., C. Fang, and F. J. Gomes (2015). Risk and returns to education over time.
  Discussion Paper 10416, Centre for Economic Policy Research.

Cameron, S. V. and C. Taber (2004). Estimation of educational borrowing constraints
  using returns to schooling. Journal of Political Economy 112 (1), 132–182.

Card, D. (1999). The causal effect of education on earnings. In O. Ashenfelter and
  D. Card (Eds.), Handbook of Labor Economics, Volume 3A, pp. 1801–1863. Amster-
  dam: Elsevier.

Card, D. and J. E. DiNardo (2002). Skill-biased technological change and rising wage
  inequality: Some problems and puzzles. Journal of Labor Economics 20 (4), 733–783.



                                          38
Carneiro, P. and J. J. Heckman (2002). The evidence on credit constraints in post-
  secondary schooling. Economic Journal 112 (482), 705–734.

Carneiro, P., J. J. Heckman, and E. J. Vytlacil (2011). Estimating marginal returns
  to education. American Economic Review 101 (6), 2754–81.

Chen, S. H. (2008). Estimating the variance of wages in the presence of selection and
  unobserved heterogeneity. Review of Economics and Statistics 90 (2), 275–289.

Clark, B., C. Joubert, and A. Maurel (2015). The career prospects of overeducated
  Americans. Manuscript.

Cunha, F. and J. J. Heckman (2007). The evolution of inequality, heterogeneity and
  uncertainty in labor earnings in the U.S. economy. Working Paper 13526, NBER.

Cunha, F., J. J. Heckman, and S. Navarro (2005). Separating uncertainty from het-
  erogeneity in life cycle earnings. Oxford Economic Papers 57 (2), 191–261.

Gale, W. G. and J. K. Scholz (1994). Intergenerational transfers and the accumulation
  of wealth. Journal of Economic Perspectives 8 (4), 145–160.

Guvenen, F., F. Karahan, S. Ozkan, and J. Song (2015). What do data on millions of
  U.S. workers reveal about life-cycle earnings risk? Manuscript.

Heckman, J., L. Lochner, and C. Taber (1998). Explaining rising wage inequality:
  Explanations with a dynamic general equilibrium model of labor earnings with het-
  erogeneous agents. Review of Economic Dynamics 1 (1), 1–58.

Heckman, J. J., L. J. Lochner, and P. E. Todd (2006). Earnings functions, rates of
  return and treatment effects: The Mincer equation and beyond. In E. A. Hanushek
  and F. Welch (Eds.), Handbook of the Economics of Education, Volume 1, Chapter 7,
  pp. 307–458. Amsterdam: North Holland.

Heckman, J. J. and S. Urzua (2009). The option value of educational choices and the
  rate of return to educational choices. Manuscript.

Heckman, J. J., S. Urzua, and E. Vytlacil (2006). Understanding instrumental variables
  in models with essential heterogeneity. Review of Economics and Statistics 88 (3),
  389–432.

Hendricks, L. and T. Schoellman (2014). Student abilities during the expansion of US
  education. Journal of Monetary Economics 63 (1), 19–36.

Horn, L. and P. Skomsvold (2011). Community college student outcomes: 1994-2009.
  Technical Report 2012-253, National Center for Education Statistics.

Hoxby, C. M. (2009). The changing selectivity of American colleges. Journal of
  Economic Perspectives 23 (4), 95–118.


                                         39
Huggett, M., G. Ventura, and A. Yaron (2011). Sources of lifetime inequality. American
  Economic Review 101 (7), 2923–2954.

Johnson, M. T. (2013). Borrowing constraints, college enrollment, and delayed entry.
  Journal of Labor Economics 31 (4), 669 – 725.

Kane, T. J. and C. E. Rouse (1995). Labor-market returns to two- and four-year
  college. American Economic Review 85 (3), 600–614.

Katz, L. F. and K. M. Murphy (1992). Changes in relative wages, 1963-1987: Supply
  and demand factors. Quarterly Journal of Economics 107 (1), 35–78.

Keane, M. P. and K. I. Wolpin (1997). The career decisions of young men. Journal of
  Political Economy 105 (3), 473–522.

Lange, F. and R. Topel (2006). The social value of education and human capital.
  In E. A. Hanushek and F. Welch (Eds.), Handbook of the Economics of Education,
  Volume 1, pp. 459–509. Amsterdam: North Holland.

Lee, D. and K. I. Wolpin (2006). Intersectoral labor mobility and the growth of the
  service sector. Econometrica 74 (1), 1–46.

Lemieux, T. (2010). What do we really know about changes in wage inequality? In
  Labor in the New Economy, pp. 17–59. NBER.

Leuven, E. and H. Oosterbeek (2011). Overeducation and mismatch in the labor
  market. Discussion Paper 5523, Institute for the Study of Labor.

Lochner, L. J. and A. Monge-Naranjo (2011). The nature of credit constraints and
  human capital. American Economic Review 101 (6), 2487–2529.

National Student Clearinghouse Research Center (2012). Snapshot report on degree
  attainment.

Stange, K. M. (2012). An empirical examination of the option value of college enroll-
  ment. American Economic Journal: Applied Economics 4 (1), 49–84.

Stinebrickner, T. and R. Stinebrickner (2012). Learning about academic ability and
  the college dropout decision. Journal of Labor Economics 30 (4), 707 – 748.

Stinebrickner, T. and R. Stinebrickner (2014). Academic performance and college
  dropout: Using longitudinal expectations data to estimate a learning model. Journal
  of Labor Economics 32 (3), 601 – 644.

Taber, C. R. (2001). The rising college premium in the eighties: Return to college or
  return to unobserved ability? Review of Economic Studies 68 (3), 665–691.

Zimmerman, S. D. (2014). The returns to college admission for academically marginal
  students. Journal of Labor Economics 32 (4), 711–754.

                                         40
A      Data Appendix
A.1      March CPS
Most of the data moments used in the analysis are computed from the IPUMS CPS,
generally following the data-cleaning procedure of Autor et al. (2008). One difference
is that we do not exclude the self-employed or farmers from the sample, because we
do not think that education decisions are made only in anticipation of becoming a
wage-worker.

Earnings We closely follow AKK, especially when handling top-coding.
  1. First, we select all race categories containing “white,” and focus only on individ-
      uals in the private labor force.
  2. Select only full-time workers, defined as individuals who report they worked 40+
      weeks last year, and 35+ usual hours worked per week.
  3. Follow AKK to adjust for top-coding by income source (“wages and salary,”
      “self-employed,” and “farm”). From 1988 onward, each income source is further
      divided into primary and secondary sources of income. All income sources and
      categories are separately top-coded. AKK’s procedure is to multiply top-coded
      incomes by 1.5 of the top-code value, available from the BLS.
  4. (Top trimming) Compute implied average weekly and hourly earnings. Drop
      individuals with implied average weekly earnings larger than the top-code value
      times 1.5/40. Repeat with implied average hourly earnings.
  5. Define total earnings as the top-coding adjusted sum of all three (or six for 1988
      onward) income categories, also adding primary and secondary sources when both
      present. Earnings are reported in annual terms. Deflate all earnings to 2000
      USD, using the chain-weighted (implicit) price deflator for personal consumption
      expenditures.
  6. (Bottom trimming) Drop individuals whose average weekly or hourly earnings are
      less than one-half the real minimum wage in 1982 ($112/week in 2000 dollars).

Educational Attainment Prior to 1992, the CPS only collected respondent’s
highest grade completed. From 1992 onward, they additionally collected data on the
highest degree or diploma attained.
  1. HSD: less than 12 years of schooling, or report not having a high school diploma
      or equivalent
  2. HSG: at least 12 years of schooling, or report having a high school diploma or
      equivalent

                                          41
  3. SMC: more than high school but less than 4 years of college, or report having a
      two-year degree

  4. CLG: at least 4 years of college, or report having a four-year degree

  5. GTC: at least 6 years of college or report having a post-college graduate degree

To compute statistics, we drop missing observations and use the CPS provided sampling
weights, except when computing the earnings premia. To control for age-demographic
effects, we use the sampling weights when computing the mean earnings for each age,
but simply take the average across the mean earnings for each age from 26 to 50
when computing premia. To compute lifetime PDV earnings values, we discount mean
earnings by age by an annual interest rate of 4 percent. For more details, refer to AKK.


A.2      BLS Education and Training Assignments and NLSY
BLS Education Projections (EP) The BLS publishes an education and train-
ing requirements chart by detailed occupation in their Occupation Outlook Quarterly
as part of its EP program (http://www.bls.gov/emp/home.htm). Published bienni-
ally, the chart is based on the BLS’s own analysis combined with the distribution of
educational attainment in each detailed occupation category. We use the 1998 chart as
a benchmark and test robustness with the 2008 chart. We use the 1998 chart because
the occupation coding changes frequently in both the CPS and the EP, and the 1998
chart requires the least use of occupational coding crosswalks with large changes when
comparing 1980 to 2005.
   The CPS uses the OCC1970 convention until 1982, OCC1980 until 1991, OCC1990
until 2002, and OCC2000 up to 2005. Occupations in the 1998 requirements chart are
coded according to SOC2000. We use BLS crosswalks to change all occupation codes
to OCC1990. To err on the safe side for our analysis, we define underemployment
only for those cases that we can match the occupation code in the CPS to that in
the requirements chart. Consequently, for approximately 25% of college graduates we
are unable to determine whether they are underemployed. In these cases, we simply
assume they work in college-level jobs.

NLSY79 and 97 We compute age-earnings profiles in the NLSY by applying the
same criteria we applied to the CPS, but dropping observations below half the 1982
minimum wage. We impute missing wage observations by linearly interpolating log
wages in adjacent years, and compute lifetime PDV earnings by discounting at an
annual interest rate of 4%. Missing observations are dropped when computing the
correlation between family income and children’s lifetime PDV earnings.



                                          42
    To compute enrollment rates and family income in the NLSY79 and 97, we follow
Lochner and Monge-Naranjo (2011) (LM), except that we drop high school dropouts.
Then we drop children who were not living with an adult for both ages 16 and 17,
and take family income as the mean reported values for those ages. We define college
enrollment as having 13+ years of schooling at age 21. If data is missing at age 21,
we apply the same criterion at age 22. We drop missing observations to compute
enrollment rates. For more details, refer to LM.


B       Maximum of Normal Random Variables
For a lognormal random variable x with distribution F , let F̂ denote the distribution
of log x, so that F̂ is normal. We have

       Ĝd (log w|z) = P r {log md + z + log $d ≤ w and log md + log $h ≤ w} ,

where log $d and log $h are lognormal as specified in (4). With independence between
the two random variables,

       Ĝd (log w|z) = F̂d log w − log md − z + σd2 /2 × F̂h log w − log mh + σh2 /2 ,
                                                                                   


which is the wage distribution faced by college non-graduates. Ĝc can be similarly
defined for three random variables. Since F̂h and F̂d are normal, we can write out the
p.d.f. of log w, ĝd , as

                               log w + σh2 /2        log w − log md − z + σd2 /2
                                                                              
                       1
       ĝd (log w|z) =    ·φ                    ·Φ
                       σh            σh                          σd
                                                         2
                                  log w − log md − z + σd /2
                                                                  
                                                                     log w + σh2 /2
                                                                                    
                          1
                       +     ·φ                                 ·Φ
                          σd                   σd                         σh

and similarly for ĝc (log w|z), where φ and Φ are, respectively, the p.d.f. and c.d.f. of
the standard normal distribution. These are the distributions we use for integration in
the numerical implementation described below.


C       Numerical Appendix
In an outer-loop, we calibrate Θ (in Table 4) to match target moments Md (in Table
3), using a downhill simplex method to solve Equation (12). Note that all moments
are in terms of percentages; the resulting RMSE is less than a percentage point for
both 1980 and 2005.




                                             43
C.1        Initialization
Grids All interpolations will be linear. Let na denote the size of the grids for ai ,
i ∈ {1, 2, 3}, and nz the size of the grids for the true returns z, prior µz1 , and posterior
µz2 . The grid points for assets are set such that lower points are closer to each other,
and the returns and posteriors grid points are set at equi-distance intervals. These
grids are used as individual states.

Quadratures and terminal values We use k-dimensional Gaussian-Hermite
quadratures whenever numerical integration is needed. Before we solve the individual’s
problem, we can set all terminal values as follows:

  1. Set quadratures over wages (wh , $d , $c ). Separately from the z-grid, set k-
      dimensional quadratures over z for each node on the µz2 -grid. Also set separate
      k-dimensional quadratures over µz2 for all nodes on the µz1 -grid. All numerical
      integration is done over these quadratures.

  2. For each node on the na × nz -grid for (ai , z), compute V (s, ai , w) and its first
      derivative w.r.t. ai in (8) for all notes on the (wh , $d , $c ) quadratures.

  3. Compute Vh (a1 ), Vd (a2 , z), Vc (a3 , z) and their derivatives w.r.t. ai by integrating
      over the w-quadratures.

  4. For each node on the na ×nz -grid for (a2 , µz2 , compute the discontinuation (work)
      option in (7) by integrating over the z-quadrature for µz2 .

  5. Similarly, compute the college value for each node on the na × nz -grid for (a3 , µz2
      by integrating over the z-quadrature. Also obtain the derivative of the college
      option w.r.t. a3 by integration.

This gives us all the terminal values and their derivatives.


C.2        Individual Decisions
                                                                 R
Policy Functions for V2 Given the derivative of                      Vc dFz2 , derive the savings
policy   a∗3   for the “school” option for each value of (v, a2 , µz2 ) on the 3 × na × nz -grid.
Once done, use the policy function to compute the value of the “school” option and
the envelope theorem to compute ∂V2 (v, a1 , µz2 )/∂a1 if the school option is chosen.
Compare with the “work” option to derive the binary policy function χG ∈ {0, 1} for
0 =work, 1 =school.

Policy Functions for V1 Given the derivative of V2 , derive the savings policy a∗2
for the “school” option for each value of (a1 , µz1 ) on the na × nz -grid, while using the
µz2 -quadrature on each node of µz1 -grid to integrate over V2 and its derivative w.r.t.


                                                 44
a2 . Once done, use the policy function to compute the value of the “school” option.
Compare with the “work” option to derive the binary policy function χE ∈ {0, 1} for
0 =work, 1 =school.


C.3     Approximating Distributions
Initial Distribution For s = 1, linearly approximate a trivariate normal distri-
bution over (log a1 , µz1 , z) given a guess on the parameters. Although the individuals
don’t know z, we need to know them to compute probabilities.

Enroll? Solve for individual decisions on each point of the approximated distribution
at s = 1, and compute the mass of individuals who don’t enroll. For the rest, compute
the masses that fall on an approximated quadvariate distribution over (a2 , µz2 , a1 , z),
which forms the approximated distribution for s = 2.

Discontinue? Solve for individual decisions on each point of the approximated
distribution for s = 2, and compute the mass of individuals who discontinue. For
the rest, compute the masses that fall on an approximated bivariate distribution over
(a3 , z), which forms the approximated distribution for s = 3.

Underemployed? The high school wage draw wh is independent of z. For each z
on the grid, we can compute the z-specific wage distributions for college non-graduates
and graduates, according to the bivariate and trivariate max distributions for log
normal random variables (using Appendix B). The c.d.f. for college graduates whose
college-job wage is not the maximum wage draw are those that we dub underemployed.


All statistics are computed using these approximated distributions.


D      Robustness and Alternative Specifications
D.1      Observed Wage Distributions
For all our analysis, we focused only on the first two moments of the education-specific
wage distributions. In Figure 6, we compare the entire ex post lifetime wage distribu-
tions obtained from the model to the distributions we recover from the CPS data using
a Q-Q plot. Specifically, we first demean log wages both in the data and the model,
and plot the simulated quantiles of residual log wages against the empirical quantiles
for each education category, separately for 1980 and 2005. A perfect match would lie
along the 45-degree line. While the simulated distributions are not perfect toward the
extreme points, overall the fit is reasonable. The fit will get significantly worse without

                                            45
             2
                                                             2

             1
                                                             1

             0
                                                             0

            −1                                              −1


            −2                                              −2
             −2      −1        0       1           2         −2     −1       0       1         2
                  (a) High School Only, 1980                      (b) High School Only, 2005

             2
                                                             2

             1
                                                             1

             0
                                                             0

            −1                                              −1


            −2                                              −2
             −2      −1        0       1           2         −2     −1       0       1         2
                    (c) Some College, 1980                         (d) Some College, 2005

             2
                                                             2

             1
                                                             1

             0
                                                             0

            −1                                              −1


            −2                                              −2
             −2      −1        0       1           2         −2     −1       0       1         2
              (e) Four-Year Degree or More, 1980             (f) Four-Year Degree or More, 2005

                                Fig. 6: Quantile-Quantile Plots
Each graph plots the model quantiles of the education-specific log wage distribution (demeaned) on the
vertical-axis against the empirical quantiles on the horizontal-axis.




                                                       46
the college dropout option. Without it, as we observed from Table 7, there is more
selection into enrollment and less into graduation. This would push up the lower quan-
tiles of the simulated some-college wage distribution. However, it is still the case that
our simulated wage distributions cannot capture the right tail of the high-school wage
distribution and the left tail of the college-graduate wage distribution. We attribute
such shortcomings primarily to several abstractions we made in the construction of the
model, which we discuss below.


D.2      Alternative Model Specifications
Heterogeneous Skills Specific to High-School Jobs If we introduce another
dimension of ex ante heterogeneity in the form of skills specific to high school jobs,
students with a comparative advantage in those jobs would self-select into them. Unless
the correlation between the high school job skill and return to college is strong, this new
dimension would push up the right tail of the simulated high school wage distribution.
It would also push down the simulated left tail of the college wage distribution, because
college graduates who become underemployed (i.e., end up with high school jobs) would
have a comparative disadvantage in high school jobs. Overall, it would improve the
model fit of the education-specific wage distribution.
   However, incorporating this new dimension of heterogeneity would not alter the
importance of heterogeneous returns to college and option values in explaining the time
trend in educational attainment and wage premia. The main mechanism in our model
is the rising dispersion of returns to college interacting with the options embedded in
college education. From 1980 to 2005, the wage inequality among high-school workers
did not increase nearly as much as that among college graduates. It is not conceptually
clear what the comparable options for high-school workers are either. This extension
would only have modest consequences on aggregate moments.

The Option of Returning to College As discussed in Section 3.3, we rule
out the possibility of returning to school once one enters the labor market, precisely
because we assume that his true return to college is revealed upon labor market entry.
This assumption clearly overstates the information value of college enrollment (i.e., the
value of the signal on individual returns while in college). We could alternatively allow
workers to return to school but then assume that they learn about their true return to
college only slowly while working.
   In the data (NLSY79/97), delayed enrollment or re-enrollment in college is not
uncommon but the gap is typically only two or three years long. Moreover, for more
than 95 percent of the people, their educational attainment at age 25 is the final
outcome. Given that we are matching observed wage and educational attainment


                                            47
      outcomes in the CPS for individuals older than 25, the intermediate stages of delayed
      entry or re-enrollment—and any learning about returns to college outside school—can
      be considered as subsumed into the enrollment/graduation decisions of our model.

      Wage Offers While in College While students in our model only make wage
      draws after they enter the labor market, other papers, e.g. Stange (2012), assume
      the opposite: wage draws are only made while in school. In-college wage draws would
      introduce a few different effects into our model. First, those who get lucky and draw a
      wage exceeding their reservation wage in college would quit education, shoring up the
      right tail of the some-college wage distribution. The flip side is that those who are not
      as lucky, having stayed in school in the hopes of drawing a better wage, will graduate
      college with a low wage, showing up in the left tail of the college wage distribution.
      On the other hand, if the in-college wage offers have information on individual-specific
      returns to college, it would strengthen the positive selection at the graduation stage.
      Finally, the wage draws in college increase the value of enrolling in college, implying less
      positive selection at the enrollment stage. The exact quantitative importance of these
      considerations in explaining the education and wage trends is left for future research.


      E       Additional Tables and Figures

                                                    1980           2005
                                      Total        0.7111         1.2243
                                    Between         0.0785         0.2237
                                     Within         0.6324         1.0001
                                        HSG         0.5547         0.8730
                                        SMC         0.5932         0.9589
                                        CLP         0.8251         1.2595
                                Between CLP          0.0129         0.0430
                                 Within CLP          0.8121         1.2165
                                          CLG        0.7928         1.1212
                                          GTC        0.9267         1.3047

             Table 11: Theil Index Decomposition, White Males, Ages 26–50
HSG: high school graduate, SMC: some college, CLP: all college graduates, CLG: only college graduates,
GTC: greater than college. To make the indices comparable across years and education groups, we normalize
them by log N , where N is the sum of the sampling weights, and multiply by 100. Total, between and within
indices are normalized by the size of the entire sample in each year, times 100. Education specific indices
are normalized by the size of each group in each year, times 100.




                                                    48
                                    100
                                    80
                                    60
                      Percent (%)

                                    40
                                    20
                                    0




                                          1965    1970     1975   1980      1985      1990   1995         2000   2005
                                                                          Survey Year

                                                     HSD          HSG              SMC              CLG              GTC




                Fig. 7: Education Attainment, White Females, Ages 26-50
HSD: high school dropout, HSG: high school graduate, SMC: some college, CLG: college graduate, GTC:
greater than college.




       2.5                                                                      2.5

         2                                                                         2

       1.5                                                                      1.5

         1                                                                         1

       0.5                                                                      0.5

         0                                                                         0
          0           1                          2                3                 0                     1                2      3
                                                 σz2                                                                 σz2
                    (a) zi = µz −                2                                           (b) zi = µz −            2    + σz
                                          High School Job               Some-College Job                  gd (w|z)

                                          Fig. 8: Some College Wage Distribution
Some-college wage distribution for an individual whose return zi is exactly at the population mean (left
panel), and one standard deviation above the mean (right panel). The horizontal axis is multiples of mean
high school wage. The G distribution is determined by the larger wage of a high school job, which would
lead to underemployment, and a some-college job.




                                                                         49
                        3                                                                                    3


                        2                                                                                    2


                        1                                                                                    1


                        0                                                                                    0
                         0                   1                   2                  3                         0                      1                    2                 3
                                                 (a) z = µz                                                                    (b) z = µz + σz
                                           High School Job                  Some-College Job                              College Job                gc (w|z)

                                                   Fig. 9: College Graduate Wage Distribution
College graduate wage distribution for an individual whose returns are exactly at the population mean (left
panel), and one standard deviation above the mean (right panel). The horizontal axis is multiples of mean
high school wage. The distributions are determined by the largest wage of a high school job, a some-college
job—both of which would lead to underemployment—and a college job.
                100




                                                                                                             100
                80




                                                                                                             80
  Percent (%)




                                                                                               Percent (%)
                60




                                                                                                             60
                40




                                                                                                             40
                20




                                                                                                             20
                0




                                                                                                             0




                      −1.5   −1            −.5         0         .5        1        1.5                            −1.5       −1            −.5        0         .5        1        1.5
                                                  True Returns                                                                                    True Returns

                                  Enroll             Graduate         College Job                                                  Enroll            Graduate         College Job




                                            (a) 1980                                                                                         (b) 2005

                                                    Fig. 10: Distribution of Education Choices
Implied educational attainment choices implied by calibrated parameters. For each level of log z, unknown
to the individual, we plot the fraction of individuals who enroll, graduate, and obtain a college job.




                                                                                          50
