                     NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                     PUBLIC DEBT GUARANTEES AND
                       PRIVATE CAPITAL FLIGHT




                           Jonathan Eaton




                      Working Paper No. 2172




                NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                      1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                         Cambridge, MA 02138
                              March 1987




The author is at the University of Virginia and the National Bureau
of Economic Research. He has benefitted substantially from
comments by seminar participants at Yale University, The Board of
Governors of the Federal Reserve System, the University of
Kentucky, and Columbia University. This paper was written while
the author was a consultant to the Macroeconomic Policy Division,
World Bank. The research reported here is part of the NBER's
research program in International Studies. Any opinions expressed
are those of the author and not those of the National Bureau of
Economic Research.
                                                  NBER Working Paper #2172
                                                  March 1987




                Public Debt Guarantees and Private Capital Flight




                                     ABSTRACT


     Significant amounts of private capital have flowed out of several of the

more heavily indebted developing countries. This outflow, often called

"capital flight," largely escapes taxation by the borrowing-country

government, and has generated concern about the prospects for future servicing

of the debt. Imperfect contract enforcement may lead to implicit or explicit

government guarantee of foreign debt. The model developed below demonstrates

that a government policy of guaranteeing private debt can, in turn, generate

more than one outcome. One such outcome replicates the allocation under

perfect contract enforcement: national savings is invested domestically and

foreign debt is repaid. The tax obligation implied by potential

nationalization of private debt, however, can also lead to another outcome in

which national capital flees and foreign debt may not be repaid.




                                                   Jonathan Eaton
                                                   Department of Economics
                                                   Rouss Hall
                                                   University of Virginia
                                                   Charlottesville, VA 22903
                                                   (804) 924-7580
                                   Introduction



     A striking feature of several of the large debtor countries is the extent

to which private capital outflows have eroded net inflows. Based on different

methodologies, Dooley, Helkie, Tryon and Underwood (1986) and Cuddington

(1987) provide estimates that are reported in Table 1. They find that up to a

half or more of the increase in the gross indebtedness of Argentina, Mexico,

and Venezuela during 1974—1.982 was offset by private capital outflows.1

     These outflows have increased the cost to these countries of raising

revenue to service debt, and have consequently generated concern about the

prospects for debt repayment. The outflows mean that borrowing by these

countries added much less to domestic resources than was initially thought.

This is reflected in the decline in domestic fixed capital formation between

1980-1981 and 1982-1984 in six of the eight countries reported in Table 1. In

addition, funds invested abroad frequently escape the tax base of the

borrowing-country government. For this reason these outflows have been

referred to as "capital flight."

     The implications of capital flight for public policy in both creditor and

debtor countries remain largely uninvestigated. To a significant extent

standard portfolio diversification motives can explain two—way flows. If this

is the reason that flight has occurred, then these outflows do not constitute

evidence of a market failure that warrants intervention. The current concern

about it is consequently misplaced.

     Some features of international capital markets may justify a less

sanguine view, however. A particular problem is the enforceability of debt

contracts. Creditors typically must rely on government intervention, or the

threat of intervention, to enforce payment. In the event of default domestic
                                      —2—

bankruptcy proceedings result in a transfer of the debtor's assets to the

creditor. In an international context, however, the willingness or ability of

the borrower's government to effect such a transfer is in doubt. Lenders may

have little ability to assess the solvency of a particular private borrower in

a developing country, at least relative to the ability of the government of

that country. They may also be much more able to penalize the country as a

whole   for nonpayment than to impose sanctions on an individual private
borrower in that country. For these reasons loans for private borrowers may
be channeled through the government, or lenders may require that loans to

private borrowers come with government guarantees.

     A major part of lending to less developed countries has taken the form of

public or publicly-guaranteed debt. Even where no guarantee was provided,

lenders have held governments accountable for the debts of private borrowers

in default. Diaz-Alejandro's (1985) account of the bankruptcy of some Chilean

banks provides an example. Even though the Chilean government explicitly did

not guarantee foreign loans to these banks, creditors demanded and received

payment from the government when private banks became insolvent.

     There is evidence that governments assumed a substantial amount of

private debt during the period in which capital flight appears to have been

most dramatic. Data taken from Sachs (forthcoming), on the percentage of U.S.

bank exposure owed by the public sector among some of the major debtor

countries is reported in Table 1.

     This paper develops a model in which the expectation of increased tax

obligations created by the potential nationalization of private debt generates

capital flight. One possibility is that government guarantees have no

implications for the allocation of resources. In this case investment

patterns replicate those that would emerge if private lenders could enforce
                                     -3-

 debt contracts directly. Subject to certain incentive-compatibility

 constraints on individual borrowers, an efficient allocation of resources

 emerges.

      Through the budget constraint of the government, however, implicit or

 explicit public guarantees create an interdependence among private investment

 decisions that is otherwise absent. A move by one borrower that increases the

 likelihood of his own default increases the expected tax obligations of other

borrowers. This increases the incentive for other borrowers to place their

own funds abroad, and increases the likelihood of default on their own loans

as well. Capital flight arises as a form of contagion.

     In the first version of the model, developed in section I, the mechanism

that leads to capital flight is outright fraud. Private borrowers have the

ability to invest their own and borrowed funds abroad, where they are not only

less productive than in domestic investment projects, but where they earn less

than the cost of funds from abroad. But by placing these funds overseas the

borrower escapes the obligation to repay his loan or to pay taxes to his

government.

     The assumption that funds placed abroad escape the tax base of the

borrower's government and the reach of foreign creditors seems largely

consistent with the observed operation of international capital markets.

Transfers of these funds are often not recorded, and have apparently been

effected through such devices as underinvoicing of exports and overinvoicing

of imports. (See Dooley's (1986) discussion, in particular.) Without an

official record, taxation is difficult. At the same time, borrowers can make

it difficult for lenders to match the identities of particular private

depositors and private borrowers. For one thing, the first tend to be

individuals and the second limited liability firms. For another, intrafamily
                                    -4-


transfers can make funds difficult to trace. Hence, while lending

institutions have knowingly accepted deposits of private individuals from

large debtor countries in significant amounts, they apparently do not, to

date, have the legal ability to use these deposits as collateral against

outstanding loans. The analysis in this paper is based on the extreme

assumption that flight capital escapes entirely both the tax base of the

borrower's government and funds available for collection by foreign lenders.

The basic points would survive (under more restricted conditions)

generalization to situations in which funds abroad were only partially

susceptible to taxation and to confiscation by lenders.

     Given the tax obligations of domestic borrowers, lenders can restrict

loan amounts to ensure that investing domestically and subsequently repaying

is in each borrower's interest. Potential nationalization of private debt

means that the flight of any one borrower's capital raises the tax obligations

of other borrowers. Hence it raises the incentive for other borrowers to

invest abroad as well. Consequently, equilibrium may involve all borrowers

investing domestically, with foreign loans repaid, or all investing abroad,

with government insolvency and default on foreign loans as the possible

consequence.

     In the second version of the model, developed in section II, the reason

for flight is somewhat more subtle. The borrower's effort in managing his

project and generating returns on his investment will determine whether he is

able to finance repayment. But the incentive to put in the necessary effort

depends negatively on debt-service obligations and anticipated tax

obligations. Again, lenders can design loan contracts that provide the

required incentive, given tax obligations.2 Here again, however, potential

nationalization of private debt implies that a low level of effort by one
                                     —5—

borrower, leading to his default, increases the tax obligations of others.

Their incentive to expend effort is consequently diminished as well. The

interdependence of borrowers' effort decisions generates the same potential

for contagion as in the first version of the model. In one equilibrium

borrowers expend sufficient effort to service debt. In another they do not.

In this second equilibrium they place their own capital abroad, since here it

earns a higher return.3

     The analysis in this paper builds on previous work on capital flight.

Khan and Haque (1985) model the phenomenon as the response to an asymmetric

risk of expropriation facing domestic and foreign investors. Domestic

investors face a higher risk of expropriation, so invest abroad. Domestic

investment is consequently financed with foreign funds. The model here

extends this approach by relating the risk of expropriation (through high

taxation) of domestically-owned capital to public and publicly—guaranteed

foreign debt. Eaton and Gersovitz (forthcoming) also provide a model in which

public debt can lead to the flight of private capital. Their concern is with

government borrowing to finance public goods rather than with publicly-

guaranteed private debt, but in both models anticipated tax obligations

generate the potential for flight.

     Dornbusch (1985) and Ize and Ortiz (1986) analyze capital flight in a

macroeconomic context. To quote Dornbusch on the Argentine case:



             The source of capital flight was the combination of
             currency overvaluation, the threat of devaluation,
             and ongoing and increasing domestic financial
             instability. The domestic instability derives from
             an inability to bring deficits under control and
             [to] stop the inflationary process in a decisive
             way. (p. 229)
                                            —6-


This view complements the analysis here. The government's inability to

finance expenditure, including debt-service obligations, led to inflationary

finance, a form of taxation of domestic capital. As a consequence, capital

fled.4



                        I. CAPITAL FLIGHT AND POTENTIAL FRAUD



     The contagion problem can be illustrated most succinctly in a simple

deterministic model .    A national economy that is small in world capital

markets is endowed with n potential projects. Project i yields an output

valued as:




     q1 =               f       > 0, f <0                                         (1)




where k Is total capital invested in the project. Each project is owned by

an entrepreneur with an endowment of capital k1. In addition, he is permitted

to borrow up to an amount            from abroad at a gross interest cost, s., which

will turn out to be a constant.

     If the owner invests the funds in the project then he must service any

debt from borrowed funds and pay a tax, t1. His after-tax return is

consequently q1 -   s1k
                            -
                                t.   where 4 denotes actual foreign borrowing.5
Alternatively he may invest his own and borrowed funds abroad, default on his

loan and evade the tax. His return on this investment is p1. assumed to be a

constant. The decision to invest at home or abroad consequently depends upon

whether the net after-tax return on domestic investment is greater than or

less than that on foreign investment:
                                            —7—

      f(k1 + k) —   skir
                           -
                               ti     p.(k + k)                                   (2)




      Given s.f, the borrower's interest cost of foreign capital; k, the

 entrepreneur's own capital;        , the   interest rate on funds placed abroad; and

t1, the tax, expression (2) constrains the amount of foreign capital that the

entrepreneur can borrow without having an incentive to invest abroad.

      In the region where the amount invested is so low that f > Si + p, an

 increase in foreign indebtedness reduces the incentive for flight. As long as

the left hand exceeds the right hand side of (2), foreign lenders will be

willing to extend further credit, since doing so will not create an incentive

to default, while domestic lenders will want to borrow more since the return

to domestic investment exceeds the marginal cost of borrowing, s1. Once the

amount invested domestically reaches a level such that
                                                              f < S1 + p, however,
as foreign indebtedness increases so does the incentive for flight. The point

at which expression (2) holds with equality consequently defines a maximum

amount that lenders will be willing to extend, k. Note that it is a

decreasing function t1, S, and p1.

     It would never be in the interest of someone intending to repay to borrow

more than an amount kf* determined by the condition:



     f!(i. + k) =
                    s1.                                                          (3)




Hence whether this ceiling is binding or not depends upon whether k > k.

In any regime in which the credit ceiling          is binding, the marginal product

of capital domestically will exceed the return on funds placed abroad

(i.e., f >        Thus, wherever it is binding, the ceiling is an increasing
                                    -8-


function of the entrepren r's own capital, as can be demonstrated by

differentiating condition (2) with respect to k1.

     Consider, as an example, the case in which technology is linear, so that



     f1(k) =     ak1.

For there to be an incentive to perpetuate fraud at y level of indebtedness

requires that a. < s. + p, while a borrower's willingness to borrow and

invest      amount domestically requires that a > 5• Under these

restrictions, condition (2) implies a debt ceiling,


                 —          —
         = (a1       p1)k
                 + r. —
            Si

     In general, more borrowed capital can safely be provided the more
productive the project in question, the lower the interest cost of the loan,

the lower the return on funds placed abroad, the lower the tax, and the more

that the entrepreneur himself has to invest. The debt ceiling, k,   reflects
the complementarity between the entrepreneur's own capital and borrowed funds

when loans are rationed.

     Foreign lenders are competitive, and supply loans at a risk—free gross

rate, r > p, given to this economy. The loan rate charged may be strictly

greater than the rate of return on investments by domestic investors abroad

due to (i) the cost of foreign banking services, (ii) foreign reserve

requirements, and (iii) the cost to domestic borrowers of evading exchange

controls. If foreign lenders can observe all the parameters of individual

projects, including the borrower's total indebtedness, and repayment of loans

in the absence of fraudulent investment is automatically guaranteed, then they
                                      —9—

                              —f
 will provide any amount up to k at the safe rate. Hence, s1 =   r.   Funds in

 excess of this amount will not be available at any rate, since default is then

 a certainty. If the credit ceiling is not binding then borrowing proceeds to

 the point at which the domestic return equals the world cost of capital.

 Otherwise the incentive-compatibility constraint implies a marginal product of

capital in excess of this cost.

     In neither case does capital flight or default ever occur. This is

because lenders know all the parameters of the borrower's decision and ensure

that this option is not in the borrower's interest. With imperfect

information capital flight, and consequent default on foreign loans, could

occur if lenders overestimate the productivity of a particular project or the

amount that the borrower himself has at stake, or underestimate total

indebtedness or the borrower's return on funds placed abroad.



                             Government Guarantees



     Foreign lenders may make loans contingent on a guarantee from the

borrower's government for either of two reasons. One is that lenders may not

be able to observe the parameters of particular loan projects directly, and

rely on the local government to determine whether or not these are at

financially sound levels. Requiring a loan guarantee makes accurate reporting

of the relevant data incentive-compatible for the government.

     A second reason is that lenders may have no direct method to enforce

repayment. Even if funds are invested domestically, lenders must rely on the

local government to pursue bankruptcy proceedings against a borrower who does

not repay. Lenders may have penalties to invoke against nations as a whole to
                                    - 10       -




enforce repayment but these may have no deterrent effect if invoked at the
level of an individual borrower.

     An obvious example is a credit embargo. A threatened embargo against an

individual borrower will have little effect in deterring default if the

borrower foresees little need to borrow again. Conversely, the central

government may have a much stronger incentive to maintain access to foreign

capital markets for other potential borrowers, including itself.

     For current purposes I assume that the impact of the penalty for failing

to repay a guaranteed loan contract is sufficient to ensure that the

government will enforce repayment of any loans that are extended, given that

borrowed funds were invested domestically. If P is the penalty that lenders

impose on the country as a whole for failing to enforce a loan contract, and
                                           n
total debt service obligations are S               s.k., then lenders will ensure
                                                    1 1
                                       1=1
that P > S for any debt obligations that arise.6



                       The Government Budget Constraint



     The government's net financing requirement from the n investment projects

(its expenditure less taxes from other sources) is denoted R. If all foreign

borrowed and domestic funds are invested locally, then the government need

only enforce existing loan contracts to make good on its loan guarantees. A

set of taxes, t1, that satisfy


      n
           t. > R
           1
     i=1



will provide sufficient revenue.

     A useful simplification is that firms are identical in the sense that
                                                        — 11 —




        f(k)        =   f(k)
        k. = k
         1
                                      i   =   i,...,n.                                      (4)
        pi =    P
        t. =
         1
                t

 These firms will have borrowed the same level of foreign capital

 kf =          —f f* at
        mm     (k , k          )   a uniform cost, s.

        Let m denote the number of loans fraudulently obtained for domestic

 projects in which the funds were invested abroad. The consequent default on

these loans generates an additional revenue requirement, equal to msk, if the

government is to fulfill its loan guarantees. The minimum per firm tax on the

remaining n - m projects necessary to meet this requirement is




        t(R+msk)/(n-m).                                                                    (5)




This tax implies a maximum after-tax income for a borrower who invests

domestically of



     (V,       k,       s, R, m) f( +          k)   -      - (R   +   msk)/(n   - m)   .   (6)


Given k, this return falls as m, the number of firms engaging in fraud, rises

(i.e., 'm <         0).
     At the time that loans are extended the government cannot precommit

itself both to a given tax structure and to guarantee loans unless it can also

ensure that all borrowed funds are invested domestically and consequently will

provide a base for repayment. Otherwise, its budget constraint forces the
                                                — 12 —




government to modify taxes in response to actual investment patterns if it is
to fulfill loan guarantees.



                                    Multiple Equilibria



     At the time that borrowers allocate funds between domestic and foreign

investment, the values of k and s as well as k and R are predetermined.

Given these values, a Nash equilibrium in investment allocation is an

allocation in which no single borrower has an incentive to deviate from his

investment decision given the investment decisions of the other n — 1

borrowers.

     The basic result of this paper is that under reasonable conditions there

are at least two such equilibria. These equilibria have different welfare

implications and one Paretodominates the other. It follows from observing

that, since         <   0, for some parameter values



     jt(k, k, S. R, n—i) <        p(k    +    k) < !(k, k1,    s, R, 0)                 (7)




where m = n   - 1       and 0, respectively. The first term is what a single borrower

would earn if he were the only borrower to invest domestically. The second is

what can be earned abroad, which is independent of other borrowers'

decisions. The third term is what a borrower earns by investing domestically

if all other borrowers do the same. The second inequality in expression (7)

is implied by condition (2) for t =             R/n.     Hence credit rationing should ensure

that this inequality is satisfied. It implies that it pays to invest

domestically if everyone else has. Hence in one equilibrium everyone does in

fact invest domestically (m =           0).     1 call this the normal equilibrium.
                                       — 13 —



       The first inequality is more likely to be satisfied the larger R, k and

 n.   It implies that it does not pay to invest domestically if no one else

 does, so that in another equilibrium no one invests domestically. I call this

 the flight equilibrium.7

       In the normal equilibrium private borrowers repay loans, and foreign

 lenders necessarily receive payment. What happens in the flight equilibrium

depends upon whether the government has sufficient revenue from other sources

to repay. If -R, net revenue already available from other sources, exceeds

debt-service obligations, nsk, then the government can repay without raising

additional revenue. Assume that the possibility of raising additional revenue

in an amount T incurs a cost (directly and in terms of excess burden,

administrative cost, or negative political consequences) of C(T). If the cost

of raising the revenue needed to repay loans exceeds the penalty of default

(i.e., if C(nsk + R)   >   P), then the government will choose to default on
foreign loans and suffer the consequences. If this inequality is reversed

then it will repay loans with income generated by taxes on other sources of

income. In this second case a precommitment by the government to using these

alternative sources of revenue to repay guaranteed loans in default would

eliminate the potential for flight. As long as income generated by investment

projects that do yield income is a less costly revenue source, however, a

promise not to use these projects as a tax base is not credible.

      Whether or not the government raises additional revenue, the normal

equilibrium Pareto—dominates the flight equilibrium. The government avoids

the default penalty or the cost of raising additional revenue, borrowers earn

a higher return (as condition (2) directly implies)., and lenders are

necessarily repaid.
                                       - 14   -




     If    in the flight equilibrium the government repays foreign loans, then

the potential for flight will not affect the terms on which foreign loans are

available. Loans from abroad will cost the safe world lending rate, r.       If

capital flight leads to default, however, then lenders must assess the

likelihood of a flight equilibrium in deciding upon the terms on which they

will supply loans. The next section discusses how the potential for flight

can affect the availability of credit.



                                     Sunspots



     At the time loans are extended neither lenders nor borrowers know which

equilibrium will emerge. Nothing intrinsic to the model determines the choice

between them. One approach in such cases is to introduce uncertainty in the

form of a lottery across equibria, assuming that the generally observed

resolution of a random process extrinsic to the model (e.g., "sunspots°)

determines the outcome (see, in particular, Cass and Shell (1983)).

     Let     denote the commonly observed outcome of a random process which can

assume any value in the set      this outcome will influence lenders' and

investors' expectations about capital flight. The true value of       is observed

after loans are extended but before the investment allocation decision is

made. All agents share the belief that certain realizations of t, imply flight

and that the remaining possible ones imply the normal outcome. When the true

value of     is realized agents then act accordingly. The probability that

lenders (correctly) assign to a normal equilibrium outcome is denoted       the
probability of flight is consequently 1- ,.

     Competition among risk—neutral lenders will ensure a level of investment
that satisfies a zero-expected-return condition, i.e.,
                                                   — 15 —




        E(snk)      =   rnk.                                                       (8)



        When flight leads to default, two types of situations could emerge:



        No flight: lenders constrain the amount that they lend to a level so low

 that even a single borrower could repay the total debt and still earn a profit

 investing domestically. Formally, the level of k would satisfy:



        'y(k, k, r, R, n—i) >       p(k   +   k)                                   (9)




There is no flight equilibrium, so that the safe rate is the rate actually

charged (s =     r).      This would typically involve very little lending.



        Potential flight: lenders constrain k to a level at which repayment

occurs only in the normal equilibrium, i.e.,



           +   k)       <y(i, k1,   ,   R, 0)                                      (10)
where


                                                                                   (ii)



     At one extreme the probability of a normal equilibrium outcome, ,,       is
equal to one; the capital flight equilibrium, while now a possibility, never

actually occurs and private loan obligations are always met. Even though the

government has guaranteed loans, it need never use general revenues to repay

them. The allocation of resources is the same as what would have emerged if

lenders could enforce loan contracts directly with borrowers without requiring

a guarantee.
                                        — 16 —




     At the other extreme it = 0.     Again, capital flight never occurs but now

borrowers are rationed to the no-flight level, such a small amount that any

one borrower could service the total foreign debt and still earn a net return

in excess of thatabroad.

     For values of it   near zero, this rationing will also be the equilibrium.

For values of ,t   closer   to one the equilibrium amount borrowed will be

intermediate between the levels observed at the two extreme values of t.         In

some states flight will occur and the government will not meet debt-service

obligations.

     Policies that reduce the probability of flight (raising )       benefit   the

country in two ways. They have the direct effect of increasing the likelihood

of the normal equilibrium, in which lenders, borrowers, and the government are

better of f. They have the additional effect of expanding the amount of

foreign capital available. Since the economy is, by assumption, one in which

the marginal product initially exceeds the world cost of capital, this is an

added benefit.



                        II. CAPITAL FLIGHT AND MORAL HAZARD



     In the model developed in the previous section capital flight occurred

because both domestic and foreign funds were invested fraudulently overseas

rather than in domestic projects. Even if borrowed funds are invested

domestically, however, government debt guarantees can imply multiple

equilibria, one of which is characterized by the flight of nationally—owned

capital and possible default on foreign loans.

     Consider a situation in which the return on a project depends both on the

outcome of an exogenous random process, denoted x, and on the level of
                                             — 17   —




managerial effort, denoted e. Only the owner of the project can observe x and
e. Consequently, outside observers cannot tell how much of the return on a

project is determined by managerial effort and how much by luck.

          The simplest case to consider is one in which the production relationship

takes the form




          g1(k1, e. x)                                                                    (12)




where e1 and x1 can take on values 0 or 1, and



                 1, 1) =
                           f(k)
          g(k1, 0, 1) =    g(k,   1, 0) =   g1(k,   0, 0) = 0



That is, a positive return requires both a high level of effort and a positive

realization of the random process. Let                  denote the probability that the

random process is positive, x. =       1.    Given that the manager expends effort (e

=   1),   the expected gross output from the project is xf(k).

          As before, let s. denote a borrower i's cost of foreign capital, l his

own endowment of capital, p. his return on funds invested abroad, and t1 the

tax on revenue from this project, which is only collectable if the project

yields a positive revenue. In addition, let                 denote the disutility in terms

of income that the borrower suffers from exerting effort in managing his

project.

      lenders can automatically recover loan obligations if the project has

yielded the available resources, but not otherwise. Hence as long as
                                       - 18   -




      f(k) t. sk—    >                                                              (13)



                = 1 then repayment is effected. If x1 = 0 or e1 =
 and x1 =
            e                                                       0,   however,

 then there are no resources available for repayment. The lender, by

 assumption, does not have access to income from the borrower's own capital

 placed abroad, so in the absence of a government guarantee loans are not

 repaid.

     The following events occur in sequence, First, owners of projects borrow

a particular amount from foreign lenders (possibly with their own government

acting as intermediary or guarantor). Second, the owners of these projects

decide, simultaneously or sequentially, whether or not to exert effort in

managing their investment project and where to invest their own funds.

Finally, after all decisions have been made, the random component of the

production process, x, is realized. In this version of the model owners of

projects are precluded from shifting borrowed funds abroad, possibly because

the lender or the government can monitor these funds, and placement abroad

would signal a decision not to exert effort in management. The potential for

embezzlement of borrowed funds could be introduced here as well, introducing

elements of the previous analysis. For simplicity it is not.

     At the time a borrower decides where to invest his own wealth and how

much effort to expend, his foreign indebtedness is already determined, while

the outcome of the random element in the production process is still

unknown. Following the standard technique of backward induction, I discuss

the effort and portfolio decision first, taking foreign indebtedness as given,

and then turn to the prior borrowing decision.

    Given that he intends to exert effort, the optimal portfolio decision for

a risk-neutral individual is to invest his own funds in his own project to the
                                              — 19 —




 point   at which the return at home equals that available abroad.

 Mathematically, he should invest an amount w1 abroad where w. satisfies:



                +         — w)     =
                                                                                                (14)
       x1f(kj


 as long as the value of w. that satisfies this expression lies between zero

 and R1. Here kr denotes the predetermined level of foreign borrowing. If



       x1f(ki) <


then   he should invest all his own funds abroad (set w1 =
                                                                           k1). Conversely,      if



       xf(k +       k1)
                          >   p.


then he should invest all his own funds domestically (set WI =                      0).   Any income

that the project generates is available for payment of debt and taxes. The

highest expected income that the borrower can achieve given a decision to

exert effort and given k is defined as h1(k) where:




       h1(k) x1max[f1(k +              - w)   —
                                                  s1k
                                                        -
                                                            t1   ,   0] + p1w   -




Here      is the optimal level of w1 given a decision to exert effort.

       Given a decision not to exert effort, the borrower's optimal portfolio

decision is, of course, to invest all his own funds abroad, ensuring himself a

return          Given k, the decision to expend effort is thus incentive

compatible if and only if
                                        - 20   -




       h1(k)   >k                                                                  (15)


 If this contraint is satisfied then the borrower will choose to exert effort

 in managing his project and set w. =              If not then he will choose not to
                                        w.
exert any managerial effort and invest all of his own funds abroad (set w1

=          Note that, in particular, an increase in tax obligations makes this
    k1).
constraint more difficult to satisfy.

      Having characterized the optimal effort and portfolio decision given

foreign indebtedness, I now turn to the prior borrowing decision. In the

absence of a government guarantee, lenders will only lend an amount that

satisfies condition (15). If this condition is not satisfied then the

borrower will not exert any effort in managing his project. Hence default is

certain. If this condition is satisfied then the borrower will exert effort,

ensuring repayment in the state of nature in which x = 1.

      Competitive, risk—neutral lenders will be willing to extend loans in any

amount that satisfies condition (15) at an interest rate that is high enough

to offset losses on loans to firms that fail to generate output because of bad

luck. Hence, for firm i the interest rate will be given by:



      s1 =   r/x                                                                  (16)



where r continues to represent the safe world gross interest rate and            the

probability that x. =   1.

      Given this interest rate and the incentive compatibility constraint (15),

risk-neutral borrowers will wish to borrow an amount that maximizes expected

income, which is given by the function h1(k). Since the expected cost of

funds from abroad, r, is at least as great as the return on funds placed
                                       — 21 -




abroad, p, a risk-neutral borrower will never borrow abroad for domestic
investment    and then place his own funds abroad, given that he exerts
effort.8 Hence the amount of borrowing that maximizes expected income is
given by the condition:


       xf(k +i) = r                                                         (17)



As   in the previous version of the model, I denote the value of k that
satisfies equation (17) as k*. For any borrowing ever to be possible
requires    that:




       h(k) >k1                                                             (18)


       In the subsequent discussion I assume that this condition is satisfied at

t1 =   0.   This condition ensures that some movement of capital to this country

increases its income. In constrast with the situation in which flight is the

consequence of outright fraud, the incentive to flee does not grow with the

total amount borrowed. If equation (18) is satisfied then k* is the actual

amount lend; if not, no amount is offered.



                               Government Guarantees



       As before, foreign lenders may require the guarantee of the borrower's

government to extend a loan to any particular private borrower. This may be

so that the government will enforce repayment or because the government can

observe project returns not observable by the foreign lender. A guarantee
                                            — 22 —



would then preclude a borrower's falsely claiming bad luck (x1 =            0),   hence

that output was zero, and that repayment could not be made.

     Consider the case, then, in which foreign borrowing is channeled through

the government, which guarantees foreign lenders a return r, and charges each

individual private borrower s >        r/X.     If the number of firms is large and x.

is independent across firms, then as long as the incentive-compatibility

constraint (15) remains satisfied, the statistical law of large numbers

ensures that the government's receipts from loans it has extended can finance

payment to foreigners.



                            The Government Budget Constraint



     Assume, as before, that the government's net revenue requirement is R.

Given that private borrowers expend effort managing their projects, this

revenue is generated by a set of tax rates, t.j,           that   satisfy


      n
     z    x.t.
           1 1
               > R.
     1=1


    Again,        it is convenient to focus upon the case in which firms are

identical in the sense that



    f1(k) =       f(k)
    k1 = k

    xi = x
          =                             i   =   1,...,n.                              (19)

    ti =      t
          =
                                             - 23   -




 Consequently each firm will have borrowed the same amount, k, at cost s.
         Let m now denote the number of firms whose owners have decided not to

 expend effort on their projects and have consequently invested their funds

 abroad. These borrowers will, of course, default on their loans. They

 generate an additional revenue requirement, mrk. In order to finance the

 total revenue required the government must impose a tax equal to the prior net

 financing requirement plus the loan default repayment, spread over those firms

earning a positive return on domestic investment:



     t = (R +     mrk)/(n   -   m).                                                                 (20)



The consequent expected income of a borrower who expends effort and invests

domestically is



     !(, k, S. R, m) =      x[f(F+ k) -                 - (R   +   mrk)/(n   - m)   -
                                                                                        p.


                                      Multiple Equilibria



     The after-tax income of any borrower who invests domestically and expends

effort   on his own   project falls as the number of borrowers who choose not to

expend   effort   (and hence invest abroad) rises. Unless indebtedness is

restricted to a level so low that even one borrower could repay the total debt

and still earn a positive return (i.e. at which y(k, k', s, R, n—i) >                        r'V)
there are again two equilibria.

     In one equilibrium all owners of firms invest their own funds

domestically and expend effort in managing their firms. The risk premium that

the government charges on guaranteed loans to domestic borrowers compensates
                                            - 24   -




for   losses on loans to firms whose output is low for exogenous reasons.9

Foreign loans are repaid without recourse to additional taxation.

       In the other equilibrium, all domestic borrowers place their own capital

abroad and exert no effort in managing their firms. All private borrowers

default, so that the government lacks revenue sufficient to repay foreign

loans, and must either raise additional revenue from other sources or default

as well. In constrast with the specification in section I, the flight

equilibrium is not the consequence of the outright perpetration of fraud.'°

Borrowers do not abscond with foreign capital that they have borrowed but do,

as promised, invest it domestically. They manage their investment in a way

that reduces the likelihood of repayment, however. Since their effort is

never observable, this failure does not constitute verifiable fraud in the

same sense that the misuse of borrowed funds did in the previous analysis.



                            The Optimal Pricing of Domestic Loans



       Again, an extrinsic source of uncertainty ('sunspots") may generate a

lottery between the two equilibria. When flight leads to default on foreign

loans, if           is the probability of a normal equilibrium and 1— the probability

of a flight equilibrium, then foreign lenders will require an interest rate



              nit                                                                (21)




       Expected national income generated by the projects under consideration is



          =    nn[xf( + k)     -   ik   -   + (1-it)pk
                                                - 25   -




            = fl{it[Xf(k   +   k) - ]-rk}   +    (l-i)pnk.                        (22)



 The level of foreign borrowing that maximizes ye satisfies



      xf'(k +     k) = r.                                                         (23)




      To achieve this level of foreign indebtedness the government should

charge individual private borrowers a nominal interest rate which accounts for

the probability of default: s =        r/x,t.     In the normal equilibrium the

government collects rnk/,, which equals foreign debt-service obligations.

Hence in this equilibrium the government can finance foreign debt fully out of

interest received from domestic borrowers.



                                        CONCLUSION



     I have developed these two versions of the model to illustrate how a

particular type of market failure, the inability to enforce contracts between

private agents without public intervention, can generate capital flight. The

interaction between government guarantees and private investment occurs in a

very simple framework. As a consequence a number of issues remain outside the

analysis.

     For one thing, the government's tax base appears only very crudely. In

principle the issues raised here relate to the government's overall fiscal and

debt structure, including tax, expenditure and monetary policy. The role of

seigniorage as a fom of finance seems particularly relevant to the countries

in question.
                                        26 -


       A second, and related, omission is an analysis of the government's

default decision as the outcome of the weighing of the costs and benefits of

repudiation. Here the cost of default is exogenous. Eaton, Gersovitz and

Stiglitz (1986) provide a recent discussion of the incentives to avoid

default.

       A third omission is an analysis of the dynamics of accumulation. The

issues raised in the model clearly have implications for savings behavior, but

I have treated national wealth as given.

       Because of these limitations the model does not provide an adequate

framework for a general comparison of alternative policies. It does point to

some considerations that could be important in weighing policy alternatives,

however.

       The most obvious one is that there is a benefit to extending the tax

base of borrowing countries to include income from private assets abroad. The

brain-drain literature has already made this point for a very different

reason.    Policies in both developing and developed countries could serve this
end.

       To the extent that taxing foreign income is infeasible, capital controls

that succeed in preventing investment abroad could alleviate the problem

simply by eliminating the possibility of flight. The benefits of such

controls that are implied by this analysis need to be weighed against the

administrative cost, the reduced possibility for diversifying exogenous risks,

and the potential   for rent—seeking activity that controls would pose. Another
problem is that if such controls do not eliminate the possibility of flight,
but only reduce the return on funds invested abroad, they will not, on their

own, reduce the probability that flight will occur. Indeed, information that

increases borrowers' expectation of future controls might lead to flight as
                                    - 27   -




borrowers attempt to remove funds before controls are put into effect. An

increased fear of controls would then be acting as a particular realization of

an extrin3i random process (or "sunspot") that leads to flight.

     The inalysis sugstr two other implications about policy that probably

deserve greater emphasis. First, there may be a benefit to replacing explicit

or implicit government backing of private loans with bankruptcy procedures

more similar to those used domestically that compensate lenders with equity in

the assets of private borrowers in default. Such a step would reduce

interdependence among private investment decisions created by guarantees that

can lead to flight. Second, the expansion of the tax base to include income

from factors in fixed supply domestically (land, in particular) can reduce the

incentive for flight. To the extent that income of this type is perceived as

a source of finance that is no more costly than taxation of income from mobile

factors, there is less reason for capital to flee in the presence of large

potential government finance requirements.
                                        - 28   -




                                    RE FE RE NCE S



Cass, David and Karl Shell (1983). "Do Sunspots Matter?" Journal of
    Political Econoriiy, 91: 193—227.

Cuddington, John 1. (1987). "Capital Flight: Issues, Estimates and
    Explanations." Princeton Essays in International Finance, Study 58,
    January.

_______________ (1986).  "The Economic Determinants of Capital Flight."
    (Georgetown University), Department of Economics, processed.

Cumby, Robert and Richard Levich (1986). "On the Definition and Magnitude of
    Recent Capital Flight." (New York University), Graduate School of
    Business, processed.

Diamond, Douglas and Philip E. Dybvig (1983). "Bank Runs, Deposit Insurance
    and Liquidity," Journal of Political Economy, 91: 401-409.

Diaz—Alejandro, Carlos F. (1985). "Goodbye Financial Repression, Hello
    Financial Crash," Journal of Development Economics, 19: 1-24.

Diwan, Ishac (1986). "Foreign Debt Rationing and Capital Flight." (New York
    University), Graduate School of Business, processed.

Dooley, Michael P., William Helkie, Ralph Tryon and John Underwood (1986).
    "An   Analysis of the External Debt Positions of Eight Developing Countries
    Through 1990." Journal of Development Economics, 22: 283—318.

Dooley, Michael (1986). "Capital Flight: A Response to Differences in
   Financial Risks." (International Monetary Fund), Research Department,
    processed.

Dornbusch, Rudiger (1985). "External Debt, Budget Deficits and Disequilibrium
    Exchange Rates," in International Debt and the Developing Countries,
    edited by Gordon W. iTE1Tin Jon        CudingtonWasliingtori,D.C.T The
    World Bank).

Eaton, Jonathan and Mark Gersovitz (forthcoming). "Country Risk and the
    Organization of International Capital Transfer." Forthcoming, in Debt,
    Stabilization and Development, edited by Guillermo Calvo, Ronald Findlay,
    Pentti J. Kouri and Jorge B. de Macedo (Oxford: Basil Blackwell).

Eatpn, Jonathan, Mark Gersovitz and Joseph E. Stiglitz (1986). "The Pure
    Theory of Country Risk," European Economic Review, 30: 481-513.

Ize, Alain and Guillermo Ortiz (1986). "Fiscal Rigidities, Public Debt and
    Capital Flight," (Washington D.C.: International Monetary Fund), Fiscal
    Affairs Department, processed.

Kahn, Mohsin S. and Nadeem U. Haque (1985). "Foreign Borrowing and Capital
    Flight: A Formal Analysis," International Monetary Fund Staff Papers, 32:
    606-628.
                                    - 29   -




Sachs, Jeffrey (forthcoming) "The Debt Overhang of Developing Countries."
   Forthcoming, in Debt, Stabilization and Development, edited by Guillermo
   Calvo, Ronald Findlay, Pentti J. Kouri and Jorge B. de Macedo (Oxford:
   Basil Blackwell).

Stiglitz, Joseph E. and Andrew Weiss (1981). "Credit Rationing in Markets
    with Imperfect Information," American Economic Review, 71: 393-411.
                                             - 30   -




                          APPENDIX TABLE 1: Symbols used in the Model

C =          costs (collection, administrative, political) to the government of
             raising additional tax revenue

e =          managerial effort as a determinant of project return; value 0 or 1
f =          gross return on domestic project I
k1 =         total   capital invested in project i

         =   entrepreneur    capital endowment for each I

ki =         foreign    capital borrowed for project i


             foreign borrowing ceiling for each project

             number of firms which invested fraudulently-obtained foreign funds
             abroad (Section I)
             number of firms which invested their own funds abroad (Section II)

n =          number of total potential investment projects

P =          penalty    imposed on country for uncompensated private loan default

q1 =         value   of output of i

R =          government's net financing requirements from n investment projects
r =          gross risk-free interest rate charged by foreign lenders
         =   foreign    interest rate, i.e. return on investment abroad

     =       interest rate charged by foreign lenders given an extrinsic source of
             uncertainty of repayment

S =          borrower's    total debt service obligation

s1 =         borrower's    cost of foreign borrowing; gross interest rate

I =          additional    tax revenue required

t.
         =   tax on project
t=           minimum tax on domestic funded projects given default on others
x    =       exogenous random determinant of return on investment; value    0 or    1


ye =         expected national income generated by projects
         =   coefficient    of return on investment in i (linear technology function)

         =   disutility    of managerial effort in project to borrower
                                                — 31 —



=       maximum after-tax income for domestic investor ('j'    <

=       commonly observed random process outcome in set       for value of loan
        before investment allocation decision

=
        probability that lenders correctly assign outcomes implying a normal
        equilibrium (i.e. domestic investment and loan repayment)
    =
        probability     that x = 1
                                      - 32 -


                                       NOTES




1.   More recent data provided by Dooley (1986), Cuddington (1986), and Cumby

     and   Levich (1986) support the conclusion that capital flight from these
     countries has been substantial
2. Stiglitz and Weiss (1981) model the potential for moral hazard in    the

     design   of debt contracts.
3. The interdependence of private borrower decisions created by public loan
     guarantees resembles that among depositors in Diamond and Dybvig's model
     of "bank runs" (1983). In both cases the interdependence of investment

     decisions leads to the possibility of contagion and an inferior

     equilibrium. They interpret their model as supporting government deposit

     guarantees. In contrast, in this model government guarantees are the

     source   of the problem.
4.   Diwan (1986) develops a model in which capital flight emerges as a

     response to the limitation that credit rationing by foreign lenders places

     on the risk—sharing opportunities available to domestic residents through

     borrowing.

5.   Making the tax obligation a function of output or income does not affect

     the analysis substantially, although it introduces some inessential

     complications.

6. Relaxing this assumption gives rise to the possibility of credit rationing

     at the aggregate level, many implications of which have been analyzed

     elsewhere. Introducing the potential for aggregate credit rationing here

     complicates the analysis substantially, without affecting most basic

     results.
                                      - 33   -




7.   A third equilibrium is one in which m =     WI   where WI is defined by the

     condition      k, s, R, WI) =   p(k+   kr). It is unstable and hence J

     assign it a zero probability of occurring.

8. Risk aversion would provide a motive to invest aboard even if the borrower

     intends to expend effort on his own project. As risk aversion introduces

     a number of complications that are largely irrelevant to the basic point,

     I continue to assume that borrowers are risk neutral.

9. The next section demonstrates that it is optimal for the government to

     charge domestic borrowers a nominal interest rate just sufficient to cover

     foreign loan obligations in the normal equilibrium.

10. There remains, however, avoidance or evasion of tax obligations. This

     feature of the flight equilibrium is essential to both versions of the

     model.
Table 1.    Capital Flight. Domestic Investment and Nationalization of the Debt: Selected Countries          (1974—1982)



                                                     Total    Capital    flight:       Percentage change June 19 82: Share of    Sept. 1984: Share of
                                                                                                         US bank exposure owed   US bank exposure owe
               Total change in   Total   implicit   capital   Percentage change        in gross DFCF
                external debt                       flight    in external       debt   (1980/81-1982/84) by the public sector    by the public sector
                                 capital outflow
                                                                    (4)                       (5)                 (6)                    (7)
Country               (1)               (2)           (3)




                    32.6                 20.2        15.3           47.0                   —36.0                  31.1                  49.5
Argentina


Brazil              93.5                 11.4         0.2               0.0                 —20.0                 29.1                  47.0


                    15.4                  0.0        —1.9           —1.3                    —34.0                 18.2                  37.9
Chile


                                          5.9         0.6               2.0                   n.a.                 n.a.                  n.a.
Korea               33.6


Mexico              82.6                 36.3        32.7               40.0                —27.0                 35.2                  50.3


Peru                10.7                  3.1         1.2               11.0                —17.0                  n.a.                  n.a.



                    19.g                  3.9         n.a.               n.a.                 n.a.                 n.a.                  n.a.
Phillipines


Venezuela           27.0                 25.5        10.8               4.0.0               —23.0                 42.4                  49.0



Notes:
a:  DFCF = gross domestic fixed capital formation
b: 1980-1981 average to 1982-1984 average

Sources:
Column
1, 2         Dooley et al. (1986), reported in Khan and Haque (1985)
3, 4         Cuddington (1987), reported in Khan ad Hague (1985)
5            ECLAC, reported in Sachs torthcomlng)
6, 7         Keefe Nationwide Bankscan, February 19, 1985, reported in Sachs (forthcoming)
