                               NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                            GLOBAL COLLABORATIVE PATENTS

                                         Sari Pekkala Kerr
                                          William R. Kerr

                                       Working Paper 21735
                               http://www.nber.org/papers/w21735


                      NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                               1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                 Cambridge, MA 02138
                                    November 2015




Comments are appreciated and can be sent to skerr3@wellesley.edu and wkerr@hbs.edu. We thank
seminar participants and two anonymous referees for very helpful comments. This research is generously
supported by the Alfred Sloan Foundation, the Kauffman Foundation, the National Science Foundation,
and Harvard Business School. William Kerr is a Research Associate of the Bank of Finland and thanks
the Bank for hosting him during a portion of this project. The views expressed herein are those of the
authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.

© 2015 by Sari Pekkala Kerr and William R. Kerr. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to
exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including
© notice, is given to the source.
Global Collaborative Patents
Sari Pekkala Kerr and William R. Kerr
NBER Working Paper No. 21735
November 2015
JEL No. F02,F22,F23,F60,J15,O19,O31,O32,O33,O34

                                           ABSTRACT

We study the prevalence and traits of global collaborative patents for U.S. public companies, where
the inventor team is located both within and outside of the United States. Collaborative patents are
frequently observed when a corporation is entering into a new foreign region for innovative work,
especially in settings where intellectual property protection is weak. We also connect collaborative
patents to the ethnic composition of the firm's U.S. inventors and cross-border mobility of inventors
within the firm. The inventor team composition has important consequences for how the new knowledge
is exploited within and outside of the firm.


Sari Pekkala Kerr
Wellesley College
106 Central Street
Wellesley, MA 02481
skerr3@wellesley.edu

William R. Kerr
Harvard Business School
Rock Center 212
Soldiers Field
Boston, MA 02163
and NBER
wkerr@hbs.edu
1     Introduction
The increased globalization of R&D activities by U.S. multinational companies over the last
several decades is a striking trend. According to the Bureau of Economic Analysis, the share
of R&D for U.S. companies conducted by their foreign operations rose from 6% in 1982 to 14%
in 2004. During this same time period, the unweighted average share of patents for U.S. public
companies that contained an inventor located outside of the United States likewise rose from 6%
in 1982 to 13% in 2004. These trends for U.S. …rms are matched by foreign …rms locating an
ever larger share of their innovative work in the United States.
    Our work considers several aspects of these trends. We speci…cally focus on global collabo-
rative patents, which we de…ne to be patents where at least one inventor is located outside of
the United States and at least one inventor is located within the United States. We compare
the origin and traits of these patents with global inventor teams to those where the inventors
for the U.S. …rm are either all located abroad or all located in the United States. We use the
detailed …lings from the U.S. Patent and Trademark O¢ ce (USPTO) for all patents granted
from 1975-2009. These …lings include the names of the inventors of each patent, their employer,
and their location. Speci…c locations are given for each inventor, which forms the basis for our
classi…cations of patents. Patents with global inventor teams feature very prominently in the
increased foreign inventive activity of U.S. public companies. They rise from 1% of U.S. public
…rm patents in 1982 to 6% in 2004, thereby accounting for a substantial portion of the observed
overall growth in global inventive activity.
    We …nd that by most conventional measures global collaborative patents tend to be strong
innovations, equal to and sometimes exceeding the strength of the innovative work done by the
same …rm using inventor teams exclusively based in the United States. Even more striking is the
extent to which both of these groups outperform the patents developed by the …rm abroad with
exclusively foreign inventor teams. Global collaboration and inventor teams appear to reduce
underperformance associated with the foreign innovation by U.S. public companies. Compared to
this latter exclusively-foreign group, collaborative patents have more claims, backward citations
within and outside of the …rm, are more original, list more subclasses, and have more novel
technology combinations. Looking forward, collaborative patents are better cited within and
outside of the …rm. The main exception to these superior patterns is that exclusively foreign


                                               1
teams are better integrated into the future foreign-based innovations of the …rm.
   We further study how these collaboration trends link to the migration of scienti…c talent into
the United States. At the same time that R&D and patenting are becoming globalized, the U.S.
workforce in science and engineering is also becoming increasingly international and diverse.
One measure, which we develop and utilize below, is the share of U.S.-based patents that have
inventors with non-Anglo-Saxon names. We use commercial databases of ethnic names to assign
probable ethnicities to inventors. For example, innovators with the surnames Ming or Wang are
assigned a high probability of being of Chinese ethnicity, while innovators with the surnames
Banerjee or Patel are assigned a high probability of being of Indian ethnicity. Our empirical
analysis shows that the employment of ethnic inventors by a U.S. …rm is tightly linked to its
generation of collaborative patents. In many cases, these observed collaborations also exhibit a
speci…c match between the ethnicity of the U.S.-based inventor and the foreign region in which
the other members of the inventor team are located. There are some indications that the overall
impact of the patent and its integration into the company’s future inventive work in the United
States are enhanced by these own-ethnicity collaborative matches, but the modest empirical
strength of these results only admits tentative conclusions.
   We also investigate the role of cross-border mobility of inventors in facilitating these col-
laborations. We …nd that a …rm’s choice to use an internal transfer can be intuitively and
systematically related to its size and also the traits of the foreign location. For example, we
show that poor use of the English language abroad is connected to a decline in collaboration
only when a cross-border migration is not present. We also show tentative evidence that larger
…rms engage in greater use of internal migration and may receive some added gains, in terms of
forward impact, from having done so. In terms of other conditions that predict collaboration,
weak rule of law and poor intellectual property rights are the most prominent factors in our
work.
   There are several rationales or models for why collaborative patenting might be useful for
conducting invention abroad. At least three related concepts focus on short-term or temporary
needs. One frame focuses on learning about new locations, the match of a …rm to the R&D
capabilities of the region, and similar unknowns. Collaborative teams may be required for the
learning process itself, or they may provide a form of protection or hedging as this learning
process occurs. A second frame suggests that collaborative patenting may reduce entry costs

                                                2
into a new location, perhaps including the training of key personnel or foreign inventors for the
innovative work. Relatedly, a careful fostering of the nascent invention team abroad may be
necessary until its own critical mass is achieved. A third model suggests that collaboration is
necessary for coordination of foreign activities with the other work of the multinational, perhaps
giving way, with time, to independence as the interfaces are mastered. In each of these models,
there are some scenarios where the importance and use of collaborative patenting fades with
time in a country.
   There are also several elements of global innovation that could give rise to long-term collabo-
rative work. First, a foreign location may not have all of the speci…c skills or types of employees
required for the …rm’s innovation; a parallel condition is that the foreign location is being tar-
geted for a speci…c skill that is in short supply or too costly in United States. One particularly
common form of this split is when architecture-level work is conducted in the United States and
more detailed developments occur abroad where R&D personnel are less expensive. If much
of the required knowledge remains tacit or is too expensive to fully codify, cross-border teams
may be necessary to facilitate this arbitrage. Second, legal or cultural issues may require local
partners as part of a multinational’s expansion plan, due to either physical operations and sales
or due to international patent laws. Third, in settings where the …rm feels particular exposure,
due to weak intellectual property rights, for example, the …rm may want to keep some key tech-
nology pieces in the United States, relying on collaborative teams rather than openly sharing
sensitive information across borders to facilitate work. In these and similar scenarios, there can
be a more permanent element to the collaboration.
   We suspect that all of these conditions and more exist across the many settings that are
included in our sample. On one hand, we document sizable declines in collaboration with
elapsed time that the …rm spends conducting innovation abroad in a region, which suggests
that some entry-type mechanisms are involved. We also see some particular elements linked to
uncertain environments that are consistent with the learning/protection stories. On the other
hand, collaborative patents still account for a third or more of the patents in every region that
we study, even after a decade of innovation by the multinational …rm in that location. Moreover,
our analysis of the forward impact of collaborative patents highlights a permanent opportunity
to exploit. That is, we do not observe a performance penalty associated with collaborative teams
that the …rm would want to shed quickly, recognizing though that we do not observe wage costs

                                                3
and all of the managerial inputs necessary. At least in terms of the attributes of developed
patents, our results suggest some potentially powerful features of the model for longer-term use.
   This paper closely relates to the analysis by Foley and Kerr (2013) of the impact that ethnic
innovators have on the global operations of U.S. public …rms. The earlier study identi…ed that
growth in the share of a …rm’s innovation performed by inventors of a particular ethnicity
increases the share of that …rm’s foreign direct investment activity that is placed into countries
related to that ethnic group. Foley and Kerr (2013) also found that ethnic inventors allow U.S.
multinationals to form new a¢ liates abroad without the support of local joint venture partners
and thereby facilitate the disintegration of innovative activity (R&D and patents) across borders.
The current study picks up in particular on the last theme of globalization of innovative activity
in these U.S. multinational …rms. It shows a particular connection of these U.S.-based ethnic
researchers to global collaborative patents, which accounts for much of the overall growth in
global invention by U.S. …rms, and it quanti…es the relative traits of these patents compared to
other inventive activity undertaken by the …rm.
   This paper also closely relates to and complements the work of Miguelez (2014). Miguelez
(2014) documents the important role of high-skilled diaspora communities for the development
of global inventor teams, using data from the World Intellectual Property Organization (WIPO).
Gravity models demonstrate how the global distribution of diaspora for a country govern tech-
nology ‡ows and overseas R&D relationships, especially at low levels of formality. Our research
…ts within the global models of Miguelez (2014) and agrees with his broad empirical …ndings.
By focusing on the United States, we are able to isolate additional outcomes and spend greater
time and attention on the comparison of collaborative patents to domestic and exclusively over-
seas inventive work conducted by the same …rm, in order to assess performance outcomes. We
also connect closely with the careful study of Branstetter, Li, and Veloso (2015) on the impor-
tant role of cross-border co-invention teams among multinationals as a factor behind the rise of
patenting in China and India (explaining, at times, the majority of patenting observed in these
locations). Branstetter et al. (2015) shows how collaborative patents outperform patents by
indigenous …rms, using interviews with researchers in multinational …rms to verify the impor-
tance of cross-border teams. In this paper, we consider a broader sample of work, allowing us to
connect co-invention teams to traits of places, and we focus more attention on the comparison



                                                4
of collaborative patents to the core U.S.-based work of the multinational.1
       The current study contributes more broadly to academic, business, and policy analyses of the
issues surrounding global innovation. The globalization of R&D activities has received consider-
able recent attention from diverse groups within and outside of academia.2 While early foreign
R&D e¤orts by U.S. …rms focused on accessing foreign technologies and re…ning products so they
were suitable for foreign markets, more recent e¤orts also attempt to tap into the large supply
of foreign scientists and engineers regardless of their knowledge of speci…c foreign technologies.3
Freeman (2013) especially emphasizes the globalization of knowledge production, with reference
to both multinational activity and also academia, and argues that global knowledge creation
and di¤usion is the leading factor governing the current patterns of trade, capital ‡ows, and
immigration. As a speci…c example of these connections, a report on the Indian diaspora by the
Government of India (2001) notes the key role that Indian Americans have played in promot-
ing foreign direct investment into India by U.S. multinationals, particularly in R&D-intensive
sectors.
       Collaborative patents, U.S.-based ethnic innovators, and internal migration of inventors could
be especially valuable in starting, coordinating, and connecting the global spread of inventive
activity within …rms. Bene…cial channels that prior work has noted for ethnic networks include
enhanced knowledge about products and services targeted at customers in foreign countries;
stronger language skills and cultural sensitivity that would promote collaboration with innovators
and business developers in foreign countries; specialized knowledge about how to enter speci…c
foreign markets and conduct business locally; and better trust and sanctioning mechanisms.
Each of these factors is essential to global business and yet can be quite di¢ cult to construct in
developing and emerging economies. Rauch and Trindade (2002) and subsequent work highlights
the importance of these connections for companies making di¤erentiated products; Saxenian et
al. (2002) and Saxenian (2006) emphasize how global ethnic connections facilitate fragmented
production, modular development, and rapid product cycles; and Kerr (2008) stresses the role of
   1
     Related work on global teams and mobility for patenting includes Breschi and Lissoni (2001, 2009), Guellec
and Van Pottelsberghe (2001), Gri¢ th, Redding, and Van Reneen (2004), Singh (2005), Maggioni, Nosvelli, and
Uberti (2007), Bergek and Bruzelius (2010), Picci (2010), Alnuami, George, and Singh (2012), Huang, Huei-
Ru, and Chen (2012), Krishna, Patra, and Bhattacharya (2012), Miguelez (2013), Miguelez and Moreno (2013),
Montobbio and Sterzi (2013), Breschi, Lissoni, and Miguelez (2015), and Freeman and Huang (2015).
   2
     For example, Dalton et al. (1999), Freeman (2006, 2013), Zhao (2006), and Puga and Tre‡er (2010).
   3
     For example, Niosi (1999), von Zedtwitz and Gassmann (2002), Thursby and Thursby (2006), and National
Science Foundation (2010).


                                                      5
ethnic innovators in settings where tacit knowledge is deeply important as opposed to codi…ed
information. To this end, we see evidence in the current project of global inventor teams being
especially prevalent when U.S. multinationals …rst enter into new markets, especially in contexts
where intellectual property protection is weak.
       To conclude, our novel …ndings contribute to several literatures by illustrating the role that
…rms play in linking ethnic networks, foreign direct investment, and knowledge di¤usion. Ethnic
networks have been shown to play important roles in promoting international trade, investment,
and cross-border …nancing activity, with recent work particularly highlighting the role of ed-
ucated and/or skilled immigrants.4 Prior work has further emphasized how social and ethnic
ties facilitate transfers of technology; individuals who are geographically mobile appear to play
a signi…cant role in these kinds of transfers.5 Because the current paper’s …ndings illustrate a
mechanism by which knowledge is transferred globally, it also adds to the research on the role
that multinational …rms play in the international di¤usion of knowledge. In addition, the results
inform a growing body of work that analyzes …rm decisions about whether to locate innova-
tive activity in a single place or in multiple locations.6 The current work also contributes to
the growing number of studies on the economic impact of recent high-skilled migration to the
United States for work in U.S. …rms.7
   4
     Broad reviews of diaspora e¤ects include Rauch (2001), Freeman (2006), Clemens (2009, 2011), Gibson and
McKenzie (2011), and Docquier and Rapoport (2012). Evidence on foreign direct investment includes Saxenian
(1999, 2002, 2006), Arora and Gambardella (2005), Buch, Kleinert, and Toubal (2006), Kugler and Rapoport
(2007, 2011), Bhattacharya and Groznik (2008), Docquier and Lodigiani (2010), Iriyama, Li, and Madhavan
(2010), Nachum (2011), Hernandez (2011), Javorcik et al. (2011), Rangan and Drummond (2011), Huang, Jin,
and Qian (2013), and Foley and Kerr (2013). Evidence on trade includes Gould (1994), Head and Ries (1998),
Rauch (1999), Rauch and Trindade (2002), Rangan and Sengul (2009), Hatzigeorgiou and Lodefalk (2011), and
Kerr (2013).
   5
     For example, Almeida and Kogut (1999), Kapur (2001), Rosenkopf and Almeida (2003), Kapur and McHale
(2005a,b), Agrawal, Cockburn, and McHale (2006), MacGarvie (2006), Kerr (2008), Papageorgiou and Spilim-
bergo (2008), Oettl and Agrawal (2008), Nanda and Khanna (2010), Agrawal et al. (2011), Foley and Kerr (2013),
and Ghani, Kerr, and Stanton (2014). Singh (2005), Obukhova (2009), Choudhury (2015), and Hovhannisyan
and Keller (2015) study related forms of international labor mobility and technology di¤usion.
   6
     For example, Keller (2004), Veugelers and Cassiman (2004), Singh (2004, 2005, 2007, 2008), MacGarvie
(2005), Branstetter (2006), Zhao (2006), Alcacer and Chung (2007), Nachum, Zaheer, and Gross (2008), Zhao
and Islam (2011), Ghemawat (2011), and Alcacer and Zhao (2012).
   7
     For example, Kerr and Lincoln (2010), Mithas and Lucas (2010), Hunt and Gauthier-Loiselle (2010), Peri
and Sparber (2011), Kerr, Lincoln, and Mishra (2014), Peri, Shih, and Sparber (2015), and Kerr, Kerr, and
Lincoln (2015).




                                                      6
2     Dataset Construction and Description
This section describes the patent dataset developed for studying ethnic contributions and collab-
orative patenting. We …rst describe the patent dataset and the assignment of inventor ethnicities.
We then de…ne collaborative patents and provide some descriptive statistics. We close with a de-
piction of inventor mobility across countries within …rms. We describe in later sections additional
data included in our analyses as warranted.

2.1     U.S. Patent Data: Ethnicity

Our analysis uses the individual records of all patents granted by the United States Patent
and Trademark O¢ ce (USPTO) from January 1975 to May 2009. Each patent record provides
information about the invention (e.g., technology classi…cation, name of …rm or institution) and
the inventors submitting the application (e.g., name, city). Hall et al. (2001) provide extensive
details about these data, and Griliches (1990) surveys the use of patents as economic indicators
of technology advancement. The data are extensive, with over eight million inventors and four
million granted patents during this period. Approximately half of the USPTO patents are …led
by inventors working in the United States, while the other half are the patents made by foreign
inventors that are registered with the USPTO.
    While the immigration status of inventors is not collected, one can determine the probable
ethnicities of inventors through their names. USPTO patents must list at least one inventor by
name, and multiple inventors are often listed. Our approach exploits the idea that inventors with
the surnames Chang or Wang are likely of Chinese ethnicity, those with surnames Rodriguez
or Martinez of Hispanic ethnicity, etc. Two commercial ethnic name databases originally used
for marketing purposes are utilized, and the name-matching algorithms have been extensively
customized for the USPTO data. The match rate is 99%. The process a¤ords the distinction of
nine ethnicities: Anglo-Saxon, Chinese, European, Hispanic, Indian, Japanese, Korean, Russian,
and Vietnamese. When there is more than one inventor associated with a patent, each individual
is given an ethnicity assignment and then these are averaged.8
   8
     Kerr (2007, 2010) provide further details on the matching process, lists frequent ethnic names, and provides
multiple descriptive statistics and quality assurance exercises. One quality assurance exercise regards the esti-
mated ethnic composition of foreign patents registered with the USPTO. The resulting compositions are quite
reasonable. About 90% of inventors …ling from India and China are classi…ed as ethnically Indian and Chinese,
respectively. This is in line with what we would expect, as native shares should be less than 100% due to the
role that foreign inventors play in these countries.


                                                       7
   Figure 1a illustrates the rapidly evolving ethnic contribution to U.S. technology development
as a percentage of all patents granted by the USPTO. Table 1 provides the tabulated values.
These descriptive statistics only use patents …led by inventors residing in the United States as
indicated by the city associated with the inventor. We group patents by the years in which they
applied to the USPTO. For presentation purposes, Figure 1a does not include the Anglo-Saxon
and European ethnic shares. They jointly decline from 90% of total U.S. domestic patents in
1975 to 76% in 2004. This declining share is primarily due to the exceptional growth over the
30 years of the Chinese and Indian ethnicities, which increase from under 2% to 9% and 6%,
respectively.
   Figure 1b depicts the ethnic share of patenting by technology …eld, using the six main cate-
gories of Hall et al. (2001). For these purposes, we de…ne "ethnic share" to be the proportion of
patents developed by non-Anglo-Saxon inventors. Ethnic shares are stronger and growing at a
faster rate in high-tech …elds than in the more traditional disciplines. By 2005, ethnic inventors
residing in the United States account for over 40% of inventions in the categories of Electrical
& Electronics, Computers & Communications, and Drugs & Medical. On the other hand, they
make up less than 30% in the categories of Mechanical and Miscellaneous.
   Figure 1c illustrates the growing ethnic contributions by type of institution. We classify
patents issued to institutions using listed assignee names (e.g., Microsoft Corporation, Stanford
University, U.S. Department of Defense). Unassigned patents are those for which the property
rights of the patent remain with the inventors themselves and account for about a quarter of
patents. We separate public and private companies by whether a …rm is a Compustat-listed
company in 1989. We hold this group of public …rms constant throughout the sample period
to look at trends consistent for this group. Due in large part to greater visa sponsorships
and engagement in research-oriented science, ethnic shares are largest for university patents.
Publicly-listed companies follow closely behind in their share of ethnic inventors, which corre-
sponds to the broadly observed trend that the degree of work visa sponsorship tends to grow
with …rm size. To some extent, migrants may also …nd larger …rms more attractive for initial
immigration choices due to greater employment stability, given that many visas like the H-1B
are assigned to a speci…c …rm-worker match.
   We again focus on the U.S.-based public companies for our analysis of collaborative patenting.
Figure 1d plots the ethnic shares of patents for …ve large representative …rms in this group. The

                                                8
di¤erences in the levels of ethnic shares across …rms align with the expectations one might have,
with, for example, Boeing’s share being lower due to employee citizenship requirements that are
often made for defense-based work. Intel has the largest ethnic share in this group illustrated.
All …ve corporations show growth in the share of their U.S.-based patents that come from ethnic
inventors. The Anglo-Saxon ethnic share declines from over 80% of U.S. domestic patents for all
public …rms in the 1975-1982 period to 68% in the 2000-2004 period. Similar to the aggregate
series in Figure 1a, this declining share is primarily due to the growth in innovation among
Chinese and Indian ethnicities, which increase from under 3% to 10% and 7%, respectively.
   For the following geographic analysis we de…ne cities through the 281 Metropolitan Statistical
Areas. Cities are identi…ed from the inventors’city names using city lists collected from the O¢ ce
of Social and Economic Data Analysis at the University of Missouri, with a matching rate of
99%. Manual recoding further ensures all patents with more than 100 citations and all city names
with more than 100 patents are identi…ed. Table 1 shows that ethnic inventors are generally
concentrated in immigration gateway cities closest to their home countries (e.g., Chinese in San
Francisco, Hispanics in Miami). Not surprisingly, total patenting shares are highly correlated
with city size, and the three largest shares of U.S. domestic patenting for 1995-2004 are from
San Francisco (12%), New York City (7%), and Los Angeles (6%). Ethnic patenting is generally
more concentrated, with shares for San Francisco, New York City, and Los Angeles being 22%,
10%, and 9%, respectively. Indian and Chinese inventions are even further agglomerated. San
Francisco shows exceptional growth from an 8% share of total U.S. Indian and Chinese patenting
in 1975-1984 to 26% in 1995-2004, while New York City’s share declines from 17% to 10%.
   While the ethnic patenting data provide a tractable platform for examining migration and
innovation, several limitations exist. Most importantly, our approach cannot distinguish be-
tween foreign-born inventors working in the United States and later generations of immigrants.
Nonetheless, the magnitudes of the inventor shares in our analysis still broadly match the im-
migrant shares for science and engineering calculated from the 1990 Census, as shown in Panel
B of Table 1. The European group is the clear exception, a point that we return to later.

2.2    U.S. Patent Data: Collaboration

The focus of this paper is on the traits and consequences of collaborative patents and their link
to migrant inventors. Collaborative patents are de…ned as patents where at least one inventor is

                                                9
located inside the United States and one inventor is located outside of the United States at the
time of the patent application. We contrast these global inventor teams against patents made by
U.S. public companies that 1) have all of their inventors located in the United States or 2) have
all of their inventors located outside of the United States. In some settings, we further isolate
in this last group cases where a multi-country team exists for a U.S. corporation that does not
have a U.S.-based inventor included in the team.
   Our conceptual framework is one of a U.S.-based company choosing to conduct global tech-
nology development. We accordingly need to be cautious using our dataset given that many
foreign …rms also …le for patents with the USPTO. We speci…cally restrict our sample to the
patents of U.S. public companies entering into patenting abroad after …rst patenting in the
United States. The link of patent assignees to U.S. public …rms uses the original match of Hall
et al. (2001) and updates made by Foley and Kerr (2013). We drop non-U.S. …rms in Compustat
even if a match to the USPTO data exists. The detailed inventor records begin in 1975. We
require that we observe in 1975 or afterwards some measure of exclusively domestic patenting in
the United States before the …rm …les patents that include inventors in a speci…c foreign region
for innovative work. Thus, we drop some …rm-region pairs that have been continually conducting
domestic and foreign patenting since before 1975. The …nal sample includes industrial patents
with application years between 1985 and 2005, building o¤ of patents granted through May 2009.
The excluded period of 1975-1984 is used for constructing traits of patents below.
   Our analysis requires connecting inventor ethnicities to countries. Patents are assigned to
one foreign country using the most frequent location of non-U.S. inventors; ties are broken by the
order of inventors listed on patents. Own-ethnicity collaborative patents are de…ned as collabo-
rative patents where at least one inventor on the patent working in the United States is of the
same ethnicity as the country entered. There is a one-to-one mapping of ethnicity and country
for …ve cases: India, Japan, Korea, Russia, and Vietnam. In contrast, Chinese, European, and
Hispanic ethnicities each relate to more than one country. Chinese economies include Mainland
China, Hong Kong, Macao, Singapore, and Taiwan. European economies include Austria, Bel-
gium, Denmark, Finland, France, Germany, Italy, Luxembourg, Netherlands, Norway, Poland,
Sweden, and Switzerland. Hispanic economies include Argentina, Belize, Brazil, Chile, Colom-
bia, Costa Rica, Dominican Republic, Ecuador, El Salvador, Guatemala, Honduras, Mexico,
Nicaragua, Panama, Paraguay, Peru, Philippines, Portugal, Spain, Uruguay, and Venezuela.

                                               10
    Figure 2a shows the trend from 1985 to 2005 for collaborative patenting. The percentage
expresses the fraction of patenting that is collaborative in nature among all patents …led by
U.S. public companies with inventors working in the eight ethnic regions identi…ed in the ethnic-
name approach. This share mostly rises over the 20-year period from about 30% of the patents
by the …rms in these foreign regions to 50%. Global inventor teams are clearly an important
and growing component to the organization of innovation in these U.S. companies, equal in
contribution by 2005 to situations where all inventors are residing abroad at the time of the
innovative work. Branstetter et al. (2015) provide important related descriptions of cross-border
teams for multinationals that are patenting in India and China speci…cally.
    Figure 2b shows that the own-ethnicity share of collaborative patents is increasing as well.
The growth of own-ethnicity collaboration accounts for over half (52%) of the total growth
in collaborative patenting observed in Figure 2a and represents about 47% of collaborative
patenting by the end of the period. This can be partly linked to the greater ethnic inventor
shares among the scientists working in the United States (Figure 1a) and the shift of global
patenting by U.S. public companies towards locations with a greater degree of collaboration
(e.g., towards China and India and relatively away from Japan). Some of these features are
quanti…ed in our analysis below.
    Figure 2c depicts a very interesting time pattern that exists within …rms with respect to
collaboration. The trend graph groups patents by how long the U.S. public company has been
conducting innovation in the ethnic region, from entry year up to 10+ years after entry. The
sample overall is again predicated on the …rm …rst conducting innovative work in the United
States. By starting our collaborative sample in 1985, each of the …ve horizontal divisions are
populated across our sample period given our initialization of the entry dates in 1975. Developing
and emerging economies display a very high collaborative patent share at the time of …rm initial
entry, with over 70% of patents having at least one inventor located in the United States. By
contrast, about half of the patents are collaborative when U.S. public companies …rst enter into
Europe or Japan for innovative work. These di¤erences across countries diminish over time after
entry, and both groups have less than 45% of the patents being collaborative by the 7th year of
the …rm’s operation abroad.9
   9
     We time these graphs and our analyses below from time since entry into the ethnic region for the cases where
we have multiple countries mapping to an ethnic group. This is done to match our ethnic shares in the United
States and to re‡ect that much is learned about the region as a whole upon entry into it.


                                                       11
    Table 2 displays collaborative patenting shares and counts by ethnic region and time since
…rm entry into the speci…c region. In Panel A, the entry rates for collaborative patenting are
highest in the Chinese economies and India, lowest in Europe and Japan. Most groups display
the declining trend with respect to time in country that is graphed in Figure 2c, although Korea
and Russia are ‡atter or slightly rising (at quite high overall rates of collaboration). Panel B
of Table 2 shows the own-ethnicity shares. These own-ethnicity shares partly link to the size of
the ethnic group in the United States, with Japan having a very low own-ethnicity collaborative
share due to the limited number of ethnic Japanese inventors in the United States. Own-ethnicity
contributions are strongest in the Chinese, Indian, and Russian economies.10
    Our analysis at several points considers inventor team size alongside that of collabora-
tive patents. Figure 3a shows the broad increase in team sizes of collaborative, foreign non-
collaborative, and U.S. domestic patents. The substantial growth in average team size for
patenting re‡ects the very general trend towards larger teams in the development of scienti…c
knowledge (e.g., Wuchty, Jones, and Uzzi 2007). Throughout our sample period, the team sizes
for collaborative patents are at least one person larger than those for U.S. domestic patents. This
di¤erential remains pretty constant in relative terms, as both series experience a net growth of
about 55% in terms of team size from 1985 to 2005. This consistent relative di¤erential means
that the raw numerical gap between the two series increases, as the 20-year period exhibits a
team size growth of 1.02 members for U.S. domestic patents and 1.63 members for collaborative
patents. By contrast, foreign non-collaborative patents for U.S. multinationals show a more
modest growth and smaller teams.
    Figure 3b provides some additional detail regarding collaborative patents. We break apart our
collaborative patent series into own-ethnicity collaborative teams vs. those that do not possess
this ethnic connection. The interesting feature here is that own-ethnicity collaborative teams
tend to be larger than the others, with some widening of the gap over time. We also plot in this
  10
     An interesting extension is the degree to which collaborative patents are connected to patents having multiple
assignees (e.g., due to a joint venture). We are able to assemble some data to help understand these features,
although we cannot do so for the full sample period. For patents with application years 2000-2005, we observe
evidence of multiple assignees at the following rates: 0.6% for patents with U.S. domestic-only teams, 4.7% for
collaborative patents, and 1.4% for foreign non-collaborative patents (and 3.8% for patents with multi-country
non-U.S. teams). These statistics show that multiple assignee patents are connected to the rise of collaborative
patents, but that they do not account for a large portion of the rise in these collaborative teams. We also observe
some measure of substitution between use of own-ethnicity inventors and multi-assignee structures. Breaking
down the 4.7% base rate for collaborative patents, it is 3.4% for own-ethnicity collaborative work and 5.7% for
collaborative work that does not involve ethnic connections. This pattern is similar to the broader …nding in
Foley and Kerr (2013) that U.S. ethnic inventors facilitate foreign direct investment that depends less on local
partners than foreign entry that is conducted without this resource.


                                                        12
…gure the trend for multi-country teams for U.S. corporations that do not include a U.S.-based
inventor as a comparison point. The sample size here is smaller— 436 patents compared to 2,023
and 3,298 for own-ethnicity and other U.S.-connected collaborative teams, respectively— and
hence some caution is warranted for the annual values. Nevertheless, these exclusively foreign
teams appear to have a roughly similar average size and trend to U.S. collaborative patents.

2.3    U.S. Patent Data: Inventor Mobility

Extensions to our analysis consider the cross-border mobility of inventors within and outside of
…rms. This added perspective provides incremental insights on the development of collaborative
teams and the heterogeneity in their e¤ectiveness. Unfortunately, the USPTO patent data do
not uniquely identify each inventor, instead only providing their names. We rely on the work of
Li et al. (2014), which uses name disambiguation techniques to probabilistically assign unique
inventor identi…ers. This work is becoming the foundation of a number of studies seeking to
identify unique inventors and their mobility with the USPTO patent data. Breschi, Lissoni, and
Tarasconi (2014) describe similar work being done with the European Patent O¢ ce records and
provide a broader literature review.
   This work is probabilistic and several features of the matching process are important to note
in our setting. The …rst, and perhaps most important, aspect is that name disambiguation
works best when names are very distinctive. A central challenge in the ethnicity context is that
many ethnicities have very concentrated naming patterns (e.g., the surnames Lee and Park for
Koreans). This concentration is very advantageous with respect to assigning ethnicities, but it
makes disambiguation harder. Second, geography is often used in these analyses to help isolate
individual inventors, and we suspect that the international migration that occurs outside of
multinationals may be harder to capture than what occurs within companies. Finally, and likely
not very important, some inventors use di¤erent …rst names depending upon location, as Asians
in particular may select an Anglo-Saxon …rst name when working in the United States. This
would be harder for the procedures to capture, but we also think this issue is rather small in
our context. Li et al. (2014) provide a broader discussion. To address these concerns and other
typical uncertainties with these naming procedures, we report below two sets of statistics that
use the upper and lower bounds on match certainty that are developed by Li et al. (2014). As
we reach extremely similar conclusions at both bounds, we believe our data platform is in a good

                                              13
position to move forward.
    Figures 4a and 4b present some visual depictions of the role of internal transfers in multina-
tionals for explaining the levels and trends of collaborative patents. In terms of levels, we observe
that for about 30% of all collaborative patents one or more of the team members have moved
across borders, as we can observe it in the patent database (and thus this forms a lower bound
for the complete share). This share dips somewhat in the middle of our sample period but does
not show a very sharp general trend, especially in comparison to the other trends observed for
collaborative patenting. This sag is common to multiple foreign regions and not due to any single
location. In the majority of cases, moving inventors are present in the United States in the …rst
years that they patent. Figure 4b shows that movers constitute a more prominent feature in the
level and trend of own-ethnicity collaborative patenting. On the whole, given their mostly stable
contributions to each category, the absolute growth rates for collaborative patents display trends
similar to the aggregate series documented in Figures 2a and 2b. They thus play a signi…cant
role in facilitating the increase of collaborative patents to 6% of U.S. patents, but they are not
the sole factor and can provide interesting insights into the in‡uence of team composition.

3     Empirical Findings
This section describes our empirical work. We …rst quantify country, technology, and …rm-level
traits associated with collaborative patenting. We then compare collaborative patenting to other
patents made by U.S. public companies.

3.1    Predictors of Global Collaborative Patents

We begin with estimates of whether a patent that includes foreign inventors is collaborative. The
sample is comprised of the patents of all U.S. public companies entering into patenting abroad
after having …rst patented within the United States. The sample includes industrial patents
with application years between 1985 and 2005. Patents included in the sample have at least
one inventor working outside of the United States in one of the eight regions identi…able with
the ethnic-name approach described above. Thus, the sample models the choice between using
an exclusively foreign inventor team vs. a global inventor team with a connection to the United
States. As noted earlier, patents are assigned to one foreign country using the most frequent
location of non-U.S. inventors; ties are broken by the order of inventors listed on patents.

                                                 14
   We develop seven basic traits for each country. The measures are taken as an average over
the period studied when time variant. Log GDP per capita describes the overall economic
development of the country. The second metric is a binary variable for low or very low English
language pro…ciency in the country as measured in EducationFirst’s English Pro…ciency Index
(http://www.ef.com/epi/). The third is the log distance between the United States and the
foreign country measured using the Great Circle distances between capital cities. The fourth is
an index for rule of law taken from La Porta, Lopez-de-Silanes, and Shleifer (2002). This metric
is on a six-point scale, with higher values representing stronger rule of law. The …fth is an index
for the protection of intellectual property rights taken from Park (2008). This metric is on a
…ve-point scale, with higher values representing stronger protection. We next include a general
measure of patenting integration of the country with the United States as measured by the log
total patents per capita that the country …les with the USPTO. This measure includes all foreign
…rms, inventors, and governments that …le patents with the USPTO for intellectual property
protection. Finally, we measure the share of this foreign patenting that is being done in the
speci…c subcategory of the patent in question. This models the degree to which collaboration is
seeking to overcome "voids" in the composition of local innovation talent or institutions for the
focal technology.
   Appendix Table 1 provides univariate correlations. The raw likelihood of collaborative
patenting is most visibly connected to patenting by …rms in places where rule of law is weak,
intellectual property rights are not well protected, and scienti…c integration with the United
States is low. Collaborative patenting is also associated with poorer and developing countries
and places with low average pro…ciency in the English language. By contrast, connections to
distance or local patenting composition are less apparent. These connections, especially to the
legal rights established abroad, make intuitive sense. At the level of the …rm and in accordance
with our descriptive graphs, collaboration is declining in the time that the …rm has been in the
foreign location, increasing in the patenting size of the …rm, and increasing in the share of the
…rm’s U.S. innovative workforce of ethnic origin.
   For a more-rigorous assessment, we estimate a linear probability model of the form

                         (0; 1)Collaborativep =     jt   + Xcj + Zf t +   p;                   (1)

where p indexes patents. Each patent p is linked to an application year t, non-U.S. country c,

                                                15
technology j, and …rm f . The dependent variable (0; 1)Collaborativep is an indicator variable
for a collaborative patent. The vector     jt   contains technology-year …xed e¤ects. The vector
Xcj contains traits of countries and technologies that we relate to the prevalence of collaborative
patenting. We eventually employ country-year …xed e¤ects to fully control for these features, but
it is interesting to …rst quantify the broad patterns of the data. Finally, the vector Zf t contains
traits of the U.S. …rm at the time of the patent application. These traits include factors like
how long the …rm has been conducting innovation in the foreign country and the ethnic share
of its U.S.-based inventor workforce. The regressions estimated are unweighted, have 11,737
observations, and cluster standard errors by country.
   Column 1 of Table 3 models the seven basic traits noted above. The coe¢ cient patterns across
the country-level variables are interesting and the legal protections continue to stand out the
most. Collaborative patenting tends to be less common in countries characterized by strong rule-
of-law and better intellectual property rights. These patterns could be re‡ective of collaboration
being important when entering into uncertain environments, which was hinted at by the …rm
entry timing noted earlier. Once we condition on these two legal variables, collaboration is more
likely when countries have a higher GDP per capita. This is a robust pattern evident in many
permutations— the univariate correlation of collaborative patenting to developing and poorer
countries came through channels connected to weaker property rights. Similarly, the strength of
these property rights accounts for the univariate correlations noted for patents per capita and
English pro…ciency. Links to distance are again not evident. These correlations, of course, are
far from causal, and other correlated traits of countries (e.g., education levels) may be more
important. The correlations nonetheless demonstrate a consistent pattern over these traits that
provides additional con…dence in the types of analyses undertaken.
   Column 1’s estimation and those that follow include technology-year …xed e¤ects, with the
technology aggregation for these …xed e¤ects being de…ned at the sub-category level of the
USPTO system (36 groups). Unreported estimates relax this structure and instead include
indicator variables for broad types of technologies. These speci…cations show that collaboration
tends to be higher in the Chemicals and Drugs categories of the USPTO system.
   Column 2 adds in our …rst …rm-level trait, which is the number of years since the …rm began
patenting in the foreign ethnic region. This measure ranges from zero (time of entry) to ten
years or longer. It has a strong negative coe¢ cient, measuring a 1.7% decline in the absolute

                                                  16
probability of the patent being collaborative with each additional year of operation in the foreign
country. At the bottom of Table 3, we compare the coe¢ cient to the 0.43 mean of the dependent
variable. One additional year since the …rst patenting activity in the region is associated with a
4.0% lower likelihood of collaborative patenting in relative terms.
   Column 3 expands the analysis to consider additional traits of the …rm’s global patenting
e¤orts. We control for time since the …rm began patenting abroad inclusive of all foreign oper-
ations. We also control for the log worldwide patent count by the …rm in the application year.
These additions lower slightly the coe¢ cient estimate on the years since entry into the foreign
ethnic region. There is a positive correlation between the global patent count of the …rm and
the frequency of collaborative patenting, but this is not precisely measured.
   Column 4 further adds the share of the …rm’s U.S. domestic inventors who are of non-Anglo-
Saxon ethnic origin. This measure is highly predictive of collaborative patents, suggestive of
the special role that migration can have in fostering global inventor teams. An increase in this
share by 10% (e.g., 20%!30%) connects to a 2.1% increase in the absolute probability of the
patent being collaborative. In relative terms, this increase is about 5%. The inclusion of this
explanatory factor also diminishes the initial importance of the global patent count of the …rm,
as larger …rms also have a higher ethnic share of their inventor workforce.
   Column 5 includes further controls for …rm size that we can derive from Compustat— the
log values of …rm worldwide sales, employment, and R&D expenditure. We can only construct
these metrics for two-thirds of our sample (7,769 observations), and hence we consider them
as a robustness exercise. The emphasized results are robust to these control variables, and the
overall time since the …rm began to patent abroad becomes more important in the presence of
these controls.
   Columns 6 and 7 show very similar results when including country-year …xed e¤ects that
remove all local conditions. We also …nd similar results in several unreported robustness checks.
For example, the patterns are similar when weighting each patent such that each …rm receives
the same overall weight in the regressions. The patterns are also similar if using the log ethnic
inventor count in the United States rather than the share-based measure. Firm-level explanatory
variables show similar statistical signi…cance when clustering standard errors by …rm. Finally, we
continue to observe the importance of our key explanatory factors (i.e., entry timing, size of the
company’s U.S. ethnic scienti…c workforce) when splitting the sample by dimensions such as …rm

                                                17
size, level of economic development, level of intellectual property protection, and local technology
composition and when looking separately at the upper and lower halves of the distributions.11
    Table 4 repeats the analysis in Table 3 but now considers as the outcome variable a (0,1)
indicator variable for an own-ethnicity collaborative patent. Among country traits, intellectual
property rights remain the most important predictor. Focusing mostly on the …rm-level traits at
the bottom of the table, the coe¢ cient patterns are quite similar. The coe¢ cients are smaller,
but this mostly re‡ects the lower variation and sample mean on this own-ethnicity dimension.
In relative terms, the e¤ect for years after entering the foreign region is quite comparable to
Table 3. The absolute and relative frequency for own-ethnicity collaboration is unsurprisingly
higher for …rms that have a larger ethnic workforce share in the United States.
    Table 5 introduces …rm …xed e¤ects in the models of collaborative patenting and own-
ethnicity collaboration in Columns 1 and 3, respectively. Not surprisingly, the measures for
time since foreign entry are accounted for by the …rm-speci…c …xed e¤ects. Growth over time in
the total patenting of the …rm is associated with lower collaboration rates, while we observe a
relatively large boost from growth in the size of the company’s ethnic workforce in the United
States. Columns 2 and 4 further interact the various …rm measures with the GDP of the country
where the foreign patenting takes place. These interactions tend to be less important overall.
They show that the declines in collaboration with …rm patent growth are especially pronounced
in developing and emerging economies. Also, the size of the ethnic workforce in the United States
matters less for collaboration when the GDP of the foreign country is greater. This re‡ects the
particular strength of this channel observed in Table 2 for countries such as China, India, and
Russia.
    The appendix reports two important robustness checks on these estimations. First, Appendix
Tables 2a, 3a and 4a repeat Tables 3-5 using a probit model instead of our linear probability
speci…cation (1). These probit models yield very similar results. Where modest di¤erences occur,
they only serve to strengthen the conclusions that we can draw from the reported estimations.
    In Appendix Tables 2b, 3b and 4b, we replicate our core model— speci…cally Column 4 from
Tables 3 and 4 and Columns 1 and 3 from Table 5— when we drop each ethnic region from the
sample one at a time. These results prove also quite similar. Most important, all of the …rm-level
  11
     This comparability focuses on our …rm-level patterns. We also considered sample splits regarding the country
traits in estimations without country …xed e¤ects. These exercises did not yield very insightful information, and
the most important variation we exploit in this regard is across the full sample.


                                                       18
explanatory factors are very robust across variants. The only exception is a weaker relationship
of collaborative patents to ethnic inventor shares when excluding Europe and including …rm …xed
e¤ects; on the other hand, the importance of own-ethnicity patenting in this setting rises. This
heightened connection of U.S. ethnic inventors to joint ethnic patenting when excluding Europe
is not very surprising and could simply indicate that ethnic linkages are less important for U.S.
corporations when establishing R&D operations in Europe, or that we are able to measure these
ethnic linkages less precisely, and in some real sense, the process of assimilation links these two
possible factors together. Excluding Europe has a larger impact on our country-level covariates,
although the central connection of collaborative patenting to settings where the rule of law and
IPR protections are weak remains quite prominent.
   The recent literature on international knowledge spillovers often highlights special U.S. con-
nections for China and India (e.g., Branstetter et al. 2015, Breschi et al. 2015, Freeman and
Huang 2015). Given their high-pro…le nature, we also test dropping the Chinese and Indian
regions at the same time in these appendix tables. We …nd overall very similar results when
jointly excluding these two countries. It is worth noting that our panel begins well before the
very large rise of these two countries, and so generally they are not that pivotal to our analysis—
although they do …t the concepts and overall patterns quite well. This parallels similar …ndings
by Miguelez (2013) about the broad applicability of diaspora for co-invention networks beyond
the China and India cases.

3.2    Role of Cross-Border Mobility within Firms

Table 6 next layers inventor migration into these analyses. Column 1 of Table 6 repeats our
base estimation for collaborative patents from Column 4 of Table 3. Columns 2-4 then separate
this outcome variable into three mutually exclusive, collectively exhaustive categories: 1) collab-
orative patents that include a within-company move of one or more inventors across borders, 2)
collaborative patents that do not include an internal move but have one or more inventors that
have moved across borders outside of the …rm, and 3) collaborative patents for which we have
no evidence of a move. Given this data structure, the coe¢ cients and means of the dependent
variables across Columns 2-4 add up to Column 1.
   Focusing on the country traits, some very intriguing di¤erences are evident. First, the nega-
tive partial correlation associated with a country having low English pro…ciency works entirely

                                                19
through a reduced likelihood of a collaborative patent that does not involve a cross-border mover,
with no impact for the cases where mobile inventors are present in the team. This is quite con-
sistent with these mobile team members lowering entry barriers connected to language, business
practices, and so on. By contrast, companies are less likely to have a within-…rm mover involved
in the team, relative to the other collaborative forms, when distance to the United States is
greater or when the foreign location does not o¤er extensive patenting in the same …eld. This
particular reduction could descend from less inherent advantage to shifting the resource over
locations or to lower supply of potential movers within the …rm.
   Looking at the …rm-level traits, bigger patenting …rms appear to exploit internal moves much
more than small …rms, with increases in …rm size almost exactly balanced on the two margins
of Columns 2 and 4 (i.e., teams using internal moves vs. teams with no movers evident). This is
interesting, but it should be treated with caution given the obvious issue of us measuring mobility
through the patent data itself. It could be that …rms with few patents are still transferring
employees across locations but that they do not show up in our patent data until they are
located in the United States. To fully disentangle these features, we would need to access broader
employment records of the …rms. That said, we …nd it unlikely that this strong symmetry on the
two margins would be purely due to measurement error. Just as interesting, the connection of
collaborative patents to the ethnic share of U.S. domestic inventors appears most prominently,
in relative terms, for teams where external-to-company moves are evident.
   Columns 5-8 have a similar structure for own-ethnicity collaborative patents; to keep a man-
ageable number of divisions, we do not distinguish here whether the cross-border mover(s) is
the same individual or not as the inventor(s) with the own-ethnicity connections. The results
are overall quite comparable, with the most noticeable di¤erence being that distance shows its
most important impact in the collaborative teams that do not include a moving individual. In
other words, the establishment of a long-distance own-ethnicity collaboration typically involves
a within-company or external move. These estimations use the upper-bound designations of Li
et al. (2014) for de…ning unique inventors, and Appendix Table 5a shows very similar results
when using the lower-bound designations. Appendix Table 5b also shows very similar results
when incorporating …rm …xed e¤ects into the analyses.
   In summary, inventor mobility within and outside of …rms clearly connects to collaborative
patenting, although it does not fully explain it (and likewise collaborative patenting does not

                                                20
fully explain inventor mobility choices). The reported contrasts with respect to the traits of
foreign countries and the characteristics of sponsoring …rms are both fascinating and intuitive.
We hope that future research picks up on these themes and builds them out, as several of these
moderating factors are worthy of their own study (in addition to some we have yet to identify).

3.3      Consequences of Global Collaborative Patents

We turn next to a quanti…cation of the traits of global collaborative patents compared to the
other patents …led by U.S. public companies at the USPTO. To this end, we build a larger
sample that also includes the domestic patents …led by these companies. We estimate a linear
regression of the form

          Yp =    jt   +   ft   + (0; 1)Collaborativep + (0; 1)F oreignN onCollaborativep +    p;    (2)

where p again indexes patents. The dependent variable Yp is one of a set of standard traits about
patents that we consider. The two regressors in our base estimations are indicator variables for
a collaborative patent (global inventor team) and for a foreign non-collaborative patent. The
vector     jt   contains technology-year …xed e¤ects, and the vector         ft   contains …rm-year …xed
e¤ects. The            and       coe¢ cients are thus measured against patents for the …rm where all
inventors are located in the United States. The estimates are unweighted, have around 400,000
observations for most traits, and cluster standard errors by …rm.
   Table 7 considers the traits of collaborative and non-collaborative patents observable at the
time of patent grant, in comparison to patents granted to inventor teams where all workers are
in the United States. Column headers indicate the speci…c trait considered. Panel A presents
the means of the studied traits for reference. Throughout this table and the next table, caution
should be exercised when considering these means, as the patents in the groups may come from
di¤erent technology areas and time periods. In most cases, regardless, the group means closely
align with the regression analyses. Panel B then provides a speci…cation (2) with just technology-
year …xed e¤ects, while Panel C includes both technology-year and …rm-year …xed e¤ects. In
both cases, we provide the            and   coe¢ cients that compare collaborative and non-collaborative
international patents to U.S. domestic patents. We likewise report the relative e¤ects of the
and      coe¢ cients to the average value observed for U.S. domestic patents. Finally, we report the
t-test for a linear di¤erence between the collaborative and non-collaborative coe¢ cients (           ).

                                                       21
Values greater than two indicate that the collaborative coe¢ cient is statistically larger than the
non-collaborative coe¢ cient, and the opposite is true for values less than negative two.
   Columns 1 and 2 of Table 7 begin with some simple statistics about the number of inventors
listed on the patent. As shown earlier in Figures 3a and 3b, it is clear that collaborative foreign
patents have a larger number of inventors per patent than the two other types. On average, they
have 4.2 inventors per patent, compared to 2.5 for domestic patents. Some of this di¤erence
re‡ects technology and time period di¤erences, but a di¤erence of about 1.5 inventors remains
in the regression-based formats. Column 2 shows that non-collaborative patents have a larger
number of foreign inventors than collaborative patents, while unreported estimates show that
the domestic teams of collaborative and U.S.-based inventor teams are pretty similar in terms
of size. Said di¤erently, exclusively U.S.-based inventor teams tend to be larger than exclusively
foreign-based inventor teams. Collaborative patents retain almost all of the typical U.S.-based
team size and add a little more than 1.5 foreign inventors on average, for a much larger total
invention team.
   Columns 3-9 of Table 7 provide additional traits of patents that are observable at the time
of the patent grant. Column 3 considers the number of claims that the patent makes, which
some prior work takes as an indicator of patent quality. There is a strict ordering in this case:
collaborative patents, followed by U.S. domestic teams, followed by non-collaborative foreign
teams. The relative e¤ects are on the order of 5%-10% and are statistically signi…cant.
   Columns 4-7 consider metrics based upon the backwards citations the patent makes to prior
work. We consider the total number of citations, the number of citations made to prior external
work outside of the …rm producing the focal patent, whether the majority of the backward
citations are to the …rm’s own prior work, and …nally an originality score for the …rm’s backward
citations. The originality score follows Hall et al. (2001) as one minus a Her…ndahl index over the
technology classes that are cited in the patent. A larger score on the originality index indicates
that the patent draws from a broader distribution of prior technologies in its work. One pattern
is strongly evident across these four metrics: non-collaborative patents display a smaller number
of citations and a narrower cited technology base compared to collaborative patents or to U.S.
domestic patents. Collaborative patents also tend to display more of these features compared
to U.S. domestic patents, but these di¤erences are substantially weaker in economic size and
statistical strength.

                                                22
   Columns 8 and 9 next look at the subclasses of technologies listed on the patent. Each
patent lists one or more patent technology subclasses, which is the most detailed level of the
USPTO system with over 150,000 separate technologies identi…ed. Non-collaborative foreign
patents tend to have fewer listed subclasses, while the other two types of patents are comparable
to each other. Non-collaborative patents are also less likely to have a novel combination of
subclasses (e.g., Strumsky, Lobo, and Van der Leeuw 2011, 2012; Akcigit, Nicholas, and Kerr
2013), while collaborative patents are marginally less than U.S. domestic patents. Thus, at the
time of application, the traits of collaborative patents typically fall in between those of patents
with exclusive U.S.- or foreign-based teams, with collaborative work usually looking more like
U.S.-based teams. The most noticeable exceptions are team size and the number of patent
claims being made, where collaborative patents rank substantially higher than either of the
other groups.
   Table 8 continues this estimation approach and considers the forward citations that the vari-
ous types of patents receive. In this context in particular, the focus should be on the regression-
based analysis since these forward citations accumulate with time. As collaborative patents are
a much more recent phenomenon, their raw citation counts tend to be naturally lower. Column 1
begins with the total count of forward citations received. Column 2 provides a normalized count
where the raw count is divided by the average for that patent class and application year (the dif-
ference to the technology-year …xed e¤ects is that the sub-category level used for technology-year
…xed e¤ects is more aggregated at 36 divisions vs. over 450 patent classes). Non-collaborative
patents have lower future citation counts than domestic or collaborative patents. There is some
suggestive evidence that collaborative patents may also outperform their domestic peers, but
this e¤ect is not statistically signi…cant in Column 2. Column 3 reports a generality index,
which is the mirror image of the originality index in Table 7. Non-collaborative patents tend to
be cited by a more concentrated technology set in the future.
   Columns 4-9 of Table 8 next disaggregate the patent’s forward citations on two dimensions: 1)
internal vs. external to the patenting …rm and 2) inside vs. outside of the United States. External
citations are often used to assess the value or broader impact of patents. Internal citations
provide insights on the degree to which the …rm itself builds upon the focal invention. This may
di¤er across …rm locations due to awareness of inventions, priorities established for technological
development, and other reasons. The sample in the latter three columns is restricted to cases

                                                23
where we observe at least one subsequent patent by the …rm in a later year than the focal
patent’s application year, so that there is at least some opportunity for an internal citation to
occur. Given that our focus is on large public …rms with high patent frequency, this restriction
is not very important.
   Column 5 shows that collaborative and non-collaborative patents receive more non-U.S.
external citations than domestic-only patents. Collaborative patents may, if anything, have an
edge in this dimension compared to non-collaborative patents, but these di¤erences are small and
statistically weak. By contrast, Column 6 shows a substantial reduction in the external impact
within the United States for non-collaborative patents. Thus, the location of the inventors
within the …rm correlates strongly with the location where the external impact of the patent is
experienced, and a distributed team of collaborative inventors connects with external impacts
both within and outside of the United States.
   Columns 7-9 show a mostly similar pattern for impacts within the …rm as measured by future
self-citations. Column 8 again shows that inventors outside of the United States, now the …rm’s
own inventors, build more on work that was conducted with inventors outside of the United
States. Likewise, Column 9 again shows that inventions developed with inventors in the United
States have a greater subsequent impact on the …rm’s U.S.-based inventions. The main di¤erence
to Columns 4-6 comes through the relative position of the collaborative patents. For external
impact, collaborative patents display a "best of both worlds" coe¢ cient pattern that indicates
greater impact in both locations than is seen for patents created by exclusively domestic or
foreign teams. For internal impact, a trade-o¤ instead exists. Collaborative patents have more
impact for the …rm’s future technology development outside of the United States than patents
by an exclusively U.S.-based team, but less than those by an exclusively foreign team. The
opposite is true for the …rm’s future technology development in the United States, and these
di¤erences are all statistically signi…cant.
   We turn now to several robustness checks and extensions on the patterns. First, we return
to the team size estimates that started Table 7. Throughout Tables 7 and 8, the relative e¤ects
are meaningful in size but not extraordinary, often on the order of 10%-20%. In most cases,
we also observe a performance advantage for collaborative patents. A natural question is the
degree to which these advantages come from di¤erent inputs into collaborative patents (e.g.,
R&D dollars, managerial attention). While we generally do not observe these inputs, we do

                                                24
observe the inventor team size. Inventor team size for collaborative patents tends to be 60%
(or more) larger than for the other types of patents. Thus, estimates that measure traits on
a "per inventor" basis (e.g., forward citations per inventor) will …nd an underperformance by
collaborative patents. We hesitate to make such an adjustment for two reasons. First, we do not
know the amount of time each inventor placed into the e¤ort, and it could be that larger team
size comes with fewer hours per inventor. Second, we also lack a very clear scale for measuring
the complete return di¤erences to the …rm across these traits (e.g., it is not clear whether a 10%
higher rate of internal citations translates into more or less than 10% of internal bene…ts to the
…rm).
    To nonetheless provide some basis for this comparison, Panel A of Table 9 extends Panel C
of Table 8 to include inventor team size-year …xed e¤ects.12 For these …xed e¤ects, we code the
maximum team size at 5+ inventors on a patent. As per the prior discussion, this additional
control weakens (and in some cases eliminates) many of the di¤erences observed between do-
mestic U.S. patents and those with collaborative teams. In other words, similarly-sized teams of
exclusively U.S.-based inventors perform more like those of collaborative patents. On the other
hand, the di¤erences between these groups and non-collaborative foreign inventors remain. It
is thus important to keep the di¤erences in inventor contributions in mind when noting the
performance advantages of collaborative patents, but the big di¤erences compared to exclusively
foreign inventor teams are not explained by the adjustment.
    Panel B of Table 9 provides a second extension. We modify the analysis to consider own-
ethnicity collaborations (i.e., at least one U.S.-based inventor matches the ethnic region of the
…rm’s overseas inventors) versus those across ethnic lines. We do not have a very strong prior
about the direction of these patterns. For example, one could hypothesize that ethnic-based
collaborations improve communication across borders and thereby boost patenting outcomes.
However, it seems equally plausible that some of the potential team diversity bene…ts are lost
in own-ethnicity collaborations. The results in Panel B of Table 9 suggest that own-ethnicity
collaborations have somewhat stronger external and internal impacts in the United States, with
the di¤erences outside of the United States more muted.
    Panel C of Table 9 reports estimations that isolate multi-country non-U.S. inventor teams
  12
     For completeness, Appendix Table 6 documents this exercise and the next three extensions for the initial
traits of patents evaluated in Table 7. Similarly, Appendix Table 7a includes two extra outcome variables (i.e.,
normalized forward citation counts, generalized score of forward citations) not reported in Table 9.


                                                      25
within our patent pool that do not contain U.S.-based inventors. It is important to remember
here that these are only U.S.-based companies, and thus we are not considering inventor teams for
Siemens, Sony, Nokia, etc. that have foreign-based headquarters. The very interesting outcome
is that these foreign collaborative teams perform even more unlike U.S.-connected collaborative
patents than the foreign patents that have teams in a single location. In terms of initial traits,
which are reported in Appendix Table 6, these patents with non-U.S. multi-country teams look
pretty much the same as patents produced by teams located in a single non-U.S. country, ex-
cepting inventor counts. But looking forward, these non-U.S. multi-country teams are even less
likely to have an external or internal impact in the United States and even more likely to have
external impact outside of the United States than the foreign teams that are located in a single
country.
   We do not seek to explain this pattern in detail, as the results are not precise enough to make
a big fuss about just yet. We are able to conclude from this exercise that the di¤erences we
observe for collaborative patents with U.S.-connected teams are not due to generic features that
come from multi-country teams, which is an important fact to highlight. An important avenue
for future work is to assemble a deeper dataset with multinational companies headquartered in
many countries and then test more broadly this phenomena with information about country pairs
and headquarters. Such a platform would likely require incorporating non-USPTO patents. This
would be the necessary next step to begin separating whether the patterns we observe descend
from a United States …xed e¤ect (which would hold true for a Sony or Siemens patent involving
an inventor team located in France and the United States) or a feature that relates to the
collaborative team being connected to the headquarters country (which happens in this case to
be the United States). Based upon case studies and anecdotal evidence, we suspect the latter
factor is the more important of the two, but this remains an open question.
   Appendix Table 7a considers whether these outcomes are heightened or diminished by the
role of internal transfers being a part of the inventor team. We allow separate indicators for
collaborative patents with an internal-to-the-…rm transfer and collaborative patents with no
evidence of cross-border mobility. We also include …xed e¤ects for a collaborative patent with
an external-to-the-…rm inventor move and main e¤ects for patents generally that include these
types of mobile inventors; these additional elements are imprecisely estimated and reported in
Appendix Table 7a. The robust insight is that our collaborative patenting results are evident in

                                               26
both types of collaborative patents, validating the results as a general feature of the collaboration
process. The point estimates might also suggest that internal-to-the-…rm mobility is associated
with greater forward knowledge use in the United States by the …rm and a smaller di¤erential to
foreign patents outside of the United States. These di¤erences, however, are far from statistically
signi…cant and are at best indicative of what might lie ahead as bigger samples and longer time
horizons emerge. We also believe that truly answering these questions requires marrying patent
data with cross-border employment records for multinational …rms (e.g., Choudhury 2015) to
provide a more comprehensive view of inventor teams and mobility.
    Finally, the recent nature of these collaborative patents raises the potential for our results
to be sensitive to how one handles the citation truncation at the end of the sample period. An
alternative approach to controlling for technology-year …xed e¤ects is to explicitly create uniform
time horizons over which future citations are calculated. We implement both three- and …ve-year
horizons in Appendix Table 7b. The comforting conclusion from those extensions is that the
e¤ects remain very similar with all of these alternative treatments. Further, a comparison of
the quanti…ed relative impacts across the shorter time horizons with our full-horizon e¤ects also
suggests that there is no obvious trend to these outcomes over the time span used, with some
margins growing while others shrink modestly.

4     Conclusions
The globalization of innovation is proceeding at an exceptionally fast pace. Many U.S. public
companies conduct signi…cant overseas R&D, and global inventor teams have become surprisingly
prominent— on average, 6% of the worldwide patents of U.S. multinational corporations in 2004.
We …nd that the ethnic composition of the …rm’s U.S.-based inventive workforce is an important
factor in whether the …rm engages in international collaboration. Collaborative patents are
also frequently observed when a U.S. public company is entering into a new foreign region for
innovative work. This is particularly true in markets where intellectual property protections are
weak. In a large fraction of these cases, an inventor moving across borders within the …rm is
evident. On the whole, the strategy appears to be a sound one. Collaborative patents tend
to perform similarly to patents developed by the same companies using exclusively U.S.-based
teams, and both of these groups are stronger than those developed with exclusively foreign



                                                 27
inventor teams. The nature and location of the inventor team has lasting e¤ects on how the
patent is used within the …rm and the degree to which the …rm’s subsequent inventive e¤orts
build upon the technologies.
   There are several important managerial implications from this work. First, it emphasizes
the importance of forethought about team design and goals for innovative work when spreading
overseas. One often hears discussions of cheaper R&D being conducted abroad, and many
…rms and managers later express disappointment at the results achieved. Our work shows
that collaborative teams may provide a particularly attractive middle ground to this trade-o¤,
even beyond the facilitation of initial entry. Second, our citation analysis reveals the imperfect
sharing of knowledge across units within multinational companies. This is commonly discussed
with respect to operational issues, and our citation work goes further and emphasizes it with
respect to knowledge creation and the ability of inventors to build upon the past work of the …rm.
Managers desiring to increment their …rm’s knowledge base both domestically and abroad may
need to sta¤ projects with inventors from both locations. In general, our …ndings emphasize the
importance of actively building absorptive capacity for knowledge within organizations across
the …rm’s own units.
   In terms of policy implications, some fairly clear themes emerge that are not exclusive to this
work— for example, better rule of law and IPR protection encourage better scienti…c integration
with the United States through these multinationals, though there are many other justi…cations
for these policy objectives, too. More distinctive to our work and related studies like Miguelez
(2014) and Branstetter et al. (2015) is the emphasis on cross-border migration for in‡uencing
technology transfer across countries and the building of local bases for innovation. The results of
this study do not build a conclusive case for "brain gain" type e¤ects due to out-migration, as we
do not conduct detailed counterfactual analyses of what could have occurred had the individuals
stayed (e.g., Agrawal et al. 2011, Breschi et al. 2015). That said, our study makes clear that
use of cross-border teams is a very attractive technique for multinationals conducting innovation
abroad, and careful thought by nations towards short-term travel policies, multinational em-
ployee transfer visas, and similar features may have a big impact as multinationals weigh their
options.
   Looking forward, more research is certainly worthwhile in this emerging domain. To revisit
some of the pieces highlighted, we see particular advantages in e¤orts to unite patent data with

                                                28
internal employment records of multinationals. This work can be in the form of single-company
studies or utilization of large-scale employer-employee datasets that are becoming available.
Second, we hope that future work can build a platform that includes many countries and multi-
nationals headquartered in many locations. Such a framework would allow us to separate the
particular importance of headquarters locations from the …xed attributes of some nations for
inventive work. Going beyond, most studies in this domain focus on patent- or country-level
traits, and more explicit consideration of a …rm’s overall strategy to multinational innovation is
desirable. This would be especially powerful if linked to information on operational data and
other performance outcomes.



References
Agrawal, Ajay, Iain Cockburn, and John McHale, "Gone But Not Forgotten: Knowledge Flows,
Labor Mobility, and Enduring Social Relationships", Journal of Economic Geography 6:5 (2006),
571-591.
Agrawal, Ajay, Devesh Kapur, John McHale, and Alexander Oettl, "Brain Drain or Brain Bank?
The Impact of Skilled Emigration on Poor-Country Innovation", Journal of Urban Economics
69 (2011), 43-55.
Akcigit, Ufuk, William Kerr, and Tom Nicholas, "The Mechanics of Endogenous Innovation and
Growth: Evidence from Historical U.S. Patents", Working Paper (2013).
Alnuami, Tufool, Gerard George, and Jasjit Singh, "Not with My Own: Long-Term E¤ects of
Cross-Country Collaboration on Subsidiary Innovation in Emerging Economies vs. Advanced
Economies", Journal of Economic Geography 12:5 (2012), 943-968.
Alcacer, Juan, and Wilbur Chung, "Location Strategies and Knowledge Spillovers", Management
Science 53:5 (2007), 760-776.
Alcacer, Juan, and Minyuan Zhao, "Local R&D Strategies and Multi-location Firms: The Role
of Internal Linkages", Management Science 58:4 (2012), 734-753.
Almeida, Paul, and Bruce Kogut, "Localization of Knowledge and the Mobility of Engineers in
Regional Networks", Management Science 45:7 (1999), 905-917.
Arora, Ashish, and Alfonso Gambardella, From Underdogs to Tigers? The Rise and Growth of
the Software Industry in Brazil, China, India, Ireland, and Israel (Oxford, UK: Oxford Univer-
sity Press, 2005).
Bergek, Anna, and Maria Bruzelius, "Are Patents with Multiple Inventors from Di¤erent Coun-
tries a Good Indicator of International R&D Collaboration? The case of ABB", Research Policy
39:10 (2010), 1321-1334.
Bhattacharya, Utpal, and Peter Groznik, "Melting Pot or Salad Bowl: Some Evidence from U.S.
Investments Abroad", Journal of Financial Markets 11:3 (2008), 228-258.
Branstetter, Lee, "Is Foreign Direct Investment a Channel of Knowledge Spillovers? Evidence
from Japan’s FDI in the United States", Journal of International Economics 68 (2006), 325-344.


                                               29
Branstetter, Lee, Guangwei Li, and Francisco Veloso, "The Rise of International Co-invention",
in Adam Ja¤e and Benjamin Jones (eds.) The Changing Frontier: Rethinking Science and
Innovation Policy (Chicago, IL: University of Chicago Press, 2015), 135-168.
Breschi, Stefano, and Francesco Lissoni, "Knowledge Spillovers and Local Innovation System: A
Critical Survey", Industrial and Corporate Change 10 (2001), 975-1005.
Breschi, Stefano, and Francesco Lissoni, "Mobility of Skilled Workers and Co-invention Networks:
An Anatomy of Localized Knowledge Flows", Journal of Economic Geography 9 (2009), 439-468.
Breschi, Stefano, Francesco Lissoni, and Ernest Miguelez, "Foreign Inventors in the US: Testing
for Diaspora and Brain Gain E¤ects", Working Paper (2015).
Breschi, Stefano, Francesco Lissoni, and Gianluca Tarasconi, "Inventor Data for Research on
Migration and Innovation: A Survey and a Pilot", WIPO Economic Research Working Paper
No. 17 (2014).
Buch, Claudia, Jörn Kleinert, and Farid Toubal, "Where Enterprises Lead, People Follow? Links
Between Migration and German FDI", European Economic Review 50:8 (2006), 2017-2036.
Choudhury, Prithwiraj, "Return Migration and Geography of Innovation in MNEs: A Natural
Experiment of On-the-job Learning of Knowledge Production by Local Workers Reporting to
Return Migrants", Journal of Economic Geography (2015), forthcoming.
Clemens, Michael, "Skill Flow: A Fundamental Reconsideration of Skilled-Worker Migration
and Development", United Nations Human Development Report (2009).
Clemens, Michael, "Economics and Emigration: Trillion-Dollar Bills on the Sidewalk?", Journal
of Economic Perspectives 25:3 (2011), 83-106.
Dalton, D.H., M.G. Serapio, and P.G. Yoshida, Globalizing Industrial Research and Development
(Washington, DC: U.S. Department of Commerce, Technology Administration, 1999).
Docquier, Frédéric, and Elisabetta Lodigiani, "Skilled Migration and Business Networks", Open
Economies Review 21:4 (2010), 565-588.
Docquier, Frédéric, and Hillel Rapoport, "Globalization, Brain Drain, and Development", Jour-
nal of Economic Literature 50:3 (2012), 681-730.
Foley, C. Fritz, and William R. Kerr, "Ethnic Innovation and U.S. Multinational Firm Activity",
Management Science 59:7 (2013), 1529-1544.
Freeman, Richard, "People Flows in Globalization", Journal of Economic Perspectives 20:2
(2006), 145-170.
Freeman, Richard, "One Ring to Rule Them All? Globalization of Knowledge and Knowledge
Creation", Nordic Economic Policy Review: Globalization, Labour Market Institutions and Wage
Structure. NBER Working Paper 19301 (2013).
Freeman, Richard, and Wei Huang, "China’s Great Leap Forward in Science and Engineering".
In Aldo Geuna (ed.), Global Mobility of Research Scientists: The Economics of Who Goes Where
and Why (Amsterdam: Elsevier, 2015).
Ghani, Ejaz, William Kerr, and Christopher Stanton, "Diasporas and Outsourcing: Evidence
from oDesk and India", Management Science 60:7 (2014), 1677-1697.
Ghemawat, Pankaj, "The Cosmopolitan Corporation", Harvard Business Review (2011).
Gibson, John, and David McKenzie, "Eight Questions about Brain Drain", Journal of Economic
Perspectives 25:3 (2011), 107-128.
Gould, David, "Immigrant Links to the Home Country: Empirical Implications for U.S. Bilateral
Trade Flows", Review of Economics and Statistics 76 (1994), 302-316.

                                              30
Government of India, The High Level Committee on the Indian Diaspora (2001),
http://indiandiaspora.nic.in/contents.htm.
Gri¢ th, Rachel, Stephen Redding, and John Van Reenen, "Mapping the Two Faces of R&D:
Productivity Growth in a Panel of OECD Industries", Review of Economics and Statistics 86
(2004), 883-895.
Griliches, Zvi, "Patent Statistics as Economic Indicators: A Survey", Journal of Economic
Literature 28:4 (1990), 1661-1707.
Guellec, Dominique, and Bruno Van Pottelsberghe, "The Internationalization of Technology
Analyzed by Patent Data", Research Policy 30:8 (2001), 1253-1266.
Hatzigeorgiou, Andreas, and Magnus Lodefalk, "Trade and Migration: Firm-Level Evidence",
Working Paper (2011).
Hall, Bronwyn, Adam Ja¤e, and Manuel Trajtenberg, "The NBER Patent Citation Data File:
Lessons, Insights and Methodological Tools", NBER Working Paper 8498 (2001).
Head, Keith, and John Ries, "Immigration and Trade Creation: Econometric Evidence from
Canada", Canadian Journal of Economics 31:1 (1998), 47-62.
Hernandez, Exequiel, "Immigrant Social Capital and Firm Strategic Heterogeneity: E¤ects on
Foreign Entry and Firm Performance", Working Paper (2011).
Hovhannisyan, Nune, and Wolfgang Keller, "International Business Travel: An Engine of Inno-
vation?", Journal of Economic Growth 20:1 (2015), 75-104.
Huang, Mu-Hsuan, Huei-Ru Dong, and Dar-Zen Chen, "Globalization of Collaborative Creativ-
ity Through Cross-Border Patent Activities", Journal of Informetrics 6 (2012), 226-236.
Huang, Yasheng, Li Jin, and Yi Qian, "Does Ethnicity Pay? Evidence from Overseas Chinese
FDI in China", Review of Economics and Statistics 95:3 (2013), 868-883.
Hunt, Jennifer, and Marjolaine Gauthier-Loiselle, "How Much Does Immigration Boost Innova-
tion?", American Economic Journal: Macroeconomics 2 (2010), 31-56.
Iriyama, Akie, Yong Li, and Ravi Madhavan, "Spiky Globalization of Venture Capital Invest-
ments: The In‡uence of Prior Human Networks", Strategic Entrepreneurship Journal 4 (2010),
128-145.
Javorcik, Beata, Ça¼glar Özden, Mariana Spatareanu, and Cristina Neagu, "Migrant Networks
and Foreign Direct Investment", Journal of Development Economics 94:2 (2011), 231-241.
Kapur, Devesh, "Diasporas and Technology Transfer", Journal of Human Development 2:2
(2001), 265-286.
Kapur, Devesh, and John McHale, "Sojourns and Software: Internationally Mobile Human
Capital and High Tech Industry Development in India, Ireland and Israel", in Ashish Arora and
Alfonso Gambardella (eds.) Underdogs to Tigers: The Rise and Growth of the Software Industry
in Some Emerging Economies (Oxford, UK: Oxford University Press, 2005a).
Kapur, Devesh, and John McHale, Give Us Your Best and Brightest: The Global Hunt for
Talent and the Developing World (Washington, DC: Center for Global Development/Brookings
Institution Press, 2005b).
Keller, Wolfgang, "International Technology Di¤usion", Journal of Economic Literature 42:3
(2004), 752-782.
Kerr, Sari, William Kerr, and William Lincoln, "Skilled Immigration and the Employment
Structures of U.S. Firms", Journal of Labor Economics 33:S1 (2015), S109-S145.
Kerr, William, "The Ethnic Composition of US Inventors", HBS Working Paper 08-006 (2007).

                                             31
Kerr, William, "Ethnic Scienti…c Communities and International Technology Di¤usion", Review
of Economics and Statistics 90:3 (2008), 518-537.
Kerr, William, "Heterogeneous Technology Di¤usion and Ricardian Trade Patterns", NBER
Working Paper 19657 (2013).
Kerr, William, "The Agglomeration of US Ethnic Inventors", in Edward Glaeser (ed.) Economics
of Agglomeration (Chicago, IL: University of Chicago Press, 2010).
Kerr, William, and William Lincoln, "The Supply Side of Innovation: H-1B Visa Reforms and
U.S. Ethnic Invention", Journal of Labor Economics 28:3 (2010), 473-508.
Kerr, William, William Lincoln, and Prachi Mishra, "The Dynamics of Firm Lobbying", Amer-
ican Economic Journal: Economic Policy 6:4 (2014), 343-379.
Krishna, V.V., Swapan Kumar Patra, and Sujit Bhattacharya, "Internationalisation of R&D and
Global Nature of Innovation: Emerging Trends from India", Science, Technology and Society 17:2
(2012), 165-199.
Kugler, Maurice, and Hillel Rapoport, "International Labor and Capital Flows: Complements
or Substitutes?", Economics Letters 92:2 (2007), 155-162.
Kugler, Maurice, and Hillel Rapoport, "Migration, FDI and the Margins of Trade", Working
Paper (2011).
LaPorta, Rafael, Florencio Lopez-de-Silanes, and Andrei Shleifer, "Government Ownership of
Banks", Journal of Finance 57:1 (2002), 265-301.
Li, Guan-Cheng, Ronald Lai, Alexander D’Amour, David Doolin, Ye Sun, Vetle Torvik, Amy
Yu, and Lee Fleming, "Disambiguation and Co-authorship Networks of the US Patent Inventor
Database (1975–2010)", Research Policy 43:6 (2014), 941-955.
MacGarvie, Megan, "The Determinants of International Knowledge Di¤usion as Measured by
Patent Citations", Economics Letters 87:1 (2005), 121-126.
MacGarvie, Megan, "Foreign Students and the Di¤usion of Scienti…c and Technological Knowl-
edge to and from American Universities", Working Paper (2006).
Maggioni, Mario, Mario Nosvelli, and Teodora Erika Uberti, "Space versus Networks in the
Geography of Innovation: A European Analysis", Papers in Regional Science 86:3 (2007), 471-
493.
Miguelez, Ernst, "How Does Geographical Mobility of Inventors In‡uence Network Formation?",
WIPO Economic Research Working Paper No. 7 (2013).
Miguelez, Ernst, "Inventor Diasporas and the Internationalization of Technology", CREAM
Discussion Paper Series 25/14 (2014).
Miguelez, Ernst, and Rosina Moreno, "Do Labour Mobility and Networks Foster Geographical
Knowledge Di¤usion? The Case of European Regions", Growth and Change 44:2 (2013), 321-354.
Mithas, Sunil, and Henry Lucas, "Are Foreign IT Workers Cheaper? U.S. Visa Policies and
Compensation of Information Technology Professionals", Management Science 56 (2010), 745-
765.
Montobbio, Fabio, and Valerie Sterzi, "The Globalization of Technology in Emerging Markets: A
Gravity Model on the Determinants of International Patent Collaborations", World Development
44 (2013), 281–299.
Nachum, Lilach, "But How Does Distance A¤ect FDI? And Why Does It Matter?" Working
Paper (2011).
Nachum, Lilach, Srilata Zaheer, and Shulamith Gross, "Does it Matter Where Countries Are?
Proximity to Knowledge, Markets and Resources, and MNE Location Choices", Management
Science 54:7 (2008), 1252-1265.

                                             32
Nanda, Ramana, and Tarun Khanna, "Diasporas and Domestic Entrepreneurs: Evidence from
the Indian Software Industry", Journal of Economics and Management Strategy 19:4 (2010),
991-1012.
National Science Foundation, Science and Engineering Indicators (Arlington, VA: National Sci-
ence Board, 2010).
Niosi, Jorge, "The Internationalization of Industrial R&D: From Technology Transfer to the
Learning Organization", Research Policy 28 (1999), 107-117.
Obukhova, Elena, "Does Brain Circulation Promote International Development? High-Skilled
Migration and Organizational Performance", MIT Working Paper (2009).
Oettl, Alexander, and Ajay Agrawal, "International Labor Mobility and Knowledge Flow Ex-
ternalities", Journal of International Business Studies 39:8 (2008), 1242-1260.
Papageorgiou, Chris, and Antonio Spilimbergo, "Learning Abroad and Technology Adoption",
Working Paper (2008).
Park, Walter, "International Patent Protection: 1960–2005", Research Policy (2008), 761-766.
Peri, Giovanni, Kevin Shih, and Chad Sparber, "STEM Workers, H-1B Visas and Productivity
in US Cities", Journal of Labor Economics 33:S1 (2015), S225-S255.
Peri, Giovanni, and Chad Sparber, "Highly-Educated Immigrants and Native Occupational
Choice", Industrial Relations 50:3 (2011), 385-411.
Picci, Lucio, "The Internationalization of Inventive Activity: A Gravity Model Using Patent
Data", Research Policy 39:8 (2010), 1070-1081.
Puga, Diego, and Daniel Tre‡er, "Wake Up and Smell the Ginseng: The Rise of Incremental
Innovation in Low-Wage Countries", Journal of Development Economics 91:1 (2010), 64-76.
Rangan, Subramanian, and Aldemir Drummond, "The Problem of Control and the Role of
Home–Host Ties in Explaining Multinationals’Foreign Operations, Competitiveness, and Per-
formance", Global Strategy Journal 1 (2011), 362-376.
Rangan, Subramanian, and Metin Sengul, "The In‡uence of Macro Structure on the Foreign
Market Performance of Transnational Firms: The Value of IGO Connections, Export Depen-
dence, and Immigration Links", Administrative Science Quarterly 54 (2009), 229-267.
Rauch, James, "Networks Versus Markets in International Trade", Journal of International
Economics 48:1 (1999), 7-35.
Rauch, James, "Business and Social Networks in International Trade", Journal of Economic
Literature 39:4 (2001), 1177-1203.
Rauch, James, and Vitor Trindade, "Ethnic Chinese Networks in International Trade", Review
of Economics and Statistics 84:1 (2002), 116-130.
Rosenkopf, Lori, and Paul Almeida, "Overcoming Local Search through Alliances and Mobility",
Management Science 49:6 (2003), 751-766.
Saxenian, AnnaLee, "Silicon Valley’s New Immigrant Entrepreneurs" (San Francisco, CA: Public
Policy Institute of California, 1999).
Saxenian, AnnaLee, The New Argonauts (Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press, 2006).
Saxenian, AnnaLee, "Transnational Communities and the Evolution of Global Production Net-
works: Taiwan, China and India", Industry and Innovation 9:3 (2002).
Saxenian, AnnaLee, with Yasuyuki Motoyama and Xiaohong Quan, Local and Global Networks
of Immigrant Professionals in Silicon Valley (San Francisco, CA: Public Policy Institute of
California, 2002).

                                             33
Singh, Jasjit, "Multinational Firms and International Knowledge Di¤usion: Evidence from
Patent Citation Data", Best Paper Proceedings of the Academy of Management (2004).
Singh, Jasjit, "Collaborative Networks as Determinants of Knowledge Di¤usion Patterns", Man-
agement Science 51:5 (2005), 756-770.
Singh, Jasjit, "Asymmetry of Knowledge Spillovers between MNCs and Host Country Firms",
Journal of International Business Studies 38:5 (2007), 764-786.
Singh, Jasjit, "Distributed R&D, Cross-Regional Knowledge Integration and Quality of Innova-
tive Output", Research Policy 37:1 (2008), 77-96.
Strumsky, Deborah, Jose Lobo, and Sander Van der Leeuw, "Using Patent Technology Codes
to Study Technological Change", Economics of Innovation and New Technology (2011), 1-20.
Strumsky, Deborah, Jose Lobo, and Sander Van der Leeuw, "Measuring the Relative Importance
of Reusing, Recombining, and Creating Technologies in the Process of Invention", Working Paper
(2012).
Thursby Jerry, and Marie Thursby, Here or There? A Survey on the Factors in Multinational
R&D Location (Washington, DC: National Academies Press, 2006).
Veugelers, Reinhilde, and Bruno Cassiman, "Foreign Subsidiaries as a Channel of International
Technology Di¤usion: Some Direct Firm Level Evidence from Belgium", European Economic
Review 48:2 (2004), 455-476.
von Zedtwitz, Maximilian, and Oliver Gassmann, "Market versus Technology Drive in R&D
Internationalization: Four Di¤erent Patterns of Managing Research and Development", Research
Policy 31 (2002), 569-588.
Wutchy, Stefan, Benjamin Jones, and Brian Uzzi, "The Increasing Dominance of Teams in
Production of Knowledge", Science 316 (2007), 1036-1039.
Zhao, Minyaun, "Conducting R&D in Countries with Weak Intellectual Property Rights Pro-
tection", Management Science 56:7 (2006), 1185-1199.
Zhao, Minyaun, and Mazhar Islam, "Cross-Regional Ties within Firms: Promoting Knowledge
Flow or Discouraging Knowledge Spillover", Working Paper (2011).




                                             34
Figure 1: Trends in U.S. ethnic innovation
Figure 2: Trends in U.S. collaborative patenting
         Figure 3: Trends in inventor team sizes




Figure 4: Trends in cross-border inventor mobility shares
                                  Table 1: Descriptive statistics for inventors residing in United States
                                                                                      Ethnicity of inventor
                         Anglo-Saxon      Chinese         European        Hispanic        Indian         Japanese         Korean          Russian          Vietnam.

                                                     Panel A: Ethnic inventor shares estimated from U.S. patent records, 1975-2004
1975-1979                74.8%            2.1%            15.6%           2.7%            2.0%            0.6%            0.3%            1.9%             0.1%
1980-1984                73.4%            2.9%            15.1%           2.7%            2.6%            0.7%            0.4%            2.0%             0.1%
1985-1989                72.2%            3.6%            14.6%           2.9%            3.1%            0.8%            0.5%            2.1%             0.2%
1990-1994                70.0%            4.8%            14.1%           3.2%            3.9%            0.9%            0.6%            2.2%             0.4%
1995-1999                66.4%            6.7%            13.6%           3.5%            5.2%            0.9%            0.7%            2.5%             0.5%
2000-2004                63.1%            8.8%            13.0%           3.8%            5.9%            1.0%            0.9%            2.8%             0.6%
Chemicals                65.8%            7.3%            14.4%           3.2%            4.9%            0.9%            0.7%            2.5%             0.3%
Computers                62.9%            8.4%            12.6%           3.4%            7.5%            1.0%            0.7%            2.7%             0.7%
Pharmaceuticals          64.8%            7.2%            14.8%           3.9%            4.6%            1.1%            0.8%            2.6%             0.3%
Electrical               64.3%            8.3%            13.3%           3.3%            5.3%            1.0%            0.9%            2.8%             0.7%
Mechanical               72.8%            3.3%            14.2%           3.3%            2.8%            0.7%            0.5%            2.2%             0.2%
Miscellaneous            74.1%            2.9%            13.9%           3.6%            2.3%            0.6%            0.5%            1.9%             0.2%
Top cities as a          WS (84)          SF (14)         MIL (21)        MIA (16)        SF (8)          SD (2)          BAL (2)         NYC (4)          AUS (2)
percentage of            SLC (83)         LA (8)          NOR (19)        SA (9)          AUS (7)         SF (2)          LA (1)          BOS (4)          SF (1)
city’s patents           NAS (82)         AUS (6)         STL (19)        WPB (6)         PRT (6)         LA (2)          DC (1)          HRT (4)          LA (1)
                                               Panel B: Immigrant scientist and engineer shares estimated from 1990 U.S. Census records
Bachelor's share         87.6%            2.7%            2.3%            2.4%            2.3%            0.6%            0.5%            0.4%             1.2%
Master's share           78.9%            6.7%            3.4%            2.2%            5.4%            0.9%            0.7%            0.8%             1.0%
Doctorate share          71.2%            13.2%           4.0%            1.7%            6.5%            0.9%            1.5%            0.5%             0.4%
Notes: Panel A presents descriptive statistics for inventors residing in the United States at the time of patent application. Inventor ethnicities are estimated through
inventors' names using techniques described in the text. Patents are grouped by application years and major technology fields. Cities, defined through Metropolitan
Statistical Areas, include AUS (Austin), BAL (Baltimore), BOS (Boston), DC (Washington), HRT (Hartford), LA (Los Angeles), MIA (Miami), MIL (Milwaukee), NAS
(Nashville), NOR (New Orleans), NYC (New York City), PRT (Portland), SA (San Antonio), SD (San Diego), SF (San Francisco), SLC (Salt Lake City), STL (St. Louis),
WPB (West Palm Beach), and WS (Winston-Salem). Cities are identified from inventors' city names using city lists collected from the Office of Social and Economic Data
Analysis at the University of Missouri, with a matching rate of 99%. Manual recoding further ensures all patents with more than 100 citations and all city names with more
than 100 patents are identified. Panel B presents comparable statistics calculated from the 1990 Census using country of birth for scientists and engineers. Anglo-Saxon
provides a residual in the Census statistics. Many U.S. inventors with European names are native citizens.
                            Table 2: Firm entry and collaborative patenting trends by region
                                                             Patents within foreign countries grouped by ethnicity
                             Chinese        European         Hispanic        Indian        Japanese      Korean                 Russian         Vietnam.

                                         Panel A: Share of patents that are collaborative with inventors based in the United States
Entry year                     70%             42%              66%             84%              46%              61%             63%             100%
Years 1-3                      59%             47%              60%             66%              45%              63%             62%
Years 4-6                      53%             43%              60%             49%              38%              56%             63%
Years 7-9                      48%             42%              71%             25%              39%              76%             73%
Years 10+                      43%             37%              49%             49%              31%              65%             69%

                                Panel B: Share of patents that are collaborative with own-ethnicity inventors based in the United States
Entry year                     23%             18%              15%             34%               3%               4%             35%              0%
Years 1-3                      21%             17%               7%             29%               2%              17%             56%
Years 4-6                      31%             15%              15%             27%               3%              12%             41%
Years 7-9                      34%             17%              14%             15%               2%              24%             63%
Years 10+                      19%             16%              11%             30%               2%               9%             51%

                                                                      Panel C: Count of observations in cell
Entry year                     223              408             137               98             270               71               48               2
Years 1-3                      249              562             115               85             218               46              109               0
Years 4-6                      321              725             108              132             173               25               46               0
Years 7-9                      461              794              93              198             223               21               49               0
Years 10+                      562             4,142            311              152            1,014              34               61               0
Notes: Table displays collaborative patenting shares and counts by ethnic region and time since firm entry into the specific region. The sample is
comprised of U.S. public companies entering into patenting abroad after first patenting in the United States. The sample includes industrial patents with
application years between 1985 and 2005, building off of patents granted through May 2009. Collaborative patents are defined as patents where at least
one inventor is located in the United States and one inventor is located outside of the United States. Patents are assigned to one foreign country using the
most frequent location of non-U.S. inventors; ties are broken by the order of inventors listed on the patent. Own-ethnicity collaborative patents are
defined as collaborative patents where at least one inventor on the patent working in the United States is of the same ethnicity as the country entered.
                           Table 3: Traits associated with collaborative patenting
                                                          Dependent variable is (0,1) for collaborative patent
                                           (1)           (2)           (3)           (4)           (5)            (6)           (7)
Country Traits:
Log GDP per capita                       0.106         0.089          0.091         0.086         0.154
                                        (0.029)       (0.029)        (0.029)       (0.029)       (0.034)
(0,1) low English proficiency            -0.032        -0.031         -0.033        -0.042        -0.046
                                        (0.028)       (0.026)        (0.025)       (0.026)       (0.032)
Log distance to United States            -0.006        -0.035         -0.034        -0.037        0.020
                                        (0.032)       (0.032)        (0.035)       (0.035)       (0.046)
Rule of law, six-point scale             -0.082        -0.065         -0.065        -0.062        -0.086
with six being highest                  (0.020)       (0.019)        (0.020)       (0.020)       (0.030)
IPR protection, five-point scale         -0.140        -0.130         -0.128        -0.126        -0.166
with five being highest                 (0.033)       (0.031)        (0.030)       (0.030)       (0.030)
Log patents per capita that              0.003         0.006          0.005         0.003         0.005
are filed in USPTO system               (0.017)       (0.017)        (0.017)       (0.017)       (0.018)
Share of national patenting              -0.496        -0.368         -0.365        -0.377        0.339
conducted in same field                 (0.344)       (0.343)        (0.340)       (0.336)       (0.401)
Firm traits:
Years since firm began                                 -0.017         -0.016        -0.016        -0.010        -0.017        -0.017
patenting in foreign location                         (0.003)        (0.004)       (0.004)       (0.003)       (0.004)       (0.004)
Years since firm began                                                -0.004        -0.004        -0.006        -0.004        -0.004
patenting abroad                                                     (0.004)       (0.004)       (0.004)       (0.005)       (0.005)
Log patent count by firm                                              0.008         0.005         -0.001        0.008         0.005
worldwide in year                                                    (0.009)       (0.008)       (0.011)       (0.008)       (0.008)
Ethnic share of domestic U.S.                                                       0.211         0.228                       0.186
inventors in year                                                                  (0.055)       (0.080)                     (0.058)
Technology-year fixed effects             Yes           Yes           Yes            Yes           Yes           Yes           Yes
Compustat covariates                                                                               Yes
Country-year fixed effects                                                                                       Yes           Yes
Mean of dependent variable                              0.432         0.432         0.432         0.432          0.432         0.432
ß [years in location] / DV mean                        -0.040        -0.037        -0.037        -0.024         -0.039        -0.040
ß [U.S. ethnic share] / DV mean                                                     0.488         0.528                        0.431
Notes: Table considers conditions associated with collaborative patenting. The sample is comprised of U.S. public companies entering
into patenting abroad after first patenting in the United States. The sample includes industrial patents with application years between
1985 and 2005, building off of patents granted through May 2009. Collaborative patents are defined as patents where at least one
inventor is located in the United States and one inventor is located outside of the United States. The dependent variable is a binary
indicator for a collaborative patent. Patents included in the sample have at least one inventor working outside of the United States.
Patents are assigned to one foreign country using the most frequent location of non-U.S. inventors; ties are broken by the order of
inventors listed on patents. Tech-year fixed effects are defined at the sub-category level of the USPTO system. Regressions are
unweighted, have 11,737 observations, and cluster standard errors by country. Compustat covariate sample includes 7,769 observations
and controls for log worldwide sales, employment, and R&D expenditures of the firm.
                Table 4: Traits associated with own-ethnicity collaborative patenting
                                                   Dependent variable is (0,1) for own-ethnicity collaborative patent
                                           (1)            (2)           (3)           (4)            (5)           (6)            (7)
Country Traits:
Log GDP per capita                        0.039         0.035          0.034         0.028         0.003
                                         (0.044)       (0.045)        (0.045)       (0.043)       (0.037)
(0,1) low English proficiency             0.027         0.027          0.027         0.017         -0.015
                                         (0.040)       (0.039)        (0.039)       (0.039)       (0.039)
Log distance to United States             -0.068        -0.075         -0.078        -0.082        -0.083
                                         (0.037)       (0.036)        (0.035)       (0.035)       (0.044)
Rule of law, six-point scale              0.010         0.014          0.016         0.020         0.052
with six being highest                   (0.042)       (0.042)        (0.043)       (0.042)       (0.037)
IPR protection, five-point scale          -0.070        -0.067         -0.064        -0.061        -0.077
with five being highest                  (0.035)       (0.034)        (0.033)       (0.033)       (0.029)
Log patents per capita that               -0.018        -0.018         -0.018        -0.020        -0.019
are filed in USPTO system                (0.020)       (0.020)        (0.020)       (0.020)       (0.018)
Share of national patenting               -0.400        -0.368         -0.355        -0.369        0.099
conducted in same field                  (0.305)       (0.304)        (0.304)       (0.306)       (0.279)
Firm traits:
Years since firm began                                  -0.004         -0.005        -0.005        -0.003         -0.005        -0.006
patenting in foreign location                          (0.002)        (0.002)       (0.002)       (0.003)        (0.003)       (0.002)
Years since firm began                                                 0.000         0.001         -0.001         0.000         0.001
patenting abroad                                                      (0.002)       (0.002)       (0.003)        (0.003)       (0.003)
Log patent count by firm                                               0.006         0.002         0.003          0.009         0.006
worldwide in year                                                     (0.007)       (0.007)       (0.008)        (0.007)       (0.006)
Ethnic share of domestic U.S.                                                        0.253         0.235                        0.231
inventors in year                                                                   (0.059)       (0.073)                      (0.056)
Technology-year fixed effects              Yes           Yes           Yes            Yes           Yes            Yes           Yes
Compustat covariates                                                                                Yes
Country-year fixed effects                                                                                         Yes           Yes
Mean of dependent variable                               0.162         0.162         0.162          0.162         0.162          0.162
ß [years in location] / DV mean                         -0.026        -0.032        -0.033         -0.016        -0.033         -0.034
ß [U.S. ethnic share] / DV mean                                                      1.556          1.447                        1.420
Notes: See Table 3. The dependent variable is a (0,1) indicator variable for at least one inventor on the patent working in the United
States being of the same ethnicity as the country entered.
                     Table 5: Panel estimates of collaborative patenting
                                                                         DV is (0,1) for own-ethnicity
                                  DV is (0,1) for collaborative patent       collaborative patent
                                         (1)               (2)              (3)                (4)
Years since firm began                 0.000              0.001            -0.001            0.000
patenting in foreign location         (0.003)            (0.003)          (0.002)           (0.002)
x Log GDP per capita                                      0.000                              0.001
                                                         (0.003)                            (0.001)
Years since firm began                 0.009              0.008            0.004             0.003
patenting abroad                      (0.004)            (0.004)          (0.003)           (0.003)
x Log GDP per capita                                      -0.003                             -0.003
                                                         (0.002)                            (0.003)
Log patent count by firm               -0.028             -0.031           -0.006            -0.007
worldwide in year                     (0.013)            (0.012)          (0.010)           (0.010)
x Log GDP per capita                                      0.021                              0.005
                                                         (0.009)                            (0.006)
Ethnic share of domestic U.S.          0.185              0.206            0.219             0.266
inventors in year                     (0.074)            (0.078)          (0.066)           (0.056)
x Log GDP per capita                                      -0.067                             -0.169
                                                         (0.056)                            (0.054)
Technology-year fixed effects           Yes                Yes              Yes               Yes
Country-year fixed effects              Yes                Yes              Yes               Yes
Firm fixed effects                      Yes                Yes              Yes               Yes
Mean of dependent variable             0.432              0.432            0.162             0.162
ß [U.S. ethnic share] / DV mean        0.429              0.478            1.351             1.639
Notes: See Tables 3 and 4.
                                Table 6: Collaborative patenting and inventor mobility
                                        Dependent variable is (0,1) for collaborative         Dependent variable is (0,1) for own-ethnicity
                                               patent with indicated traits:                   collaborative patent with indicated traits:
                                                    Include a Include an                                   Include a Include an
                                                     within- external-to- Does not                          within- external-to- Does not
                                         Base       company company include a                   Base       company company include a
                                      estimation      move      move       move              estimation      move      move       move
                                          (1)          (2)           (3)          (4)            (5)           (6)          (7)           (8)
Country Traits:
Log GDP per capita                       0.086        0.028         0.010        0.049          0.028        0.019         0.006        0.003
                                        (0.029)      (0.018)       (0.006)      (0.026)        (0.043)      (0.020)       (0.006)      (0.025)
(0,1) low English proficiency            -0.042       0.028         0.004        -0.073         0.017        0.034         0.002        -0.019
                                        (0.026)      (0.030)       (0.011)      (0.027)        (0.039)      (0.022)       (0.005)      (0.020)
Log distance to United States            -0.037       -0.051        0.012        0.002          -0.082       -0.023        0.004        -0.063
                                        (0.035)      (0.033)       (0.005)      (0.032)        (0.035)      (0.016)       (0.006)      (0.020)
Rule of law, six-point scale             -0.062       -0.027        -0.010       -0.025         0.020        0.001         -0.007       0.026
with six being highest                  (0.020)      (0.019)       (0.006)      (0.019)        (0.042)      (0.018)       (0.006)      (0.020)
IPR protection, five-point scale         -0.126       -0.054        0.003        -0.075         -0.061       -0.028        0.000        -0.034
with five being highest                 (0.030)      (0.031)       (0.010)      (0.032)        (0.033)      (0.020)       (0.005)      (0.018)
Log patents per capita that              0.003        0.008         0.000        -0.005         -0.020       -0.004        -0.001       -0.015
are filed in USPTO system               (0.017)      (0.016)       (0.004)      (0.016)        (0.020)      (0.009)       (0.003)      (0.011)
Share of national patenting              -0.377       -0.819        0.093        0.349          -0.369       -0.658        0.022        0.267
conducted in same field                 (0.336)      (0.261)       (0.067)      (0.448)        (0.306)      (0.187)       (0.043)      (0.255)
Firm traits:
Years since firm began                   -0.016       -0.006        0.000        -0.010         -0.005       -0.002        0.000        -0.003
patenting in foreign location           (0.004)      (0.004)       (0.001)      (0.003)        (0.002)      (0.002)       (0.001)      (0.002)
Years since firm began                   -0.004       0.002         -0.003       -0.003         0.001        0.001         -0.001       0.001
patenting abroad                        (0.004)      (0.003)       (0.001)      (0.003)        (0.002)      (0.002)       (0.001)      (0.002)
Log patent count by firm                 0.005        0.018         0.003        -0.016         0.002        0.012         0.001        -0.011
worldwide in year                       (0.008)      (0.005)       (0.003)      (0.006)        (0.007)      (0.004)       (0.002)      (0.004)
Ethnic share of domestic U.S.            0.211        0.044         0.047        0.119          0.253        0.064         0.029        0.160
inventors in year                       (0.055)      (0.050)       (0.018)      (0.055)        (0.059)      (0.032)       (0.013)      (0.039)
Technology-year fixed effects            Yes           Yes          Yes           Yes            Yes          Yes           Yes          Yes
Mean of dependent variable               0.432         0.110        0.022         0.299         0.162         0.056        0.010         0.096
ß [years in location] / DV mean         -0.037        -0.050       -0.004        -0.035        -0.033        -0.042        0.015        -0.033
ß [U.S. ethnic share] / DV mean          0.488         0.403        2.147         0.398         1.556         1.147        2.804         1.657
Notes: See Tables 3 and 4. Estimates separate collaborative patents by whether a member of the collaborative patent team appears to have moved
across borders, either within the company or outside of it. Within-company moves are identified through the inventor patenting with the same firm
in multiple countries; external-to-company moves are identified through inventors moving across firms and borders. Inventor moves are
determined through the upper-bound designations from Li et al. (2014). The appendix shows very similar outcomes using lower-bound
designations. Columns 2-4 add up to Column 1, and Columns 6-8 add up to Column 5.
              Table 7: Traits of collaborative patents at the time of patent grant, comparison to U.S. domestic patents
                                                                                                                Number of      (0,1)                           (0,1) for
                                                                                                 Number of       external  majority of Originality            subclasses
                                                    Number of      Number of      Number of      backward       backward backward        score for Number of    being a
                                                    inventors       foreign        claims         citations      citations citations are backward subclasses     novel
                                                    worldwide      inventors        listed          made           made      self-cites  citations   listed  combination
                                                         (1)            (2)           (3)            (4)            (5)            (6)            (7)           (8)            (9)
                                                                                                       Panel A: Means of groups
Collaborative mean                                     4.164          1.604          19.142       14.057          11.862         0.096          0.451          3.646         0.714
non-Collaborative mean                                 2.107          2.107          15.652       10.173           8.811         0.059          0.387          3.130         0.664
U.S. domestic patent mean                              2.452          0.000          16.869       12.809          10.803         0.089          0.455          3.887         0.747
Observations                                          400,132        400,132        400,072       400,132        400,132        400,132        391,799        400,132       364,477
                                                                                            Panel B: Estimation with tech-year fixed effects
(0,1) Collaborative patent                             1.518          1.601          1.462          -0.909         -0.707        0.004          -0.024         -0.047         -0.016
                                                      (0.095)        (0.044)        (0.329)        (0.665)        (0.568)       (0.009)        (0.008)        (0.054)        (0.011)
(0,1) non-Collaborative patent                         -0.416         2.103          -1.896         -4.547         -3.691        -0.022         -0.078         -0.338         -0.045
                                                      (0.095)        (0.085)        (0.635)        (0.615)        (0.567)       (0.009)        (0.015)        (0.066)        (0.014)
ß [Collaborative] / U.S. patent mean                    0.619          n.a.           0.087        -0.071         -0.065          0.045         -0.053        -0.012         -0.021
ß [non-Collaborative] / U.S. patent mean               -0.170          n.a.          -0.112        -0.355         -0.342         -0.247         -0.171        -0.087         -0.060
t-Test: ß [Collab.] - ß [non-Collab.] = 0               17.23         -5.79            5.59         5.86           5.39            2.84          4.06          3.95           1.89
                                                                                   Panel C: Estimation with tech-year and firm-year fixed effects
(0,1) Collaborative patent                             1.536          1.594          0.983          -1.289         -1.149        0.006          -0.022         -0.075         -0.016
                                                      (0.083)        (0.047)        (0.308)        (0.616)        (0.513)       (0.008)        (0.007)        (0.048)        (0.010)
(0,1) non-Collaborative patent                         -0.350         2.121          -1.517         -3.925         -3.229        -0.017         -0.053         -0.251         -0.033
                                                      (0.085)        (0.092)        (0.563)        (0.509)        (0.443)       (0.007)        (0.007)        (0.051)        (0.009)
ß [Collaborative] / U.S. patent mean                    0.626          n.a.           0.058        -0.101         -0.106          0.067         -0.048        -0.019         -0.022
ß [non-Collaborative] / U.S. patent mean               -0.143          n.a.          -0.090        -0.306         -0.299         -0.191         -0.116        -0.065         -0.044
t-Test: ß [Collab.] - ß [non-Collab.] = 0               16.47         -5.77            4.55         4.14           3.87            2.37          3.85          2.71           1.34
Notes: Table compares traits of collaborative patents with global inventor teams, non-collaborative patents where inventors are exclusively located outside of the United States, and
domestic patents where all inventors are located in the United States. The sample is comprised of patents filed by U.S. public companies entering into patenting abroad after first
patenting in the United States. The sample includes industrial patents with application years between 1985 and 2005, building off of patents granted through May 2009. Technologies
are defined at the sub-category level of the USPTO system. Regressions are unweighted and cluster standard errors by firm.
       Table 8: Traits of collaborative patents in terms of forward citations received, comparison to U.S. domestic patents
                                                      Count of      Count of       Generality            External citations received               Internal self-citations received
                                                      forward        forward        score of                       Count         Count                          Count         Count
                                                      citations     citations,      forward                      outside of     inside of                     outside of     inside of
                                                      received     normalized       citations      Total count      U.S.          U.S.          Total count      U.S.          U.S.
                                                         (1)            (2)            (3)             (4)            (5)            (6)             (7)           (8)            (9)
                                                                                                        Panel A: Means of groups
Collaborative mean                                      9.646         1.250          0.404           8.276          2.204          6.071           1.383          0.220         1.163
non-Collaborative mean                                  7.327         0.991          0.355           6.271          2.032          4.239           1.072          0.405         0.667
U.S. domestic patent mean                              11.603         1.175          0.442           9.895          2.244          7.461           1.726          0.081         1.645
Observations                                          393,174        393,174        393,174         393,174        393,174        393,174         389,069        389,069       389,069
                                                                                              Panel B: Estimation with tech-year fixed effects
(0,1) Collaborative patent                              0.884          0.065         -0.009           1.002         0.461          0.540           -0.119         0.146          -0.266
                                                       (0.399)        (0.054)       (0.010)          (0.368)       (0.086)        (0.356)         (0.127)        (0.029)        (0.111)
(0,1) non-Collaborative patent                          -1.786         -0.184        -0.057           -1.383        0.230          -1.613          -0.400         0.332          -0.732
                                                       (0.371)        (0.072)       (0.012)          (0.316)       (0.150)        (0.275)         (0.144)        (0.058)        (0.108)
ß [Collaborative] / U.S. patent mean                    0.076          0.055         -0.020           0.101         0.205           0.072          -0.069         1.802         -0.162
ß [non-Collaborative] / U.S. patent mean               -0.154         -0.157         -0.129          -0.140         0.102          -0.216          -0.232         4.099         -0.445
t-Test: ß [Collab.] - ß [non-Collab.] = 0                5.67          4.19           4.12             5.49          1.48            5.44           2.58          -4.17          5.58
                                                                                    Panel C: Estimation with tech-year and firm-year fixed effects
(0,1) Collaborative patent                              0.769          0.038         -0.008           0.815         0.404          0.411           -0.048         0.112          -0.160
                                                       (0.382)        (0.045)       (0.009)          (0.359)       (0.098)        (0.342)         (0.071)        (0.020)        (0.061)
(0,1) non-Collaborative patent                          -1.747         -0.202        -0.045           -1.463        0.124          -1.587          -0.287         0.281          -0.568
                                                       (0.242)        (0.047)       (0.006)          (0.223)       (0.100)        (0.188)         (0.082)        (0.042)        (0.073)
ß [Collaborative] / U.S. patent mean                    0.066          0.032         -0.018           0.082         0.180           0.055          -0.028         1.383         -0.097
ß [non-Collaborative] / U.S. patent mean               -0.151         -0.172         -0.102          -0.148         0.055          -0.213          -0.166         3.469         -0.345
t-Test: ß [Collab.] - ß [non-Collab.] = 0                7.01          3.64           4.23             6.68          2.31            6.15           2.50          -3.80          5.01
Notes: See Table 7. Columns 1-3 present worldwide counts and traits of citations received by the patent. Normalized counts divide the citation count by the average for the patent class
and application year. Columns 4-6 present traits of citations made by patents external to the original assignee, while Columns 7-9 present traits internal to the original assignee. The
sample in Columns 7-9 is conditional on at least some patenting later being conducted by the assignee. Counts of citations in Columns 5-6 and 8-9 allow citing patents with inventors in
multiple countries to be counted twice.
                                                     Table 9: Extensions on Table 8
                                                Count of              External citations received                Internal self-citations received
                                                forward                         Count          Count                          Count          Count
                                                citations                     outside of     inside of                      outside of     inside of
                                                received        Total count      U.S.          U.S.          Total count       U.S.          U.S.
                                                    (1)             (2)            (3)            (4)             (5)            (6)           (7)
                                                                  Panel A: Panel C of Table 8 with team size-year fixed effects
(0,1) Collaborative patent                        -0.086           0.163         0.283          -0.121          -0.252         0.106          -0.358
                                                 (0.399)          (0.373)       (0.103)        (0.346)         (0.078)        (0.021)        (0.068)
(0,1) non-Collaborative patent                    -1.532           -1.299        0.154          -1.453          -0.237         0.283          -0.519
                                                 (0.240)          (0.219)       (0.101)        (0.180)         (0.081)        (0.042)        (0.071)
                                                     Panel B: Panel C of Table 8 with separate ethnicity-based collaborative interactions
(0,1) Own-ethnicity collaborative patent          1.334            1.243         0.242          1.000           0.090          0.123          -0.033
                                                 (0.614)          (0.566)       (0.145)        (0.631)         (0.103)        (0.031)        (0.091)
(0,1) Other collaborative patent                  0.417            0.548         0.504          0.044           -0.134         0.105          -0.239
                                                 (0.484)          (0.454)       (0.123)        (0.373)         (0.094)        (0.025)        (0.089)
(0,1) non-Collaborative patent                    -1.748           -1.463        0.124          -1.588          -0.287         0.281          -0.568
                                                 (0.243)          (0.223)       (0.100)        (0.189)         (0.082)        (0.042)        (0.074)
                                                          Panel C: Panel C of Table 8 with separate non-U.S. collaborative interactions
(0,1) Collaborative patent                        0.773            0.818         0.403          0.414           -0.047         0.111          -0.159
                                                 (0.382)          (0.359)       (0.098)        (0.341)         (0.071)        (0.020)        (0.061)
(0,1) Foreign non-Collaborative patent            -1.689           -1.408        0.117          -1.525          -0.282         0.271          -0.553
                                                 (0.244)          (0.228)       (0.101)        (0.193)         (0.082)        (0.037)        (0.072)
(0,1) Foreign collaborative patent                -2.711           -2.321        0.211          -2.532          -0.403         0.391          -0.795
                                                 (1.206)          (1.183)       (0.186)        (1.086)         (0.152)        (0.135)        (0.154)

                                                   Panel D: Panel C of Table 8 with separate internal migration collaborative interactions
(0,1) Collaborative patent with inventor          1.062            1.106         0.207          0.899           -0.043         0.104          -0.147
migrating internationally within firm            (0.764)          (0.738)       (0.194)        (0.836)         (0.151)        (0.028)        (0.132)
(0,1) Other collaborative patent                  0.731            0.814         0.540          0.274           -0.086         0.123          -0.209
                                                 (0.472)          (0.442)       (0.129)        (0.350)         (0.077)        (0.024)        (0.065)
(0,1) non-Collaborative patent                    -1.836           -1.502        0.116          -1.618          -0.336         0.248          -0.584
                                                 (0.248)          (0.233)       (0.104)        (0.199)         (0.073)        (0.037)        (0.072)
Notes: See Panel C of Table 8. Panel A further includes inventor team size-year fixed effects, with a category maximum of 5+ inventors on a team.
Panel B separates the collaborative patent regressor by whether the ethnicity of the U.S.-based inventor matches that of the foreign region. Panel C
separates the non-collaborative regressor by whether the foreign inventor team is located in two or more non-U.S. countries. Panel D separates the
collaborative patent regressor by whether or not the inventor team includes a within-firm inventor migration. Panel D also includes fixed effects for a
collaborative patent with an external-to-the-firm inventor move and main effects for patents with these types of movements, which are reported in
Appendix Table 7a.
                       Appendix Table 1: Univariate correlations
                                                                            (0,1) own-ethnicity
                                          (0,1) collaborative patent        collaborative patent
                                                       (1)                          (2)
Country Traits:
Log GDP per capita                                  -0.096*                       -0.132*


(0,1) low English proficiency                        0.098*                       0.146*


Log distance to United States                        0.004                        -0.019*


Rule of law, six-point scale                        -0.119*                       -0.122*
with six being highest
IPR protection, five-point scale                    -0.114*                       -0.153*
with five being highest
Log patents per capita that                         -0.120*                       -0.170*
are filed in USPTO system
Share of national patenting                          0.035*                       0.045*
conducted in same field

Firm traits:
Years since firm began                              -0.134*                       -0.031*
patenting in foreign location
Years since firm began                              -0.069*                        0.013
patenting abroad
Log patent count by firm                             0.016*                       0.108*
worldwide in year
Ethnic share of domestic U.S.                        0.065*                       0.133*
inventors in year
Notes: See Table 3. Star indicates statistical significance at 10% level.
                  Appendix Table 2a: Estimating Table 3 with a probit specification
                                                Dependent variable is (0,1) for collaborative patent
                                     (1)       (2)         (3)          (4)          (5)          (6)       (7)
Country Traits:
Log GDP per capita                  0.108     0.090       0.091        0.086        0.157
                                   (0.028)   (0.028)     (0.028)      (0.028)      (0.033)
(0,1) low English proficiency       -0.036    -0.035      -0.037       -0.045       -0.052
                                   (0.026)   (0.023)     (0.023)      (0.024)      (0.033)
Log distance to United States       -0.010    -0.038      -0.038       -0.041       0.015
                                   (0.032)   (0.031)     (0.034)      (0.035)      (0.046)
Rule of law, six-point scale        -0.083    -0.065      -0.065       -0.062       -0.092
with six being highest             (0.019)   (0.018)     (0.019)      (0.019)      (0.029)
IPR protection, five-point scale    -0.139    -0.128      -0.126       -0.124       -0.172
with five being highest            (0.031)   (0.029)     (0.028)      (0.028)      (0.029)
Log patents per capita that         0.001     0.004       0.003        0.002        0.006
are filed in USPTO system          (0.016)   (0.016)     (0.016)      (0.015)      (0.017)
Share of national patenting         -0.478    -0.334      -0.330       -0.339       0.367
conducted in same field            (0.327)   (0.326)     (0.323)      (0.319)      (0.382)
Firm traits:
Years since firm began                        -0.017      -0.016       -0.017       -0.011       -0.018    -0.018
patenting in foreign location                (0.003)     (0.004)      (0.004)      (0.003)      (0.004)   (0.004)
Years since firm began                                    -0.004       -0.004       -0.007       -0.003    -0.003
patenting abroad                                         (0.004)      (0.004)      (0.004)      (0.005)   (0.005)
Log patent count by firm                                  0.008        0.005        0.000        0.008     0.005
worldwide in year                                        (0.008)      (0.008)      (0.011)      (0.008)   (0.008)
Ethnic share of domestic U.S.                                          0.219        0.243                  0.192
inventors in year                                                     (0.056)      (0.080)                (0.056)
Technology-year fixed effects       Yes       Yes          Yes          Yes          Yes          Yes      Yes
Compustat covariates                                                                 Yes
Country-year fixed effects                                                                        Yes      Yes
Mean of dependent variable                    0.432       0.432        0.432        0.432        0.432     0.432
ß [years in location] / DV mean              -0.040      -0.038       -0.039       -0.025       -0.042    -0.042
ß [U.S. ethnic share] / DV mean                                        0.509        0.563                  0.445
Notes: See Table 3.
                                Appendix Table 2b: Table 3 with exclusions of individual ethnic groups
                                                  Drop       Drop      Drop       Drop       Drop      Drop      Drop     Drop Chinese
                                   Full sample   Chinese   European   Hispanic   Indian    Japanese   Korean    Russian    and Indian
                                       (1)         (2)       (3)        (4)        (5)       (6)        (7)       (8)         (9)
Country Traits:
Log GDP per capita                    0.086       0.183     0.048      0.089      0.106     0.093      0.079     0.083       0.187
                                     (0.029)     (0.038)   (0.032)    (0.034)    (0.036)   (0.030)    (0.028)   (0.032)     (0.070)
(0,1) low English proficiency         -0.042      -0.054    -0.051     -0.035     -0.039    -0.053     -0.027    -0.040      -0.044
                                     (0.026)     (0.025)   (0.036)    (0.038)    (0.028)   (0.025)    (0.028)   (0.025)     (0.031)
Log distance to United States         -0.037      0.070     -0.079     -0.058     -0.036    -0.042     -0.050    -0.041      0.067
                                     (0.035)     (0.055)   (0.050)    (0.063)    (0.036)   (0.032)    (0.036)   (0.036)     (0.057)
Rule of law, six-point scale          -0.062      -0.070    -0.049     -0.067     -0.069    -0.062     -0.045    -0.057      -0.073
with six being highest               (0.020)     (0.024)   (0.028)    (0.028)    (0.020)   (0.021)    (0.022)   (0.024)     (0.034)
IPR protection, five-point scale      -0.126      -0.211    -0.087     -0.160     -0.132    -0.116     -0.136    -0.127      -0.216
with five being highest              (0.030)     (0.039)   (0.039)    (0.042)    (0.032)   (0.029)    (0.030)   (0.029)     (0.040)
Log patents per capita that           0.003       -0.008    0.001      0.016      0.004     -0.007     0.003     0.003       -0.002
are filed in USPTO system            (0.017)     (0.017)   (0.020)    (0.024)    (0.018)   (0.018)    (0.018)   (0.017)     (0.019)
Share of national patenting           -0.377      -0.183    -0.931     -0.251     -0.074    -0.481     -0.376    -0.352      0.521
conducted in same field              (0.336)     (0.455)   (0.226)    (0.368)    (0.559)   (0.288)    (0.341)   (0.318)     (0.543)
Firm traits:
Years since firm began                -0.016      -0.016    -0.012     -0.015     -0.015    -0.018     -0.017    -0.017      -0.014
patenting in foreign location        (0.004)     (0.004)   (0.004)    (0.004)    (0.004)   (0.004)    (0.004)   (0.004)     (0.004)
Years since firm began                -0.004      -0.004    -0.003     -0.005     -0.005    -0.001     -0.003    -0.004      -0.006
patenting abroad                     (0.004)     (0.004)   (0.006)    (0.005)    (0.004)   (0.004)    (0.004)   (0.004)     (0.004)
Log patent count by firm              0.005       0.003     0.001      0.003      0.008     0.006      0.001     0.010       0.008
worldwide in year                    (0.008)     (0.009)   (0.018)    (0.009)    (0.009)   (0.009)    (0.008)   (0.008)     (0.010)
Ethnic share of domestic U.S.         0.211       0.242     0.251      0.208      0.208     0.178      0.221     0.198       0.238
inventors in year                    (0.055)     (0.055)   (0.086)    (0.057)    (0.056)   (0.062)    (0.054)   (0.056)     (0.054)
Observations                         11,737      10,282     5,236     10,988     11,073     9,875     11,543    11,425       9,618
Technology-year fixed effects         Yes         Yes        Yes       Yes        Yes        Yes       Yes       Yes          Yes
Mean of dependent variable           0.432       0.424      0.473      0.422     0.428      0.443     0.428     0.425        0.420
ß [years in location] / DV mean      -0.037      -0.037     -0.026     -0.036    -0.035     -0.041    -0.039    -0.040       -0.034
ß [U.S. ethnic share] / DV mean      0.488       0.571      0.530      0.493     0.486      0.402     0.517     0.464        0.567
Notes: See Table 3.
                  Appendix Table 3a: Estimating Table 4 with a probit specification
                                             Dependent variable is (0,1) for own-ethnicity collaborative patent
                                     (1)          (2)          (3)          (4)          (5)          (6)           (7)
Country Traits:
Log GDP per capita                  0.044        0.040        0.039        0.032        0.013
                                   (0.040)      (0.040)      (0.040)      (0.038)      (0.042)
(0,1) low English proficiency       0.021        0.021        0.020        0.008        -0.030
                                   (0.043)      (0.042)      (0.042)      (0.041)      (0.044)
Log distance to United States       -0.095       -0.102       -0.104       -0.110       -0.130
                                   (0.045)      (0.045)      (0.043)      (0.041)      (0.064)
Rule of law, six-point scale        0.017        0.021        0.022        0.028        0.057
with six being highest             (0.039)      (0.039)      (0.039)      (0.037)      (0.040)
IPR protection, five-point scale    -0.067       -0.064       -0.061       -0.057       -0.089
with five being highest            (0.033)      (0.033)      (0.032)      (0.031)      (0.030)
Log patents per capita that         -0.027       -0.026       -0.026       -0.030       -0.028
are filed in USPTO system          (0.024)      (0.024)      (0.024)      (0.023)      (0.022)
Share of national patenting         -0.284       -0.253       -0.245       -0.265       0.194
conducted in same field            (0.232)      (0.231)      (0.231)      (0.233)      (0.258)
Firm traits:
Years since firm began                           -0.005       -0.005       -0.006       -0.003       -0.007        -0.007
patenting in foreign location                   (0.002)      (0.002)      (0.002)      (0.003)      (0.002)       (0.002)
Years since firm began                                        -0.001       -0.001       -0.003       0.000         0.001
patenting abroad                                             (0.003)      (0.003)      (0.003)      (0.003)       (0.003)
Log patent count by firm                                      0.007        0.005        0.009        0.011         0.009
worldwide in year                                            (0.007)      (0.007)      (0.009)      (0.007)       (0.007)
Ethnic share of domestic U.S.                                              0.310        0.320                      0.295
inventors in year                                                         (0.049)      (0.076)                    (0.069)
Technology-year fixed effects       Yes           Yes          Yes          Yes          Yes         Yes           Yes
Compustat covariates                                                                     Yes
Country-year fixed effects                                                                           Yes           Yes
Mean of dependent variable                        0.162       0.162        0.162        0.162        0.162         0.162
ß [years in location] / DV mean                  -0.030      -0.032       -0.034       -0.017       -0.043        -0.045
ß [U.S. ethnic share] / DV mean                                            1.908        1.973                      1.816
Notes: See Table 4.
                                Appendix Table 3b: Table 4 with exclusions of individual ethnic groups
                                                  Drop       Drop      Drop       Drop       Drop      Drop      Drop     Drop Chinese
                                   Full sample   Chinese   European   Hispanic   Indian    Japanese   Korean    Russian    and Indian
                                       (1)         (2)       (3)        (4)        (5)       (6)        (7)       (8)         (9)
Country Traits:
Log GDP per capita                    0.028       0.042     0.092      0.106      0.030     0.004      0.023     -0.037      0.173
                                     (0.043)     (0.068)   (0.018)    (0.029)    (0.055)   (0.045)    (0.048)   (0.026)     (0.081)
(0,1) low English proficiency         0.017       0.003     0.146      0.005      0.013     0.037      0.028     -0.008      -0.030
                                     (0.039)     (0.039)   (0.048)    (0.052)    (0.039)   (0.034)    (0.034)   (0.031)     (0.035)
Log distance to United States         -0.082      -0.074    0.048      -0.206     -0.080    -0.037     -0.089    -0.100      -0.065
                                     (0.035)     (0.067)   (0.043)    (0.034)    (0.034)   (0.031)    (0.035)   (0.029)     (0.055)
Rule of law, six-point scale          0.020       0.007     -0.095     -0.042     0.019     0.015      0.034     0.087       -0.053
with six being highest               (0.042)     (0.042)   (0.030)    (0.033)    (0.043)   (0.041)    (0.057)   (0.034)     (0.046)
IPR protection, five-point scale      -0.061      -0.057    -0.152     -0.122     -0.058    -0.064     -0.069    -0.075      -0.056
with five being highest              (0.033)     (0.048)   (0.035)    (0.044)    (0.036)   (0.029)    (0.033)   (0.026)     (0.041)
Log patents per capita that           -0.020      -0.021    0.033      -0.026     -0.022    0.004      -0.020    -0.014      -0.032
are filed in USPTO system            (0.020)     (0.020)   (0.019)    (0.021)    (0.020)   (0.018)    (0.018)   (0.014)     (0.018)
Share of national patenting           -0.369      -0.142    -0.922     -0.188     -0.313    -0.470     -0.324    -0.175      -0.069
conducted in same field              (0.306)     (0.327)   (0.238)    (0.281)    (0.471)   (0.293)    (0.320)   (0.290)     (0.468)
Firm traits:
Years since firm began                -0.005      -0.005    -0.005     -0.007     -0.005    -0.007     -0.005    -0.005      -0.004
patenting in foreign location        (0.002)     (0.002)   (0.003)    (0.003)    (0.002)   (0.002)    (0.002)   (0.002)     (0.003)
Years since firm began                0.001       0.001     0.004      0.002      0.000     0.002      0.001     -0.002      0.001
patenting abroad                     (0.002)     (0.002)   (0.005)    (0.002)    (0.003)   (0.003)    (0.003)   (0.002)     (0.003)
Log patent count by firm              0.002       -0.002    -0.007     0.007      0.004     0.004      0.001     0.008       -0.001
worldwide in year                    (0.007)     (0.007)   (0.013)    (0.006)    (0.007)   (0.008)    (0.007)   (0.005)     (0.008)
Ethnic share of domestic U.S.         0.253       0.253     0.387      0.245      0.235     0.257      0.251     0.210       0.235
inventors in year                    (0.059)     (0.063)   (0.097)    (0.053)    (0.056)   (0.073)    (0.059)   (0.044)     (0.059)
Observations                         11,737      10,282     5,236     10,988     11,073     9,875     11,543    11,425       9,618
Technology-year fixed effects         Yes         Yes        Yes       Yes        Yes        Yes       Yes       Yes          Yes
Mean of dependent variable           0.162       0.151      0.161      0.165     0.157      0.188     0.163     0.153        0.144
ß [years in location] / DV mean      -0.033      -0.033     -0.032     -0.041    -0.031     -0.037    -0.032    -0.034       -0.028
ß [U.S. ethnic share] / DV mean      1.556       1.677      2.402      1.483     1.498      1.366     1.540     1.375        1.634
Notes: See Table 4.
          Appendix Table 4a: Estimating Table 5 with a probit specification
                                                                         DV is (0,1) for own-ethnicity
                                  DV is (0,1) for collaborative patent       collaborative patent
                                         (1)               (2)              (3)                (4)
Years since firm began                 0.001              0.003            0.000             0.003
patenting in foreign location         (0.003)            (0.004)          (0.003)           (0.004)
x Log GDP per capita                                      0.002                              0.001
                                                         (0.004)                            (0.001)
Years since firm began                 0.012              0.010            0.007             0.004
patenting abroad                      (0.004)            (0.005)          (0.004)           (0.005)
x Log GDP per capita                                      -0.003                             -0.003
                                                         (0.003)                            (0.004)
Log patent count by firm               -0.030             -0.033           -0.001            -0.002
worldwide in year                     (0.013)            (0.013)          (0.015)           (0.015)
x Log GDP per capita                                      0.022                              0.009
                                                         (0.009)                            (0.005)
Ethnic share of domestic U.S.          0.234              0.268            0.330             0.373
inventors in year                     (0.088)            (0.097)          (0.094)           (0.104)
x Log GDP per capita                                      -0.089                             -0.189
                                                         (0.062)                            (0.088)
Technology-year fixed effects           Yes                Yes              Yes               Yes
Country-year fixed effects              Yes                Yes              Yes               Yes
Firm fixed effects                      Yes                Yes              Yes               Yes
Mean of dependent variable             0.432              0.432            0.162             0.162
ß [U.S. ethnic share] / DV mean        0.542              0.620            2.032             2.299
Notes: See Table 5.
                               Appendix Table 4b: Table 5 with exclusions of individual ethnic groups
                                                       Drop           Drop         Drop               Drop      Drop      Drop      Drop       Drop Chinese
                                          Base        Chinese       European      Hispanic           Indian   Japanese   Korean    Russian      and Indian
                                           (1)           (2)           (3)           (4)              (5)       (6)        (7)           (8)       (9)
                                                                         A. Dependent variable is (0,1) for collaborative patent
Years since firm began                   0.000          -0.001        0.005         0.002         0.000        0.000      -0.003     0.000        0.001
patenting in foreign location           (0.003)        (0.004)       (0.006)       (0.003)       (0.003)      (0.005)    (0.003)    (0.003)      (0.003)
Years since firm began                   0.009          0.013         0.021         0.005         0.009        0.010      0.011      0.008        0.012
patenting abroad                        (0.004)        (0.004)       (0.012)       (0.003)       (0.004)      (0.005)    (0.003)    (0.003)      (0.005)
Log patent count by firm                 -0.028         -0.025        -0.044        -0.023        -0.022       -0.036     -0.027     -0.026       -0.020
worldwide in year                       (0.013)        (0.015)       (0.035)       (0.012)       (0.013)      (0.016)    (0.013)    (0.013)      (0.015)
Ethnic share of domestic U.S.            0.185          0.142         0.039         0.175         0.199        0.190      0.168      0.180        0.153
inventors in year                       (0.074)        (0.071)       (0.166)       (0.076)       (0.078)      (0.098)    (0.071)    (0.075)      (0.075)
Observations                             11,737        10,282         5,236        10,988        11,073        9,875     11,543     11,425        9,618

                                                                 B. Dependent variable is (0,1) for own-ethnicity collaborative patent
Years since firm began                   -0.001         0.000         0.004         -0.002        -0.001       0.000      -0.002     0.000        -0.001
patenting in foreign location           (0.002)        (0.002)       (0.004)       (0.002)       (0.002)      (0.003)    (0.002)    (0.002)      (0.002)
Years since firm began                   0.004          0.005         0.015         0.006         0.004        0.003      0.005      0.002        0.006
patenting abroad                        (0.003)        (0.004)       (0.006)       (0.003)       (0.003)      (0.004)    (0.003)    (0.002)      (0.004)
Log patent count by firm                 -0.006         -0.011        -0.015        -0.003        0.001        -0.010     -0.006     -0.005       -0.005
worldwide in year                       (0.010)        (0.011)       (0.024)       (0.010)       (0.009)      (0.013)    (0.010)    (0.010)      (0.009)
Ethnic share of domestic U.S.            0.219          0.184         0.297         0.215         0.197        0.237      0.217      0.212        0.156
inventors in year                       (0.066)        (0.060)       (0.142)       (0.066)       (0.064)      (0.084)    (0.065)    (0.064)      (0.055)
Observations                             11,737        10,282         5,236        10,988        11,073        9,875     11,543     11,425        9,618
Notes: See Table 5. All estimations include technology-year, country-year, and firm fixed effects.
                      Appendix Table 5a: Table 6 using lower-bound inventor assignments
                                       Dependent variable is (0,1) for collaborative          Dependent variable is (0,1) for own-ethnicity
                                              patent with indicated traits:                    collaborative patent with indicated traits:
                                                    Include a Include an                                   Include a Include an
                                                     within- external-to- Does not                          within- external-to- Does not
                                         Base       company company include a                   Base       company company include a
                                      estimation      move      move       move              estimation      move      move       move
                                          (1)          (2)           (3)          (4)            (5)          (6)           (7)       (8)
Country Traits:
Log GDP per capita                      0.086         0.027        0.011         0.048         0.028         0.019         0.007     0.003
                                       (0.029)       (0.019)      (0.006)       (0.026)       (0.043)       (0.020)       (0.006)   (0.025)
(0,1) low English proficiency           -0.042        0.029        0.001         -0.071        0.017         0.034         0.002     -0.019
                                       (0.026)       (0.031)      (0.011)       (0.027)       (0.039)       (0.022)       (0.005)   (0.020)
Log distance to United States           -0.037        -0.052       0.013         0.003         -0.082        -0.023        0.004     -0.063
                                       (0.035)       (0.034)      (0.006)       (0.033)       (0.035)       (0.016)       (0.006)   (0.020)
Rule of law, six-point scale            -0.062        -0.027       -0.009        -0.025        0.020         0.001         -0.007    0.025
with six being highest                 (0.020)       (0.019)      (0.006)       (0.019)       (0.042)       (0.018)       (0.006)   (0.020)
IPR protection, five-point scale        -0.126        -0.055       0.003         -0.074        -0.061        -0.029        0.001     -0.033
with five being highest                (0.030)       (0.031)      (0.009)       (0.032)       (0.033)       (0.020)       (0.005)   (0.018)
Log patents per capita that             0.003         0.009        -0.002        -0.004        -0.020        -0.004        -0.002    -0.015
are filed in USPTO system              (0.017)       (0.016)      (0.004)       (0.016)       (0.020)       (0.009)       (0.003)   (0.011)
Share of national patenting             -0.377        -0.822       0.098         0.348         -0.369        -0.657        0.026     0.263
conducted in same field                (0.336)       (0.256)      (0.070)       (0.446)       (0.306)       (0.186)       (0.043)   (0.256)
Firm traits:
Years since firm began                  -0.016        -0.005       0.000         -0.011        -0.005        -0.002        0.000     -0.003
patenting in foreign location          (0.004)       (0.004)      (0.001)       (0.003)       (0.002)       (0.002)       (0.001)   (0.002)
Years since firm began                  -0.004        0.002        -0.003        -0.003        0.001         0.001         -0.001    0.001
patenting abroad                       (0.004)       (0.003)      (0.001)       (0.003)       (0.002)       (0.002)       (0.001)   (0.002)
Log patent count by firm                0.005         0.018        0.004         -0.017        0.002         0.012         0.001     -0.011
worldwide in year                      (0.008)       (0.005)      (0.003)       (0.006)       (0.007)       (0.004)       (0.002)   (0.004)
Ethnic share of domestic U.S.           0.211         0.048        0.047         0.116         0.253         0.067         0.029     0.156
inventors in year                      (0.055)       (0.050)      (0.019)       (0.054)       (0.059)       (0.032)       (0.013)   (0.038)
Technology-year fixed effects            Yes           Yes          Yes           Yes           Yes           Yes          Yes       Yes
Mean of dependent variable               0.432        0.111         0.023        0.298          0.162        0.056        0.011      0.096
ß [years in location] / DV mean         -0.037       -0.050        -0.004       -0.035         -0.033       -0.042        0.015     -0.033
ß [U.S. ethnic share] / DV mean          0.488        0.403         2.147        0.398          1.556        1.147        2.804      1.657
Notes: See Table 6. Inventor moves are determined in this table through lower-bound designations from Li et al. (2014).
            Appendix Table 5b: Estimations of inventor mobility and firm fixed effects
                                                      Include a                                 Include a
                                                       within-     Include an     Does not       within-    Include an   Does not
                                                      company       external      include a     company      external    include a
                                                        move,        move,          move,         move,       move,        move,
                                          Base          lower        lower          lower         upper       upper        upper
                                        estimate        bound        bound          bound         bound       bound        bound
                                           (1)           (2)           (3)           (4)            (5)        (6)          (7)
                                                         A. Dependent variable is (0,1) for collaborative patent
Years since firm began                   0.000          0.003         0.000         -0.003        0.003       0.000        -0.003
patenting in foreign location           (0.003)        (0.002)       (0.001)       (0.004)       (0.002)     (0.001)      (0.004)
Years since firm began                   0.009          0.004         0.000         0.005         0.004       0.001        0.004
patenting abroad                        (0.004)        (0.003)       (0.002)       (0.004)       (0.003)     (0.002)      (0.004)
Log patent count by firm                 -0.028         0.012         0.006         -0.046        0.012       0.004        -0.044
worldwide in year                       (0.013)        (0.008)       (0.004)       (0.013)       (0.008)     (0.004)      (0.013)
Ethnic share of domestic U.S.            0.185          0.029         0.019         0.137         0.029       0.020        0.137
inventors in year                       (0.074)        (0.027)       (0.018)       (0.077)       (0.027)     (0.017)      (0.077)

                                                  B. Dependent variable is (0,1) for own-ethnicity collaborative patent
Years since firm began                   -0.001         0.001         0.000         -0.002        0.001       0.000        -0.002
patenting in foreign location           (0.002)        (0.001)       (0.001)       (0.002)       (0.001)     (0.001)      (0.002)
Years since firm began                   0.004          0.002         0.000         0.002         0.002       0.000        0.002
patenting abroad                        (0.003)        (0.003)       (0.001)       (0.003)       (0.003)     (0.001)      (0.002)
Log patent count by firm                 -0.006         0.015         0.001         -0.022        0.014       0.001        -0.022
worldwide in year                       (0.010)        (0.004)       (0.003)       (0.010)       (0.004)     (0.003)      (0.010)
Ethnic share of domestic U.S.            0.219          0.080         0.017         0.122         0.080       0.017        0.123
inventors in year                       (0.066)        (0.027)       (0.011)       (0.059)       (0.027)     (0.011)      (0.058)
Notes: See Tables 5 and 6. All estimations include technology-year, country-year, and firm fixed effects.
                                                     Appendix Table 6: Extensions on Table 7
                                                                                               Number of      (0,1)                           (0,1) for
                                                                                  Number of     external  majority of Originality            subclasses
                                            Number of    Number of   Number of    backward     backward backward        score for Number of    being a
                                            inventors     foreign     claims       citations    citations citations are backward subclasses     novel
                                            worldwide    inventors     listed        made         made      self-cites  citations   listed  combination
                                               (1)          (2)         (3)           (4)          (5)          (6)           (7)          (8)       (9)
                                                                      Panel A: Panel C of Table 7 with team size-year fixed effects
(0,1) Collaborative patent                    0.202        1.567       0.277         -2.562       -2.214       0.005         -0.030       -0.141    -0.021
                                             (0.053)      (0.045)     (0.317)       (0.674)      (0.576)      (0.008)       (0.007)      (0.049)   (0.010)
(0,1) non-Collaborative patent                -0.013       2.128       -1.339        -3.602       -2.957       -0.017        -0.051       -0.235    -0.032
                                             (0.011)      (0.091)     (0.554)       (0.488)      (0.427)      (0.008)       (0.007)      (0.050)   (0.009)
ß [Collaborative] / U.S. patent mean          0.082         n.a.        0.016       -0.200       -0.205         0.056       -0.066       -0.036    -0.028
ß [non-Collaborative] / U.S. patent mean     -0.005         n.a.       -0.079       -0.281       -0.274        -0.189       -0.111       -0.060    -0.042
t-Test: ß [Collab.] - ß [non-Collab.] = 0      3.99        -6.13         3.07        1.63         1.38           2.43        2.71         1.49      0.84
                                                           Panel B: Panel C of Table 7 with separate ethnicity-based collaborative interactions
(0,1) Own-ethnicity collaborative patent      2.189        1.660       1.759         -1.381       -1.281       0.015         -0.021       -0.086    -0.016
                                             (0.169)      (0.078)     (0.450)       (0.995)      (0.787)      (0.016)       (0.011)      (0.075)   (0.018)
(0,1) Other collaborative patent              1.129        1.554       0.500         -1.231       -1.067       0.000         -0.023       -0.068    -0.016
                                             (0.060)      (0.040)     (0.288)       (0.532)      (0.460)      (0.007)       (0.007)      (0.061)   (0.010)
(0,1) non-Collaborative patent                -0.352       2.121       -1.519        -3.925       -3.229       -0.017        -0.053       -0.251    -0.033
                                             (0.085)      (0.092)     (0.563)       (0.509)      (0.443)      (0.008)       (0.007)      (0.051)   (0.009)
Notes: See Tables 7 and 9.
                                                          Appendix Table 6, continued
                                                                                               Number of      (0,1)                           (0,1) for
                                                                                 Number of      external  majority of Originality            subclasses
                                            Number of   Number of   Number of    backward      backward backward        score for Number of    being a
                                            inventors    foreign     claims       citations     citations citations are backward subclasses     novel
                                            worldwide   inventors     listed        made          made      self-cites  citations   listed  combination
                                               (1)         (2)          (3)          (4)           (5)          (6)          (7)           (8)       (9)
                                                             Panel C: Panel C of Table 7 with separate non-U.S. collaborative interactions
(0,1) Collaborative patent                    1.536       1.590        0.985        -1.281       -1.143        0.006        -0.022       -0.074     -0.016
                                             (0.083)     (0.047)      (0.307)      (0.615)      (0.513)       (0.008)      (0.007)      (0.048)    (0.010)
(0,1) Foreign non-Collaborative patent        -0.412      2.054        -1.559       -3.846       -3.152        -0.017       -0.053       -0.248     -0.032
                                             (0.090)     (0.097)      (0.573)      (0.491)      (0.428)       (0.008)      (0.007)      (0.051)    (0.009)
(0,1) Foreign collaborative patent            0.587       3.126        -0.948       -5.000       -4.272        -0.025       -0.056       -0.233     -0.023
                                             (0.141)     (0.127)      (0.856)      (1.349)      (1.092)       (0.019)      (0.017)      (0.128)    (0.026)
                                                         Panel D: Panel C of Table 7 with separate internal migration collaborative interactions
(0,1) Collaborative patent with inventor      1.919       1.515        1.648        -0.596       -0.596        0.022        -0.032       -0.109     -0.049
migrating internationally within firm        (0.198)     (0.106)      (0.478)      (1.280)      (1.069)       (0.021)      (0.013)      (0.097)    (0.018)
(0,1) Collaborative patent with inventor      2.024       1.701        0.717        -0.523       -0.482        -0.031       0.003        -0.425     -0.018
migrating internationally outside of firm    (0.200)     (0.114)      (0.804)      (1.689)      (1.371)       (0.018)      (0.020)      (0.250)    (0.034)
(0,1) Other collaborative patent              1.378       1.625        0.484        -1.860       -1.600        0.000        -0.017       -0.048     -0.005
                                             (0.076)     (0.036)      (0.322)      (0.614)      (0.533)       (0.006)      (0.007)      (0.074)    (0.010)
(0,1) non-Collaborative patent                -0.327      2.149        -1.556       -3.994       -3.286        -0.017       -0.055       -0.253     -0.031
                                             (0.089)     (0.096)      (0.592)      (0.533)      (0.466)       (0.008)      (0.007)      (0.053)    (0.009)
(0,1) Patent has an inventor migrating        -0.118      -0.013       0.309        1.324        1.142         0.004        0.004        0.205      -0.009
within firm across countries                 (0.064)     (0.008)      (0.441)      (0.542)      (0.496)       (0.011)      (0.010)      (0.116)    (0.011)
(0,1) Patent has an inventor migrating        0.059       0.007        -0.425       -0.397       -0.753        0.012        -0.017       -0.043     0.025
outside of firm across countries             (0.067)     (0.010)      (0.513)      (0.865)      (0.775)       (0.016)      (0.011)      (0.134)    (0.012)
Notes: See Tables 7 and 9.
                                              Appendix Table 7a: Complete results for Table 9
                                            Count of     Count of     Generality         External citations received           Internal self-citations received
                                            forward       forward      score of                    Count         Count                      Count         Count
                                            citations    citations,    forward                   outside of     inside of                 outside of     inside of
                                            received    normalized     citations   Total count      U.S.          U.S.      Total count      U.S.          U.S.
                                               (1)          (2)          (3)           (4)           (5)           (6)          (7)           (8)           (9)
                                                                        Panel A: Panel C of Table 8 with team size-year fixed effects
(0,1) Collaborative patent                   -0.086       -0.052        -0.019        0.163        0.283         -0.121        -0.252       0.106         -0.358
                                            (0.399)      (0.047)       (0.009)       (0.373)      (0.103)       (0.346)       (0.078)      (0.021)       (0.068)
(0,1) non-Collaborative patent               -1.532       -0.180        -0.042        -1.299       0.154         -1.453        -0.237       0.283         -0.519
                                            (0.240)      (0.047)       (0.006)       (0.219)      (0.101)       (0.180)       (0.081)      (0.042)       (0.071)
ß [Collaborative] / U.S. patent mean         -0.007       -0.044       -0.042          0.016       0.126         -0.016        -0.146       1.306         -0.218
ß [non-Collaborative] / U.S. patent mean     -0.132       -0.153       -0.096         -0.131       0.069         -0.195        -0.137       3.490         -0.316
t-Test: ß [Collab.] - ß [non-Collab.] = 0     3.95         1.90         2.75            4.25        1.02          4.23          -0.16       -3.92          2.07
                                                            Panel B: Panel C of Table 8 with separate ethnicity-based collaborative interactions
(0,1) Own-ethnicity collaborative patent     1.334        0.056         -0.025        1.243        0.242         1.000         0.090        0.123         -0.033
                                            (0.614)      (0.067)       (0.016)       (0.566)      (0.145)       (0.631)       (0.103)      (0.031)       (0.091)
(0,1) Other collaborative patent             0.417        0.026         0.002         0.548        0.504         0.044         -0.134       0.105         -0.239
                                            (0.484)      (0.055)       (0.008)       (0.454)      (0.123)       (0.373)       (0.094)      (0.025)       (0.089)
(0,1) non-Collaborative patent               -1.748       -0.202        -0.045        -1.463       0.124         -1.588        -0.287       0.281         -0.568
                                            (0.243)      (0.047)       (0.006)       (0.223)      (0.100)       (0.189)       (0.082)      (0.042)       (0.074)
Notes: See Table 9.
                                                          Appendix Table 7a, continued
                                            Count of     Count of      Generality          External citations received           Internal self-citations received
                                            forward       forward       score of                     Count         Count                      Count         Count
                                            citations    citations,     forward                    outside of     inside of                 outside of     inside of
                                            received    normalized      citations    Total count      U.S.          U.S.      Total count      U.S.          U.S.
                                               (1)          (2)            (3)           (4)           (5)           (6)          (7)             (8)         (9)
                                                                  Panel C: Panel C of Table 8 with separate non-U.S. collaborative interactions
(0,1) Collaborative patent                   0.773        0.038           -0.008        0.818        0.403         0.414         -0.047       0.111         -0.159
                                            (0.382)      (0.045)         (0.009)       (0.359)      (0.098)       (0.341)       (0.071)      (0.020)       (0.061)
(0,1) Foreign non-Collaborative patent       -1.689       -0.199          -0.044        -1.408       0.117         -1.525        -0.282       0.271         -0.553
                                            (0.244)      (0.046)         (0.006)       (0.228)      (0.101)       (0.193)       (0.082)      (0.037)       (0.072)
(0,1) Foreign collaborative patent           -2.711       -0.285          -0.056        -2.321       0.211         -2.532        -0.403       0.391         -0.795
                                            (1.206)      (0.103)         (0.018)       (1.183)      (0.186)       (1.086)       (0.152)      (0.135)       (0.154)

                                                           Panel D: Panel C of Table 8 with separate internal migration collaborative interactions
(0,1) Collaborative patent with inventor     1.062        0.134           -0.010        1.106        0.207         0.899         -0.043       0.104         -0.147
migrating internationally within firm       (0.764)      (0.087)         (0.025)       (0.738)      (0.194)       (0.836)       (0.151)      (0.028)       (0.132)
(0,1) Collaborative patent with inventor     -0.922       0.044           -0.006        -0.683       -0.119        -0.565        -0.244       0.005         -0.249
migrating internationally outside of firm   (1.046)      (0.237)         (0.029)       (0.962)      (0.253)       (0.845)       (0.269)      (0.017)       (0.265)
(0,1) Other collaborative patent             0.731        0.033           -0.006        0.814        0.540         0.274         -0.086       0.123         -0.209
                                            (0.472)      (0.040)         (0.007)       (0.442)      (0.129)       (0.350)       (0.077)      (0.024)       (0.065)
(0,1) non-Collaborative patent               -1.836       -0.244          -0.047        -1.502       0.116         -1.618        -0.336       0.248         -0.584
                                            (0.248)      (0.031)         (0.005)       (0.233)      (0.104)       (0.199)       (0.073)      (0.037)       (0.072)
(0,1) Patent has an inventor migrating       1.418        0.169           0.003         0.602        0.312         0.291         0.829        0.054         0.774
within firm across countries                (0.851)      (0.106)         (0.009)       (0.536)      (0.146)       (0.458)       (0.613)      (0.033)       (0.595)
(0,1) Patent has an inventor migrating       -0.519       -0.047          -0.015        -0.340       -0.340        0.000         -0.196       0.048         -0.243
outside of firm across countries            (0.845)      (0.103)         (0.012)       (0.766)      (0.220)       (0.602)       (0.499)      (0.034)       (0.493)
Notes: See Table 9.
                      Appendix Table 7b: Table 8 with different time horizons for citations
                                            Count of          External citations received           Internal self-citations received
                                            forward                     Count        Count                       Count        Count
                                            citations        Total    outside of inside of           Total     outside of inside of
                                            received         count       U.S.         U.S.          count         U.S.         U.S.
                                              (1)             (2)            (3)         (4)          (5)            (6)       (7)
                                                      Panel A: Base estimation with tech-year and firm-year fixed effects
Collaborative mean                           9.646           8.276         2.204       6.071        1.383          0.220      1.163
non-Collaborative mean                       7.327           6.271         2.032       4.239        1.072          0.405      0.667
U.S. domestic patent mean                    11.603          9.895         2.244       7.461        1.726          0.081      1.645
Observations                                393,174         393,174       393,174     393,174      389,069        389,069    389,069
(0,1) Collaborative patent                   0.769           0.815         0.404       0.411         -0.048         0.112     -0.160
                                            (0.382)         (0.359)       (0.098)     (0.342)       (0.071)        (0.020)   (0.061)
(0,1) non-Collaborative patent               -1.747          -1.463        0.124       -1.587        -0.287         0.281     -0.568
                                            (0.242)         (0.223)       (0.100)     (0.188)       (0.082)        (0.042)   (0.073)
ß [Collaborative] / U.S. patent mean          0.066          0.082         0.180        0.055       -0.028         1.383     -0.097
ß [non-Collaborative] / U.S. patent mean     -0.151         -0.148         0.055       -0.213       -0.166         3.469     -0.345
t-Test: ß [Collab.] - ß [non-Collab.] = 0      7.01           6.68          2.31         6.15        2.50          -3.80      5.01
                                                                    Panel B: Using a three-year citation horizon
Collaborative mean                           2.912           2.277         0.723       1.554         0.640         0.118      0.522
non-Collaborative mean                       2.273           1.814         0.684       1.130         0.466         0.240      0.227
U.S. domestic patent mean                    2.929           2.286         0.643       1.643         0.651         0.024      0.627
(0,1) Collaborative patent                   0.148           0.165         0.139       0.026         -0.018         0.064     -0.083
                                            (0.111)         (0.109)       (0.040)     (0.082)       (0.034)        (0.012)   (0.031)
(0,1) non-Collaborative patent               -0.461          -0.326        0.074       -0.400        -0.136         0.182     -0.318
                                            (0.096)         (0.078)       (0.037)     (0.058)       (0.046)        (0.026)   (0.034)
ß [Collaborative] / U.S. patent mean          0.050          0.072         0.216        0.016       -0.028         2.687     -0.132
ß [non-Collaborative] / U.S. patent mean     -0.157         -0.142         0.115       -0.243       -0.209         7.608     -0.508
t-Test: ß [Collab.] - ß [non-Collab.] = 0      5.21           4.63          1.28         5.30        2.47          -4.09      6.80
                                                                    Panel C: Using a five-year citation horizon
Collaborative mean                           5.209           4.263         1.232       3.031         0.955         0.168      0.787
non-Collaborative mean                       3.847           3.161         1.124       2.037         0.697         0.320      0.377
U.S. domestic patent mean                    5.304           4.270         1.144       3.126         1.045         0.042      1.003
(0,1) Collaborative patent                   0.421           0.457         0.232       0.225         -0.037         0.092     -0.129
                                            (0.199)         (0.185)       (0.065)     (0.164)       (0.050)        (0.016)   (0.045)
(0,1) non-Collaborative patent               -0.885          -0.662        0.091       -0.753        -0.224         0.238     -0.462
                                            (0.144)         (0.123)       (0.062)     (0.095)       (0.063)        (0.035)   (0.056)
ß [Collaborative] / U.S. patent mean          0.079          0.107         0.203        0.072       -0.036         2.181     -0.129
ß [non-Collaborative] / U.S. patent mean     -0.167         -0.155         0.080       -0.241       -0.215         5.633     -0.461
t-Test: ß [Collab.] - ß [non-Collab.] = 0      6.84           6.39          1.69         6.28        2.71          -3.91      5.75
Notes: See Table 8.
