NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

JOB CREATION, SMALL VS. LARGE VS. YOUNG, AND THE SBA
J. David Brown
John S. Earle
Yana Morgulis
Working Paper 21733
http://www.nber.org/papers/w21733
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
November 2015

We thank the SBA for providing the list of loans we use in the analysis and Manuel Adelino, Julie
Cullen, Javier Miranda, and participants in the 2013 CAED Conference and the 2014 NBER/CRIW
Conference on Measuring Entrepreneurial Businesses for comments. John Earle’s research on this
project was supported by the National Science Foundation (NSF Grant No. 1262269 to George Mason
University). Any opinions and conclusions expressed herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily
reflect the views of the U.S. Census Bureau. All results have been reviewed to ensure that no confidential
information on individual firms is disclosed. The views expressed herein are those of the authors and
do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peerreviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.
© 2015 by J. David Brown, John S. Earle, and Yana Morgulis. All rights reserved. Short sections of
text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit,
including © notice, is given to the source.

Job Creation, Small vs. Large vs. Young, and the SBA
J. David Brown, John S. Earle, and Yana Morgulis
NBER Working Paper No. 21733
November 2015
JEL No. H81
ABSTRACT
Analyzing a list of all Small Business Administration (SBA) loans in 1991 to 2009 linked with annual
information on all U.S. employers from 1976 to 2012, we apply detailed matching and regression methods
to estimate the variation in SBA loan effects on job creation and firm survival across firm age and
size groups. The number of jobs created per million dollars of loans generally increases with size
and decreases in age. The results imply that fast-growing firms (“gazelles”) experience the greatest
financial constraints to growth, while the growth of small, mature firms is least financially constrained.
The estimated association between survival and loan amount is larger for younger and smaller firms
facing the “valley of death”.
J. David Brown
U.S. Census Bureau
4600 Silver Hill Road
Washington, DC 20233
j.david.brown@census.gov
John S. Earle
George Mason University
School of Public Policy
3351 Fairfax Drive, MS 3B1
Arlington VA 22201
earle@gmu.edu

Yana Morgulis
University of California, San Diego
Department of Economics
9500 Gilman Drive #0508
La Jolla, CA 92093-0508
ymorgulis@ucsd.edu

Introduction
One of the few areas of recent consensus across all major political groups in the U.S. is
the supposedly important role played by small businesses in job creation. The initiatives
justified by this conviction include a variety of small business loan and support programs, largely
through the Small Business Administration (SBA), as well as preferential treatment of small
businesses in contracting and regulatory requirements.2 The empirical basis for the belief goes
back to Birch (1987), although the underlying methods and data were questioned by Davis,
Haltiwanger, and Schuh (1996). More recently, Neumark, Wall, and Zhang (2011) have
reconfirmed the Birch conclusion with improved data and methods, but Haltiwanger, Jarmin, and
Miranda (hereafter HJM, 2013) have shown that the size-growth relationship is not robust to
controlling for age (as had Evans (1987) for a much smaller data set on manufacturing
industries). Indeed, HJM find that the relationship may even reverse signs, so that larger firms
contribute more to job creation, once age is taken into account.
This research has attracted considerable attention both from scholars and journalists, and
it is very useful as an empirical description of the economy, laying out the “facts” that may be
juxtaposed against theories of firm and industry dynamics. HJM infer from their results that “to
the extent that policy interventions aimed at small businesses ignore the important role of firm
age, we should not expect much of an impact on the pace of job creation.” (p. 360) Strictly
speaking, this inference requires the assumption that the patterns of responsiveness of
employment to interventions across different categories of firms (defined by age and size) mimic
the empirical regularities of employment dynamics in these categories more generally. While it
could be the case that the categories with the strongest record of job creation also respond the
most to a given intervention, it is also possible that there is no relationship. Potentially, the types
of firms that typically create the fewest jobs might even benefit the most from supportive
measures. More generally, empirical regularities have no necessary implications for the design
of effective interventions.
Several studies provide indirect evidence that financial constraints on growth vary with
firm size and age. Fort et al. (2013) suggest that financial constraints have the greatest impact on
smaller, younger firms’ growth, finding that their employment dynamics are more sensitive to
housing price shocks. They state this could be due to such firms’ greater dependence on home
equity financing than other firms that can more easily obtain commercial loans. Adelino, Ma,
and Robinson (2014) show that start-ups’ higher responsiveness to investment opportunities is
accentuated in local areas with better access to small business finance, implying that start-up job
creation is curbed by financing constraints. Levenson and Willard (2000) supply survey
evidence suggesting that younger, smaller U.S. firms are more likely to be denied credit, and
Canton et al. (2013) also report that younger, smaller firms across the European Union are more
likely to perceive that bank loan accessibility is low. Note, however, that inability to obtain a
bank loan does not by itself mean the firm’s growth is constrained; the firm may not intend to
2

A recent example is the JOBS Act, which loosens regulations on financing.

1

use the loan for expansion. Hurst and Pugsley (2011) report that most small firms grow very
little, entering at low employment levels and tending to remain small; survey evidence suggests
the majority do not desire to grow, with the implication that they wouldn’t grow even if they had
better financial access.3
This paper more directly tests the variation by age and size in the association between
financial access and firm growth, using the SBA’s 7(a) and 504 loan guarantee programs. For
this purpose, we have linked a complete list of SBA 7(a) and 504 loans to the Census Bureau’s
employer and non-employer business registers and to the Longitudinal Business Database
(LBD), which tracks all firms and establishments in the U.S. non-farm business sector with paid
employees on an annual basis in 1976-2012. We restrict the analysis to recipients of loans in
1991-2009 and their matched controls.
While our paper is inspired to some extent by HJM, and we use some of the Census data
they developed, our question and therefore our methods are different. While HJM measure yearto-year growth in employment, our focus is the change in employment from the period before the
SBA loan to the period after the loan is received, as well as on firm survival after loan receipt.
Our estimation method involves construction of a control sample of firms based on age, industry,
year, size in the year prior to loan receipt, and several years of growth history.
The estimation results suggest that both job creation and survival effects of a $1 million
loan decrease in age, controlling for size. Survival effects also decrease in size, but the size-job
creation from loans association is positive with or without age controls. This contrasts somewhat
with HJM, who find positive size effects on job creation only when controlling for age. The fact
that the job creation effect from loans is stronger in firms growing faster (often called “gazelles”)
prior to loan receipt can help explain the positive association between the job creation effect
from loans and size. Survival effects are strongest in the age-size categories most vulnerable to
exit.
The rest of the paper is structured as follows. Section 2 describes the SBA programs we
analyze. Section 3 describes the data, including the matched control samples. Section 4 outlines
our methodology. Section 5 provides estimation results, and Section 6 concludes.
2. SBA Loan Programs
The SBA has several small business loan guarantee programs. In this paper, we focus on
the largest two groups of programs, 7(a) and 504, and this section describes the programs’
current characteristics.4
Small businesses seeking financing apply to private lenders (generally not for SBA loans
in particular, but for any type of loan). The lenders then decide which applicants are denied,
which receive conventional loans, and which of them are both eligible and good candidates for
SBA loans. For subprograms where the SBA makes the final credit decision, the lender sends an
An alternative possibility is that small, mature firms are small due to lack of access to finance in the past, in which
case they may benefit even more from SBA loans than other firms.
4
SBA (2015) is the primary source for our description, and it contains further details. Brown and Earle (2015)
estimate separate job creation effects for 7(a) and 504 loans, finding similar magnitudes. In this paper we do not
distinguish separate effects by loan type.
3

2

application for a SBA loan to the SBA on behalf of the applicant, while for other subprograms
the lender makes the final credit decision. Not all firms meeting program eligibility
requirements receive loans – e.g., the lender or the SBA could deny an application based on
credit risk just as with conventional loans.
Most 7(a) loans (aside from special subprograms) have a $5 million maximum amount,
with an 85 percent maximum SBA guarantee rate for loans up to $150,000 and 75 percent for
higher amounts. Loans for working capital and machinery usually have a maturity of up to 10
years, while the term for loans for purchase of real estate can be as long as 25 years. The SBA
sets maximum loan interest rates, which decrease with loan amount and increase with maturity.
To qualify, a business must be for-profit; meet SBA size standards;5 show good character,
management expertise, and a feasible business plan; not have funds available from other sources;
and be an eligible type of business.6 The SBA itself makes the final credit decisions for most of
these loans.
Some 7(a) programs are more streamlined. In the Preferred Lender Program (PLP) the
SBA delegates the final credit decision and most servicing and liquidation authority to PLP
lenders, while the SBA’s role is to check loan eligibility criteria. The SBA grants lenders PLP
status based on their past record with the SBA, including proficiency in processing and servicing
SBA-guaranteed loans. The PLP lender agrees to liquidate all business assets before asking the
SBA to honor its guaranty in payment default cases. In the 7(a) Certified Lender Program
(CLP), the SBA promises a loan decision within three working days on applications handled by
CLP lenders. The SBA conducts a credit review, relying on the credit knowledge of the lender’s
loan officers, rather than ordering an independently conducted analysis. Lenders with a good
performance history may receive CLP status.
The express loan program is a final large category of 7(a). These have a 50 percent
maximum SBA guaranty and a $350,000 maximum loan amount. Interest rates can be higher
than on other 7(a) loans, but the SBA promises a decision on approval within 36 hours. PLPs
also have an advantage here, as they may make eligibility determinations on their own.
Depending on the type of business, the 504 Loan Program offers loan guarantees up to
$5.5 million. Typically a lender covers 50 percent of the project costs, a Certified Development
Company (CDC) certified by the SBA provides up to 40 percent of the financing (100 percent
guaranteed by an SBA-guaranteed debenture), and the borrower contributes at least 10 percent
(the borrower is sometimes required to contribute up to 20 percent). CDCs are nonprofit
corporations promoting community economic development via disbursement of 504 loans.
Proceeds may be used for fixed assets or to refinance debt in connection with an expansion of the
business via new or renovated assets.7 The 504 loan eligibility requirements are similar to those
listed for 7(a) loans above.
Lenders must pay a guaranty fee that increases with maturity and guaranteed amount for
7(a) loans. For both programs they must sign the “Credit Elsewhere Requirement,” which states
“Without the participation of SBA to the extent applied for, we would not be willing to make this
loan, and in our opinion the financial assistance applied for is not otherwise available on
5

The size standards vary by industry, with the criterion sometimes employment, sometimes revenue, and sometimes
assets.
6
This includes engaging in business in the United States; possessing reasonable owner equity to invest; and using
alternative financial resources, including personal assets, before seeking financial assistance.
7
The SBA loan data for 2006-2009 contain the amount of loan receipts devoted to each category of loan use. The
shares of loans going to different uses vary by age and size, but not in a way that can help explain the job creation
and survival effect patterns.

3

reasonable terms.” This requirement, also called the “Credit Elsewhere Test,” must be
accompanied by a detailed explanation why the loan would be unavailable on conventional
terms.8 Both the requirement and the fee create costs of using SBA loan guarantees. In addition,
there are administrative costs to the lender, including the specific bureaucratic formulae for loan
application and SBA monitoring of lenders participating in the program. SBA loans tend to be
concentrated in a relatively small number of lenders (especially PLP lenders), probably because
of scale economies in these costs.9
3. Data
We identify loan recipients, dates, and amounts with a confidential database on all 7(a)
and 504 loans guaranteed by the SBA from the fourth quarter of 1990 through the third quarter
of 2009. We reset the loan year to be on a fiscal year basis (October of the previous calendar
year through September of the current calendar year), using the date the SBA approved the loan,
so that the loan year is roughly centered on the Census Bureau’s LBD (described below)
employment measure, which is the number of employees in the pay period including March 12.
As shown in Table 1, loans to firms in U.S. territories are excluded, because of uneven coverage
of other data sources. Since cancellations may occur at the initiative of the borrower, cancelled
loans are excluded. We aggregate loan amounts when borrowers receive multiple SBA loans in
the same year.10 We drop loans received in subsequent years to focus on the effects of the first
treatment.
We match the confidential SBA 7(a) and 504 data and publicly available 7(a), 504, and
disaster loan data covering loans since the inception of these programs to the Census Bureau’s
employer and non-employer business registers.11 We first link by Employer Identification
Numbers (EINs) and Social Security Numbers (SSNs).12 For confidential 7(a) and 504 records
that cannot be linked by EIN or SSN, and for the publicly available data without EINs or SSNs,
we probabilistically link records by different combinations of business name, street address, and
zip code. Table 1 shows that 87 percent of the confidential loan records are linked to a business
register. Of these, 7.8 percent are linked only to a non-employer business register (i.e., they are
self-employed and have no payroll employment). We exclude firms receiving a disaster loan
before their first 7(a) or 504 loan, as well as firms receiving a 7(a) or 504 loan prior to 1991.
Firms require an industry code, state (for those with 19 or fewer employees), and employment in
Examples of acceptable factors are that the business needs a larger loan or longer maturity than the lender’s policy
permits, or the collateral does not meet the lender’s policy requirements.
9
As shown by Brown and Earle (2015) PLP lender branches are not evenly distributed across the country, raising
the potential concern that they may locate in areas with higher growth potential. Using a nearly identical sample to
this paper, Brown and Earle (2015) find that the job creation effects of SBA loans are robust to the inclusion of a
control for county-industry employment growth over the analyzed period.
10
Our loan amount variable is the amount disbursed, converted to real 2010 prices using the annual average
Consumer Price Index. We use the total amount from loan financing, not just the amount guaranteed by the SBA.
For 504 loans, we impute the total loan amount based on the guaranteed amount specified in the database, using the
504 program guidelines. The SBA-guaranteed portion is 40 percent, the equity share is 10 percent plus an additional
5 percent if a new business and/or an additional 5 percent if special use property, and the residual is a nonguaranteed bank loan. We are unable to observe if the project is for special use property; our imputations assume
there is none. The database includes a third party loan amount, but it contains many implausibly high values.
11
The SBA has a separate disaster loan program, and we have names and addresses for the recipients from 1953
through March 31, 2011. We have chosen to focus the analysis on 7(a) and 504 loans in the confidential database,
because the match rate to Census data is much higher due to the presence of EINs and SSNs.
12
About three-fourths of the linked records are linked via EIN or SSN.
8

4

the year prior to loan receipt to be included in the matching process with LBD control firms, as
described in the next section. Of these, we could not find any control firms meeting our matching
criteria (discussed in the next section) for 32 percent of them. About 87,000 treated firms do not
have employment in each of the next three years following loan receipt, which is necessary for
the dependent variable in the main employment regression samples. About 7,300 additional
treated firms cannot be included in the main regression sample, because none of their matched
controls has employment in each of the next three years after the treated firm’s loan receipt.13
The LBD is built from longitudinally linked employer business registers (Jarmin and
Miranda 2002) tracking all firms and establishments with payroll employment in the U.S. nonfarm business sector on an annual basis in 1976-2012. The SBA loan match to employer
business registers allows us to link the SBA data to the entire LBD. The LBD contains
employment, annual payroll, establishment age (based on the first year the establishment appears
in the dataset), state, county, zip code, industry code, and firm id. The industry code is a fourdigit SIC code through the year 2001 and a six-digit NAICS code in 2002-2012.
We aggregate the LBD to the firm level by assigning each firm the location of its largest
establishment by employment and its modal industry code. Following HJM, we set the firm
birth year to be the earliest birth year among establishments belonging to the firm when it first
appears in the LBD, and the firm exit year is the latest exit year among establishments belonging
to the firm in the last year the firm appears in the LBD.
Our firm employment measure aggregates establishment employment in a way that
focuses on organic job creation.14 Employment in t-1, the year prior to the treatment year
(defined for control firms as the matched treated firm’s treatment year), is the base year
(unadjusted) for treated firms and their matched controls. The employment of the acquired
establishments as of the year of the merger is included in the firm’s employment in all years
prior to any mergers or acquisitions occurring before the base year, as if the establishments were
always together. The employment of divested establishments is not included in the firm’s
employment prior to divestment, as if the establishments were never together, if a divestiture
occurs before the base year. If a merger, acquisition, or divestiture occurs after the base year,
employment of divested establishments measured in the year prior to divestment is included in
all subsequent years, while that of the acquired establishments is not.15
Following HJM and other analyses of age-size variation in firm growth, we form age-size
categories. Only a tiny fraction of SBA loan recipients have more than 249 employees in the
year prior to loan receipt,16 so we restrict attention to firms up to this threshold, with the
following groupings: 1-4, 5-19, 20-49, 50-99, and 100-249 employees. As we show below,
SBA recipients also tend to be young firms, and we group years of age as follows: 0 (start-up),
1-3, 4-10, and 11+.17 We estimate separate effects for the 16 age-size groups defined as the
13

Brown and Earle (2015) provide comparisons between the matched and unmatched samples of firms receiving
loans after start-up based on characteristics in the SBA loan recipient data.
14
Our method of calculating organic growth builds on HJM, but is more complicated because HJM consider growth
only over one-year periods, while we estimate for several years before and after the loan.
15
For acquisitions prior to the base year and divestitures after the base year, we use a single employment value
applied to all pre-acquisition years and post-divestment years, respectively, to avoid including employment changes
occurring under other firms’ ownership.
16
Among SBA loan recipients otherwise able to be in the regressions in Tables 8 and 9, 0.3 percent have more than
249 employees in the year prior to loan receipt.
17
Start-up is defined as entry into the LBD, implying positive employment, and therefore employment in start-up
firms is by definition zero in the year prior to start-up. We do not divide start-ups into size categories.

5

intersection of these categorizations. As discussed in the next section, start-ups require a
separate matching process (because of the lack of available history for matching), but they are
also of special interest in light of the HJM findings on their great importance in job creation.
Among the 15 non-start-up groups, the 1-3 year-old age category is of particular interest,
representing the “valley of death” – the period of high mortality among firms in their first few
years. The 11+ age category corresponds to “mature” firms.
We next turn to a description of the SBA loan recipients by age, size, and growth in
comparison to non-recipients in the LBD. As discussed in Brown and Earle (2015), remarkably
little is known about what types of firms get SBA loans and how recipients compare to nonrecipients, so these results may be of broader interest to anyone studying SBA programs.
Table 2 shows the number of loan recipients in the LBD that fall into each of the 16 agesize categories. The numbers decline in size for the youngest continuers, while the most
numerous size category is 5-19 employees for the older age groups. The youngest continuers
(age 1-3) in the largest size (100-249 employees) group is a particularly small cell, suggesting
caution in the interpretation of the results for this group.
How does the age-size distribution of recipients compare with non-recipients? Table 3
shows the empirical probability of receiving an SBA loan in a particular year. For the sample as
a whole, the probability is 0.40 percent, and for start-ups the probability is 0.69 percent.
Probabilities decline in age overall and for the size categories with up to 49 employees, while the
age 4-10 group has the largest probability for the two largest size categories. The relationship
with size is inverse-U-shaped, with the 20-49 employee category having the highest
probabilities. For every age group, the probability of receiving an SBA loan is higher for the
100-249 size group than for the 1-4 employee group. Thus, from a probability of receipt
standpoint, SBA loans are in practice allocated towards start-ups and younger firms but not
towards the smallest size groups among the more mature small- to medium-sized firms that
receive the loans. Nonetheless, a substantial share of all SBA loans goes to very small, mature
firms.
Brown and Earle (2015) report that SBA recipients’ pre-loan growth rates tend to differ
systematically from that of typical firms described by Hurst and Pugsley (2011). Eslava and
Haltiwanger (2014) show that young Colombian manufacturing firms that are also larger (often
meaning they grew faster since birth) experience higher growth rates. One explanation for this
pattern is that young firms with drive, managerial talent, and ambition grow faster from birth,
and these factors persist in affecting growth rates later on.18 Table 4 tabulates average
employment growth rates from four years before the loan to one year prior to the loan for the
SBA recipient sample by age-size categories, restricting attention to firms at least four years old.
For comparison, Table 5 contains the analogous computation for all non-recipients in the LBD.
The mean three-year pre-loan growth rate is higher among SBA recipients than non-recipients in
all age-size groups except very small, mature firms (age 11+ with 1-4 employees). Mean threeyear growth among SBA recipients is 0.150 compared to 0.019 among non-recipients. Thus,
while these results support Hurst and Pugsley’s (2011) findings about the growth of typical small
firms, they imply that many SBA firms belong to the atypical subset of small firms (including
gazelles) that tend to grow strongly, even prior to loan receipt. Together with the other factors
differentiating recipients and non-recipients, this result highlights the importance of conditioning
18

To the extent that initial success is due to luck or other transient factors, however, there could be reversion to the
mean.

6

on prior growth. Below, we outline a matching approach to estimation where comparisons are
carried out with controls experiencing similar past growth histories.
The analysis above is conditional on survival. But SBA loan receipt may also affect
survival, which we discuss in a separate subsection below.
Finally, all of this analysis so far has implicitly treated SBA loan receipt as a binary
treatment. SBA loan amounts vary substantially, however. Table 6 displays mean loan amounts
by age-size categories. Loan amounts increase monotonically in both age and size, except that
start-ups receive slightly large loans than 1-4 employee non-start-ups. While the grand mean
across all SBA loans is $445,995 (in 2010 USD), the mean amount for the smallest size group is
about half that, and it is three times bigger for the largest size group. This suggests that the
treatments are very different across age-size groups, and the analysis allows for this variation by
using loan amount rather than a simple treatment dummy.
4. Estimation Strategy
Our attempt to estimate the causal effect of SBA loan receipt on employment and
survival faces typical identification challenges. Let
indicate whether firm i
receives an SBA loan in year t, and let
be employment at time t+s,
, following loan
receipt. The employment of the firm if it hadn’t received a loan is
. The loan’s causal
effect for firm i at time t+s is defined as
. The value of
is not observable,
however. We define the average effect of treatment on the treated as
. A counterfactual of the last term, i.e., the
average employment outcome of loan recipients had they not received a loan, can be estimated
using the average employment of non-recipients,
. This approximation is
valid as long as there are no uncontrolled contemporaneous effects correlated with loan receipt.
To help control for such contemporaneous effects, we use matching techniques to select a
comparison group.
For this purpose, we have taken the following steps. As mentioned in Section 3 above,
we limit our treated sample to firms in the LBD receiving their first SBA 7(a) or 504 loan in
1991-2009 and those not receiving a SBA disaster loan prior to their first 7(a) or 504 loan. To be
eligible to be a candidate control firm for a particular treated firm, a firm can never have received
an SBA 7(a), 504, or disaster loan at any time between 1953-2009; it must be in the same fourdigit industry in the treated firm’s loan receipt year, and be in the same firm age category (1-2
years old, 3-5 years old, 6-10 years old, and 11 or more years old) in the treated firm’s loan
receipt year and in the same employment category (1 employee, 2-4 employees, 5-9 employees,
10-19 employees, 20-49 employees, 50-99 employees, and 100 or more employees) in the year
prior to loan receipt. For non-start-ups, the control must have non-missing employment in the
year prior to the treated firm’s loan receipt. Among firms with 19 or fewer employees in the
previous year and start-ups, we also require the candidate control firm to be located in the same
state (firms with 1-19 employees are much more numerous than ones with more than 19
employees, so we can afford to impose more restrictions on this group). 19 In addition, for nonstart-ups we impose a restriction that the ratio of the treated firm’s employment in the previous
19

Larger firms may well be in national markets, in which case matching on state would not be appropriate.
Matching on geography below the state level even for the smallest firm categories would result in a large number of
treated firms being left out of the analysis, potentially biasing the results.

7

year to the control firm’s previous year employment be greater than 0.9 and less than 1.1. This
means that among firms with nine or fewer employees, employment must match exactly.
For the non-start-ups, we would also like to match on variables representing the growth
history prior to treatment year, but it is difficult to design matching thresholds for each variable
separately, so we reduce this dimensionality problem with propensity score matching. We
estimate separate probit regressions using the sample of treated firms and their candidate controls
(according to the exact matching criteria) for different age-size categories (defined in the exact
matching above).20 The probit regresses a dummy for SBA loan receipt on cubic functions of the
pre-loan year logs of employment, revenue, and assets, and their annual growth rates back four
year prior to the loan; the log of payroll/number of employees in the pre-loan year; firm age; firm
age squared; a multi-unit firm dummy; and year dummies. For the lagged employment growth
variables, all revenue and assets variables, and for the log of payroll/number of employees in the
year prior to the treated firm’s loan receipt, we also impute zeroes in place of missing values and
include dummies for such cases. Conditioning on four years of lagged employment, revenues,
and assets is intended to create a control group with very similar histories to the treated firms.
The treated firm observations in the probit regressions are each assigned a weight of
, where N is the total number of firms in the regression and R is the number of treated firms
in the regression. The non-treated firms are assigned a weight of 1. This equalizes the total
weight of the treated firm and non-treated firm groups. The purpose of this weighting is to
produce propensity scores that span a wider range, centered around 0.5 rather than near zero.
We limit the treated and non-treated firms in the employment and survival regression
analysis to those within a common support, meaning that no propensity score of a treated (nontreated) firm that we use is higher than the highest non-treated (treated) firm propensity score,
and no propensity score of a treated (non-treated) firm that we use is lower than the lowest nontreated (treated) firm propensity score. A non-treated firm is included as a control for a
particular treated firm if the ratio of the treated to the non-treated firm’s propensity score is at
least 0.9 and not more than 1.1. Treated firms with no controls meeting all these criteria are not
included in the employment and survival regression analysis. Non-treated firms appear in the
regressions as many times as they have treated firms to which they are matched (i.e., this is
matching with replacement). Kernel weights are applied to the controls. 21 In the employment
and survival regressions, each control is assigned a final weight of their kernel weight divided by
the sum of the kernel weights for all controls for a particular treated firm, and the treated firm is
given a weight of one. As a result, the treated firm and all its control firms together receive
equal weight.
Propensity score matching relies on a strong assumption of “selection on observables.”
Since our data are longitudinal, for the non-start-ups we are also able to eliminate unobserved,
time-invariant differences in employment through difference-in-differences (DID) regression
specifications.
This estimation strategy does not control for possible time-varying
unobservables, such as systematically different demand, productivity, or cost shocks received by
treated and control firms during the treatment year. Brown and Earle (2015) address this
possibility by using an instrumental variable (IV) strategy in addition to the OLS strategy
20

Treated firms with no candidate controls are dropped at this point.

21

The kernel weight is

, where tr is a subscript for the treated firm, and ntr is a

subscript for the non-treated firm. See Imbens and Wooldridge (2009) for discussion of kernel weighting.

8

employed here. They estimate slightly stronger employment effects in IV specifications than in
OLS specifications like those used here. We do not estimate IV specifications here, because the
instrumental variables suffer from weak 1st-stage power in thin age-size cells.
For firms receiving an SBA loan at start-up (during the first year of positive employment
in the LBD), the matching procedures involve exact matching on industry, year, age (start-ups
are matched only with start-ups), state, but not propensity score matching. We do not exact
match on start-up employment, because that is influenced by the treatment. Without propensity
score matching on growth history and exact matching on pre-loan employment level, treated and
control start-ups may thus be less closely matched on observables than non-start-ups.
Our analysis focuses on the first SBA loan, as subsequent loan receipt (approximately 2025 percent of the loan sample is subsequent loans) may be influenced by the outcome of the first
one. Also, given our long time series, we find it useful to constrain the time frame around which
we calculate employment growth to focus on the short- and medium-term effects of the loan.
This puts all of the loan cohorts on an equal footing, so that each counts equally rather than
having longer time series for the early cohorts and shorter series for the later ones. The basic
form of the regression therefore uses the change in employment as the dependent variable, as
follows:
,
where ΔE is the change in the number of employees over some period, i indexes firms from 1 to
I, j indexes from 1 to J the treated firms to which the firm is a control (for treated firms i = j),
and t indexes the loan years from 1 to T.
is a fixed effect for each group of treated firms and
its matched controls (the “treatment-control-group”),
is a set of other variables including
firm age and age squared (only for the specifications used in Figure 1);
is an idiosyncratic
error.
is the amount of the SBA loan (which equals 0 for non-treated firms) received in year t,
and is the loan effect of interest.
The dependent variable is defined in one specification as change in average employment
from three years before to three years after the loan: ∆Eijt = Eij,post – Eij,pre, with Eij,post = (Eijt+1 +
Eijt+2 + Eijt+3)/3, and Eij,pre_t = (Eijt-1 + Eijt-2 + Eijt-3)/3.22 In survival regressions the dependent
variable is a dummy for survival through a particular year after the treated firm’s loan receipt.
The reliability of propensity score matching depends on whether, conditional on the
propensity score, the potential outcomes
and
are independent of treatment incidence. The
assumption of independence conditional on observables depends on the pre-treatment variables
being balanced between the treated and control groups. We assess this in two ways – by
performing a standardized difference (or bias) test for the main variables included in the
matching probit regressions, and by analyzing the pre-treatment event-time dynamics. Table 7
reports the means of the main variables included in the matching probit regressions for four
different samples: all treated firms, all non-treated firms, treated firms included in the
employment regressions in Tables 8 and 9, and controls included in those employment
regressions. Treated firm employment is larger and age is younger than for non-treated firms
prior to matching, and treated firms experience more employment growth in the four years prior
to treatment. After matching, these differences are negligible. The standardized difference
22

In cases of missing values in years prior to loan receipt, we average employment during the available years t-3, t2, and t-1.

9

measures confirm this: employment, employment growth, and age biases are reduced by over 93
percent.23 None of the biases are close to being large after matching.24 Appendix Table 1 shows
the means and percent bias after matching, by age-size categories. Though none of the biases are
large, the biggest ones are for larger young firms (the age 1-3 categories with 50 or more
employees), which are the groups with the smallest loan recipient counts. These tests suggest the
matching has achieved reasonable balance within each age-size category; treated firms are
matched with controls that have had similar growth in the past.
The second test for how effectively the matching process has achieved balance between
the treated and control groups uses estimates of the dynamic effects of SBA loan receipt on
employment in our sample of non-start-up firms as a “pre-program test” in the sense of Heckman
and Hotz 1989, or a “pseudo-outcome” test in the sense of Imbens and Wooldridge (2009). We
define t as the loan year, and use the year prior to the loan, t-1, as the base year, computing
employment differences for each year from five before to five after the loan, so that ∆Eijt = Eijt+s
– Eijt-1 (s = -5, -4,…4, 5). Figure 1 shows that pre-treatment growth differences between future
treated and control firms are negligible, so the matching appears to be effective at eliminating
growth differences prior to t-1. Non-start-up SBA loan recipient employment grows
significantly more than that of controls starting in the loan year, and the gap steadily grows to 4.3
extra jobs per $1 million loan by five years after loan receipt.
5. Results
5.1. Employment Growth Estimates
We present estimates considering heterogeneity separately by size and age groups (Table
8), followed by effects across age-size groups (Table 9 and Figures 2 and 3), to see how the
effects differ with and without age-size interactions. For a decisionmaker interested in allocating
loans to maximize the impact, an important question concerns the observability of variables used
in targeting. Decisionmakers may have more reliable information on firm size than age (because
age is more easily manipulated), so it is useful to know whether conditioning loans only on size
reduces the efficiency of loan allocation.25 The question is similar to HJM’s analysis of the sizegrowth relationship with and without age controls. HJM report that controlling for age
essentially eliminates the negative size-growth relationship found without age controls, and we
can carry out a similar analysis for the effects of SBA loans.
Table 8 shows that the employment effects of the loans generally rise in size, varying
from 2.2 jobs per $1 million loan for the 5-19 employment category to 5.9 jobs for the 100-249
23

The mean age is very similar in the total treated and total non-treated samples, leaving little scope for
improvement through matching.
24
Rosenbaum and Rubin (1985) consider a value of 20 to be large.
25
Observed firm age might be easily manipulated, for example by renaming and re-registering what is essentially
the same company. Firm size might be manipulated through hiring decisions on the margin, but large changes in
firm size are more difficult, although splitting up a large firm to make it eligible for small business preferences is
hardly unheard of. If age is therefore less easily or reliably observed than size, then an important question is
whether using information on size alone is at all useful, or if age is a crucial piece of information for targeting types
of firms.

10

category. This pattern holds despite the likelihood that control firms in the larger size categories
have access to more conventional financing than smaller controls. Start-up effects (5.3 jobs) are
much larger than those in the other age categories (roughly flat at 3 jobs each).
The size analysis for non-start-ups with and without age controls in Figure 4 shows that
the size effects are virtually identical either way. Comparing the results in Table 9 with the
average pre-loan growth rates in Table 4, we find a strong positive association between average
past growth in the category and average job creation effects of SBA loans. The results in Table 9
suggest that smaller, older firms do grow after loan receipt, but much less than other groups.
Firms in the smaller, older age-size categories have a much lower propensity to receive SBA
loans than other age-size categories (Table 2),26 but they still represent a significant fraction of
total SBA loans (the three categories with fewer than two created jobs per $1 million loan
represent 26 percent of all SBA loans).
Firms with a history of growth have both demonstrated the ability to grow and may be
more likely to want to expand further in the future, which could explain their larger SBA loan
effects. This is despite the possibility that growing firms have greater access to conventional
financing, which should attenuate the effect of SBA-backed loans.27
The results above focus on organic growth. Appendix Tables 2 and 3 show results that
include firm boundary changes as employment changes. Boundary changes are most frequent in
larger, more mature firms, especially those with 100-249 employees and that are 11+ years old.
The employment effects are a bit higher for firms with 100-249 employees than the effects solely
using organic employment growth, suggesting larger treated firms are expanding more via
acquisition than their matched controls.
5.2 Survival Estimates
The analysis so far assumes no differences in survival rates between treated firms and
controls, although the SBA frequently refers to business survival as a performance measure, and
access to loans may well affect survival. The direction of the effect is not certain, however,
because while more finance may help a business through hard times, increased leverage and
possible over-extension could create greater vulnerability. Nor is the measurement of survival
unambiguous, and any disappearance from the database is classified as an exit. Though great
effort has been made to link establishments across time in the LBD, we cannot always
distinguish bankruptcy and other genuine shutdowns from buy-outs or reorganizations that lead
to a change in the identifying code in the LBD. As some of these outcomes represent business
failure, others reflect success, and some level of exit is a normal feature of a dynamic economy,
the analysis of exit is thus also not as clear normatively as our analysis of employment effects.
With these qualifications in mind, we are nonetheless interested to ascertain how SBA
loan receipt affects firm survival. In this section we estimate these effects using linear
probability model (LPM) regressions for shorter- (three-year) and longer-run (ten-year) survival.
Again we examine the heterogeneity by age-size categories. Other than the dependent variable,
the regressions are identical to the employment regressions in the previous section.
We include only firm exits occurring within the examined time period that have no
surviving establishments (establishment sales to other firms) post-exit. Firms that exit via sale of

26

This could reflect either less need/desire for a loan or lower quality loan applications.
The control firms in the age-size categories with higher past growth rates are more likely to receive conventional
financing than controls in other categories, dampening the treatment effects if finance facilitates growth.
27

11

their establishments are ambiguous from a performance perspective - some may be cases where
the entrepreneur is cashing in on a successful venture.
To provide a baseline for the estimated effects, the three- and ten-year survival rates in
the regression sample for each age-size category are reported in Tables 10 and 11. Average
survival rates generally increase with both age and size, but for within age groups there is little
difference in survival for size groups of five employees and greater.
Tables 12 and 13 and Figures 5-7 display the three-year survival regression results. The
effects are sharply declining in age, ranging from a 14 percent higher propensity to survive per
$1 million loan for start-ups to -1.2 percent for mature firms, and this pattern holds across all size
classes (Figure 6). The effects for non-start-ups vary little across employment categories, with
the exception of a higher effect for the smallest firms (1-4 employees), and this pattern holds
with or without age controls (Figure 7). The firms least likely to want to grow (small, mature
firms) actually exhibit negative survival effects from loan receipt.
The ten-year survival effect (Tables 14 and 15 and Figures 8-10) is much stronger for
firms with 19 or fewer employees than the three-year effect, while it is very similar for larger
firms, resulting in a sharper decline of the effect with size. Loans have a larger effect on shorterrun than longer-run survival for start-up firms, suggesting that the loans are particularly
beneficial while they are in the “valley of death”. The effects are higher over the longer period
for the other age categories, though. Across age-size groups, the estimated survival effects are
strongly negatively correlated with average survival rates in the corresponding sub-populations,
suggesting SBA loans have the greatest survival benefits for firms that are particularly
vulnerable to exit.
5.3. Employment Growth Estimates Incorporating Exit
If we assume exit represents job loss, the significant survival effects from SBA loan
receipt suggest the employment growth analysis focusing on surviving firms in section 5.1 may
be biased. We investigate this by imputing zero values for employment following exit and reestimating.28 The patterns are somewhat sensitive to whether exit is taken into account: the
estimates incorporating exit, shown in Tables 16 and 17 and Figures 11-13, result in a stronger
positive association between size and the employment effect, and the effect now declines with
age: relative to their matched controls, fewer treated firms going through the “valley of death”
destroy jobs via exiting.
These patterns are again highly correlated with mean past growth rates in the age-size
groups, consistent with the idea that firms demonstrating past growth are more likely to want to
grow in the future and thus to use the loan for expansion.
5.4 Variation by Pre-Treatment Growth
The fact that the job creation loan effects are larger by size categories suggests there may
be an association between pre-treatment growth and the employment response to loan receipt,
since there is a mechanical relationship between past growth and size. If so, then past
employment growth could be used to inform loan allocation. A similar argument applies to
survival: if past growth reflects not only a demonstrated desire to grow in the future, but also
firm quality, then it should associated with survival.
28

Exit effects could be incorporated in many ways, as it is not conceptually clear how many years of zeros to impute
post-exit. These results can thus be viewed as giving an indication of the direction the exit effect exerts on
employment estimates rather than some exact magnitude.

12

We may test this directly by interacting pre-treatment employment growth and loan amount in
regressions by age categories (except start-ups).29
Table 18 shows that the estimated relationship between pre-treatment growth and the loan
amount impact is positive for all three age groups, although it is statistically significant only for
firms in the two older age categories, when exiting firms are excluded. When exit zeroes are
incorporated, all three categories have positive associations. The estimates suggest job creation
per $1 million loan increases by one for every 8.3 (10.8) in employment growth in the four years
prior to loan receipt when focusing on surviving firms aged 4-10 (11+), and it is one for every
11.1 (9.8, 13.2) in prior employment growth for firms aged 1-3 (4-10, 11+) when including
exiting firms. The effects on survival are weaker: shorter-run survival propensity increases by
one percent per $1 million loan for every 34.5 (28.6) in prior employment growth for firms in
age category 1-3 (11+), and the effect on longer-run survival is statistically insignificant for all
three age categories. These results are consistent with pre-treatment growth partly reflecting
firm quality and partly a desire to expand further in the future.
6. Conclusion
Research on measures to support small businesses has been preoccupied with examining
the basic proposition that small firms are disproportionate job creators. Although the proposition
is practically an article of faith for many, HJM have recently shown that firm size and growth are
essentially uncorrelated once the analysis accounts for firm age, and systematically larger job
creation only comes from new entrants and very young firms. Whatever the nature of the firm
age-size-growth relationships, however, the existing research does not address the question of
whether and how job creation and survival per dollar of financing backed by the government
varies across firms by size and age.
Our analysis matches firms with fewer than 250 employees receiving loans in the two
largest loan guarantee programs of the Small Business Administration (the 7(a) and 504
programs) to non-recipients that are essentially identical along every observable: pre-loan size,
age, industry, year, and pre-loan growth history. For the results to be interpreted as causal, one
must assume that there are no systematic time-varying differences between the loan recipients
and control firms, such as differential demand, productivity, or cost shocks at the time of loan
receipt.
Consistent with HJM’s findings for overall job creation rates and with the literature on
loan access and financial constraints on growth by firm age, we find strong employment and
survival effects for start-up firms, both the employment and survival effects decline in age, and
the employment effects are increasing within age categories. The survival effects also decline in
size. Unlike HJM, however, the employment effects increase with size even without age
controls. The fact that gazelles grow particularly strongly in response to loan receipt implies
they face significant financial constraints to their continued growth.

29

For firms with positive employment in both t-4 and t-1, pre-treatment growth is the difference between
employment in t-1 and t-4, divided by three so as to annualize it. If a firm doesn’t have employment in t-4, but has it
in t-3, pre-treatment growth is the difference between employment in t-1 and t-3, divided by two. Firms without
positive employment in t-4 and t-3, but with it in t-2, have pre-treatment growth of the difference between
employment in t-1 and t-2, and those only with positive employment in t-1 have pre-treatment growth of
employment in t-1 (since employment prior to that is assumed to be zero).

13

We find that the categories of firms most vulnerable to exit experience the largest
survival effects from loan receipt. The loans are particularly helpful to young firms coping with
the “valley of death”.
The result that small, mature firms expand the least and actually experience lower
survival rates in response to SBA loan receipt suggests that though they may have difficultly
obtaining loans (as suggested by the literature on loan access by firm size), their growth is only
weakly constrained by this, consistent with Hurst and Pugsley’s (2011) premise that such firms
don’t wish to grow and thus that government support for them may have less of an impact.
Though small, mature firms exhibit the lowest propensity to receive SBA loans among all agesize categories, the absolute number going to them is still a substantial fraction of the total.
References
Adelino, Manuel, Song Ma, and David T. Robinson, Firm Age, Investment Opportunities, and
Job Creation,” NBER Working Paper No. 19845, January 2014.
Birch, David L., Job Creation in America: How Our Smallest Companies Put the Most People to
Work. New York: Free Press, 1987.
Brown, J. David, and John S. Earle, "Finance and Growth at the Firm Level: Evidence from SBA
Loans," IZA Discussion Paper No. 9267, August 2015.
Canton, Erik, Isabel Grilo, Josefa Monteagudo, and Peter van der Zwan, “Perceived Credit
Constraints in the European Union,” Small Business Economics, Vol. 41, 701-715, 2013.
Davis, Steven, John Haltiwanger, and Scott Schuh, Job Creation and Destruction. Cambridge,
Mass: The MIT Press, 1996.
Evans, David S., ‘‘The Relationship between Firm Growth, Size, and Age: Estimates for 100
Manufacturing Industries,’’ Journal of Industrial Economics, Vol. 35, 567–581, 1987.
Eslava, Marcela, and John Haltiwanger, “Young Businesses, Entrepreneurship, and the
Dynamics of Employment and Output in Colombia’s Manufacturing Industry,” mimeo, May
2014.
Haltiwanger, John, Ron S. Jarmin, and Javier Miranda, “Who Creates Jobs? Small versus Large
versus Young.” Review of Economics and Statistics, Vol. 95(2), 347–361, May 2013.
Heckman, James, and Joseph V. Hotz, “Choosing among Alternative Nonexperimental Methods
for Estimating the Impact of Social Programs: The Case of Manpower Training,” Journal of the
American Statistical Association, Vol. 84(408), 862-74, December 1989.
Hurst, Erik, and Benjamin Wild Pugsley, “What Do Small Firms Do?” Brookings Papers on
Economic Activity, 73-118, Fall 2011.
Imbens, Guido W., and Jeffrey M. Wooldridge, “Recent Developments in the Econometrics of
Program Evaluation,” Journal of Economic Literature, Vol. 47(1), 5-86, 2009.
Jarmin, Ronald S., and Javier Miranda, “The Longitudinal Business Database.” CES Working
Paper 02-17, 2002.

14

Levenson, Alec R., and Kristen L. Willard, “Do Firms Get the Financing They Want? Measuring
Credit Rationing Experienced by Small Businesses in the U.S.” Small Business Economics, Vol.
14, 83-94, 2000.
Neumark, David, Brandon Wall, and Junfu Zhang, “Do Small Businesses Create More Jobs?
New Evidence for the United States from the National Establishment Time Series,” Review of
Economics and Statistics 93(1), 16-29, 2011.
Rosenbaum, P., and D. B. Rubin, “Constructing a Control Group Using a Multivariate Matched
Sampling Method that Incorporates the Propensity Score,” The American Statistician, Vol. 39,
pp. 33-38, 1985.
SBA, SOP 50 10 5(H), Lender and Development Company Loan Programs, effective May 1,
2015. Downloadable from
https://www.sba.gov/sites/default/files/sops/SOP_50_10_5_H_FINAL_FINAL_CLEAN_5-1-15.pdf,
accessed July 29, 2015.

15

Table 1. Path from Full SBA Loan Dataset to Treated Firms in Final Matched Regression Sample
Number
Total SBA Loans in 1991-2009
1,141,200
Except U.S. Territories
1,124,900
Except cancelled loans
979,600
After consolidating loans to the same borrower in the same year
947,300
Except loans not matched to any business register
824,200
Except loans matched to non-employer business register
760,000
Except loans matched to a business register but not matched to the
701,500
LBD firm data
Except SBA 7A/504 loans in years after the first loan year in the
518,200
1991-2009 period
Except firms with first SBA loan before 1991 or a SBA disaster
486,200
loan at any time
Except firms with missing exact matching variables (employment
459,600
in year before loan receipt, industry, or state (sample for control
matching process)
Except firms without matched controls for three-year employment
310,400
growth with exit zeroes
Except firms with greater than 249 employees in t-1 (Regression
309,700
sample for Tables 16 and 17)
Except firms missing three-year employment growth without exit
222,300
Except firms without matched controls for three-year employment
215,000
growth without exit (Regression sample for Tables 8 and 9)
Numbers are rounded to the nearest one hundred for disclosure avoidance.

16

Table 2. Number of SBA Loan Recipients in LBD by Age and Size
Employment in Year t-1
Age
1-4
5-19
20-49
50-99
100-249
Total
0
65,600
1-3
55,300
40,800
7,700
1,500
400 107,700
4-10
37,500
52,900
14,400
3,300
1,000 111,800
11+
20,700
40,200
16,600
5,500
2,300
86,700
Total
113,400 133,900
38,800
10,300
3,700 373,500

This sample includes SBA loan recipients with and without matched controls that either
received a loan at start-up or had 249 employees or fewer in t-1. The numbers are rounded to
the nearest 100 for disclosure avoidance. Age is measured in the loan receipt year, and size is
employment in the year prior to loan receipt.

Table 3. SBA Loan Recipients as Percent of All LBD Firm-Years in 19912009
Employment in Year t-1
Age
1-4
5-19
20-49
50-99
100-249
Total
0
0.69
1-3
0.44
0.78
0.88
0.69
0.45
0.55
4-10
0.26
0.60
0.82
0.71
0.48
0.42
11+
0.13
0.29
0.42
0.40
0.30
0.23
Total
0.26
0.48
0.59
0.50
0.34
0.40

This sample includes SBA loan recipients with and without matched controls. SBA loan
recipients in the numerator are counted once. All SBA loan recipient and non-recipient firmyears are included in the denominator. Age is measured in the loan receipt year, and size is
employment in the year prior to loan receipt.

17

Table 4. Mean Employment Growth Between Four Years Before and One
Year Before Loan Receipt for SBA Loan Recipients by Age and Size
Employment in Year t-1
Age
1-4
5-19
20-49
50-99
100-249
Total
4-10
0.041
0.336
0.451
0.516
0.564
0.222
11+
-0.072
0.092
0.145
0.174
0.198
0.054
Total
0.003
0.232
0.288
0.305
0.306
0.150

This sample includes SBA loan recipients with and without matched controls. Growth is
calculated using the Davis-Haltiwanger method

. Age is measured in the

loan receipt year, and size is employment in the year prior to loan receipt.

Table 5. Mean Pre-Treatment Employment Growth for All Non-SBA LBD
Firms Present in Year t in 1991-2009, by Age and Size
Employment in Year t-1
Age
1-4
5-19
20-49
50-99
100-249
Total
4-10
0.007
0.267
0.342
0.382
0.421
0.066
11+
-0.064
0.072
0.104
0.122
0.135
-0.015
Total
-0.031
0.147
0.176
0.186
0.191
0.019
Growth is calculated using the Davis-Haltiwanger method

. Age is measured in

the loan receipt year, and size is employment in the year prior to loan receipt.

Table 6. Mean SBA Loan Size (2010 $US), With and Without Matched Controls
Employment in Year t-1
Age
1-4
5-19
20-49
50-99
100-249
Total
0
259,362
1-3
220,059 389,783 648,111
895,688
902,995 327,228
4-10
250,075 471,787 800,836 1,008,725 1,116,431 456,831
11+
253,158 505,480 902,777 1,204,657 1,314,167 584,643
Total
236,005 456,907 814,098 1,096,969 1,219,093 445,995

This sample includes SBA loan recipients with and without matched controls that either received a
loan at start-up or had 249 employees or fewer in t-1. The numbers are rounded to the nearest 100
for disclosure avoidance. Age is measured in the loan receipt year, and size is employment in the
year prior to loan receipt.

18

Table 7. Bias Before and After Propensity Score Matching
All NonAll
Control
Treated
Treated
Treated
Sample
Sample
Log Empt-1
Log (Empt-1/
Empt-2)
Log (Empt-2/
Empt-3)
Log (Empt-3/
Empt-4)
Log Revt-1
Log (Revt-1/
Revt-2)
Log (Revt-2/
Revt-3)
Log (Revt-3/
Revt-4)
Log Assetst-1
Log (Assetst-1/
Assetst-2)
Log (Assetst-2/
Assetst-3)
Log (Assetst-3/
Assetst-4)
Log Wage
Age
Multi-Unit

1.761
0.017

1.902
0.071

1.999
0.073

1.997
0.075

Final
Standardized
Difference
-0.143
0.565

0.024

0.072

0.070

0.073

0.735

93.57

0.027

0.070

0.067

0.070

0.660

93.75

6.396
0.031

6.611
0.091

6.710
0.093

6.691
0.111

-1.278
3.892

91.19
70.13

0.041

0.095

0.099

0.109

2.308

81.48

0.052

0.098

0.094

0.102

2.076

82.03

4.867
0.017

5.107
0.116

5.220
0.096

5.100
0.121

-6.533
4.040

50.22
74.21

0.030

0.073

0.077

0.088

1.803

74.87

0.038

0.076

0.074

0.084

1.784

72.62

3.042
10.706
0.044

3.048
8.324
0.051

3.079
8.863
0.050

3.088
8.773
0.050

1.074
-1.080
-0.381

-42.39
96.21
88.90

For a given variable, say age, the standardized difference (% bias) is

% Bias
Reduction
98.69
95.48

.

The group before propensity score matching is treated and control firms satisfying exact matches on employment,
treatment year age category, industry, year, and state (if it has 19 or fewer employees in the prior year). Firms in the
group after propensity score matching satisfy the propensity score bandwidth criterion, the common support criterion,
and are in the regression samples for Tables 8 and 9. The samples do not include firms receiving loans at start-up or
their controls.

19

Figure 1. Dynamics for Number of Employees per $1 Million Loan, Firms Receiving Loans After Start-Up

Number of Employees Per $1 Million Loan

5
4
3
2
1
0
-1
-5

-4

-3

-2

-1

0

1

2

3

4

5

Years Since Loan Receipt
These are loan amount coefficients from kernel-weighted OLS regressions with a dependent variable of the firm’s employment in the respective year minus
employment in year t-1. Loan amount is in millions of 2010 dollars. Treatment year age, age squared, and treated firm-control fixed effects are included in the
regressions. The sample is the same in the regressions in years t, t+1, t+2, t+3, t+4, and t+5. To be in the samples for the pre-treatment years, treated firms and
at least one control must have positive employment in the respective year, as well as in t-1 through t+5. The dotted lines are the bounds of the 99 percent
confidence interval, based on standard errors clustered by firm.

20

Table 8. Size Effects on Employment Growth per $1 Million Loan by Size Categories, Age
Categories
Loan Amount
Number of
Number of
Coefficient
Observations
Treated Firms
Emp 1-4
2.434
1,284,000
59,700
(0.061)
Emp 5-19
2.173
737,700
67,800
(0.043)
Emp 20-49
3.115
2,517,600
28,400
(0.066)
Emp 50-99
3.946
286,800
6,900
(0.206)
Emp 100-249
5.873
56,900
2,400
(0.635)
Age 0
5.336
7,556,800
49,800
(0.195)
Age 1-3
3.130
1,282,100
53,100
(0.128)
Age 4-10
2.960
1,108,400
57,400
(0.100)
Age 11+
3.015
2,492,400
54,700
(0.081)
These are kernel-weighted OLS regressions, run separately for each size and age category. The dependent
variable is average employment in t+1 through t+3 minus average employment in t-3 through t-1, including
only firms that have positive employment in each of those years. Loan amount is in millions of 2010
dollars. Treated firm-control fixed effects are also included in the regressions. Standard errors, clusteradjusted by firm, are in parentheses. The number of observations and SBA firms are rounded to the nearest
100 for disclosure avoidance.

21

Table 9. Employment Growth Regressions by Age-Size Categories
Loan Amount
Number of
Coefficient
Observations
Age 0
5.336
7,556,800
(0.195)
Age 1-3, Emp 1-4
3.356
622,500
(0.113)
Age 1-3, Emp 5-19
2.606
163,800
(0.130)
Age 1-3, Emp 20-49
3.738
467,400
(0.280)
Age 1-3, Emp 50-99
2.127
26,600
(0.876)
Age 1-3, Emp 100-249
8.712
1,800
(4.739)
Age 4-10, Emp 1-4
1.783
313,800
(0.067)
Age 4-10, Emp 5-19
2.244
201,100
(0.069)
Age 4-10, Emp 20-49
3.260
547,600
(0.119)
Age 4-10, Emp 50-99
4.587
41,000
(0.539)
Age 4-10, Emp 100-249
6.932
4,700
(2.131)
Age 11+, Emp 1-4
1.644
347,700
(0.120)
Age 11+, Emp 5-19
1.879
372,700
(0.047)
Age 11+, Emp 20-49
2.871
1,502,400
(0.072)
Age 11+, Emp 50-99
3.969
219,200
(0.217)
Age 11+, Emp 100-249
5.504
50,400
(0.625)

Number of
Treated Firms
49,800
28,500
18,500
5,000
800
200
19,500
25,100
10,300
1,900
500
11,700
24,200
13,100
4,200
1,700

These are kernel-weighted OLS regressions, run separately for each age-size category. The dependent
variable is average employment in t+1 through t+3 minus average employment in t-3 through t-1, including
only firms that have positive employment in each of those years. Loan amount is in millions of 2010
dollars. Treated firm-control fixed effects are also included in the regressions. Standard errors, clusteradjusted by firm, are in parentheses. The number of observations and SBA firms are rounded to the nearest
100 for disclosure avoidance.

22

Figure 2. Size Effects on Employment Growth per $1 Million Loan for Each Age Category

Number of Employees Per $1 Million Loan

8
7
6
5

Age 1-3
4

Age 4-10
Age 11+

3
2
1
0
Emp 1-4

Emp 5-19

Emp 20-49

Emp 50-99 Emp 100-249

These are plots of non-start-up firm loan amount coefficients reported in Table 9, including only coefficients significant at the 5 percent level.

23

Figure 3. Age Effects on Employment Growth per $1 Million Loan for Each Size Category

Number of Employees Per $1 Million Loan

8
7
6
Emp 1-4

5

Emp 5-19
4

Emp 20-49
Emp 50-99

3

Emp 100-249

2
1
0
Age 1-3

Age 4-10

Age 11+

These are plots of non-start-up firm loan amount coefficients reported in Table 9, including only coefficients significant at the 5 percent level.

24

Figure 4. Size Effects on Employment Growth per $1 Million Loan, With and Without Age Controls

Number of Employees Per $1 Million Loan

7
6
5
4

with age controls
3

without age controls

2
1
0
Emp 1-4

Emp 5-19

Emp 20-49

Emp 50-99 Emp 100-249

These are plots of loan amount coefficients for non-start-up firms reported in Tables 8 and 9. The numbers with age controls are averages of the coefficients for
the size category across age categories, weighted by the number of treated firms in each cell.

25

Table 10. Three-Year Survival Rates (%) in Survival Regression Samples
Employment in Year Prior to SBA Loan
Age
1 to 4
5 to 19 20 to 49 50 to 99
100 to
249
0
1-3
68.17
72.50
71.80
71.88
71.00
4-10
74.57
80.31
80.86
79.76
79.47
11+
76.78
83.60
85.18
85.57
86.51
Total
71.76
79.05
80.95
81.97
83.44

Total
62.27
70.00
78.26
82.54
72.90

These numbers are calculated from the full survival regression samples for loans issued in 19912009, including both treated and control firms.

Table 11. Ten-Year Survival Rates (%) in Survival Regression Samples
Employment in Year Prior to SBA Loan
Age
1 to 4
5 to 19 20 to 49 50 to 99
100 to
249
0
1-3
36.31
40.85
39.31
37.33
34.79
4-10
43.56
49.78
49.92
49.02
46.80
11+
45.83
56.13
58.47
57.82
58.53
Total
40.46
49.37
51.83
52.76
54.20

Total
30.79
38.28
47.80
54.99
43.13

These numbers are calculated from the full survival regression samples for loans issued in 1991-2002,
including both treated and control firms.

26

Table 12. Three-Year Survival Regressions by Size Categories, Age Categories
Loan Amount
Number of
Number of
Coefficient
Observations
Treated Firms
Emp 1-4
0.026
2,832,100
95,100
(0.002)
Emp 5-19
0.007
1,220,600
94,900
(0.001)
Emp 20-49
0.010
4,221,500
37,000
(0.001)
Emp 50-99
0.012
423,400
8,900
(0.002)
Emp 100-249
0.012
77,200
3,100
(0.003)
Age 0
0.140
24,686,200
83,400
(0.002)
Age 1-3
0.055
3,057,100
85,100
(0.002)
Age 4-10
0.020
1,953,200
81,700
(0.001)
Age 11+
-0.0124
3,764,600
72,200
(0.0009)

These are kernel-weighted OLS regressions, run separately for each size and age category. The dependent
variable is a dummy for survival through t+3. Loan amount is in millions of 2010 dollars. Treated firmcontrol fixed effects are also included in the regressions. Standard errors, cluster-adjusted by firm, are in
parentheses. The number of observations and SBA firms are rounded to the nearest 100 for disclosure
avoidance.

27

Table 13. Three-Year Survival Regressions by Age-Size Categories
Loan Amount
Number of
Coefficient
Observations
Age 0
0.140
24,686,200
(0.002)
Age 1-3, Emp 1-4
0.067
1,638,900
(0.004)
Age 1-3, Emp 5-19
0.052
350,000
(0.003)
Age 1-3, Emp 20-49
0.042
1,012,900
(0.004)
Age 1-3, Emp 50-99
0.069
51,600
(0.007)
Age 1-3, Emp 100-249
0.036
3,800
(0.022)
Age 4-10, Emp 1-4
0.017
608,900
(0.004)
Age 4-10, Emp 5-19
0.013
331,700
(0.002)
Age 4-10, Emp 20-49
0.025
939,300
(0.002)
Age 4-10, Emp 50-99
0.026
65,700
(0.005)
Age 4-10, Emp 100-249
0.023
7,600
(0.009)
Age 11+, Emp 1-4
-0.044
584,300
(0.005)
Age 11+, Emp 5-19
-0.026
538,900
(0.002)
Age 11+, Emp 20-49
-0.010
2,269,300
(0.001)
Age 11+, Emp 50-99
-0.0003
306,200
(0.0020)
Age 11+, Emp 100-249
0.0078
65,800
(0.0032)

Number of
Treated Firms
83,400
47,700
28,600
7,300
1,200
300
30,100
34,800
13,400
2,600
700
17,300
31,500
16,200
5,100
2,100

These are kernel-weighted OLS regressions, run separately for each age-size category. The dependent
variable is a dummy for survival through t+3. Loan amount is in millions of 2010 dollars. Treated firmcontrol fixed effects are also included in the regressions. Standard errors, cluster-adjusted by firm, are in
parentheses. The number of observations and SBA firms are rounded to the nearest 100 for disclosure
avoidance.

28

Figure 5. Size Effects on Three-Year Survival Propensity per $1 Million Loan for Each Age Category

Change in 3-Year Survival Propensity
Per $1 Million Loan

0.08
0.06
0.04
0.02

Age 1-3
Age 4-10

0

Age 11+

-0.02
-0.04
-0.06
Emp 1-4

Emp 5-19

Emp 20-49

Emp 50-99 Emp 100-249

These are plots of non-start-up firm results reported in Table 13, including only coefficients significant at the 5 percent level.

29

Figure 6. Age Effects on Three-Year Survival Propensity per $1 Million Loan for Each Size Category

Change in 3-Year Survival Propensity
Per $1 Million Loan

0.08
0.06
0.04
Emp 1-4
0.02

Emp 5-19
Emp 20-49

0

Emp 50-99
Emp 100-249

-0.02
-0.04
-0.06
Age 1-3

Age 4-10

Age 11+

These are plots of non-start-up firm results reported in Table 13, including only coefficients significant at the 5 percent level.

30

Figure 7. Size Effects on Three-Year Survival Propensity per $1 Million Loan, With and Without Age Controls

Change in 3-Year Survival Probability
Per $1 Million Loan

0.035
0.03
0.025
0.02

with age controls

0.015

without age controls

0.01
0.005
0
Emp 1-4

Emp 5-19 Emp 20-49 Emp 50-99 Emp 100249

These are plots of results for non-start-up firms reported in Tables 12 and 13. The results with age controls are averages of the coefficients for the size category
across age categories, weighted by the number of treated firms in each cell.

31

Table 14. Ten-Year Survival Regressions by Size Categories, Age Categories
Loan Amount
Number of
Number of
Coefficient
Observations
Treated Firms
Emp 1-4
0.072
1,105,000
40,000
(0.004)
Emp 5-19
0.035
659,900
48,400
(0.003)
Emp 20-49
0.011
2,697,500
22,400
(0.002)
Emp 50-99
0.012
286,500
5,600
(0.004)
Emp 100-249
0.013
43,000
1,800
(0.006)
Age 0
0.117
8,729,600
37,700
(0.003)
Age 1-3
0.079
1,405,200
38,000
(0.004)
Age 4-10
0.046
1,197,300
42,100
(0.003)
Age 11+
-0.008
2,189,400
38,200
(0.002)

These are kernel-weighted OLS regressions, run separately for each size and age category. The dependent
variable is a dummy for survival through t+10. Loan amount is in millions of 2010 dollars. Treated firmcontrol fixed effects are also included in the regressions. Standard errors, cluster-adjusted by firm, are in
parentheses. The number of observations and SBA firms are rounded to the nearest 100 for disclosure
avoidance.

32

Table 15. Ten-Year Survival Regressions by Age-Size Categories
Loan Amount
Number of
Coefficient
Observations
Age 0
0.117
8,729,600
(0.003)
Age 1-3, Emp 1-4
0.094
563,600
(0.007)
Age 1-3, Emp 5-19
0.081
171,900
(0.006)
Age 1-3, Emp 20-49
0.065
635,500
(0.006)
Age 1-3, Emp 50-99
0.089
32,200
(0.014)
Age 1-3, Emp 100-249
0.002
2,000
(0.034)
Age 4-10, Emp 1-4
0.066
287,800
(0.008)
Age 4-10, Emp 5-19
0.044
197,100
(0.005)
Age 4-10, Emp 20-49
0.036
661,400
(0.004)
Age 4-10, Emp 50-99
0.057
46,100
(0.008)
Age 4-10, Emp 100-249
0.069
5,000
(0.018)
Age 11+, Emp 1-4
0.039
253,600
(0.009)
Age 11+, Emp 5-19
0.00002
290,900
(0.00444)
Age 11+, Emp 20-49
-0.020
1,400,700
(0.003)
Age 11+, Emp 50-99
-0.014
208,200
(0.004)
Age 11+, Emp 100-249
0.002
36,000
(0.007)

Number of
Treated Firms
37,700
19,400
13,700
4,100
700
100
13,200
18,600
8,200
1,600
400
7,400
16,200
10,100
3,300
1,300

These are kernel-weighted OLS regressions, run separately for each age-size category. The dependent
variable is a dummy for survival through t+10. Loan amount is in millions of 2010 dollars. Treated firmcontrol fixed effects are also included in the regressions. Standard errors, cluster-adjusted by firm, are in
parentheses. The number of observations and SBA firms are rounded to the nearest 100 for disclosure
avoidance.

33

Figure 8. Size Effects on Ten-Year Survival Propensity per $1 Million Loan for Each Age Category

Change in 10-Year Survival Propensity
Per $1 Million Loan

0.12
0.1
0.08
0.06

Age 1-3
0.04

Age 4-10
Age 11+

0.02
0
-0.02
-0.04
Emp 1-4

Emp 5-19

Emp 20-49

Emp 50-99 Emp 100-249

These are plots of non-start-up firm results reported in Table 15, including only coefficients significant at the 5 percent level.

34

Figure 9. Age Effects on Ten-Year Survival Propensity per $1 Million Loan for Each Size Category

Change in 10-Year Survival Propensity
Per $1 Million Loan

0.12
0.1
0.08
Emp 1-4

0.06

Emp 5-19
0.04

Emp 20-49
Emp 50-99

0.02

Emp 100-249

0
-0.02
-0.04
Age 1-3

Age 4-10

Age 11+

These are plots of non-start-up firm results reported in Table 15, including only coefficients significant at the 5 percent level.

35

Figure 10. Size Effects on Ten-Year Survival Propensity per $1 Million Loan, With and Without Age Controls

Change in 10-Year Survival Probability
Per $1 Million Loan

0.08
0.07
0.06
0.05
0.04

with age controls

0.03

without age controls

0.02
0.01
0
Emp 1-4

Emp 5-19 Emp 20-49 Emp 50-99 Emp 100249

These are plots of results for non-start-up firms reported in Tables 14 and 15. The results with age controls are averages of the coefficients for the size category
across age categories, weighted by the number of treated firms in each cell.

36

Table 16. Employment Growth Regressions by Size Categories, Age Categories,
Accounting for Exit
Loan Amount
Number of
Number of
Coefficient
Observations
Treated Firms
Emp 1-4
2.094
2,633,400
90,700
(0.050)
Emp 5-19
1.892
1,176,000
92,000
(0.038)
Emp 20-49
2.995
4,036,100
35,800
(0.067)
Emp 50-99
4.137
409,100
8,600
(0.214)
Emp 100-249
6.947
73,800
2,900
(0.702)
Age 0
6.278
22,887,400
79,600
(0.122)
Age 1-3
3.537
2,860,300
81,500
(0.113)
Age 4-10
2.995
1,850,000
78,500
(0.104)
Age 11+
2.585
3,618,100
70,100
(0.085)

These are kernel-weighted OLS regressions, run separately for each size and age category. The dependent
variable is average employment in t+1 through t+3 minus average employment in t-3 through t-1, including
zeros for employment in years after exit. Loan amount is in millions of 2010 dollars. Treated firm-control
fixed effects are also included in the regressions. Standard errors, cluster-adjusted by firm, are in
parentheses. The number of observations and SBA firms are rounded to the nearest 100 for disclosure
avoidance.

37

Table 17. Employment Growth Regressions by Age-Size Categories, Accounting for Exit
Loan Amount
Number of
Number of
Coefficient
Observations
Treated Firms
Age 0
6.278
22,887,400
79,600
(0.122)
Age 1-3, Emp 1-4
2.984
1,510,600
45,400
(0.087)
Age 1-3, Emp 5-19
2.643
334,400
27,600
(0.368)
Age 1-3, Emp 20-49
4.369
962,900
7,000
(0.246)
Age 1-3, Emp 50-99
5.362
48,800
1,200
(0.907)
Age 1-3, Emp 100-249
16.587
3,600
300
(3.777)
Age 4-10, Emp 1-4
1.554
567,100
28,700
(0.058)
Age 4-10, Emp 5-19
2.035
318,500
33,700
(0.061)
Age 4-10, Emp 20-49
3.400
894,600
13,000
(0.116)
Age 4-10, Emp 50-99
5.403
62,700
2,500
(0.513)
Age 4-10, Emp 100-249
7.488
7,200
700
(2.329)
Age 11+, Emp 1-4
1.143
555,700
16,700
(0.115)
Age 11+, Emp 5-19
1.301
523,100
30,700
(0.046)
Age 11+, Emp 20-49
2.341
2,178,600
15,800
(0.081)
Age 11+, Emp 50-99
3.516
297,700
4,900
(0.232)
Age 11+, Emp 100-249
6.232
63,100
2,000
(0.678)

These are kernel-weighted OLS regressions, run separately for each age-size category. The dependent
variable is average employment in t+1 through t+3 minus average employment in t-3 through t-1, including
zeros for employment in years after exit. Loan amount is in millions of 2010 dollars. Treated firm-control
fixed effects are also included in the regressions. Standard errors, cluster-adjusted by firm, are in
parentheses. The number of observations and SBA firms are rounded to the nearest 100 for disclosure
avoidance.
.

38

Figure 11. Size Effects on Employment Growth (Accounting for Exit) per $1 Million Loan for Each Age Category

Number of Employees Per $1 Million Loan

18
16
14
12
10

Age 1-3

8

Age 4-10
Age 11+

6
4
2
0
Emp 1-4

Emp 5-19

Emp 20-49

Emp 50-99

Emp 100-249

These are plots of non-start-up firm results reported in Table 17, including only coefficients significant at the 5 percent level.

39

Figure 12. Age Effects on Employment Growth (Accounting for Exit) per $1 Million Loan for Each Size Category

Number of Employees Per $1 Million Loan

18
16
14
12

Emp 1-4

10

Emp 5-19

8

Emp 20-49
Emp 50-99

6

Emp 100-249

4
2
0
Age 1-3

Age 4-10

Age 11+

These are plots of non-start-up firm results reported in Table 17, including only coefficients significant at the 5 percent level.

40

Figure 13. Size Effects on Employment Growth (Accounting for Exit) per $1 Million Loan, With and Without Age Controls

Number of Employees Per $1 Million Loan

8
7
6
5

with age controls

4

without age controls

3
2
1
0
Emp 1-4

Emp 5-19

Emp 20-49

Emp 50-99 Emp 100-249

These are plots of results for non-start-up firms reported in Tables 16 and 17. The results with age controls are averages of the coefficients for the size category
across age categories, weighted by the number of treated firms in each cell.

41

Table 18. Regressions with Pre-Treatment Growth Interactions by Age Categories
Loan Amount Pre-Treatment Loan Amt.*
Number of
Number
Growth
Pre-Treatment
Obs.
of Treated
Growth
Firms
Employment Growth
Age 1-3
3.080
0.102
0.012
1,282,100
53,100
(0.150)
(0.019)
(0.021)
Age 4-10
2.611
0.060
0.120
1,108,400
57,400
(0.107)
(0.035)
(0.034)
Age 11+
2.786
0.210
0.093
2,492,400
54,700
(0.078)
(0.024)
(0.021)
Employment Growth with Exit Zeros
Age 1-3
2.896
0.068
0.090
2,860,300
81,500
(0.156)
(0.017)
(0.023)
Age 4-10
2.696
0.114
0.102
1,850,000
78,500
(0.115)
(0.030)
(0.038)
Age 11+
2.406
0.297
0.076
3,618,100
70,100
(0.082)
(0.027)
(0.018)
Three-Year Survival, 1991-2009 Treatments
Age 1-3
0.052
-0.00168
0.00029
3,057,100
85,100
(0.002)
(0.00009)
(0.00013)
Age 4-10
0.019
-0.00011
0.00016
1,953,200
81,700
(0.001)
(0.00014)
(0.00017)
Age 11+
-0.013
0.00053
0.00035
3,764,600
72,200
(0.001)
(0.00010)
(0.00009)
Ten-Year Survival, 1991-2002 Treatments
Age 1-3
0.077
-0.0018
0.00015
1,405,200
38,000
(0.004)
(0.0001)
(0.00022)
Age 4-10
0.045
-0.0006
0.00029
1,197,300
42,100
(0.003)
(0.0002)
(0.00039)
Age 11+
-0.008
0.0007
-0.00001
2,189,400
38,200
(0.002)
(0.0002)
(0.00020)

These are kernel-weighted OLS regressions, run separately for each age category. The dependent variable for
employment growth is average employment in t+1 through t+3 minus average employment in t-3 through t-1,
including only firms that have positive employment in each of those years. The dependent variable for
employment growth with exit zeros is average employment in t+1 through t+3 minus average employment in t3 through t-1, including zeros for employment in years after exit. The dependent variable for three–year
survival is a dummy for survival through t+3. The dependent variable for ten–year survival is a dummy for
survival through t+10. Loan amount is in millions of 2010 dollars. Treated firm-control fixed effects are also
included in the regressions. For firms with positive employment in both t-4 and t-1, pre-treatment growth is the
difference between employment in t-1 and t-4, divided by three so as to annualize it. If a firm doesn’t have
employment in t-4, but has it in t-3, pre-treatment growth is the difference between employment in t-1 and t-3,
divided by two. Firms without positive employment in t-4 and t-3, but with it in t-2, have pre-treatment growth
of the difference between employment in t-1 and t-2, and those only with positive employment in t-1 have pretreatment growth of employment in t-1 (since employment prior to that is assumed to be zero).Standard errors,
cluster-adjusted by firm, are in parentheses. The number of observations and SBA firms are rounded to the
nearest 100 for disclosure avoidance.

42

Appendix Table 1. Bias After Propensity Score Matching by Age-Size Category
Control
Treated
Standardized
Sample
Sample
Difference
Age 1-3, Emp 1-4
Log Empt-1
0.703
0.703
0.000
Log (Empt-1/Empt-2)
0.045
0.055
2.257
Log (Empt-2/Empt-3)
0.136
0.135
-0.231
Age 1-3, Emp 5-19
Log Empt-1
2.099
2.097
-0.138
Log (Empt-1/Empt-2)
0.281
0.277
-0.867
Log (Empt-2/Empt-3)
0.311
0.301
-2.343
Age 1-3, Emp 20-49
Log Empt-1
3.331
3.328
-0.236
Log (Empt-1/Empt-2)
0.345
0.358
2.881
Log (Empt-2/Empt-3)
0.413
0.437
5.740
Age 1-3, Emp 50-99
Log Empt-1
4.155
4.153
-0.126
Log (Empt-1/Empt-2)
0.368
0.384
3.740
Log (Empt-2/Empt-3)
0.492
0.547
12.913
Age 1-3, Emp 100-249
Log Empt-1
4.947
4.945
-0.102
Log (Empt-1/Empt-2)
0.481
0.518
8.626
Log (Empt-2/Empt-3)
0.586
0.598
2.774
Age 4-10, Emp 1-4
Log Empt-1
0.833
0.833
0.000
Log (Empt-1/Empt-2)
-0.039
-0.038
0.161
Log (Empt-2/Empt-3)
0.008
0.012
1.071
Log (Empt-3/Empt-4)
0.042
0.040
-0.564
Age 4-10, Emp 5-19
Log Empt-1
2.163
2.161
-0.118
Log (Empt-1/Empt-2)
0.102
0.097
-1.144
Log (Empt-2/Empt-3)
0.092
0.091
-0.274
Log (Empt-3/Empt-4)
0.127
0.131
0.802
Age 4-10, Emp 20-49
Log Empt-1
3.351
3.347
-0.322
Log (Empt-1/Empt-2)
0.143
0.150
1.513
Log (Empt-2/Empt-3)
0.143
0.149
1.391
Log (Empt-3/Empt-4)
0.188
0.181
-1.683
Age 4-10, Emp 50-99
Log Empt-1
4.169
4.166
-0.230
Log (Empt-1/Empt-2)
0.163
0.166
0.664
Log (Empt-2/Empt-3)
0.151
0.150
-0.292
Log (Empt-3/Empt-4)
0.205
0.206
0.339

43

Appendix Table 1 Continued. Bias After Propensity Score Matching by AgeSize Category
Control
Treated
Standardized
Sample
Sample
Difference
Age 4-10, Emp 100-249
Log Empt-1
4.923
4.923
0.062
Log (Empt-1/Empt-2)
0.180
0.209
6.741
Log (Empt-2/Empt-3)
0.153
0.157
1.069
Log (Empt-3/Empt-4)
0.213
0.204
-2.368
Age 11+, Emp 1-4
Log Empt-1
0.876
0.876
0.000
Log (Empt-1/Empt-2)
-0.066
-0.064
0.376
Log (Empt-2/Empt-3)
-0.040
-0.032
1.770
Log (Empt-3/Empt-4)
-0.022
-0.015
1.766
Age 11+, Emp 5-19
Log Empt-1
2.240
2.237
-0.260
Log (Empt-1/Empt-2)
0.030
0.035
1.074
Log (Empt-2/Empt-3)
0.021
0.026
1.278
Log (Empt-3/Empt-4)
0.019
0.026
1.806
Age 11+, Emp 20-49
Log Empt-1
3.384
3.378
-0.426
Log (Empt-1/Empt-2)
0.056
0.061
1.263
Log (Empt-2/Empt-3)
0.044
0.052
1.826
Log (Empt-3/Empt-4)
0.044
0.046
0.479
Age 11+, Emp 50-99
Log Empt-1
4.201
4.198
-0.232
Log (Empt-1/Empt-2)
0.079
0.074
-1.121
Log (Empt-2/Empt-3)
0.054
0.055
0.321
Log (Empt-3/Empt-4)
0.053
0.055
0.530
Age 11+, Emp 100-249
Log Empt-1
4.962
4.960
-0.180
Log (Empt-1/Empt-2)
0.074
0.097
5.295
Log (Empt-2/Empt-3)
0.055
0.054
-0.241
Log (Empt-3/Empt-4)
0.056
0.071
3.538
For a given variable, say age, the standardized difference (% bias) is

. These numbers are calculated for the regression samples in
Table 9.

44

Appendix Table 2. Unadjusted Employment Growth Regressions by Size Categories, Age
Categories
Loan Amount
Number of
Number of
Percent of
Coefficient
Observations
Treated Firms
Observations
with Boundary
Change
Emp 1-4
2.431
1,284,000
59,700
0.01
(0.062)
Emp 5-19
2.079
737,500
67,800
0.06
(0.078)
Emp 20-49
3.180
2,516,300
28,400
0.34
(0.083)
Emp 50-99
3.692
286,000
6,900
2.00
(0.230)
Emp 100-249
6.234
55,700
2,400
13.65
(0.706)
Age 0
6.022
7,555,600
49,800
0.16
(0.167)
Age 1-3
2.978
1,282,100
53,100
0.08
(0.181)
Age 4-10
2.975
1,108,300
57,400
0.23
(0.122)
Age 11+
3.011
2,489,100
54,700
0.76
(0.088)

These are kernel-weighted OLS regressions, run separately for each size and age category. The dependent variable is
average employment in t+1 through t+3 minus average employment in t-3 through t-1, including only firms that have
positive employment in each of those years. Employment changes can be due to either organic growth or boundary
changes. Loan amount is in millions of 2010 dollars. Treated firm-control fixed effects are also included in the
regressions. Standard errors, cluster-adjusted by firm, are in parentheses. The share of observations with boundary
changes is kernel weighted. The number of observations and SBA firms are rounded to the nearest 100 for disclosure
avoidance.

45

Appendix Table 3. Unadjusted Employment Growth Regressions by Age-Size Categories
Loan Amount
Number of
Number of
Percent of
Coefficient
Observations
Treated Firms
Observations
with Boundary
Change
Age 0
6.022
7,555,600
49,800
0.16
(0.167)
Age 1-3, Emp 1-4
3.340
622,500
28,500
0.01
(0.114)
Age 1-3, Emp 5-19
2.158
163,800
18,500
0.03
(0.339)
Age 1-3, Emp 20-49
3.714
467,400
5,000
0.15
(0.293)
Age 1-3, Emp 50-99
2.168
26,600
800
0.70
(0.920)
Age 1-3, Emp 100-249
11.630
1,800
200
6.11
(5.095)
Age 4-10, Emp 1-4
1.797
313,800
19,500
0.01
(0.068)
Age 4-10, Emp 5-19
2.244
201,100
25,100
0.06
(0.069)
Age 4-10, Emp 20-49
3.480
547,900
10,300
0.27
(0.180)
Age 4-10, Emp 50-99
3.918
40,900
1,900
1.56
(0.687)
Age 4-10, Emp 100-249
6.823
4,700
500
7.85
(2.255)
Age 11+, Emp 1-4
1.638
347,700
11,700
0.01
(0.120)
Age 11+, Emp 5-19
1.881
372,600
24,200
0.08
(0.047)
Age 11+, Emp 20-49
2.857
1,501,100
13,000
0.43
(0.077)
Age 11+, Emp 50-99
3.813
218,400
4,100
2.25
(0.219)
Age 11+, Emp 100-249
5.852
49,300
1,700
14.47
(0.712)

These are kernel-weighted OLS regressions, run separately for each age-size category. The dependent variable is
average employment in t+1 through t+3 minus average employment in t-3 through t-1, including only firms that have
positive employment in each of those years. Employment changes can be due to either organic growth or boundary
changes. Loan amount is in millions of 2010 dollars. Treated firm-control fixed effects are also included in the
regressions. Standard errors, cluster-adjusted by firm, are in parentheses. The share of observations with boundary
changes is kernel weighted. The number of observations and SBA firms are rounded to the nearest 100 for disclosure
avoidance.

46

