                                NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




       SIGN RESTRICTIONS IN BAYESIAN FAVARS WITH AN APPLICATION TO
                         MONETARY POLICY SHOCKS

                                        Pooyan Amir Ahmadi
                                           Harald Uhlig

                                        Working Paper 21738
                                http://www.nber.org/papers/w21738


                      NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                               1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                 Cambridge, MA 02138
                                    November 2015




The authors would like to thank without implicating Albrecht Ritschl, Chris Sims, Mark Watson, and
Bartosz Mackowiak, workshop participants at Princeton University, Humboldt University, Nottingham
University, annual SED meetings in Prague as well as Cyprus, and the NBER summer Institute 2010.
This research has been supported by the NSF grant SES-0922550. We are grateful to Paul Ho for research
assistance. Part of this research was conducted while the first author was a visiting research scholar
at the economics department at Princeton University, or while both were at Humboldt University and
the SFB649: their support is gratefully acknowledged. Harald Uhlig has consulting relationships with
the Bundesbank, the Federal Reserve Bank of Chicago and the ECB. The usual disclaimer applies.
The views expressed herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the
National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.

© 2015 by Pooyan Amir Ahmadi and Harald Uhlig. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not
to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including
© notice, is given to the source.
Sign Restrictions in Bayesian FaVARs with an Application to Monetary Policy Shocks
Pooyan Amir Ahmadi and Harald Uhlig
NBER Working Paper No. 21738
November 2015
JEL No. C22,E5

                                              ABSTRACT

We propose a novel identification strategy of imposing sign restrictions directly on the impulse responses
of a large set of variables in a Bayesian factor-augmented vector autoregression. We conceptualize
and formalize conditions under which every additional sign restriction imposed can be qualified as
either relevant or irrelevant for structural identification up to a limiting case of point identification.
Deriving exact conditions we establish that, (i) in a two dimensional factor model only two out of
potentially infinite sign restrictions are relevant and (ii) in contrast, in cases of higher dimension every
additional sign restriction can be relevant improving structural identification. The latter result can
render our approach a blessing in high dimensions. In an empirical application for the US economy
we identify monetary policy shocks imposing conventional wisdom and find modest real effects avoiding
various unreasonable responses specifically present and pronounced combining standard recursive
identification with FAVARs.


Pooyan Amir Ahmadi
Goethe University Frankfurt
Department of Economics
House of Finance
Grüneburgplatz 1
60323 Frankfurt am Main, Germany
amir@econ.uni-frankfurt.de

Harald Uhlig
Dept. of Economics
University of Chicago
1126 E 59th Street
Chicago, IL 60637
and NBER
huhlig@uchicago.edu
       SIGN RESTRICTIONS IN BAYESIAN FAVARS WITH AN
         APPLICATION TO MONETARY POLICY SHOCKS1

                 Pooyan Amir-Ahmadia and Harald Uhligb
        We propose a novel identification strategy of imposing sign restrictions directly
    on the impulse responses of a large set of variables in a Bayesian factor-augmented
    vector autoregression. We conceptualize and formalize conditions under which every
    additional sign restriction imposed can be qualified as either relevant or irrelevant for
    structural identification up to a limiting case of point identification. Deriving exact
    conditions we establish that, (i) in a two dimensional factor model only two out of
    potentially infinite sign restrictions are relevant and (ii) in contrast, in cases of higher
    dimension every additional sign restriction can be relevant improving structural iden-
    tification. The latter result can render our approach a blessing in high dimensions.
    In an empirical application for the US economy we identify monetary policy shocks
    imposing conventional wisdom and find modest real effects avoiding various unrea-
    sonable responses specifically present and pronounced combining standard recursive
    identification with FAVARs.
       Keywords: Bayesian FAVAR, Dynamic Factor Models, Identification, Sign Re-
    striction, Gibbs Sampling, Monetary Policy Shocks.



                                     1. INTRODUCTION
  What are the dynamic effects of monetary policy shocks on the economy? To
answer these type of questions and generally policy analysis in time series settings
we suggest combining two recent advances in empirical macroeconomics: factor-
augmented VARs (FAVAR) and identification per sign restrictions. We propose
and assess a novel identification strategy of imposing sign restrictions directly on
the impulse responses of large set of variables to shocks in a Bayesian FAVAR.
The novel feature and key strength of our approach is the additional “bite” due
to the differences in factor loadings across sets of time series representing, say,
“prices” or “output” resulting in a further minimized and refined identified set.
As an important advantage, our procedure does not require a structural inter-
pretation of the factors themselves or adding observables to the list of factors1 .
For the application to monetary policy shocks we impose the conventional wis-
dom regarding the responses of prices, monetary aggregates, spreads and interest
rates.
  1 The  authors would like to thank without implicating Albrecht Ritschl, Chris Sims, Mark
Watson, and Bartosz Maćkowiak, workshop participants at Princeton University, Humboldt
University, Nottingham University, annual SED meetings in Prague as well as Cyprus, and
the NBER summer Institute 2010. This research has been supported by the NSF grant SES-
0922550. We are grateful to Paul Ho for research assistance. Part of this research was conducted
while the first author was a visiting research scholar at the economics department at Prince-
ton University, or while both were at Humboldt University and the SFB649: their support is
gratefully acknowledged. The usual disclaimer applies.
   a Goethe University Frankfurt,amir@econ.uni-frankfurt.de
   b The University of Chicago, NBER and CEPR,huhlig@uchicago.edu
   1 Hence our suggested approach works for the general class of dynamic factor models.



                                                 1
2                                 P. AMIR-AHMADI, H. UHLIG

   We provide formal conditions to establish whether an additional sign restric-
tion is relevantly binding and by that leading to an improved and refined iden-
tification further narrowing the bounds of the identified set towards exact point
identification. This is generally feasible due to the inherent large dimensional
nature of dynamic factor models and FAVARs. We demonstrate an important
distinction in those conditions for case of two or higher factor dimensions. In the
former case exactly two sign restriction are sufficient and we show what those
conditions are. In the latter case, theoretically every additional sign restriction
could potentially improve structural identification. In the limit of binding sign
restrictions the it can lead to exact point identification.
   Our approach avoids the price puzzle by construction, and remains usable
for subsamples as well. We show this per applying our approach to a data set
ending in June 2010, thus including the 2008 financial crisis episode and the
ensuing quantitative easing policies of the Federal Reserve Bank, an episode
that generates considerable challenges to any strategy of identifying monetary
policy shocks: the results do not change much, even when we restrict the sample
to include only the “post-Volcker” years from 1984 to 2010 or excluding the
period in which quantitative easing was in place.
   Following the lead of Sims [1972], Sims [1980] and Sims [1986], a large literature
has developed, analyzing the effects of monetary policy shocks with the aid of
vector autoregression (VAR). Most VAR studies consider a small number of vari-
ables in order to save degrees of freedom for keeping the model tractable2 . The
central bank is likely to take considerably more information into account when
choosing its course of actions, however. As pointed out by Bernanke and Boivin
[2003], monetary policy takes place in a “data-rich environment”. Bernanke and
Boivin [2003], Stock and Watson [2005] and Bernanke, Boivin and Eliasz [2005]
therefore introduced factor vector autoregression (FAVAR) models, combining
dynamic factor models with the VAR analysis.
   Identifying assumptions are key. We propose to identify monetary policy shocks
with the help of sign restrictions, introduced by Dywer [1997], Faust [1998],
Canova and Pina [2005], Canova and De Nicoló [2002] and Uhlig [2005]. A sur-
vey and various extensions for structural VAR identified with sign restrictions
are in Rubio-Ramirez, Waggoner and Zha [2010]. They also show how to ef-
ficiently draw from the Haar measure generating candidate rotation matrices.
Mumtaz and Surico [2009] and Mumtaz, Zabczyk and Ellis [2014] impose stan-
dard contemporaneous sign restrictions either directly on structured factors in a
FAVAR model or on the standard small set of variables respectively. Hamilton
and Baumeiseter [2015] study among others the role of the prior in set identified
structural VAR models potentially carrying over to the posterior with substan-
tial weight. Arias, Waggoner and Rubio-Ramirez (2014) and Kilian and Murphy
(2012) show how to employ a mixture of zero and sign restrictions. Employing
sign restrictions, the response of key macroeconomic variables such as prices and
    2 On   the larger side, Leeper, Sims and Zha [1996] employ a Bayesian VAR with 18 variables.
                        BFAVAR WITH SIGN RESTRICTION                               3

interest rates to a monetary policy shock is restricted to accord with a priori
theory, in order to achieve identification. Our key innovation compared to that
literature is to use a FAVAR approach allowing us to impose restrictions on a
comparatively large number of observable time series, potentially providing a
more exact identification. For example, not one, but many price series can and
will be restricted in their response: as each reacts somewhat differently to shocks,
the range of potential candidates for monetary policy shocks is reduced. This is
important, since sign restrictions offer weak or set identification, as opposed to
point identification, see Canova [2007] for a discussion of the latter. Compared
to other identification strategies in FAVARs as introduced as well as surveyed
by Stock and Watson [2005] and Stock and Watson [2011], our approach avoids
a structural interpretation of the factors themselves or adding observables to
the list of factors. In fact, our approach can be applied and is appealing more
broadly, when a substantial number of observable time series can potentially be
restricted in their response to a shock, and thus can also be applied in dynamic
factor models.
   Sims and Zha [1998] review Bayesian methods for multivariate models and
their advantages: our paper is in that tradition. For the estimation we choose
a Bayesian likelihood-based estimation based on MCMC methods which is fully
parametric. Thus we can explicitly exploit the factor structure of the data and
the law of motion of the extracted factors. Our impulse response confidence
bands are posterior probability statements rather than confidence sets, an issue
raised and analyzed in Moon and Schorfheide [2012] and Granziera, Moon and
Schorfheide [2013], and discussed from a Bayesian perspective in Rubio-Ramı́rez-
Waggoner-Zha [2010]. Giacomini and Kitagawa (2015) propose general method
for conducting inference in SVARs that are partially identified due to inequality
restrictions. Their objective is to characterize the identified set using robust
Bayesian methods. We use a set of monthly macroeconomic data from 1960:02
to 2010:06, building and extending a data set provided by Stock and Watson. We
check for subsample stability. We compare the results from our approach to the
Cholesky identification in FAVARs, as proposed by Bernanke, Boivin and Eliasz
[2005]. We choose a benchmark specification in terms of the FAVAR as well as
the restrictions imposed, but have studied a number of variations, documented
in a technical appendix.
   Compared to the VAR sign restriction literature, our confidence bands for the
on-impact response is typically considerably more narrow. For the full sample
as well as the post-Volcker sample, we find that a monetary policy shock one
standard deviation in size raises the Federal Funds Rate by about 15 basis points,
before eventually reverting course and an eventual decrease of 10 basis points. In
response, we find that industrial production decreases, with a maximum impact
of minus 0.2 percent at the median estimate after one year before reverting
back. For the subsectors, we find the smallest or even a positive reaction for
the industrial production in residential utilities as well as fuels, while industrial
production of business equipment as well as durable materials falls somewhat
4                            P. AMIR-AHMADI, H. UHLIG

more strongly and more persistently than total industrial production. The effect
on real GDP is less pronounced. The posterior confidence bands includes zero or
positive reactions, consistent with Uhlig [2005]. We find that the forecast-error
revision variance of industrial production due to monetary policy shocks accounts
for less than 10 percent at the median estimate, which is consistent with results
in Sims and Zha [2006] and Uhlig [2005]. Similar results have been obtained
for the period of the US Great Depression in Sims [1999] and Amir Ahmadi
and Ritschl [2013]. Employment falls by 0.1 percent within two years, starting
from an initial zero response. Total unemployment puzzlingly shows an initial
fall of about 0.08 percentage points. The CPI falls by 0.1 percent on impact, and
by half a percent eventually within four years, showing a persistent response.
Yield spreads initially fall in response, and fall the more strongly, the longer the
maturity. The spread between the 3-month TBill and the Federal Funds Rate
falls by 5 basis points one month after the shock, whereas the spread between
the 10 year Treasury Bond and the Federal Funds Rate falls by 15 basis points.
The spread responses are rather tightly estimated.
   For the Cholesky identification as proposed by Bernanke, Boivin and Eliasz
[2005], we find substantial prize puzzles. For the post-1984 subsample, for exam-
ple, the CPI response is rather tightly estimated to rise by 0.1 percent within
a year. Even within four years, it remains considerably more likely that the
CPI response stays positive rather than turning negative. The commodity prices
increase on impact. We argue that these results render the Cholesky identifica-
tion approach considerably less useful for the analysis of monetary policy shocks
than ours. The Cholesky decomposition implies a persistent fall in industrial
production, whereas our identification shows industrial production to return to
a near-zero uncertainty band within two years. This matters in particular for the
purpose of political debates regarding monetary policy choices, and provides all
the more reason to adapt our identification rather than a Cholesky identification
in a FAVAR.


                                   2. THE MODEL
  The idea of a factor vector autoregression or FAVAR, as introduced by Bernanke,
Boivin and Eliasz [2005], is to summarize the key dynamics of a large set of time
series by a small list, containing some common factors as well as some key vari-
ables. Time is indexed by t = 1, . . . , T . The small list of key variables is a [ny × 1]
vector fty . The remaining time series are a [nx × 1] vector xt . Let ft denote the
[nf × 1] vector of unobservable common factors of Xtc . The [nx × 1] vector et is
a time-t error term. The model is

(2.1)     Xtc = λc ftc + λy fty + et , with et ∼ N (0, Re ) iid

Here λc and λy denote the matrix of factor loadings of the factors and the
perfectly observable variables included as factors with dimension [nx × nf ] and
                             BFAVAR WITH SIGN RESTRICTION                              5

[nx × ny ] respectively. The covariance matrix Re is assumed to be diagonal.
Hence the error terms of the observable variables are assumed to be mutually
uncorrelated. The FAVAR state equation represents the joint dynamics of factors
and the key variables ft = ((ftc )0 , (fty )0 )0 following a VAR(P) process.
                           P               c
             ftc
                                              
                           X              ft−p
(2.2)                  =         φp                  + ut , with ut ∼ N (0, Qu ) iid
             fty                           y
                                          ft−p
                           p=1

where ut is the date-t reduced form shock, Qu is the factor error covariance
matrix and φp are the p-lag coefficient matrices. The dimensions are [K × 1],
[K×1] and [K×K] respectively, where the total number of factors is K = nf +ny .
We assume that Qu is of full rank.


                                           3. IDENTIFICATION
                       3.1. Sign Restrictions in FAVARs and DFMs
  The major objective of this paper is to identify structural shocks in a FAVAR,
per imposing sign restrictions on impulse responses as introduced by Uhlig [2005]
for the VAR framework. The specific application is to the identification of a
monetary policy shock.
  The structural shocks νt ∈ R  I K are related to the reduced form shocks ut of
the factor VAR (2.2) per
           ut = Aνt
where the matrix A is an orthogonal invertible matrix of dimension [K × K],
satisfying

         Qu = AA0

arising from the assumption that the νt are uncorrelated and of unit variance,

         E[νt νt0 ] = IK

The instantaneous response to any structural shock is an “impulse vector”, as
defined in Uhlig (2005):

Definition 1 The vector a ∈ RI K is called an impulse vector, iff there is some
matrix A, so that AA0 = Qu and so that a is a column of A.

  Per proposition 1 of Uhlig [2005,pp. 18], any impulse vector can be charac-
terized as follows. Let ÃÃ0 = Qu be the Cholesky decomposition. Then a is an
impulse vector if and only if there is some K-dimensional vector α of unit length
so that

(3.1)    a = Ãα
6                           P. AMIR-AHMADI, H. UHLIG

For estimation and further analysis, consider the companion form of (2.1) to
(2.2)
         Ft = ΦFt−1 + ut
          Xt = ΛFt + Et .
where Ft , Xt , Φ, Et are defined in the appendix, equations (A.4) in the usual
manner per stacking. Let a = [a0 , 01,K(P −1) ]0 . Compute
          ra(f ) (s) = Φs a
to obtain the vector of impulse responses of ft to an impulse in a at horizon s.
Compute
          ra(X) (s) = Λra (s).
to obtain the vector of impulse responses of Xt to an impulse in a at horizon s.
  To impose sign restrictions means to pick a list L  I ⊆ {1, . . . , nf + ny + nx } of
variables among ft and Xt as well as a restriction horizon H ≥ 0.

Definition 2 The impulse vector a satisfies the sign restrictions (IL, H), if
 (f )                                         (X)
ra (s)j ≥ 0 for all j ∈ LI , j ≤ nf + ny and ra (s)j−nf −ny ≥ 0 for all j ∈ L
                                                                            I,j >
nf + ny , for all s ∈ {0, . . . , H}.

   For the ease of exposition, we have imposed that sign restrictions are always
positive. If the sign restriction on the original variable is negative, this can be
achieved by flipping the sign of the variable: in practice, one would simply distin-
guish between negative and positive restrictions, of course. Further, and for the
ease of exposition, we have assumed that the restriction horizon is the same for
all variables: this is rather trivial to generalize, at the expense of more cumber-
some notation. Furthermore, one may wish to impose sign restrictions on several
impulse vectors or impose additional exact identifying restrictions: we do not
pursue these rather straightforward generalizations here, in the interest of space
and for the ease of exposition.


                 3.2. Many sign restrictions: when do they help?
  In contrast to a VAR in a few variables, a FAVAR offers the opportunity
to impose sign restrictions on many variables in X. In particular, as the panel
dimension of the FAVAR diverges to infinity, one may have the opportunity to
impose ever more sign restrictions, in principle. While one can also contemplate
ever more sign restrictions in the VAR case per increasing the restriction horizon,
this is arguably far less sensible than, say, finding more price series or more asset
price series to constrain monetary policy impulse vectors.
  The question then arises, whether they help and when? We seek to offer some
insights on this matter. To that end, we wish to express sign restrictions in terms
of sets for the impulse vector a. That vector only has an interpretation, if the
coefficient matrices Φ, Λ are known. These need to be estimated in practice. Fur-
ther, the factors and thus Φ will generally only be exactly known asymptotically,
                             BFAVAR WITH SIGN RESTRICTION                                    7

as both the panel dimension and the time dimension approach infinity. From a
Bayesian perspective, which we adopt here throughout, the posterior will provide
candidate draws for Φ, Λ, which one can condition on. All these issues are well-
understood outside the particular focus on sign restrictions here. We therefore
allow ourselves to assume Φ, Λ to be known, for the discussion here.
   Given the sign restrictions (IL, H), values for Φ, Λ, enumerate the m = (H −
1) × ]I
      L sign restrictions i = 1, . . . , m, i.e., every one of these i corresponds one
for one to some ji ∈ LI and si ∈ {0, . . . , H}. For each i construct a row vector bi
of length nf + ny as follows. If ji ≤ nf + ny , let

           bi = e(ji ) Φsi

where e(ji ) is a row vector of length nf + ny , with only zero entries, except for
(e(ji ) )ji = 1. If ji > nf + ny , let

           bi = ẽ(ji −nf −ny ) ΛΦsi

where ẽ(ji −nf −ny ) is a row vector of length nx , with only zero entries, except for
(ẽ(ji −nf −ny ) )ji −nf −ny = 1. We shall refer to the bi as sign restriction vectors.
Let
                           
                       b1
                     b2 
            B= . 
                           
                     .. 
                    bm

the matrix stacking all row vectors b1 , . . . , bm . Finally, define the set B =
                                                                                     I nf +ny ,
{b01 , . . . , b0m } of all sign restriction vectors. Generally, for any subset C of R
                               ∗
define the dual cone C per

           C ∗ = {y ∈ R
                      I nf +ny | x0 y ≥ 0 for all x ∈ C}

The following property is well-known in convex analysis: for completeness, we
provide a proof.

Proposition 1                            I nf +ny , we have C ∗ = C ∗∗∗
                     For any subset C of R

Proof: If x ∈ C, then x0 y ≥ 0 for all y ∈ C ∗ per definition of C ∗ . Thus, x ∈ C ∗∗ .
This implies that C ∗∗∗ ⊆ C ∗ . Conversely, let y ∈ C ∗ . Then x0 y ≥ 0 for all x ∈ C ∗∗
per definition of C ∗∗ . Hence, y ∈ C ∗∗∗ .                                     Q.E.D.
  The following characterization is now immediate.

Proposition 2 Given Φ, Λ, the following statements are equivalent:
  1. The impulse vector a satisfies the sign restrictions (IL, H).
  2. bi a ≥ 0 for all sign restriction vectors bi , i = 1, . . . , m.
8                                     P. AMIR-AHMADI, H. UHLIG

    3. Ba ≥ 0.
    4. a ∈ B ∗
    5. a ∈ B ∗∗∗

   Note that the sign restrictions only restrict the direction or cone for a. The
length restriction for a obtains from the requirement that AA0 = Qu , see equation
(3.1).
   Equipped with these tools, we can characterize, when some additional sign
restriction is useful or not.

Definition 3 Given the sign restrictions (IL, H) and values for Φ, Λ, an ad-
ditional sign restriction ba ≥ 0, characterized by a sign restriction vector b0 ∈
I nf +ny , is called irrelevant, if all a satisfying the sign restrictions (IL, H) also
R
satisfy ba ≥ 0.

    With the insights above, we obtain

                                                                  I nf +ny
Proposition 3 An additional sign restriction ba ≥ 0 for some b0 ∈ R
                    0   ∗∗
is irrelevant, iff b ∈ B .

    Note that B ∗∗ is the closure of the smallest convex cone containing B.
Proof: Per proposition 2, a satisfies the sign restrictions (IL, H), iff a ∈ B ∗∗∗ .
Suppose it does. If b0 ∈ B ∗∗ , we therefore have ba ≥ 0. Conversely, suppose that
b0 ∈
   / B ∗∗ . Then ba < 0 for some a ∈ B ∗ , and thus for some a satisfying the sign
restrictions (I
              L, H), per proposition 2.                                    Q.E.D.
  A rather clean distinction can and should be made between the two-dimensional
case and higher-dimensional cases3 .

Proposition 4 Suppose there are only two factors, nf + ny = 2. Suppose there
are finitely many sign restrictions, ]B < ∞ and that the sign restrictions are not
impossible to satisfy, i.e. that B ∗ 6= {0}. Then there are two sign restrictions b̂
and b̌, such that B ∗ = {b̂, b̌}∗ . The two sign restrictions solve

                                 b̂b̌0
(3.2)            min
              b̂,b̌∈B/{0}   || b̂ || || b̌ ||

In words, with these two sign restrictions b̂ and b̌, which maximizes the angle
between them, all others are irrelevant.

Proof: Geometrically, the proposition is equivalent to the statement that a
closed cone in two dimensions is the area between two rays, which have the
maximal angle between them of all rays in the cone. This latter statement is
true by inspection.                                                  Q.E.D.
    3 We   leave out the trivial zero-dimensional and one-dimensional cases.
                            BFAVAR WITH SIGN RESTRICTION                                 9

   It is worth emphasizing that this applies also to sign restrictions in two-
dimensional VARs: only two sign restrictions “matter”.
   In dimensions higher than three, it can happen that no sign restriction is
irrelevant, i.e. no sign restriction is irrelevant, when added to the set of all other
sign restrictions. It suffices to provide an example in R    I 3 : it is then clear, that
this example can be generalized to all higher dimensions. For R          I 3 , let the sign
restrictions be characterized by bi = [cos θi , sin θi , 1], where the θi ∈ [0, π) are
all distinct. Examine one of these, say, b1 = [cos θ1 , sin θ1 , 1]. Consider aλ =
[− cos θ1 , − sin θ1 , λ] for λ ∈ [0, 1]. Note that
            bi aλ = − cos(θi − θ1 ) + λ
                    >      −1 + λ
                    = b1 aλ
We can therefore find λ ∈ [0, 1], so that bi aλ > 0 for all i 6= 1, but b1 aλ < 0.
This shows that b1 is not irrelevant, when added to all other sign restrictions.
    Finally, we can examine what happens as the panel dimension n = nx of
the FAVAR diverges to infinity. Suppose there are potentially infinitely many
sign restrictions L  I∞ ⊆ N I , with the list L   I n of sign restrictions for any given
n = nx given by L    I ∞ ∩ {1, . . . , nf + ny + nx }. Does it help to impose ever more
sign restrictions? The analysis above provides the answer, at least conceptually.
Proposition 3 shows that if there is some n̄ and associated set of sign restriction
vectors Bn̄ , so that all additional b arising for larger panels are contained in
Bn̄∗∗ , i.e. the closure of the smallest cone containing Bn̄ , then these new sign
restrictions are irrelevant.
    In the two-dimensional case, as proposition 4 and the geometric interpretation
in the proof shows, this irrelevance arises, if all future b-rays are within the two
boundary rays b̂n and b̌n of the panel-dimension-n FAVAR. On the other hand,
suppose that

                b̂n b̌0n
                                 →κ
           || b̂n || || b̌n ||

without reaching the limit at some n, where b̂n and b̌n are the extreme rays
of the panel-dimension-n FAVAR, calculated in proposition 4. Then there are
always new sign restrictions coming up with increasing the panel dimension,
which are not irrelevant. In the extreme case, where κ = −1, one obtains exact
identification of a, as n → ∞. It may not be particularly reasonable to hope for
such a tightening of sign restrictions, as the panel dimension diverges to infinity,
but such a hope might have a better foundation in any empirical application than
the hope that one can obtain exact identification in the sign-restricted VAR case,
with an ever increasing horizon.
   In higher-dimensional cases, it may be that all new sign restrictions are relevant
as in example constructed above for R   I 3 : one can certainly construct a sequence
of θi ∈ [0, π), which are all distinct, i = 1, 2, . . .. One can also construct cases,
10                             P. AMIR-AHMADI, H. UHLIG

where one gets exact identification of a, as n → ∞: this happens, if the cone
B ∗∗ , which is an intersection of half-spaces, converges4 to a ray.



                  3.3. Sign restrictions for monetary policy shocks

  We proceed by imposing sign restrictions derived from “conventional wisdom”:
after a monetary policy contraction, the federal funds rate should increase, prices
should not increase and nonborrowed reserves as well as M1 should decrease. The
precise list is stated in section 4.

Assumption 1 A (contractionary) monetary policy impulse vector is
an impulse vector a so that the individual impulse response functions to a of
prices, nonborrowed reserves and M1 are not positive and the impulse responses
short term interest rate is positive, for a specified horizons s=0,. . . ,S.

Note that our strategy can be implemented, even if ny = 0, i.e., even if the
model is a dynamic factor model rather than a FAVAR.



      3.4. Cholesky decomposition and monetary policy shocks in FAVARs

  For comparison we also employ the Cholesky Identification following Bernanke,
Boivin and Eliasz [2005] who impose a recursive structure. We impose that fty =
[CP It , F F Rt ]0 , i.e., we use the CPI and the Federal Funds Rate as the key
macroeconomic variables in the overall list of factors ft . Let
              ut = Ãνt
           ÃÃ0 = Qu
where Ã is lower triangular Cholesky factor of the covariance matrix Qu of the
reduced form shocks ut and where the Federal Funds Rate as policy instrument
is ordered last in the FAVAR equation. A detailed description and defense of the
identification assumptions can be found in Bernanke et. al. [2005]. A survey and
discussion of alternatives identification schemes is provided in Stock and Watson
[2005], Stock and Watson [2011] and Stock and Watson [2015]. Note that this
strategy can only be implemented, when the policy instrument is part of the list
of factors, and therefore cannot be implemented in a dynamic factor model as
opposed to a FAVAR. Note that this strategy can only be implemented, when the
policy instrument (or a subeset of observable data) is part of the list of factors,
and therefore cannot be implemented in a dynamic factor model as opposed to
a FAVAR.

  4 We use the word “converge” in this sentence somewhat loosely, but it can be given a precise

mathematical definition
                       BFAVAR WITH SIGN RESTRICTION                             11

                              3.5. Misspecification
   Bernanke, Boivin and Eliasz [2005] add the Federal Funds Rate as the key
policy variable to a list of factors. The following considerations show, that one
ought to also include those variables, for which the “noise” component in the
factor representation is relevant for the monetary authority, when choosing its
monetary policy instrument. If the true underlying monetary policy rule involves
a variable not spanned by factors then the corresponding monetary policy shock
is not spanned by factors. This leads to misspecifications and the identification
of the monetary policy shock is incorrect.

While this may sound reasonably obvious in this rather general form, it may
be less obvious why it is useful to also include the CPI in the list of factors. It
turns out that the FAVAR specification can be misspecified, if the monetary au-
thority reacts to the “noise” component in the CPI and the CPI is not included
in the list of factors. Therefore, we include the CPI as well as the FFR in the
specification of our benchmark sign-restricted FAVAR model. These considera-
tions may also show, why prices might respond positively to a monetary policy
shock identified in a FAVAR, when the CPI is not included in the core VAR.
This insight may help to understand the puzzling results for the CPI index in
figures IV and V of Bernanke, Boivin and Eliasz [2005].

To provide a simple example, suppose that an inflation component πt and an
interest rate component rt follow the data generating process
(3.3)     πt = −αrt−1 + γπt−1 + π,t
(3.4)      rt = φπt + m,t
where α, γ, φ are positive coefficients, where π,t and where m,t are shocks to
inflation and to monetary policy respectively, assumed to be independent with
                                                                              2
each other and across time as well as normally distributed with variances σ,π
       2
and σ,m .

It is best to think about the components πt and rt as the noise components
in a factor structure. The model above thus makes the extreme assumption, that
the monetary policy shock is entirely contained in the “noise” component of the
interest rates. There are also more general versions. For example, the structure
above is relevant if the monetary policy shock does not affect inflation via the
other factors, but solely through the direct effect of interest rates on the “noise
component” of inflation. It is also relevant, if part of the monetary policy shock
component in a FAVAR without inflation included in the core VAR can actually
be explained by movements in inflation, and it is the part of interest rates driven
by that component, which affects inflation.

Note that the model implies

(3.5)     πt = (γ − αφ)πt−1 + π,t − αm,t−1
12                          P. AMIR-AHMADI, H. UHLIG

Assume that 0 ≤ γ − αφ < 1, and one can see that a positive monetary policy
shock m,t will affect inflation negatively with a one period delay, and with in-
flation gradually climbing back up to zero.

The empirical issue is now to correctly identify the monetary policy shock m,t .
The approach in Bernanke, Boivin and Eliasz [2005] recommends to add the fed-
eral funds rate to the available factors. Since there are no factors in the model
above (or since they have already been subtracted out), this amounts to esti-
mating the model
(3.6)     rt = βrt−1 + ut
(3.7)     πt = λrt + νt
where the first equation represents the factor model (with zero factors aside from
the interest rate), the second equation is the factor representation of inflation
with a factor loading λ on the interest rate component as the only available
factor. Usually, ut would be interpreted as the monetary policy shock. Given the
assumptions above, the coefficients can easily be calculated.

Proposition 5 Assume 0 ≤ γ − αφ < 1.
  1. The variance of the inflation component is given by
                             2
                           σ,π + α2 σ,m
                                      2
                 E[ππ] =
                           1 − (γ − αφ)2
       The variance of the interest rate component is given by

                 E[rr] = φ2 E[pp] + σm
                                     2


     2. For large samples, the estimates for β and λ converge to
                                       σ2
        (3.8)     β → γ − αφ − γ m
                                      E[rr]
                                     2
                                        
                          1         σm
        (3.9)     λ →         1−
                          φ        E[rr]
     3. If φ > 0, then λ > 0. If φ = 0, then β = 0 and λ = 0.

Proof: These results follow from straightforward calculations:
 1. The equation for E[ππ] follows directly from (3.5). For E[rr], use (3.4) to
    write E[rr] = E[(φπ + m )(φπ + m )] and exploit E[πm ] = 0.
 2. For the covariance E[rt πt ] of rt with πt or the autocovariance E[rt rt−1 ],
    note E[rt πt ] = E[(φπt + m,t )πt ] = φE[ππ] as well as

            E[rt rt−1 ] = E[φ(−αφrt−1 +γπt−1 +π,t )rt−1 ] = −αφE[rr]+γφE[rt πt ]

       Now, calculate β → E[rt rt−1 ]/E[rr] and λ → E[rt πt ]/E[rr].
 3.    Direct.
                                                                          Q.E.D.
                         BFAVAR WITH SIGN RESTRICTION                                13

  Note now, that the impulse response of the inflation component to ut , the
“identified” monetary policy shock, is simply λ times the impulse response of rt
to a monetary policy shock. Since λ > 0 for φ > 0, there will be a price puzzle on
impact. If furthermore β > 0, a condition which is easily met, inflation appears
to react positively to a monetary policy shock throughout. Put differently, if the
”noise” inflation component matters to monetary policy in setting interest rates,
and if the researcher fails to include inflation in the ”core” VAR, one easily ob-
tains a price puzzle.

On the other hand, note the shocks could be correctly identified from a VAR
in (rt , πt ) with one lag and a Cholesky-decomposition. Thus adding both, the
interest rate as well as inflation, to the factor specification, would resolve this
problem and result in correct identification of the monetary policy shock.

                            4. EMPIRICAL APPLICATION
                 4.1. Data, Model Specification and Identification
   We follow the empirical approach of Bernanke, Boivin and Eliasz [2005]. They
use the data set of Stock and Watson [1998,1999] which consists of a panel of
120 macroeconomic variables in monthly frequency transformed to induce sta-
tionarity. For our analysis we have updated the data set documented in Stock
and Watson [2005] with observations from 1960:02-2003:12 to 1960:02-2010:06,
slightly changing the set of variables5 . The data set is listed in Appendix B.1.
To check on subsample stability, we also use 1960:02-1979:09 (“Pre-Volcker”) as
well 1984:02-2010:06 (“Post-Volcker”).

We use a total of K = 6 factors ft . We use ny = 2 key variables, the CPI
and the Federal Funds Rate, for reasons described in appendix 3.5, and nf = 4
general factors, which are “extracted” and sampled from the remaining time se-
ries in the estimation phase. We used P = 12 lags in the factor VAR. The horizon
for the sign restriction to hold is set to H = 6 which is based on Uhlig (2005). In
our baseline specification, the impulse responses of the following variables have
been sign-restricted, in order to achieve identification of the monetary policy
shock, where numbers refer to table I in appendix B.1:
   1. prices: 104 to 111, 113, 114, 116 to 118.
   2. monetary aggregates: M1 (69) and nonborrowed reserves (73).
   3. interest rates: Federal Funds Rate (82).
   We also examined a minimal restriction specification, where we have restricted
the following variables:
   1. prices: commodity price index (108) and CPI (109).
   2. monetary aggregates: M1 (69) and nonborrowed reserves (73).
  5 We thank Mark Watson for making his data and computer codes available on his webpage
http://www.princeton.edu/ mwatson/wp.html. Our updated data set is available on our web
pages and in companion material for this paper.
14                          P. AMIR-AHMADI, H. UHLIG

    3. interest rates: Federal Funds Rate (82).
The results are very similar to our benchmark identification, and we thus refrain
from reporting the results here: they are available in a technical appendix.
   Alternatively, we examine an output-restricted specification where, in addition
to the full set of restrictions in our benchmark model, total industrial production
(17) as well as real GDP (18) is restricted to fall. This specification is useful for
economists, who believe that output surely falls after a monetary contraction,
and are interested in the shapes of the impulse responses and their quantita-
tive magnitudes, given these additional identifying assumption. This turns out
to result in more tightly estimated responses and (unsurprisingly) rather clearly
negative responses for output. The results, in form of a comparison to our bench-
mark specification, is available in a technical appendix to this paper.
   As a robustness check, we employed several variants of our strategy. The de-
tails are available as a technical appendix. We considered changing the set of
sign-restricted variables as well as the set of key variables fty included as factors.
Leaving out the CPI altered the results, which we suspect is due to the misspec-
ification discussed in 3.5. We experimented with changing the number of general
factors extracted from the data. We found that little information was added by
increasing the dimension of the system, per analyzing the marginal contribution
of further factors for the explanation of the variation in the data based on R2 .
We tried several versions with different lag length, but the results compared to
the ones reported here do not differ much. We found a tendency that the impact
and intensity of the responses of restricted variables increases with the horizon
H. For additional subsample checks, we used the data sets 1984:02-2002:12 as
well as 1981:09-2002:12, to vary the begin of the “post-Volcker” episode and to
exclude the financial crisis of 2008.


                                  4.2. Estimation
   For the estimation, we rely on now standard techniques. A detailed survey
with several identification schemes in the classical estimation approach can be
found in Stock and Watson [2005]. Bernanke, Boivin and Eliasz [2005] present
two competing approaches. The second estimation approach described in their
paper is the one that we employ in this paper because the likelihood based
one-step estimation approach employing MCMC methods explicitly exploits the
factor structure. We employ a Bayesian approach. We estimate the model with
a multi-move Gibbs sampler for which we have to cast the model into its state
space representation. Details matter: they are described in appendix A. All our
results are based on 50000 simulation draws of the Gibbs sampler of which the
first 40000 were discarded as a burn-in, keeping only the last 10000, in order to
avoid an initial transient of the starting values that initiated the simulation. For
each of these draws, 100 impulse vectors are drawn and checked for consistency
with the sign restrictions: we keep the once that do to calculate the posterior
distributions.
                        BFAVAR WITH SIGN RESTRICTION                               15

  In order to assure that the results are based on converged simulations, that
represent the respective target distribution completely and e.g. not only some
local mode, we apply a number of standard convergence diagnostics for the sim-
ulated parameters. We checked the ineffciency factors in figure (14). In figure
(15)-(19) we plotted the first half of the kept draws against the second to check
whether the sampler is still ”moving” towards the target distribution or whether
the whole density of the distribution is represented. Details are reported in a
technical appendix.


   We check the fit of our model. To this end, we estimated the R2 s from re-
gressing the respective series onto the four factors. Results are listed in table (II)
in appendix B.2. These results provide a report to what extend the individual
series are driven by common components: those with a low R2 are driven by
idiosyncratic forces rather than the common factors. We find that the model
fits well overall. We also estimated the respective marginal contribution of each
factor, not reported here, for the explanatory part in the variation of the data.
We provide plots of the extracted factors in a technical appendix.


                          4.3. Impulse Response Analysis
   The key statistics suited to answer the question at hand are impulse response
functions. Figure (1) shows some of the results for our benchmark specification.
A monetary policy shock one standard deviation in size raises the Federal Funds
Rate by about 15 basis points, before eventually reverting course and an eventual
decrease of 10 basis points. This may reflect either an attempt of the Federal
Reserve Bank to reverse an earlier mistake or reflect the increase in the implied
real rate, due to the fallen inflation rate. In response, we find that industrial pro-
duction decreases, with a maximum impact of minus 0.2 percent at the median
estimate after one year before reverting back. The 80 percent posterior confidence
set two years after the shock ranges from a decline of 0.4 percent to an increase
of 0.5 percent. The CPI falls 0.1 percent on impact and nearly half a percent
eventually, showing a persistent response. By contrast the commodity price index
decreases less strong with a maximum impact after about a year (aside from the
initial reaction) before reverting back to the pre shock level a year later. Com-
pared to CPI this may not be surprising as the commodity price index reflects
measures traded on the market with presumably more flexible prices.
   The rather clearly negative and hump-shaped response of industrial produc-
tion in (1) may appear to be in contrast to the more neutral finding regarding
real GDP reported in Uhlig [2005], when applying sign restrictions in a small-
scale VAR. The resolution is partly the distinction between these two variables:
as figure (2) shows, the posterior confidence band for the response of real GDP
is rather symmetric around zero for the first 12 months following the shock,
consistent with Uhlig [2005]. Figure (2) shows that employment falls by 0.1 per-
16                                      P. AMIR-AHMADI, H. UHLIG


     Figure 1.— Selected Impulse Responses for the Baseline Model.

                                IP: total                                     FedFunds

                   0.8
                                                                 0.2
                   0.6
                                                                 0.1
                   0.4
        Percent




                                                      Percent
                   0.2                                            0

                    0
                                                                −0.1
                  −0.2
                                                                −0.2
                  −0.4
                      0   12       24       36   48                0   12         24         36   48



                               CPI−U: all                                   NAPM com price
                    0
                                                                  0
                  −0.1                                          −0.5

                  −0.2                                           −1
        Percent




                                                      Percent




                                                                −1.5
                  −0.3
                                                                 −2
                  −0.4
                                                                −2.5
                  −0.5                                           −3

                  −0.6                                          −3.5

                     0    12       24       36   48                0   12         24         36   48




Results identified with sign restriction with the grey shaded area covering the 8 deciles (80%
                                 posterior probability bands).



cent within the first year, starting from an initial zero or modestly negative
response. Somewhat puzzlingly, unemployment shows an initial fall of 0.08 per-
centage points, but rises subsequently from that point during the first two years.
We speculate that this is either due to a discouragement effect of fewer displaced
workers re-entering the labor force and searching for employment, following a
contractionary monetary policy shock, or due to monetary policy misinterpret-
ing a fall in unemployment as a rationale for raising interest rates. For more
disaggregated unemployment series, we essentially find only increases, however,
see figure (59) in the appendix.
  Different sectors are affected differently. Figure (57) in the appendix shows the
impulse responses for the industrial production for a variety of sectors. We find
the smallest or even a positive reaction for the industrial production in residential
utilities as well as fuels, while industrial production of business equipment as well
as durable materials falls somewhat more strongly and more persistently than
total industrial production. Figure (58) in the appendix shows the reaction of
the different price indices. The producer price indices generally fall a bit more
                          BFAVAR WITH SIGN RESTRICTION                                     17


   Figure 2.— Selected Impulse Responses for the Baseline Model.

                         RealGDP                                 Emp CPS total

                                                   0.1
           0.5
                                                  0.05
           0.4

           0.3                                      0

           0.2                                   −0.05

           0.1                                    −0.1
            0
                                                 −0.15
          −0.1
                                                  −0.2
             0      12     24      36     48          0     12        24         36   48



                          U: all
          0.05


            0


         −0.05


          −0.1


         −0.15
              0     12     24      36     48




Results identified with sign restriction with the grey shaded area covering the 8 deciles (80%
                                 posterior probability bands).



than the consumer price indices. Note that we did not restrict the price indices
for medical care, or the implicit price deflators. This can serve as a cross-check
on our identification: indeed, they all react negatively, except for a very modest
price puzzle for the price index for medical services.
  Yield spreads initially fall in response. Figure (3) shows the responses of the
spreads to the Federal Funds Rate one month after the shock, as a function of
maturity: the spread response is the larger, the longer the maturity of the bonds.
While the 3-mo-FF spread falls by 5 basis points, the 10-year bond falls by 12
basis points, at the median estimate and at the one-month horizon. Figure (62) in
the appendix shows the impulse response for each spread: the responses tend to
be stronger for longer maturities. These responses are rather tightly estimated.
  Figures (4) and (5) show the impulse responses of figure (1), but for the
two subsamples 1960:02-1979:09 (“Pre-Volcker”) as well 1984:02-2010:06 (“Post-
Volcker”). The results for these variables as well as for most other variables
in the VAR remain reasonably robust during the first year or two after the
shock, though differences arise. In particular, there appears to be a continu-
18                                        P. AMIR-AHMADI, H. UHLIG


  Figure 3.— Impulse Responses after 1 month for the treasury
spreads at different maturities vs. the federal funds rate in the baseline
model.
                                                      IRF of Term Spread after 1 month



                                     0




                                  −0.05




                                   −0.1
                        Percent




                                  −0.15




                                   −0.2




                                  −0.25



                                          1   2   3        4        5       6        7   8   9   10
                                                                 Maturity




Results identified with sign restriction with the grey shaded area covering the 8 deciles (80%
                                 posterior probability bands).



ous sequence of reversals in the Federal Funds Rate in the pre-Volcker episode
than in the post-Volcker episode. One possible explanation may be that these
shocks in the pre-Volcker episode were mistakes that the Federal Reserve sub-
sequently tried to undo, but overshooting a bit in doing so, and so forth. More
importantly, the results for the post-Volcker episode look reasonable and plau-
sible, and more consistent with the results for the total sample, including the
response for the Federal Funds Rate. We find these results encouraging, as the
post-Volcker subsample includes the financial crisis of 2008 and the subsequent
quantitative easing episode, generating substantial challenges for any empirical
exercise aimed at identifying monetary policy shocks.
   Surely, these results should be taken with a grain of salt. It is plausible, that
monetary policy has changed both in terms of its reactions to economic news,
as well as in its constraints (such as the zero lower bound) and tools. It would
be fascinating to extend the methods here to allow for smooth time variation as
analyzed e.g. in Primiceri [2005], Cogley-Sargent [2005] and Sargent-Williams-
Zha [2006] or for Markov regime shifts as analyzed in Sims-Zha [2006], Sims-
Waggoner-Zha [2008] and Auerbach-Gorodnichenko [2012] or to extend the meth-
ods to allow for nonlinearities and the peculiarities of the zero lower bound. This
is beyond the scope of this paper. We rather wish to emphasize that reasonable
progress can already be made with the method at hand, that ours provides an im-
portant benchmark. However, note that the extension of our suggested approach
extends to the case of FAVARs with either time varying or Markov-Switching
parameters. Extensions of this method with these additional tools should provide
                           BFAVAR WITH SIGN RESTRICTION                                     19


  Figure 4.— Selected Impulse Responses for the pre-Volcker period.

                          IP: total                                FedFunds

                                                   0.1
           0.1


            0                                     0.05


          −0.1                                      0


          −0.2                                   −0.05


          −0.3                                    −0.1
              0     12       24       36   48         0     12         24         36   48



                         CPI−U: all                              NAPM com price

            0                                      0.5


         −0.05
                                                    0

          −0.1

                                                  −0.5
         −0.15


          −0.2                                     −1

             0      12       24       36   48        0      12         24         36   48




Results identified with sign restriction with the grey shaded area covering the 8 deciles (80%
                                 posterior probability bands).



a promising avenue for future research.
   Figure (6) shows the forecast error variance decompositions for our four key
variables, in the benchmark specification. Monetary policy shocks account for
less than 10% of the variation in industrial production and the Federal Funds
Rate, consistent with the view that the central bank typically does not role dice,
but do explain around 30 percent of the variation in the CPI. These results are
amongst others consistent with Sims [1999], Sims and Zha [2006], Uhlig [2005]
and Amir-Ahmadi and Ritschl [2008].
   Figure (7) shows the impulse response functions for the post-Volcker sample
and a FAVAR-Cholesky identification of the monetary policy shock one standard
deviation in size as the last shock in the Cholesky decomposition of the factors,
where the federal funds rate is ordered last. The results for the entire sample are
very similar and available in a technical appendix. The most striking difference
is the unreasonable high and long lasting ”price puzzle”. The CPI response is
rather tightly estimated to rise by 0.1 percent within a year. Even within four
years, it remains considerably more likely that the CPI response stays positive
20                                     P. AMIR-AHMADI, H. UHLIG


  Figure 5.— Selected Impulse Responses for the post-Volcker period.

                               IP: total                                         FedFunds

                   0.1
                                                                   0.06
                  0.05
                                                                   0.04
                    0
       Percent




                                                     Percent
                                                                   0.02
                 −0.05
                                                                     0
                  −0.1
                                                               −0.02
                 −0.15
                                                               −0.04
                  −0.2

                     0   12       24       36   48                    0   12         24         36   48



                              CPI−U: all                                       NAPM com price
                    0
                                                                    0.2
                 −0.02
                                                                     0
                 −0.04                                             −0.2
       Percent




                                                         Percent




                 −0.06                                             −0.4

                 −0.08                                             −0.6
                                                                   −0.8
                  −0.1
                                                                    −1
                 −0.12
                                                                   −1.2

                     0   12       24       36   48                    0   12         24         36   48




Results identified with sign restriction with the grey shaded area covering the 8 deciles (80%
 posterior probability bands). The time span for the estimation covers 1984 : 02 − 2006 : 12.




rather than turning negative. The commodity prices increase on impact. Another
anomaly is the increasing reaction (not shown) of nonborrowed reserves which
lasts for the whole horizon considered. We argue that these results render the
Cholesky identification approach considerably less useful for the analysis of mon-
etary policy shocks than ours. While the Cholesky decomposition implies that
industrial production falls by nearly 0.4 percent within a year, and then stays
there, our post-Volcker response shown in (5) implies a modest fall by 0.2 percent
within a year, with subsequent reversal to an uncertainty band around a zero
response within two years. While the difference in the size of the response may
entirely be due to the initial difference of the movement in the Federal Reserve
Rate ( 30 basis points for the Cholesky decomposition versus 15 basis points for
our identification), the differences in the results regarding the persistence mat-
ters in particular for the purpose of political debates regarding monetary policy
choices, and provides all the more reason to adapt our identification rather than
a Cholesky identification in a FAVAR.
                           BFAVAR WITH SIGN RESTRICTION                                     21


           Figure 6.— Selected FEVD for the Baseline Model.

                          IP: total                                FedFunds
           14
                                                    30
           12
                                                    25
           10
                                                    20
            8
                                                    15
            6

            4                                       10

            2                                       5


            0       12       24       36      48     0      12         24         36   48



                         CPI−U: all                              NAPM com price

           60                                       60

           50                                       50

           40                                       40

           30                                       30

           20                                       20

           10                                       10
            0       12       24       36      48     0      12         24         36   48




Forecast error variance decomposition for the baseline model identified with sign restriction.
           The grey shaded area cover the 9 deciles of the posterior distribution.



                                           5. CONCLUSION

   In this paper we propose to conduct structural identification combining Bayesian
FAVARs with sign restrictions. We show and discuss exact conditions under
which many sign restrictions improve structural identification up to the limiting
case of point identification. Furthermore we discuss the implication of misspecifi-
cation and how they can lead to the ”price puzzle”. In our empirical application
we estimate the model from a Bayesian perspective relying on MCMC meth-
ods. To infer the effects of a contractionary shock to monetary policy we impose
sign restriction on the impulses responses on many prices, monetary aggregates
and short term interest rates. FAVAR models as well as dynamic factor mod-
els offer the opportunity to impose a larger set of reasonable sign restrictions,
leading to sharper identification and results. Sign restrictions in FAVARs offer
the advantage of avoiding a structural interpretation of the factors themselves
or adding observables to the list of factors. Our approach should therefore prove
to be appealing in many applications beyond the one studied here. Our results
22                                        P. AMIR-AHMADI, H. UHLIG


 Figure 7.— Recursive Cholesky identification: post-Volcker Period

                                  IP: total                                     FedFunds
                                                                   0.1
                       0
                                                                  0.08
                 −0.02

                                                                  0.06
       Percent




                                                        Percent
                 −0.04

                 −0.06                                            0.04

                 −0.08                                            0.02

                     −0.1
                                                                    0
                        0   12       24       36   48                0   12         24         36   48



                                 CPI−U: all                                   NAPM com price
                     0.07
                                                                   0.3
                     0.06
                                                                   0.2
                     0.05
           Percent




                                                        Percent




                     0.04                                          0.1

                     0.03                                           0
                     0.02
                                                                  −0.1
                     0.01
                                                                  −0.2
                       0
                        0   12       24       36   48                0   12         24         36   48




Results based on a recursive Cholesky identification with the grey shaded area covering the 8
     deciles (80% posterior probability bands). The time span for the estimation covers
                                    1984 : 02 − 2006 : 12.



are reasonable, even with the inclusion of the post-2008 financial-crisis data and
remain fairly robust across subsamples, while a more conventional Cholesky iden-
tification leads to unreasonably large price puzzles. Compared to the VAR sign
restriction literature, our confidence bands for the on-impact response is typically
considerably more narrow. We find that after a contractionary monetary policy
shock a negative response of output but modest in size. We find that industrial
production decreases after a monetary contraction one standard deviation in
size, with a maximum impact of minus 0.2 percent at the median estimate after
one year, before returning to an uncertainty band around zero within two years.
The effect on real GDP is less pronounced and includes zero within the posterior
confidence band throughout. Monetary policy shocks account for less than 10
percent of the variation in industrial production and the Federal Funds Rate.
The CPI falls by 0.1 percent initially and by half a percent eventually, showing a
persistent response. Yield spreads initially fall in response, with the fall ranging
from 5 basis points for the 3-month to Federal Funds Rate spread to 25 basis
                              BFAVAR WITH SIGN RESTRICTION                                         23

points for ten-year bonds.


                      APPENDIX A: ESTIMATION AND INFERENCE
   For the estimation of FAVAR models Bernanke, Boivin and Eliasz [2005] present two com-
peting approaches. The first one, which they prefer due to their results and the computational
simplicity is the two-step estimation based on a dynamic principal component approach. This
classical approach goes back to Stock and Watson [2003]. A detailed survey with several identi-
fication schemes in the classical estimation approach can be found in Stock and Watson [2005].
The second estimation approach described in their paper is the one that we employ in this
paper because the likelihood based one-step estimation approach employing MCMC methods
explicitly exploits the factor structure. We pursue the multi-move Gibbs sampler for which we
have to cast the model into the state space representation. Let (2.2) be extended by fty which
results in h               h c
               Xtc                  λy
                    i                     ih c i h           i
                             λ                ft          et
(A.1)            y      =                      y      +
               ft             0    I Ny       ft           0
                      0                                                    0
Let Xt ≡ (Xtc 0 , fty )0 , Et ≡ (et 0 , 0[Ny ×1] 0 )0 and ft ≡ (ftc 0 , fty )0 , then the model can be
rewritten as
(A.2)       Xt = λft + Et
                       P
                       X
(A.3)        ft   =          φp ft−p + ut
                       p=1
where Xt has dimension [N × 1] with N = Nc + Ky . In most empirical applications and also
in our specification the lag order P exceeds one hence we have to rewrite the state space in a
stacked first order Markov process. This requires the following straight forward definitions for
the companion form of h the model:
                            λc      λy
                                        i
(A.4)         λ ≡
                         0Ny ×Kc INy
             φ    ≡   [φ1 , φ2 , . . . , φP ]0
            Ft    ≡   (ft , ft−1 , ..., ft−p+1 )
           Ut ≡ (ut , 0, ..., 0)0
The lag polynomial
                h of the FAVAR equation in the  i first-order representation changes to:
                     φ1      ···        φP
           Φ=                                     .
                  IK(P −1)         0K(P −1)×K
Now we have to transform the VCV of the FAVAR disturbances with 0’s in a straightforward
way to adjust the
                h dimensions
                           i of the state equation which results in the following matrix:
                  Qu 0
           Q=
                   0    0
where Q is of dimension [P K × P K] extended by zero matrices to match the companion form.
We define Λ ≡ [λ 0 · · · 0]. Then
(A.5)      Ft = ΦFt−1 + Ut
(A.6)       Xt    =    ΛFt + Et
(A.7)       Ut    ∼    N (0, Q)
(A.8)         Et ∼ N (0, R)
is the final state-space representation prepared to fit the estimation procedure. Note again that
R is diagonal and that et and ut are mutually independent.


                                         A.1. Factor Identification
   The factors are only identified up to an invertible rotation. Any rotation of the factors results
in the same likelihood for the factors though the models are different. Identifying restrictions
24                                P. AMIR-AHMADI, H. UHLIG

have to be set, in order to distinguish the idiosyncratic from the common component. Addi-
tionally one can set further identifying assumptions in order to identify the factors and the
loadings, separately. We follow the standard identification restrictions either on the factor load-
ing matrix employed by Bernanke, Boivin and Eliasz [2005] for unique identification against
rotational indeterminacy. Since factors are estimated up to a rotation, the normalization should
not affect the space spanned by the estimated factors. In the joint estimation case the specified
identification against rotation requires that the factors are uniquely identified in the following
form
(A.9)        ft∗ = Aftc − Bfty
where A and B are nonsingular. Restrictions are only imposed on the observation equation.
Here we substitute Ft∗ into (2.1) due to the fact that restrictions should not be imposed on
the VAR dynamics we obtain
(A.10)       Xtc = λc A−1 ft∗ + (λy + λc A−1 B)fty + et .
For unique identification of the factors and the loadings it is required that λc A−1 = λc and
λy + λc A−1 B = λy . As discussed in Bernanke, Boivin and Eliasz [2005] sufficient conditions
are to set the upper Kc × Kc block of λc to identity and the upper Kc × Ny block of λy to a
zero matrix6 .


                                              A.2. Inference
    Bayesian analysis treats the parameters of the model as random
                                                                         variables. We are interested
in inference on the parameter space θ = λf , λy , Re , φ, Qu and the factors {ft }T          t=1 . Multi
move Gibbs Sampling alternately samples the parameters θ and the factors ft , given the data.
We use the multi move version of the Gibbs sampler because this approach allows us, as a first
step, to estimate the unobserved common components, namely the factors via the Kalman
filtering technique conditional on the given hyperparameters and data, and as a second step
calculate the hyperparameters of the model given the factors and data via the Gibbs sampler in
the respective blocking. Let X T = (Xt , . . . , XT ) and F T = (F1 , . . . , FT ) define the respective
histories. For the estimation of the model we want to derive the posterior densities which
requires to empirically approximating
                          Z            the marginal posterior densities of F T and θ:
            p(F T )   =        p(F T , θ)dθ
                           Z
               p(θ)   =        p(F T , θ)dF T
where
             p(F T , θ)
is the joint posterior density and the integrals are taken with respect to the supports of θ and
F T respectively. The procedure applied to obtain the empirical approximation of the posterior
distribution is the previously mentioned multi move version of the Gibbs sampling technique
by Carter and Kohn [1994] and Frühwirth-Schnatter [1994]7 .


                                 A.3. Choosing the Starting Values
  In general one can start the iteration cycle with any arbitrary randomly drawn set of pa-
rameters, as the joint and marginal empirical distributions of the generated parameters will
converge at an exponential rate to its joint and marginal target distributions as S → ∞. This
has been shown by Geman and Geman [1984]. Since Gelman and Rubin [1992] have shown
that a single chain of the Gibbs sampler might give a ”false sense of security ”, it has become
  6 Note that this identification strategy is over-identified. However, for comparison purposes

we follow closely the approach of Bernanke, Boivin and Eliasz [2005].
  7 For a survey and more details see Kim and Nelson [1999], Eliasz [2005] and Bernanke,

Boivin and Eliasz [2005]
                               BFAVAR WITH SIGN RESTRICTION                                      25

common practice to try out different starting values. We check our results based on four dif-
ferent strategies regarding the set of starting values. One out of many convergence diagnostics
involves testing the fragility of the results with respect to the starting values. For the results
to be reliable, estimates based on different stating values should not differ. Strictly speak-
ing, the different chains should represent the same target distribution. In order to verify we
resestimated our model initialzing our Gibbs sampler in the following different ways
   (i) Randomly draw θ0 from (over)dispersed distribution
  (ii) Set θ0 to rather ”agnostic values” which involves setting 0’s for coefficients and 1’s for
       variances8
 (iii) Set θ0 to results from principal component analysis.9 In such a way the number of draws
       required for convergence can be reduced considerably.
 (iv) Set θ0 to parameters of the last iteration of the previous run.
  Results are robust to the various initialization strategies.


                  A.4. Conditional density of the factors F T given X T and θ

   In this subsection we want to sample from p(F T | X T , θ) assuming that the data and the
hyperparameters of the parameter space θ are given, hence we describe Bayesian inference on
the dynamic evolution of the factors ft conditional on Xtc for t = 1, . . . , T and conditional on
θ. The transformations that are required to draw the factors have been done in the previous
section. The conditional distribution, from which the state vector is generated, can be expressed
as the product of conditional distributions by exploiting the Markov property of state space
models in the following way
                                                 T −1
                                                 Y
            p(F T | X T , θ) = p(FT | X T , θ)          p(Ft | Ft+1 , X T , θ)
                                                 t=1
The state space model is linear and Gaussian, hence we have:
(A.11)             FT | X T , θ ∼ N (FT |T , PT |T )
(A.12)      Ft|T | Ft+1|T , X T , θ   ∼   N (Ft|t,Ft+1|T , Pt|t,Ft+1|T )
with
(A.13)            FT |T    =    E(FT | X T , θ)
(A.14)            PT |T    =    Cov(fT | X T , θ)
(A.15)      Ft|t,Ft+1|T    =    E(Ft | Ft|t , Ft+1 , θ)
(A.16)     Pt|t,Ft+1|T = Cov(Ft | Ft|t , Ft+1 , θ).
We first run the Kalman filter generating Ft|t and Pt| for t = 1, . . . , T . For the initialization
we set F1|0 = 0KP ×1 and P1|0 = IKP and iterate through the Kalman filter according to
(A.17)     Ft|t = Ft|t−1 + Pt|t−1 Λ0 H −1 ηt|t−1
(A.18)     Pt|t = Pt|t−1 − Pt|t−1 Λ0 H −1 ΛPt|t−1
where ηt|t−1 = (Xt − ΛFt|t−1 ) is the conditional forecast error and its covariance is denoted
by Ht|t−1 = (ΛPt|t−1 Λ0 + Re ). Furthermore let
(A.19)     Ft|t−1 = ΦFt−1|t−1
(A.20)      Pt|t−1 = ΦPt−1|t−1 Φ0 + Qu .
The last iteration of the Kalman filter yields FT |T and PT |T required for (A.11) to draw the
last observation and start the Kalman smoother according to (A.12) going backwards through

  8 Thisstrategy has been applied by Belviso and Milani [2007].
  9 Thisstrategy is particularly suited for large models as the ones studied here and has been
proposed by Eliasz [2005].
26                                       P. AMIR-AHMADI, H. UHLIG

the sample for Ft , t = T − 2, T − 3, . . . , 1 updating the filtered estimates with the sampled
factors one period up subject to
             ∗                                   −1
(A.21)      Ft|t,F       = Ft|t + Pt|t Φ∗0 Jt+1|t   ξt+1|t
                      t+1|T
              ∗                                         −1
(A.22)       Pt|t,F              =     Pt|t − Pt|t Φ∗0 Jt+1|t Φ∗ Pt|t .
                      t+1|T
                  ∗
where ξt+1|t = Ft+1  − Φ∗ Ft|t and Jt+1|t = Φ∗ Pt|t Φ∗ + Q∗ . Note that Q∗ refers to the upper
K × K block of Q and Φ∗ and Ft∗ denote the first K rows of Φ and Ft respectively. This is
required when Q is singular which is the case for the companion form when there is more than
one lag in (A.3). Here we closely follow Kim and Nelson [1999] where a detailed explanation
and derivation can be found.


                A.5. Conditional density of the parameters θ given X T and F T
   Sampling from the conditional distribution of the parameters p(θ | X T , F T ) requires the
blocking of the parameters into the two parts that refer to the observation equation and to
the state equation respectively. The blocks can be sampled independently from each other
conditional on the extracted factors and the data.

A.5.1. Conditional density of Λ and Re
   This part refers to observation equation of the state space model which, conditional on
the estimated factors and the data, specifies the distribution of Λ and Re . The errors of the
observation equation are mutually orthogonal with diagonal Re . Hence we can apply equation
by equation OLS in order to obtain the ols estimates Λ̂n and êc as the observation equation
amounts to a set of independent regressions. Note that the subscript n refers to the n-th
equation and all hat variables refer to the respective ols estimates. We assume conjugate priors
                p(Rnn ) = IG(δ0 /2, η0 /2)
                                            −1
           p(Λn | Rnn ) = N (Λn0 , Rnn Mn0     )
which according to Bayesian results10 conform to the following conditional posterior distribu-
tion
                p(Rnn | X̃T , F̃T ) = IG(δi /2, ηi /2)
             p(Λ̄nn | X̃T , F̃T , Rnn )        =         N (Λ̄n , Rnn Mn−1 ).
with
              ηn      =       η0 + T
                                                                    0
                                                                    −1
                                                                                         −1
              δn      =       δ0 + (êcn )0 (êcn ) + (Λ̂n − Λn0 ) Mn0 + (FTn 0 FTn )−1         (Λ̂n − Λn0 )
                                                     
             M̄n      =       Mn0 +      FTn 0 FTn
                              −1
                                                               
            Λn = M̄n (Mn0        Λn0 + FTn 0 FTn Λ̂n )
where we set the same prior specification (δ0 = 6, η0 = 10−3 , Mn0 = IKc , Λn0 = 0Kc ×1 ) as in
Bernanke, Boivin and Eliasz [2005] in order to allow an adequate comparison. M0 denotes the
matrix in the prior on the coefficients of the n-th equation of Λn . The factor normalization
discussed earlier requires to set M0 = I. The regressors of the n-th equation are represented
by FTn and the fitted errors of the n-th equation are represented by eˆct n .

A.5.2. Conditional density of vec(φ) and Qu
   The next Gibbs block requires to draw vec(φ) and Qu conditional on the most current draws
of the factors and the data. We employ the Normal-Inverse Wishart prior according to Uhlig
[1994]
                    p(Qu ) = IW(S0 , ν0 )
             p(vec(φ) | Qu )         =     N (φ̄0 , Qu ⊗ N0−1 )
  10 For   a derivation see Gelman, Carlin, Stern and Rubin [1995],
                                   BFAVAR WITH SIGN RESTRICTION                                           27

which results in the following posterior:
                    p(Qu | X T , F T ) =          IW(ST , νT )
              P (vec(φ) | X T , F T , Qu )   =    N (vec(φ̄T ), Qu ⊗ NT−1 )
with
               νT      =   T + ν0
              NT       =   N0 + (FT0 −1 FT −1 )
              φ̄T      =   NT−1 (N0 φ̄0 + FT0 −1 FT −1 φ̂)
                      ν0       T ˆ        1
              ST       = S0 +     Qu +      (φ̂ − φ̄0 )0 N0 (NT )−1 (FT0 −1 FT −1 )(φ̂ − φ̄0 )
                      νT       νT        νT
This prior and has the following specification
            ν0 = 0
             N0 = 0K×K
where the choice of S0 and φ̄0 are arbitrary as they cancel out in the posterior. We alternatively
also implemented the Normal-Wishart prior for according to Kadiyala and Karlsson [1997]
where the diagonal elements of Q0 are set to the corresponding p-lag univariate autoregressions,
σi2 . The diagonal elements of Ω0 are constructed such that the prior variances of the parameter
of the k lagged j’th variable in the i’th equation equals σi2 /kσj2 . Hence S0 = Q0 and φ̄0 = 0.
Results were virtually the same. To ensure stationarity, we truncate the draws by discarding
the draws of φ with the larges eigenvalue greater than 1 in absolute value.


                               APPENDIX B: TABLES AND FIGURES
                                        B.1. Data
  Table (I) contains our set of monthly macroeonomic data from 1960 : 02 to 2010 : 06,
building and extending a data set provided by Stock and Watson [2005] and lists the short
name of each series, its mnemonic (the series label used in the source database) and a brief
data description.


        Shortname          Mnemonics     Description
 Pos.
 1      PI                 a0m052        Personal income (AR, bil. chain 2005 $)
 2      PI less trans-     A0M051        Personal income less transfer payments (AR, bil. chain 2005 $)
        fers
 3      M&T sales          A0M057        Manufacturing and trade sales (mil. Chain 1996 $)
 4      Retail sales       A0M059        Sales of retail stores (mil. Chain 2000 $)
 5      IP: products       IPS11         INDUSTRIAL PRODUCTION INDEX - PRODUCTS, TOTAL
 6      IP: final prod     IPS299        INDUSTRIAL PRODUCTION INDEX - FINAL PRODUCTS
 7      IP: cons gds       IPS12         INDUSTRIAL PRODUCTION INDEX - CONSUMER GOODS
 8      IP: cons dble      IPS13         INDUSTRIAL PRODUCTION INDEX - DURABLE CONSUMER
                                         GOODS
 9      iIP:cons nond-     IPS18         INDUSTRIAL PRODUCTION INDEX - NONDURABLE CONSUMER
        ble                              GOODS
 10     IP:bus eqpt        IPS25         INDUSTRIAL PRODUCTION INDEX - BUSINESS EQUIPMENT
 11     IP: matls          IPS32         INDUSTRIAL PRODUCTION INDEX - MATERIALS
 12     IP: dble mats      IPS34         INDUSTRIAL PRODUCTION INDEX - DURABLE GOODS MATERI-
                                         ALS
 13     IP:nondble         IPS38         INDUSTRIAL PRODUCTION INDEX - NONDURABLE GOODS MA-
        mats                             TERIALS
 14     IP: mfg            IPS43         INDUSTRIAL PRODUCTION INDEX - MANUFACTURING (SIC)
 15     IP: res util       IPS307        INDUSTRIAL PRODUCTION INDEX - RESIDENTIAL UTILITIES
 16     IP: fuels          IPS306        INDUSTRIAL PRODUCTION INDEX - FUELS
 17     IP: total          IPS10         INDUSTRIAL PRODUCTION INDEX - TOTAL INDEX
 18     RealGDP            RealGDP       RealGDP
 19     PCE Def            PCEPI         Personal Consumption Expenditures: Chain-type Price Index (Keep
                                         used as defator in progam)
 20     PCED lfe           PCEPILFE      Personal Consumption Expenditures: Chain-Type Price Index Less Food
                                         and Energy (Keep used as defator in progam)
 21     NAPM prodn         PMP           NAPM PRODUCTION INDEX (PERCENT)
 22     Cap util           A0m082        Capacity Utilization (Mfg)
 23     Emp CPS total      LHEM          CIVILIAN LABOR FORCE: EMPLOYED, TOTAL (THOUS.,SA)
 24     Emp      CPS       LHNAG         CIVILIAN LABOR FORCE: EMPLOYED, NONAGRIC.INDUSTRIES
        nonag                            (THOUS.,SA)
 25     U: all             LHUR          UNEMPLOYMENT RATE: ALL WORKERS, 16 YEARS & OVER
                                         (%,SA)
28                                 P. AMIR-AHMADI, H. UHLIG

 Pos.   Shortname         Mnemonics      Description
 26     U: mean dura-     LHU680         UNEMPLOY.BY        DURATION:       AVERAGE(MEAN)DURATION    IN
        tion                             WEEKS (SA)
 27     U < 5 wks         LHU5           UNEMPLOY.BY DURATION: PERSONS UNEMPL.LESS THAN 5 WKS
                                         (THOUS.,SA)
 28     U 5-14 wks        LHU14          UNEMPLOY.BY DURATION: PERSONS UNEMPL.5 TO 14 WKS
                                         (THOUS.,SA)
 29     U 15+ wks         LHU15          UNEMPLOY.BY DURATION: PERSONS UNEMPL.15 WKS +
                                         (THOUS.,SA)
 30     U 15-26 wks       LHU26          UNEMPLOY.BY DURATION: PERSONS UNEMPL.15 TO 26 WKS
                                         (THOUS.,SA)
 31     U 27+ wks         LHU27          UNEMPLOY.BY DURATION: PERSONS UNEMPL.27 WKS +
                                         (THOUS,SA)
 32     UI claims         A0M005         Average weekly initial claims, unemploy. insurance (thous.)
 33     Emp: total        CES002         EMPLOYEES ON NONFARM PAYROLLS - TOTAL PRIVATE
 34     Emp: gds prod     CES003         EMPLOYEES ON NONFARM PAYROLLS - GOODS-PRODUCING
 35     Emp: mining       CES006         EMPLOYEES ON NONFARM PAYROLLS - MINING
 36     Emp: const        CES011         EMPLOYEES ON NONFARM PAYROLLS - CONSTRUCTION
 37     Emp: mfg          CES015         EMPLOYEES ON NONFARM PAYROLLS - MANUFACTURING
 38     Emp: dble gds     CES017         EMPLOYEES ON NONFARM PAYROLLS - DURABLE GOODS
 39     Emp: nondbles     CES033         EMPLOYEES ON NONFARM PAYROLLS - NONDURABLE GOODS
 40     Emp: services     CES046         EMPLOYEES ON NONFARM PAYROLLS - SERVICE-PROVIDING
 41     Emp: TTU          CES048         EMPLOYEES ON NONFARM PAYROLLS - TRADE, TRANSPORTA-
                                         TION, AND UTILITIES
 42     Emp:    whole-    CES049         EMPLOYEES ON NONFARM PAYROLLS - WHOLESALE TRADE
        sale
 43     Emp: retail       CES053         EMPLOYEES ON NONFARM PAYROLLS - RETAIL TRADE
 44     Emp: FIRE         CES088         EMPLOYEES ON NONFARM PAYROLLS - FINANCIAL ACTIVITIES
 45     Emp: Govt         CES140         EMPLOYEES ON NONFARM PAYROLLS - GOVERNMENT
 46     Avg hrs           CES151         AVERAGE WEEKLY HOURS OF PRODUCTION OR NONSUPERVI-
                                         SORY WORKERS ON PRIVATE NONFAR
 47     Overtime: mfg     CES155         AVERAGE WEEKLY HOURS OF PRODUCTION OR NONSUPERVI-
                                         SORY WORKERS ON PRIVATE NONFAR
 48     Avg hrs: mfg      aom001         Average weekly hours, mfg. (hours)
 49     NAPM empl         PMEMP          NAPM EMPLOYMENT INDEX (PERCENT)
 50     HStarts: Total    HSFR           HOUSING                         STARTS:NONFARM(1947-58);TOTAL
                                         FARM&NONFARM(1959-)(THOUS.,SA
 51     HStarts: NE       HSNE           HOUSING STARTS:NORTHEAST (THOUS.U.)S.A.
 52     HStarts: MW       HSMW           HOUSING STARTS:MIDWEST(THOUS.U.)S.A.
 53     HStarts: South    HSSOU          HOUSING STARTS:SOUTH (THOUS.U.)S.A.
 54     HStarts: West     HSWST          HOUSING STARTS:WEST (THOUS.U.)S.A.
 55     BP: total         HSBR           HOUSING AUTHORIZED: TOTAL NEW PRIV HOUSING UNITS
                                         (THOUS.,SAAR)
 56     BP: NE            HSBNE          HOUSES          AUTHORIZED          BY      BUILD.       PER-
                                         MITS:NORTHEAST(THOU.U.)S.A
 57     BP: MW            HSBMW          HOUSES          AUTHORIZED          BY      BUILD.       PER-
                                         MITS:MIDWEST(THOU.U.)S.A.
 58     BP: South         HSBSOU         HOUSES AUTHORIZED BY BUILD. PERMITS:SOUTH(THOU.U.)S.A.
 59     BP: West          HSBWST         HOUSES AUTHORIZED BY BUILD. PERMITS:WEST(THOU.U.)S.A.
 60     PMI               PMI            PURCHASING MANAGERS’ INDEX (SA)
 61     NAPM new or-      PMNO           NAPM NEW ORDERS INDEX (PERCENT)
        drs
 62     NAPM vendor       PMDEL          NAPM VENDOR DELIVERIES INDEX (PERCENT)
        del
 63     NAPM Inven-       PMNV           NAPM INVENTORIES INDEX (PERCENT)
        tories
 64     Orders:   cons    A0M008         Mfrs’ new orders, consumer goods and materials (bil. chain 1982 $)
        gds
 65     Orders:   dble    A0M007         Mfrs’ new orders, durable goods industries (bil. chain 2000 $)
        gds
 66     Orders:    cap    A0M027         Mfrs’ new orders, nondefense capital goods (mil. chain 1982 $)
        gds
 67     Unf     orders:   A1M092         Mfrs’ unfilled orders, durable goods indus. (bil. chain 2000 $)
        dble
 68     M&T invent        A0M070         Manufacturing and trade inventories (bil. Chain 2005 $)
 69     M1                FM1            MONEY STOCK: M1(CURR,TRAV.CKS,DEM DEP,OTHER CK’ABLE
                                         DEP)(BIL$,SA)
 70     M2                FM2            MONEY          STOCK:M2(M1+O’NITE               RPS,EURO$,G/P&B/D
                                         MMMFS&SAV&SM TIME DEP(BIL$,
 71     MB                FMFBA          MONETARY       BASE,     ADJ    FOR      RESERVE      REQUIREMENT
                                         CHANGES(BIL$,SA)
 72     Reserves tot      FMRRA          DEPOSITORY INST RESERVES:TOTAL,ADJ FOR RESERVE REQ
                                         CHGS(BIL$,SA)
 73     Reserves non-     FMRNBA         DEPOSITORY INST RESERVES:NONBORROWED,ADJ RES REQ
        bor                              CHGS(BIL$,SA)
 74     LoansRealEst      LoansRealEst   Real Estate Loans at All Commercial Banks
 75     C&I loans         FCLNQ          Commercial and Industrial Loans at All Commercial Banks (BUS-
                                         LOANS), bil $ (SA)
 76     Cons credit       CCINRV         CONSUMER CREDIT OUTSTANDING - NONREVOLVING(G19)
 77     Inst cred/PI      A0M095         Ratio, consumer installment credit to personal income (pct.)
 78     S&P 500           FSPCOM         S&P’S COMMON STOCK PRICE INDEX: COMPOSITE (1941-43=10)
 79     DJIA              FSDJ           COMMON STOCK PRICES: DOW JONES INDUSTRIAL AVERAGE
 80     S&P div yield     FSDXP          S&P’S COMPOSITE COMMON STOCK: DIVIDEND YIELD (% PER
                                         ANNUM)
 81     S&P PE ratio      FSPXE          S&P’S COMPOSITE COMMON STOCK: PRICE-EARNINGS RATIO
                                         (%,Cyclically Adjusted)
                                BFAVAR WITH SIGN RESTRICTION                                        29
Pos.   Shortname           Mnemonics     Description
82     FedFunds            FYFF          INTEREST RATE: FEDERAL FUNDS (EFFECTIVE) (% PER AN-
                                         NUM,NSA)
83     Commpaper           CP90          Cmmercial Paper Rate (AC)
84     3 mo T-bill         FYGM3         INTEREST RATE: U.S.TREASURY BILLS,SEC MKT,3-MO.(% PER
                                         ANN,NSA)
85     6 mo T-bill         FYGM6         INTEREST RATE: U.S.TREASURY BILLS,SEC MKT,6-MO.(% PER
                                         ANN,NSA)
86     1 yr T-bond         FYGT1         INTEREST RATE: U.S.TREASURY CONST MATURITIES,1-YR.(%
                                         PER ANN,NSA)
87     5 yr T-bond         FYGT5         INTEREST RATE: U.S.TREASURY CONST MATURITIES,5-YR.(%
                                         PER ANN,NSA)
88     10 yr T-bond        FYGT10        INTEREST RATE: U.S.TREASURY CONST MATURITIES,10-YR.(%
                                         PER ANN,NSA)
89     Aaabond             FYAAAC        BOND YIELD: MOODY’S AAA CORPORATE (% PER ANNUM)
90     Baa bond            FYBAAC        BOND YIELD: MOODY’S BAA CORPORATE (% PER ANNUM)
91     CP-FF spread        scp90         cp90-fyff
92     3       mo-FF       sfygm3        fygm3-fyff
       spread
93     6       mo-FF       sFYGM6        fygm6-fyff
       spread
94     1 yr-FF spread      sFYGT1        fygt1-fyff
95     5 yr-FFspread       sFYGT5        fygt5-fyff
96     10yr-FF spread      sFYGT10       fygt10-fyff
97     Aaa-FF spread       sFYAAAC       fyaaac-fyff
98     Baa-FF spread       sFYBAAC       fybaac-fyff
99     Ex rate: major      Ex    rate:   FRB Nominal Major Currencies Dollar Index (Linked to EXRUS in
                           major         1973:1)
100    Ex rate: Switz      EXRSW         FOREIGN EXCHANGE RATE: SWITZERLAND (SWISS FRANC PER
                                         U.S.$)
101    Ex rate: Japan      EXRJAN        FOREIGN EXCHANGE RATE: JAPAN (YEN PER U.S.$)
102    Ex rate: UK         EXRUK         FOREIGN EXCHANGE RATE: UNITED KINGDOM (CENTS PER
                                         POUND)
103    EX        rate:     EXRCAN        FOREIGN EXCHANGE RATE: CANADA (CANADIAN $ PER U.S.$)
       Canada
104    PPI: fin gds        PWFSA         PRODUCER PRICE INDEX: FINISHED GOODS (82=100,SA)
105    PPI: cons gds       PWFCSA        PRODUCER    PRICE INDEX:FINISHED   CONSUMER      GOODS
                                         (82=100,SA)
106    PPI: int matls      PWIMSA        PRODUCER PRICE INDEX:INTERMED MAT.SUPPLIES & COMPO-
                                         NENTS(82=100,SA)
107    PPI:     crude      PWCMSA        PRODUCER PRICE INDEX:CRUDE MATERIALS (82=100,SA)
       matls
108    NAPM       com      PMCP          NAPM COMMODITY PRICES INDEX (PERCENT)
       price
109    CPI-U: all          PUNEW         CPI-U:   ALL ITEMS (82-84=100,SA)
110    CPI-U: apparel      PU83          CPI-U:   APPAREL & UPKEEP (82-84=100,SA)
111    CPI-U: transp       PU84          CPI-U:   TRANSPORTATION (82-84=100,SA)
112    CPI-U:   medi-      PU85          CPI-U:   MEDICAL CARE (82-84=100,SA)
       cal
113    CPI-U: comm.        PUC           CPI-U: COMMODITIES (82-84=100,SA)
114    CPI-U: dbles        PUCD          CPI-U: DURABLES (82-84=100,SA)
115    CPI-U:      ser-    PUS           CPI-U: SERVICES (82-84=100,SA)
       vices
116    CPI-U: ex food      PUXF          CPI-U: ALL ITEMS LESS FOOD (82-84=100,SA)
117    CPI-U: ex shel-     PUXHS         CPI-U: ALL ITEMS LESS SHELTER (82-84=100,SA)
       ter
118    CPI-U: ex med       PUXM          CPI-U: ALL ITEMS LESS MEDICAL CARE (82-84=100,SA)
119    PCE defl            GMDC          PCE,IMPL PR DEFL:PCE (2005=100)
120    PCE        defl:    GMDCD         PCE,IMPL PR DEFL:PCE; DURABLES (2005=100)
       dlbes
121    PCE        defl:    GMDCN         PCE,IMPL PR DEFL:PCE; NONDURABLES (2005=100)
       nondble
122    PCE defl: ser-      GMDCS         PCE,IMPL PR DEFL:PCE; SERVICES (2005=100)
       vices
123    AHE: goods          CES275        AVERAGE HOURLY EARNINGS OF PRODUCTION OR NONSUPER-
                                         VISORY WORKERS ON PRIVATE NO
124    AHE: const          CES277        AVERAGE HOURLY EARNINGS OF PRODUCTION OR NONSUPER-
                                         VISORY WORKERS ON PRIVATE NO
125    AHE: mfg            CES278        AVERAGE HOURLY EARNINGS OF PRODUCTION OR NONSUPER-
                                         VISORY WORKERS ON PRIVATE NO
126    Consumer      ex-   HHSNTN        U. OF MICH. INDEX OF CONSUMER EXPECTATIONS(BCD-83)
       pect




                                                  B.2. Tables
30                            P. AMIR-AHMADI, H. UHLIG




                                       TABLE II
                    Share of Variance Explained by Common Factors.


Variable                R2    Variable              R2    Variable             R2
FedFunds                  1   Emp: mfg             0.76   S&P PE ratio        0.39
CPI-U: all                1   PCE defl: nondble    0.74   IP:nondble mats     0.39
1 yr T-bond               1   Emp: gds prod        0.74   Unf orders: dble    0.38
6 mo T-bill               1   IP: dble mats        0.73   Avg hrs: mfg        0.37
Aaabond                   1   IP: matls            0.72   PCE defl: dlbes     0.34
5 yr T-bond            0.99   CP-FF spread         0.71   Emp: retail         0.32
3 mo T-bill            0.99   Emp: dble gds         0.7   M&T sales           0.31
10 yr T-bond           0.99   Emp: total           0.69   Avg hrs              0.3
Aaa-FF spread          0.99   NAPM Inventories     0.67   Orders: cons gds     0.3
Commpaper              0.99   IP: cons gds         0.66   U 15+ wks           0.28
Baa bond               0.99   IP: cons dble        0.62   Emp: FIRE           0.28
10yr-FF spread         0.99   NAPM vendor del       0.6   Emp CPS nonag       0.24
Baa-FF spread          0.98   Emp: wholesale        0.6   PI less transfers   0.23
1 yr-FF spread         0.98   CPI-U: transp        0.59   iIP:cons nondble    0.23
6 mo-FF spread         0.98   IP:bus eqpt          0.58   UI claims           0.22
5 yr-FFspread          0.98   U: all               0.57   Emp: const          0.22
IP: mfg                0.97   PCED lfe             0.57   Emp CPS total       0.21
Cap util               0.96   S&P div yield        0.56   PPI: crude matls     0.2
PMI                    0.94   CPI-U: services      0.56   U 27+ wks            0.2
IP: total              0.93   NAPM com price       0.55   CPI-U: apparel      0.17
CPI-U: ex med          0.92   PPI: int matls       0.55   Overtime: mfg       0.17
3 mo-FF spread         0.92   PCE defl: services   0.54   Cons credit         0.16
NAPM empl              0.89   PPI: fin gds         0.53   PI                  0.16
IP: products           0.86   Emp: nondbles         0.5   LoansRealEst        0.16
NAPM prodn             0.85   Emp: TTU              0.5   AHE: goods          0.16
CPI-U: ex shelter      0.85   PPI: cons gds        0.49   AHE: mfg            0.15
NAPM new ordrs         0.83   Consumer expect      0.49   Orders: dble gds    0.14
CPI-U: ex food         0.83   Emp: services        0.45   MB                  0.13
PCE Def                0.82   M&T invent           0.41   BP: total           0.13
PCE defl               0.82   C&I loans             0.4   U 15-26 wks         0.12
CPI-U: comm.           0.81   CPI-U: dbles         0.39   Reserves tot        0.11
IP: final prod          0.8   CPI-U: medical       0.39   U: mean duration     0.1
BP: South               0.1   HStarts: South       0.05   IP: fuels           0.03
RealGDP                 0.1   Emp: mining          0.05   DJIA                0.03
U 5-14 wks             0.09   BP: MW               0.05   U ¡ 5 wks           0.03
M1                     0.09   Ex rate: Japan       0.05   HStarts: West       0.02
Emp: Govt              0.09   BP: West             0.05   Orders: cap gds     0.02
Retail sales           0.08   M2                   0.04   Reserves nonbor     0.02
AHE: const             0.08   Ex rate: UK          0.04   S&P 500             0.02
Inst cred/PI           0.08   BP: NE               0.04   HStarts: MW         0.02
HStarts: Total         0.06   EX rate: Canada      0.03   HStarts: NE         0.02
Ex rate: major         0.05   Ex rate: Switz       0.03   IP: res util        0.01
BFAVAR WITH SIGN RESTRICTION      31

  B.3. Figures: Benchmark Model
32                                              P. AMIR-AHMADI, H. UHLIG


             Figure 8.— Output Responses: Benchmark Model


                    IP: products                     IP: final prod                  IP: cons gds               IP: cons dble
           0.8                                 0.8                           0.8
           0.6                                 0.6                           0.6                           2
           0.4                                 0.4                           0.4
           0.2                                 0.2                           0.2                           1
             0                                   0                             0                           0
          −0.2                                −0.2                          −0.2
             0     12      24       36   48      0   12     24      36   48     0    12   24    36   48     0   12     24       36   48
                  iIP:cons nondble                   IP:bus eqpt                      IP: matls                 IP: dble mats
                                                                                1
           0.4                                  1                                                          1
           0.2                                 0.5                             0.5                        0.5

            0                                   0                               0                          0

                                            −0.5                                                        −0.5
             0     12      24       36   48     0    12     24      36   48      0   12   24    36   48     0   12     24       36   48
                  IP:nondble mats                         IP: mfg                     IP: res util                IP: fuels
           0.8                                                                  2
                                             0.8                                                          0.4
           0.6                               0.6
           0.4                               0.4                                                          0.2
           0.2                               0.2                                1
             0                                 0                                                           0
          −0.2                              −0.2
          −0.4                              −0.4                                0                       −0.2
              0    12      24       36   48     0    12     24      36   48      0   12   24    36   48     0   12     24       36   48
                        IP: total                      RealGDP                       NAPM prodn                      Cap util
           0.8                                                                                           0.6
           0.6                                 0.4                              0                        0.4
           0.4                                                                                           0.2
           0.2                                 0.2                            −0.5                         0
             0
          −0.2                                  0                                                       −0.2
                                                                               −1                       −0.4
          −0.4
              0    12      24       36   48      0   12     24      36   48      0   12   24    36   48     0   12     24       36   48




This figure provides plots of posterior IRFs for a selection of many output indicators for the
                                      benchmark model.
                                   BFAVAR WITH SIGN RESTRICTION                                                                       33


                 Figure 9.— Price Responses: Benchmark Model


                  PPI: fin gds                   PPI: cons gds                PPI: int mat’ls                PPI: crude mat’ls
           0                              0                             0                              0

                                                                                                     −0.5
         −0.5                           −0.5                          −0.5

            0     12 24 36 48              0      12 24 36       48      0     12 24 36 48              0     12 24 36           48
                 NAPM com price                    CPI−U: all                 CPI−U: apparel                  CPI−U: transp
           0                              0                             0                              0
          −1
          −2                                                          −0.2                           −0.5
          −3                            −0.5
                                                                    −0.4
            0     12 24 36 48              0      12 24 36       48     0      12 24 36 48              0      12 24 36 48
                 CPI−U: comm.                     CPI−U: dbles                CPI−U: ex food                 CPI−U: ex shelter
           0                              0                             0                              0


         −0.5                                                                                        −0.5
                                                                      −0.5
                                        −0.5
            0     12 24 36 48               0     12 24 36 48            0     12 24 36 48              0      12 24 36          48
                 CPI−U: ex med                   CPI−U: medical               CPI−U: services                    PCE defl
           0                                                            0                              0
                                         0
                                      −0.1                            −0.2
                                      −0.2
         −0.5                         −0.3                            −0.4
                                                                                                     −0.5
            0     12 24 36         48     0       12 24 36 48            0     12 24 36 48               0     12   24   36      48
                 PCE defl: dlbes                PCE defl: nondble            PCE defl: services
           0                              0                             0

         −0.2
                                                                      −0.2
                                        −0.5
         −0.4
             0    12   24   36     48      0      12   24   36   48      0     12   24   36     48




This figure provides plots of posterior IRFs for a selection of many price indicators for the
                                     benchmark model.
34                                            P. AMIR-AHMADI, H. UHLIG


      Figure 10.— Unemployment Responses: Benchmark Model
                                                   for the benchmark model.


                        U: all                     U: mean duration                 U < 5 wks              U 5−14 wks
          0.05                                3
                                                                             1.5                       8
            0                                 2
                                                                              1                        6
         −0.05                                1                              0.5                       4

          −0.1                                                                0                        2
                                              0
                                                                            −0.5                       0
         −0.15
              0   12     24      36   48       0     12   24   36     48       0   12   24   36   48   0   12   24   36   48

                  U 15+ wks                          U 15−26 wks                    U 27+ wks               UI claims
                                             30                              40
                                                                                                       4
           30
                                                                             30                        3
                                             20
           20                                                                                          2
                                                                             20
                                             10                                                        1
           10                                                                10
                                                                                                       0
            0                                 0                               0
             0    12     24      36   48       0     12   24   36     48       0   12   24   36   48   0   12   24   36   48

                       Avg hrs                      Overtime: mfg                  Avg hrs: mfg

          0.06                                                              0.06
                                            0.02
          0.04                                                              0.04
                                              0                             0.02
          0.02
                                           −0.02                              0
            0
                                                                           −0.02
         −0.02                             −0.04
             0    12     24      36   48       0     12   24   36     48       0   12   24   36   48




This figure provides plots of posterior IRFs for a selection of many unemployment indicators
                                  BFAVAR WITH SIGN RESTRICTION                                                               35


        Figure 11.— Employment Responses: Benchmark Model


                  Emp CPS total                Emp CPS nonag               Emp: total                  Emp: gds prod
           0.1                          0.1                                                     0.4
                                                                     0.1
                                                                                                0.2
            0                            0                             0
                                                                                                 0
          −0.1                         −0.1                         −0.1
                                                                                               −0.2
                                                                    −0.2
          −0.2                         −0.2                                                    −0.4
              0    12   24   36   48       0    12   24   36   48      0   12   24   36   48       0    12   24   36    48
                   Emp: mining                  Emp: const                  Emp: mfg                   Emp: dble gds
            0                         0.4                          0.4                          0.5
                                      0.2                          0.2
          −0.2
                                        0                            0                           0
          −0.4                       −0.2                         −0.2
          −0.6                       −0.4                         −0.4                         −0.5
              0    12   24   36   48     0      12   24   36   48     0    12   24   36   48       0    12   24   36    48
                  Emp: nondbles                Emp: services                Emp: TTU                   Emp: wholesale
           0.2                          0.1                          0.1                      0.1
                                         0                            0                         0
            0
                                                                    −0.1                     −0.1
                                       −0.1                                                  −0.2
          −0.2                                                      −0.2
                                                                                             −0.3
             0     12   24   36   48      0     12   24   36   48      0   12   24   36   48     0      12   24   36    48
                   Emp: retail                   Emp: FIRE                 Emp: Govt                    NAPM empl
           0.1                          0.1                        0.15                         0.2
                                                                    0.1                           0
            0                            0                                                     −0.2
                                                                   0.05
          −0.1                                                                                 −0.4
                                       −0.1                           0                        −0.6
          −0.2                                                    −0.05                        −0.8
                                       −0.2
             0     12   24   36   48       0    12   24   36   48      0   12   24   36   48      0     12   24   36    48




This figure provides plots of posterior IRFs for a selection of many employment indicators for
                                     the benchmark model.
36                                 P. AMIR-AHMADI, H. UHLIG


                Figure 12.— Loan Responses: Benchmark Model

                         LoansRealEst                            C&I loans

          0.1                                      0.8

                                                   0.6
           0                                       0.4

                                                   0.2
         −0.1
                                                    0

                                                  −0.2
         −0.2
                                                  −0.4

                                                  −0.6
         −0.3
             0      12        24        36   48      0      12       24         36   48



                          Cons credit                            Inst cred/PI
          0.3
                                                   0.3
          0.2

          0.1                                      0.2

           0
                                                   0.1
         −0.1
                                                    0
         −0.2

         −0.3                                     −0.1

            0       12        24        36   48      0      12       24         36   48




 This figure provides plots of posterior IRFs for a selection of many loan indicators for the
                                      benchmark model.
                              BFAVAR WITH SIGN RESTRICTION                                          37


            Figure 13.— Spread Responses: Benchmark Model


                  CP−FF spread                  3 mo−FF spread                6 mo−FF spread
          0.05                           0.05                          0.05

                                           0                             0
            0
                                        −0.05                         −0.05

                                                                       −0.1
                                         −0.1
         −0.05
              0   12   24     36   48       0   12   24     36   48       0   12   24     36   48

                  1 yr−FF spread                5 yr−FFspread                 10yr−FF spread
           0.1                            0.1
                                                                        0.1

                                           0                             0
            0

                                         −0.1                          −0.1
          −0.1
                                         −0.2                          −0.2

             0    12   24     36   48       0   12   24     36   48       0   12   24     36   48

                  Aaa−FF spread                 Baa−FF spread

           0.1                            0.1

            0                              0

          −0.1                           −0.1

          −0.2                           −0.2

             0    12   24     36   48       0   12   24     36   48




This figure provides plots of posterior IRFs for a selection of many spread indicators for the
                                      benchmark model.
38                             P. AMIR-AHMADI, H. UHLIG

                                       REFERENCES

[1] Amir-Ahmadi, Pooyan (2009), ”Credit Shocks, Monetary Policy and Business Cycles”;
   working paper Goethe University Frankfurt
[2] Amir-Ahmadi, Pooyan and Albrecht Ritchl (2013), ”Depression Econometrics: A FAVAR
   Model of Monetary Policy During the Great Depression”; CEPR Discussion Papers 7546,
   C.E.P.R. Discussion Papers.
[3] Arias, Jonas E., Rubio-Ramirez, Juan F. and Daniel F. Waggoner (2014), ”Inference Based
   on SVARs Identified with Sign and Zero Restrictions: Theory and Applications”, unpub-
   lished Working Paper
[4] Auerbach, Alan J., and Yuriy Gorodnichenko (2012), ”Measuring the Output Responses to
   Fiscal Policy.” American Economic Journal: Economic Policy, 4(2): 1-27.
[5] Baumeister, C. and Hamilton, J. D. (2015), ”Sign Restrictions, Structural Vector Autore-
   gressions, and Useful Prior Information.” Econometrica, 83: 19631999.
[6] Bernanke, Ben and Jean Boivin (2003), ”Monetary Policy in a Data-Rich Environment”;
   Journal of Monetary Economics 50:3, pp. 525-546
[7] Bernanke, Ben, Jean Boivin and P. Eliasz (2005), ”Measuring the effects of monetary
   policy: a factor-augmented vector autoregressive (FAVAR) approach”; Quarterly Journal of
   Economics 120, pp. 387-422
[8] Bernanke, Ben and Illian Mihov (1998a), ”Measuring Monetary Policy”; Quarterly Journal
   of Economics 113, pp. 869-902
[9] Bernanke, Ben and Illian Mihov (1998b), ”The Liquidity Effect and Long-run Neutrality:
   Identification by Inequality Constraints”; Carnegie-Rochster Conference Series on Public
   Policy; 49, pp. 149-94
[10] Blanchard, Oliver J. and Mark Watson (1986), ”Are All Business Cycles Alike?”; in R.
   J. Gordon, ed., The American Business Cycle, Chicago: University Press
[11] Blanchard, Oliver J. and Danny Quah (1989), ”The Dynamics Effects of Aggregate De-
   mand and Supply Disturbances”; American Economic Review; 79, pp. 655-73
[12] Canova, Fabio and Gianni De Nicolo (2002), ”Monetary Disturbances Matter for Business
   Cycle Fluctuations in the G-7”; Journal of Monetary Economics; 49, pp. 1131-59
[13] Carter, C.K. and P. Kohn (1994), ”On Gibbs Sampling for State Space Models?”;
   Biometrika 81, pp. 541-53
[14] Christiano, Lawrence, Martin Eichenbaum and Charles Evans (1999), ”Monetary Policy
   Shocks: What Have We Learned and to What End”; ch.2 in J. B. Taylor and M. Woodford
   (eds.), The Handbook of Macroeconomics, v. 1a:65-148
[15] Christiano, Lawrence, Martin Eichenbaum and Charles Evans (2005), ”Nominal Rigidities
   and the Dynamic Effects of a Shock to Monetary Policy”; Journal of Political Economy, vol.
   113
[16] Timothy Cogley and Thomas J. Sargent, (2005), ”Drifts and volatilities: Monetary policies
   and outcomes in the post WWII U.S”; Review of Economic Dynamics, Elsevier for the
   Society for Economic Dynamics, vol. 8(2), pages 262-302, April.
[17] J. Cochrane (1994), ”Shocks”; Carnegie Rochester Conference Series on Public Policy 41,
   pp. 295-364
[18] Eliasz, Piotr (2005), ”Likelihood-Based Inference in Large Dynamic Factor Models Using
   Gibbs Sampling”; Princeton University, unpublished Working Paper
[19] Gelman, A. and D.B.Rubin, (1992), ”A Single Sequence from the Gibbs Sampler Gives a
   False Sense of Security”; in J.M. Bernardo, J. O. Berger, A. P. Dawid, and A.F.M. Smith,
   eds., Bayesian Statistics, Oxford: University Press
[20] Geman, S. and D. Geman, (1984), ”Stochastic Relaxation, Gibbs Distribution and the
   Bayesian Restoration of Images”; IEEE Transactions of Pattern Analysis and Machine
   Intelligence 6, pp. 721-41
[21] Giacomini, Raffaella and Toru Kitagawa, T. and , (2015) ”Robust inference about non-
   identified SVARs”; unpublished Working Paper
[22] Gordon, David and Eric Leeper, (1994) ”The Dynamic Impacts of Monetary Policy: An
   Exercise in Tentative Identification”; Journal of Political Economy 102, pp. 1228-47
                           BFAVAR WITH SIGN RESTRICTION                                     39

[23] Granziera, Eleonora , Moon, Hyungsik Roger and Frank Schorfheide (2013), ”Inference
   for VARs Identified with Sign Restrictions”; NBER Working Paper 17140
[24] Kadiyala, Rao and Sune Karlsson, (1997) ”Numerical Methods for Estimation and Infer-
   ence Bayesian VAR-Models”; Journal of Applied Econometrics, Vol. 12, pp. 99-132
[25] Kilian, Lutz and Daniel P. Murphy, (2012) ”Why Agnostic Sign Restrictions Are Not
   Enough: Understanding the Dynamics of Oil Market VAR Models”; Journal of the European
   Economic Association, 10(5), October 2012, 1166-1188.
[26] Leeper, Eric, Christopher Sims, and Tao Zha, (1996) ”What does Monetary Policy Do?”;
   Brookings Papers on Economic Activity 2, 1-63
[27] Moon, Hyungsik Roger and Frank Schorfheide (2012), ”Bayesian and Frequentist Infer-
   ence in Partially Identified Models”; Econometrica, 80(2), 2012, 755-782.
[28] Mountford, Andrew and Harald Uhlig (2005), ”What are the effects of fiscal policy
   shocks?”; draft, Humboldt University
[29] Mumtaz, Haroon and Paolo Surico (2009), ”The Transmission of International Shocks:
   A Factor-Augmented VAR Approach”; Journal of Money, Credit and Banking, Blackwell
   Publishing, vol. 41(s1), pages 71-100, 02
[30] Primiceri, Giorgio (2005), ”Time Varying Structural Vector Autoregressions and Mone-
   tary Policy”, The Review of Economic Studies, 72, July 2005, pp. 821-852
[31] Quah, D. and T. J. Sargent (1993), ”A Dynamic Index Model for Large Cross Sections”; in
   J. H. Stock and M. W. Watson, eds., Business Cycles, Indicators, and Forecasting (University
   of Chicago Press for the NBER, Chicago) CH.7
[32] Rubio-Ramirez, Juan F., Daniel F. Waggoner and Tao Zha (2010), ”Structural Vector Au-
   toregressions: Theory of Identification and Algorithms for Inference”, Review of Economic
   Studies, Wiley Blackwell, vol. 77(2), pages 665-696, 04.
[33] Sargent, Thomas, Noah Williams and Tao Zha (2006), ”Shocks and Government Beliefs:
   The Rise and Fall of American Inflation,”, American Economic Review, American Economic
   Association, vol. 96(4), pages 1193-1224, September.
[34] Sims, Christopher (1980), ”Macroeconomics and Reality”, Econometrica, vol. 48, pp. 1-48
[35] Sims, Christopher (1986), ”Are Forecasting Models Usable for Policy Analysis”, Min-
   neapolis Federal Reserve Bank Quarterly Review, Winter 1986, pp. 2-16
[36] Sims, Christopher (1992), ”Interpreting the Macroeconomic Time Series Facts: The Ef-
   fects of Monetary Policy”, European Economic Review, vol. 36, pp. 975-1011
[37] Sims, Christopher and Uhlig Harald (1991) ”Understanding unit rooters: a helicopter
   tour”, Econometrica, vol. 59, pp. 1591-1600
[38] Sims, Christopher, Daniel F. Waggoner and Tao Zha (2008), ”Methods for inference in
   large multiple-equation Markov-switching models,”, Journal of Econometrics, Elsevier, vol.
   146(2), pages 255-274, October.
[39] Sims, Christopher and Tao Zha (1998), ”Bayesian Methods for Dynamic Multivariate
   Models”, International Economic Review, vol. 39(4), pp. 649-68
[40] Sims, Christopher and Tao Zha (1999), ”Error Bands for Impulse Responses”, Econo-
   metrica, vol. 67(5), pp. 1113-55
[41] Sims, Christopher and Tao Zha (2006), ””Were There Regime Switches in U.S. Monetary
   Policy?”, American Economic Review, American Economic Association, vol. 96(1), pages
   54-81, March.
[42] Stock, J. H. and M. W. Watson (1989), ”New Indexes of coincident and leading economic
   indicators”,NBER Macroeconomics Annual, 351-393
[43] Stock, J. H. and M. W. Watson (1991), ”A probability model of the coincident economic in-
   dicators”,in G. Moore and K. Lahiri, eds. The leading Economic Indicators:New Approaches
   and Forecasting Records (Cambridge University Press) 63-90
[44] Stock, J. H. and M. W. Watson (2005), ”Implications of Dynamic Factor Models for VAR
   Analysis”, unpublished Working Paper
[45] Stock, J. H. and M. W. Watson (2011), ”Dynamic Factor Models”, in Oxford Handbook
   of Forecasting, Michael P. Clements and David F. Hendry (eds), 2011, Oxford: Oxford
   University Press.
[46] Stock, J. H. and M. W. Watson (2015), ”Factor Models and Structural Vector Autore-
40                            P. AMIR-AHMADI, H. UHLIG

   gressions in Macroeconomics”, unpublished manuscript
[47] Uhlig, Harald (1994) ”What macroeconomists should know about unit roots: a Bayesian
   perspective”, Econometric Theory, vol. 10, pp. 645-71
[48] Uhlig, Harald (1998) ”The robustness of identified VAR conclusion about money. A Com-
   ment.”, Carnegie-Rochester Series in Public Economics, vol. 49, pp. 245-63
[49] Uhlig, Harald (2005) ”What are the effects of a shock to monetary policy? Results from
   an agnostic identification procedure”, Journal of Monetary Economics, vol. 52, pp. 381-419
                           BFAVAR WITH SIGN RESTRICTION                                       41

TECHNICAL APPENDIX — NOT FOR PUBLICATION

                            A.4. Figures: Convergence Diagnostics
   Following Primiceri(2005), we assess the convergence of the Markov chain by inspecting the
autocorrelation properties of the ergodic distributions draws. Specifically, in what follows, we
consider the draws inefficiency factors (henceforth, IFs), defined as the inverse of the relative
numerical efficiency measure of Geweke
                                 Z π (1992),
                         −1 1
(A.1)        RN E = (2π)              S(ω)dω
                            S(0) −π
is the spectral density of the sequence of draws from the Gibbs sampler for the quantity of
interest at the frequency ω. We estimate the spectral densities by smoothing the periodograms
in the frequency domain by means of a Bartlett spectral window. Following Berkowitz and
Diebold (1998), we select the bandwidth parameter automatically via the procedure intro-
duced by Beltrao and Bloomfield (1987). Figures (XXX) show, the draws IFs for the models
hyperparametersi.e. the free elements of the matrices B, Q, Λ, R, F . As the figures show, the
autocorrelation of the draws is uniformly very low, being in the vast majority of cases around
or below 2, thus suggesting that the Markov chains have indeed converged11 .


            Figure 14.— Inefficiency Factors for all parameters




This figure reports the inefficiency factors (IFs) for the posterior estimates of the parameters.
 The IF is the inverse of the relative
                                P∞ numerical efficiency measure of Gewekes (1992), i.e. the
  IF is an estimate of (1 + 2 k=1 ρk ), where ρk is the k-th autocorrelation of the chain.
 Following Primiceri (2005) our estimates estimate are performed using a 4 percent tapered
window for the estimation of the spectral density at frequency zero. Values of the IFs below
  or around twenty are regarded as satisfactory. All parameters are clearly below with the
                                         highest IF of 2.


   11 As stressed by Primiceri (2005, Appendix B), values of the IFs below or around twenty

are generally regarded as satisfactory.
42                           P. AMIR-AHMADI, H. UHLIG




                   Figure 15.— Convergence of Factors

                      Factor 1                                  Factor 2

                                                  1
      0.5
                                                 0.5

       0                                          0

                                                −0.5
     −0.5
                                                 −1

      −1                                        −1.5

                                                 −2
            1970    1980   1990   2000   2010          1970   1980        1990   2000     2010



                      Factor 3                                  Factor 4
                                                  2
                                                                     st
                                                                 1 half of posterior draws
       1                                                         2nd half of posterior draws
                                                  1
       0

                                                  0
      −1

                                                 −1
      −2

                                                 −2
      −3
            1970    1980   1990   2000   2010          1970   1980        1990   2000     2010
                              BFAVAR WITH SIGN RESTRICTION                                                                          43




                 Figure 16.— Convergence of Coefficients


        Coefficients at lag 1            Coefficients at lag 2            Coefficients at lag 3            Coefficients at lag 4
                                                                    0.1
                 1st half of posterior
                                    0.2draws                                                         0.1
   1             2nd half of posterior draws                       0.05
                                       0                                                            0.05
                                                                     0
  0.5                            −0.2                                                                 0
                                                                  −0.05                            −0.05
   0                             −0.4
                                                                   −0.1                             −0.1
            10     20    30                  10    20    30                   10    20    30                   10    20    30

        Coefficients at lag 5            Coefficients at lag 6            Coefficients at lag 7            Coefficients at lag 8
  0.2
                                   0.1                              0.1                              0.3
  0.1                               0                                                                0.2
                                                                     0
                                 −0.1                                                                0.1
   0
                                 −0.2                                                                 0
                                                                   −0.1
 −0.1                            −0.3                                                               −0.1

            10     20    30                  10    20    30                   10    20    30                   10    20    30

        Coefficients at lag 9            Coefficients at lag 10           Coefficients at lag 11           Coefficients at lag 12

                                 0.05                              0.15                              0.1
  0.1
                                    0                               0.1                             0.05
 0.05
                                −0.05                              0.05                               0
   0
                                 −0.1                                0                             −0.05
−0.05
                                −0.15                             −0.05                             −0.1
 −0.1
            10     20    30                  10    20    30                   10    20    30                   10    20    30
44                                P. AMIR-AHMADI, H. UHLIG




     Figure 17.— Convergence of state error covariance matrix

                                            Q state error covariance

               st
              1 half of posterior draws
       0.14   2nd half of posterior draws


       0.12


        0.1


       0.08


       0.06


       0.04


       0.02


         0


      −0.02


      −0.04

                    5             10        15             20          25   30   35
                 BFAVAR WITH SIGN RESTRICTION                                45




Figure 18.— Convergence of idiosyncratic covariance matrix

                      R: Idiosyncratic error covariance matrix


   18



   16



   14



   12



   10



    8



    6



    4



    2



    0
            20        40              60               80        100   120
46                               P. AMIR-AHMADI, H. UHLIG




           Figure 19.— Convergence of factor loadings

          Loadings to Factor 1                Loadings to Factor 2                     Loadings to Factor 3
                                       10                                        10
                                                   st
                                                  1 half of posterior draws
     15                                 8         2nd half of posterior draws     8

                                                                                  6
     10                                 6
                                                                                  4
                                        4
      5                                                                           2
                                        2
                                                                                  0
      0
                                        0
                                                                                 −2
     −5                               −2
                                                                                 −4
          20   40   60   80 100 120          20   40    60   80 100 120                20    40   60   80 100 120



          Loadings to Factor 4              Loadings to CPI inflation                       Loadings to FFR
      2                                                                           1
                                       20
      1
                                       15
      0                                                                          0.5
                                       10
     −1
                                        5
                                                                                  0
     −2
                                        0
     −3
                                      −5
                                                                                −0.5
     −4
                                      −10
     −5
                                      −15
          20   40   60   80 100 120          20   40    60   80 100 120                20    40   60   80 100 120
                             BFAVAR WITH SIGN RESTRICTION                                                  47

                                        A.5. Figures: Comparisons



Figure 20.— Recursive Cholesky identification: full sample


                            IP: total                                             FedFunds
                                                                0.35
             0

          −0.05                                                  0.3

           −0.1                                                 0.25
Percent




                                                      Percent
          −0.15                                                  0.2
           −0.2
                                                                0.15
          −0.25
                                                                 0.1
           −0.3

          −0.35                                                 0.05

           −0.4                                                   0

                  0   12       24         36    48                     0   12         24         36   48




                           CPI−U: all                                           NAPM com price
                                                                 0.8
           0.25
                                                                 0.6
            0.2
                                                                 0.4
           0.15
                                                                 0.2
Percent




                                                     Percent




            0.1
                                                                  0

           0.05                                                 −0.2

             0                                                  −0.4

                                                                −0.6
          −0.05
                                                                −0.8
                  0   12       24         36    48                     0   12         24         36   48
48                                              P. AMIR-AHMADI, H. UHLIG

   In the Figure (21)-(26) we compare the results for the output-restricted specification to the
results from the benchmark specification. While it may not be surprising that we find a more
pronounced decline in industrial production as a result, we also find considerably tighter con-
fidence bands, indicating that this particular identification restriction has considerable “bite”.
We do not recommend imposing it, however, unless one already “believes” in the continuous,
contractionary impact of a monetary policy shock, and wishes to examine its quantitative
consequences, given this additional assumption.


  Figure 21.— Selected output IRFs comparing two different sets of
sign restrictions: baseline restrictions (grey) and the additional output
resteiction (red) for the full sample model.


                    IP: products                      IP: final prod                  IP: cons gds                IP: cons dble
                                               0.6                              0.6
           0.4                                                                                            1.5
                                               0.4                              0.4
           0.2                                                                                              1
                                               0.2                            0.2
             0                                                                                            0.5
                                                 0                              0
          −0.2                                                                                              0
                                              −0.2                           −0.2                        −0.5
             0     12      24       36   48      0    12     24      36   48     0    12   24    36   48     0    12     24       36   48
                  iIP:cons nondble                    IP:bus eqpt                      IP: matls                  IP: dble mats
           0.3                                                                0.6
                                               0.5                            0.4                           0.5
           0.2
           0.1                                                                0.2
                                                0                               0                            0
             0                                                               −0.2
          −0.1                                                               −0.4                        −0.5
                                              −0.5
              0    12      24       36   48       0   12     24      36   48     0    12   24    36   48     0    12     24       36   48
                  IP:nondble mats                          IP: mfg                     IP: res util                 IP: fuels
                                             0.6                                                            0.3
           0.4                                                                  1.2
                                             0.4                                  1                         0.2
           0.2                               0.2                                0.8                         0.1
             0                                 0                                0.6
                                                                                0.4                          0
          −0.2                              −0.2
                                            −0.4                                0.2                        −0.1
             0     12      24       36   48     0     12     24      36   48      0   12   24    36   48      0   12     24       36   48
                        IP: total                       RealGDP                       NAPM prodn                       Cap util
           0.6                                 0.4                                                        0.4
           0.4                                                                   0                        0.2
           0.2                                 0.2
                                                                                                            0
             0                                                                 −0.5
                                                0                                                        −0.2
          −0.2
                                                                                −1                       −0.4
             0     12      24       36   48      0    12     24      36   48      0   12   24    36   48     0    12     24       36   48
                                 BFAVAR WITH SIGN RESTRICTION                                                                      49




  Figure 22.— Selected price IRFs comparing two different sets of
sign restrictions: baseline restrictions (grey) and the additional output
resteiction (red) for the full sample model.


                  PPI: fin gds                PPI: cons gds                PPI: int mat’ls                PPI: crude mat’ls

        −0.2                          −0.2                         −0.2                           −0.4
                                      −0.4                         −0.4                           −0.6
        −0.4
                                    −0.6                           −0.6                           −0.8
        −0.6
            0    12 24 36        48     0      12 24 36       48      0     12 24 36 48              0     12 24 36 48
                NAPM com price                  CPI−U: all                 CPI−U: apparel                  CPI−U: transp
          0                                                                                       −0.2
         −1                           −0.2                         −0.1                           −0.4
         −2                                                        −0.2                           −0.6
                                      −0.4
         −3                                                      −0.3                             −0.8
           0      12 24 36 48            0     12 24 36       48     0      12 24 36 48               0     12 24 36 48
                 CPI−U: comm.                  CPI−U: dbles                CPI−U: ex food                 CPI−U: ex shelter

        −0.2                                                                                      −0.2
                                                                   −0.2
        −0.4                          −0.2
                                                                   −0.4                           −0.4
        −0.6                        −0.4
            0    12 24 36        48     0      12 24 36 48            0     12 24 36 48              0      12 24 36          48
                CPI−U: ex med                 CPI−U: medical               CPI−U: services                    PCE defl
                                        0                             0
        −0.2                                                       −0.1
                                      −0.1                                                        −0.2
                                                                   −0.2
        −0.4                          −0.2                         −0.3
                                                                                                  −0.4
           0     12 24 36 48             0     12 24 36 48            0     12 24 36 48               0     12   24   36      48
                PCE defl: dlbes              PCE defl: nondble            PCE defl: services

        −0.1                          −0.2                       −0.05
                                                                  −0.1
        −0.2                          −0.4                       −0.15
                                                                  −0.2
        −0.3                          −0.6                       −0.25
           0     12   24    36   48      0     12   24   36   48      0     12   24   36     48
50                                    P. AMIR-AHMADI, H. UHLIG




  Figure 23.— Selected unemployment IRFs comparing two different
sets of sign restrictions: baseline restrictions (grey) and the additional
output resteiction (red) for the full sample model.


                      U: all                       U: mean duration                       U < 5 wks
                                                                               1.5
          0                                   2
                                                                                1
       −0.05                                  1                                0.5
        −0.1                                  0                                 0

           0   12      24        36   48       0   12      24       36   48      0   12      24       36   48
                    U 5−14 wks                          U 15+ wks                     U 15−26 wks
          8                                                                    30
                                             30
          6                                                                    20
                                             20
          4
          2                                  10                                10
          0                                   0                                 0
           0   12      24        36   48       0   12      24       36   48      0   12      24       36   48
                    U 27+ wks                           UI claims                         Avg hrs

         30                                   4                               0.04
         20                                                                   0.02
                                              2
         10                                                                     0
                                              0
          0                                                                 −0.02
           0   12      24        36   48       0   12      24       36   48      0   12      24       36   48
               Overtime: mfg                         Avg hrs: mfg
        0.02
                                            0.04
          0                                 0.02
                                               0
       −0.02
                                           −0.02
           0   12      24        36   48       0   12      24       36   48
                                BFAVAR WITH SIGN RESTRICTION                                                                 51




  Figure 24.— Selected employment IRFs comparing two different sets
of sign restrictions: baseline restrictions (grey) and the additional out-
put resteiction (red) for the full sample model.


                Emp CPS total                 Emp CPS nonag                Emp: total                  Emp: gds prod
        0.05                        0.05                            0.1
                                                                                                0.2
          0                            0                             0
                                                                                                 0
       −0.05                       −0.05
                                                                   −0.1
        −0.1                        −0.1                                                       −0.2
       −0.15                       −0.15                           −0.2
            0    12   24   36   48      0      12   24   36   48      0    12   24   36   48      0     12   24   36    48
                 Emp: mining                   Emp: const                   Emp: mfg                   Emp: dble gds
                                                                                                0.4
        −0.1                           0.2                          0.2
                                                                                                0.2
        −0.2                            0                            0                           0
        −0.3
                                      −0.2                         −0.2                        −0.2
        −0.4
                                      −0.4                                                     −0.4
           0     12   24   36   48        0    12   24   36   48      0    12   24   36   48       0    12   24   36    48
                Emp: nondbles                 Emp: services                 Emp: TTU                   Emp: wholesale
         0.1                          0.05
                                                                     0                           0
          0                             0
                                     −0.05                         −0.1                        −0.1
        −0.1
                                      −0.1
        −0.2                                                       −0.2                        −0.2
                                     −0.15
           0     12   24   36   48        0    12   24   36   48       0   12   24   36   48      0     12   24   36    48
                 Emp: retail                    Emp: FIRE                  Emp: Govt                    NAPM empl
                                      0.05                                                      0.2
                                                                    0.1
          0                             0                                                         0
                                                                   0.05                        −0.2
                                     −0.05
        −0.1                                                                                   −0.4
                                      −0.1                           0                         −0.6
        −0.2                         −0.15
            0    12   24   36   48        0    12   24   36   48      0    12   24   36   48      0     12   24   36    48
52                               P. AMIR-AHMADI, H. UHLIG




  Figure 25.— Selected spread IRFs comparing two different sets of
sign restrictions: baseline restrictions (grey) and the additional output
resteiction (red) for the full sample model.


                CP−FF spread                   3 mo−FF spread                 6 mo−FF spread
                                       0.04                           0.05
        0.04
                                       0.02
        0.02                             0                              0
                                      −0.02
          0                           −0.04                          −0.05
       −0.02                          −0.06
                                      −0.08                           −0.1
           0    12   24     36   48        0   12   24     36   48        0   12   24     36   48

                1 yr−FF spread                 5 yr−FFspread                  10yr−FF spread
                                                                       0.1
        0.05                           0.05
                                         0                              0
          0
                                      −0.05
       −0.05                           −0.1                           −0.1
                                      −0.15
        −0.1                                                          −0.2
           0    12   24     36   48       0    12   24     36   48        0   12   24     36   48

                Aaa−FF spread                  Baa−FF spread

         0.1                            0.1

          0                              0

        −0.1                           −0.1

        −0.2                           −0.2
            0   12   24     36   48        0   12   24     36   48
                        BFAVAR WITH SIGN RESTRICTION                               53




  Figure 26.— Selected loan IRFs comparing two different sets of
sign restrictions: baseline restrictions (grey) and the additional output
resteiction (red) for the full sample model.


                    LoansRealEst                          C&I loans
                                               0.4

          0
                                               0.2
       −0.05

                                                0
        −0.1

       −0.15                                  −0.2

        −0.2
                                              −0.4

           0   12        24        36   48       0   12       24         36   48



                     Cons credit                          Inst cred/PI

                                              0.25
         0.1
                                               0.2

                                              0.15
          0
                                               0.1

        −0.1                                  0.05

                                                0
        −0.2
                                             −0.05

           0   12        24        36   48       0   12       24         36   48
54                            P. AMIR-AHMADI, H. UHLIG

                              APPENDIX B: VARIATIONS
   In this section, we explore and document variations on our model specification and sub-
samples to cover potential model and parameter instabilities. The table below summarizes all
variations we considered in the paper.

                                        TABLE III
                                    Model Variation.
               Model Version        Core VAR (fty )     Time Span
               Baseline Model       [CPI, FFR]          1960 : 02 − 2010 : 06
               Variation 1          [FFR]               1960 : 02 − 2010 : 06
               Variation 2          [CPI, FFR]          1960 : 02 − 1979 : 09
               Variation 3          [FFR]               1960 : 02 − 1979 : 09
               Variation 4          [CPI, FFR]          1984 : 02 − 2010 : 06
               Variation 5          [FFR]               1984 : 02 − 2010 : 06
               Variation 6          [CPI, FFR]          1984 : 02 − 2007 : 01
               Variation 7          [FFR]               1984 : 02 − 2003 : 12
               Variation 8          [FFR]               1981 : 09 − 2010 : 06
                                          BFAVAR WITH SIGN RESTRICTION                                                                         55

                                                       B.1. Figures: Variation 2
   In this subsection we analyze the data for the pre Volcker period covering 1960 : 02−1979 : 09
including CPI inflation and the federal funds rate in the core VAR for the FAVAR model.


             Figure 27.— Output Responses: Benchmark Model


                     IP: products                      IP: final prod                   IP: cons gds                 IP: cons dble
            0.1                                 0.1                              0.1                        0.4
             0                                   0                                0                         0.2
                                                                                                              0
           −0.1                                −0.1                             −0.1
                                                                                                           −0.2
           −0.2                                −0.2                             −0.2                       −0.4
                                               −0.3                             −0.3                       −0.6
              0     12      24       36   48       0   12     24      36   48       0   12   24    36   48     0     12     24       36   48
                   iIP:cons nondble                     IP:bus eqpt                      IP: matls                   IP: dble mats

           0.05                                 0.1                              0.1                          0.2
              0                                   0                                0
                                                                                                               0
          −0.05                                −0.1                             −0.1
                                               −0.2                             −0.2                         −0.2
           −0.1
                                               −0.3                             −0.3                         −0.4
          −0.15
               0    12      24       36   48      0    12     24      36   48      0    12   24    36   48       0   12     24       36   48
                   IP:nondble mats                          IP: mfg                      IP: res util                  IP: fuels
                                                                                 0.4
            0.1                               0.1                                                              0
             0                                  0
                                                                                 0.2                         −0.1
                                             −0.1
           −0.1
                                             −0.2
           −0.2                              −0.3                                 0                          −0.2
               0    12      24       36   48     0     12     24      36   48      0    12   24    36   48       0   12     24       36   48
                         IP: total                       RealGDP                        NAPM prodn                        Cap util
                                                                               0.4
            0.1                                                                0.2                          0.1
                                                0.1
              0                                                                  0                            0
                                                                              −0.2                         −0.1
           −0.1                                  0                            −0.4
           −0.2                                                               −0.6                         −0.2
           −0.3                                −0.1                           −0.8                         −0.3
               0    12      24       36   48       0   12     24      36   48     0     12   24    36   48     0     12     24       36   48




This figure provides plots of posterior IRFs for a selection of many output indicators for the
                                      benchmark model.
56                                        P. AMIR-AHMADI, H. UHLIG


                 Figure 28.— Price Responses: Benchmark Model


                    PPI: fin gds                PPI: cons gds                   PPI: int mat’ls                PPI: crude mat’ls
                                                                                                         0
            0                             0                              0.1
                                                                          0                            −0.2
          −0.1                          −0.1
                                                                        −0.1
          −0.2                          −0.2                            −0.2                           −0.4

             0     12   24    36   48      0     12   24   36      48      0     12   24   36     48      0      12   24   36      48
                  NAPM com price                  CPI−U: all                    CPI−U: apparel                  CPI−U: transp
                                          0                            0.04                             0.1
           0.5                                                         0.02
            0                                                             0                              0
                                        −0.1                          −0.02
          −0.5                                                        −0.04                            −0.1
                                                                      −0.06
           −1                           −0.2                          −0.08                            −0.2
             0     12   24    36   48      0     12   24   36      48      0     12   24   36     48       0     12   24   36      48
                  CPI−U: medical                CPI−U: comm.                    CPI−U: dbles                   CPI−U: services
           0.1                            0                              0.1                            0.1

            0                           −0.1                              0                              0
                                                                        −0.1
          −0.1                          −0.2                                                           −0.1

             0     12   24    36   48      0     12   24   36      48      0     12   24   36     48      0      12   24   36      48
                  CPI−U: ex food               CPI−U: ex shelter                CPI−U: ex med                      PCE defl

          0.05                            0                               0                           0.05
             0                                                                                           0
         −0.05                          −0.1                            −0.1                         −0.05
          −0.1                                                                                        −0.1
         −0.15                        −0.2                                                           −0.15
                                                                        −0.2
              0    12   24    36   48     0      12   24   36      48       0    12   24   36     48      0      12   24   36      48




 This figure provides plots of posterior IRFs for a selection of many price indicators for the
                                      benchmark model.
                                      BFAVAR WITH SIGN RESTRICTION                                                               57


      Figure 29.— Unemployment Responses: Benchmark Model
                                                   for the benchmark model.


                        U: all                     U: mean duration                 U < 5 wks                U 5−14 wks
                                             0.8                                                        4
                                             0.6
            0                                                                0.5                        3
                                             0.4
                                             0.2                                                        2
         −0.05                                                                0
                                              0
                                                                                                        1
                                            −0.2
          −0.1
                                         −0.4                            −0.5                           0
             0    12     24      36   48     0       12   24   36     48     0     12   24   36   48     0   12   24   36   48

                  U 15+ wks                          U 15−26 wks                    U 27+ wks                 UI claims

            3                                                                                          1.5
                                                                              2
                                              2
            2                                                                                           1
                                                                              1
                                              1                                                        0.5
            1
                                                                              0                         0
            0                                 0
                                                                                                     −0.5
             0    12     24      36   48       0     12   24   36     48       0   12   24   36   48     0   12   24   36   48

                       Avg hrs                      Overtime: mfg                  Avg hrs: mfg
          0.02
                                            0.02                            0.02
                                            0.01
            0
                                              0                               0

         −0.02                             −0.01
                                                                           −0.02
                                           −0.02
         −0.04
              0   12     24      36   48       0     12   24   36     48       0   12   24   36   48




This figure provides plots of posterior IRFs for a selection of many unemployment indicators
58                                        P. AMIR-AHMADI, H. UHLIG


        Figure 30.— Employment Responses: Benchmark Model


                  Emp CPS total                Emp CPS nonag                 Emp: total                   Emp: gds prod
          0.05
                                      0.02
                                         0                             0                            0
            0                        −0.02
                                     −0.04                          −0.05                         −0.1
         −0.05                       −0.06
                                                                     −0.1                         −0.2
                                     −0.08
             0     12   24   36   48      0     12   24   36   48        0   12   24   36   48        0    12   24   36    48
                   Emp: mining                  Emp: const                    Emp: mfg                    Emp: dble gds
            0                                                         0.1
                                          0                                                        0.1
          −0.1                                                         0                            0
                                        −0.1
          −0.2                                                       −0.1                         −0.1
                                        −0.2                                                      −0.2
          −0.3
              0    12   24   36   48       0    12   24   36   48       0    12   24   36   48       0     12   24   36    48
                  Emp: nondbles                Emp: services                  Emp: TTU                    Emp: wholesale
                                                                   0.04                           0.04
          0.05                            0                                                       0.02
                                                                   0.02
            0                                                         0                              0
                                       −0.02                                                     −0.02
                                                                  −0.02
         −0.05                                                                                   −0.04
                                       −0.04                      −0.04
          −0.1                                                    −0.06                          −0.06
              0    12   24   36   48       0    12   24   36   48      0     12   24   36   48       0     12   24   36    48
                   Emp: retail                   Emp: FIRE                   Emp: Govt                     NAPM empl
                                        0.02                         0.06                          0.4
          0.02
                                                                                                   0.2
             0                                                       0.04
                                                                                                     0
                                          0                          0.02
         −0.02                                                                                    −0.2
         −0.04                                                          0                         −0.4
                                       −0.02                        −0.02                         −0.6
         −0.06
              0    12   24   36   48       0    12   24   36   48       0    12   24   36   48       0     12   24   36    48




This figure provides plots of posterior IRFs for a selection of many employment indicators for
                                     the benchmark model.
                            BFAVAR WITH SIGN RESTRICTION                                   59


               Figure 31.— Loan Responses: Benchmark Model

                        LoansRealEst                            C&I loans


        0.05                                      0.05

                                                    0
          0
                                                 −0.05
       −0.05
                                                  −0.1

        −0.1
                                                 −0.15


           0       12        24        36   48       0     12       24         36   48



                         Cons credit                            Inst cred/PI


        0.05                                      0.08
                                                  0.06
                                                  0.04
          0
                                                  0.02
                                                    0
       −0.05
                                                 −0.02
                                                 −0.04
        −0.1
                                                 −0.06
           0       12        24        36   48       0     12       24         36   48




This figure provides plots of posterior IRFs for a selection of many loan indicators for the
                                     benchmark model.
60                                 P. AMIR-AHMADI, H. UHLIG


            Figure 32.— Spread Responses: Benchmark Model


                  CP−FF spread                   3 mo−FF spread                 6 mo−FF spread

          0.01                           0.02
                                                                          0
            0                              0
                                        −0.02                          −0.05
         −0.01
                                        −0.04
         −0.02                          −0.06                           −0.1
              0   12   24     36   48        0   12   24     36   48        0   12   24     36   48

                  1 yr−FF spread                 5 yr−FFspread                  10yr−FF spread
          0.04
          0.02                           0.05                           0.05
            0
                                           0                              0
         −0.02
         −0.04                                                         −0.05
                                        −0.05
         −0.06
                                                                        −0.1
             0    12   24     36   48       0    12   24     36   48        0   12   24     36   48

                  Aaa−FF spread                  Baa−FF spread


          0.05                           0.05

            0                              0

         −0.05                          −0.05

          −0.1                           −0.1
             0    12   24     36   48       0    12   24     36   48




This figure provides plots of posterior IRFs for a selection of many spread indicators for the
                                      benchmark model.
                                         BFAVAR WITH SIGN RESTRICTION                                                                       61

                                                      B.2. Figures: Variation 3
   In this subsection we analyze the data for the pre Volcker period covering 1960 : 02−1979 : 09
including only the federal funds rate in the core VAR for the FAVAR model.


            Figure 33.— Output Responses: Benchmark Model


                    IP: products                      IP: final prod                  IP: cons gds                IP: cons dble
           0.4                                 0.4
                                                                                0.4                         1.5
           0.2                                 0.2                                                           1
                                                                                0.2
            0                                   0                                                           0.5
                                                                                 0
                                                                                                             0
          −0.2                                −0.2
              0    12      24       36   48       0   12     24      36   48      0   12   24    36   48      0   12     24       36   48
                  iIP:cons nondble                     IP:bus eqpt                     IP: matls                  IP: dble mats
           0.2                               0.6                                0.8                         1.5
                                             0.4                                0.6
                                             0.2                                0.4                           1
            0                                                                   0.2
                                               0                                                            0.5
                                            −0.2                                  0
                                                                                                              0
                                            −0.4                               −0.2
          −0.2
              0    12      24       36   48     0     12     24      36   48      0   12   24    36   48      0   12     24       36   48
                  IP:nondble mats                          IP: mfg                     IP: res util                 IP: fuels
                                               0.6                              0.2                         0.4
           0.4
                                               0.4                               0                          0.2
           0.2
                                               0.2
            0                                                                  −0.2                          0
                                                 0
          −0.2                                −0.2                             −0.4                        −0.2

             0     12      24       36   48      0    12     24      36   48      0   12   24    36   48      0   12     24       36   48
                        IP: total                       RealGDP                       NAPM prodn                       Cap util
                                               0.4                              0.5                       0.8
           0.4                                                                                            0.6
           0.2                                 0.2                               0                        0.4
                                                                                                          0.2
            0                                   0                                                           0
          −0.2                                                                 −0.5
                                                                                                         −0.2
             0     12      24       36   48      0    12     24      36   48      0   12   24    36   48     0    12     24       36   48




This figure provides plots of posterior IRFs for a selection of many output indicators for the
                                      benchmark model.
62                                        P. AMIR-AHMADI, H. UHLIG


                 Figure 34.— Price Responses: Benchmark Model


                   PPI: fin gds                  PPI: cons gds                    PPI: int mat’ls               PPI: crude mat’ls
                                         0.2
                                                                           0.4                            0.5
           0.1
            0                             0                                0.2
                                                                                                           0
          −0.1                                                              0
          −0.2                          −0.2
                                                                       −0.2                            −0.5
             0     12   24   36    48      0      12   24   36      48     0       12   24   36     48     0      12   24   36      48
                 NAPM com price                    CPI−U: all                     CPI−U: apparel                 CPI−U: transp
                                          0                                                                0
                                                                            0
            0                           −0.1
                                                                         −0.05                           −0.2
          −0.5                          −0.2                              −0.1
                                        −0.3                             −0.15                           −0.4
           −1
             0     12   24   36    48       0     12   24   36      48       0     12   24   36     48      0     12   24   36      48
                  CPI−U: medical                 CPI−U: comm.                     CPI−U: dbles                  CPI−U: services
                                          0                                 0                              0
            0
                                        −0.1                              −0.1                           −0.1
          −0.1
                                        −0.2                              −0.2                           −0.2
          −0.2
                                      −0.3                             −0.3                              −0.3
             0     12   24   36    48     0       12   24   36      48     0       12   24   36     48      0     12   24   36      48
                  CPI−U: ex food                CPI−U: ex shelter                 CPI−U: ex med                     PCE defl
            0                             0                                 0
                                                                                                           0
          −0.1                                                            −0.1
                                        −0.1
          −0.2                                                            −0.2                           −0.1
                                        −0.2
          −0.3                                                            −0.3                           −0.2
             0     12   24   36    48      0      12   24   36      48        0    12   24   36     48      0     12   24   36      48




 This figure provides plots of posterior IRFs for a selection of many price indicators for the
                                      benchmark model.
                                      BFAVAR WITH SIGN RESTRICTION                                                             63


      Figure 35.— Unemployment Responses: Benchmark Model
                                                   for the benchmark model.


                        U: all                     U: mean duration                 U < 5 wks              U 5−14 wks
                                              4                                                        8
          0.05                                3                               6
                                                                                                       6
                                              2                               4                        4
            0
                                              1                               2                        2
                                              0
         −0.05                                                                0                        0
             0    12     24      36   48       0     12   24   36     48       0   12   24   36   48   0   12   24   36   48

                  U 15+ wks                          U 15−26 wks                    U 27+ wks               UI claims
                                             30
           20                                                                40                        4
           15                                20                              30
           10                                                                20                        2
                                             10
            5                                                                10
                                                                                                       0
            0                                 0                               0
             0    12     24      36   48       0     12   24   36     48       0   12   24   36   48   0   12   24   36   48

                       Avg hrs                      Overtime: mfg                  Avg hrs: mfg
          0.02
                                                                            0.02

            0                                 0
                                                                              0

         −0.02                             −0.02                           −0.02


         −0.04                           −0.04                             −0.04
              0   12     24      36   48      0      12   24   36     48       0   12   24   36   48




This figure provides plots of posterior IRFs for a selection of many unemployment indicators
64                                        P. AMIR-AHMADI, H. UHLIG


        Figure 36.— Employment Responses: Benchmark Model


                  Emp CPS total                 Emp CPS nonag                 Emp: total                   Emp: gds prod
                                                                       0.1                          0.2
          0.05                          0.05
            0                             0                             0
                                                                                                     0
         −0.05                         −0.05                          −0.1
          −0.1                          −0.1                                                       −0.2
                                                                      −0.2
             0     12   24   36   48       0     12   24   36   48        0   12   24   36   48       0     12   24   36    48
                   Emp: mining                   Emp: const                    Emp: mfg                    Emp: dble gds
           0.4                           0.2                                                        0.4
                                                                       0.2
           0.2                                                                                      0.2
             0                            0
                                                                        0
                                                                                                     0
          −0.2                          −0.2
          −0.4                                                        −0.2                         −0.2

             0     12   24   36   48       0     12   24   36   48       0    12   24   36   48       0     12   24   36    48
                  Emp: nondbles                 Emp: services                  Emp: TTU                    Emp: wholesale
           0.1                          0.05                                                       0.05
                                                                      0.05
            0                             0                              0                           0

          −0.1                                                       −0.05                        −0.05
                                       −0.05
                                                                      −0.1                         −0.1
          −0.2
                                        −0.1                                                      −0.15
             0     12   24   36   48        0    12   24   36   48       0    12   24   36   48        0    12   24   36    48
                   Emp: retail                    Emp: FIRE                   Emp: Govt                     NAPM empl
                                          0                           0.15                       0.4
           0.1                                                         0.1                       0.2
                                       −0.05                                                       0
            0                                                         0.05                      −0.2
                                        −0.1                            0                       −0.4
          −0.1                                                                                  −0.6
              0    12   24   36   48       0     12   24   36   48       0    12   24   36   48     0       12   24   36    48




This figure provides plots of posterior IRFs for a selection of many employment indicators for
                                     the benchmark model.
                            BFAVAR WITH SIGN RESTRICTION                                   65


               Figure 37.— Loan Responses: Benchmark Model

                        LoansRealEst                            C&I loans
         0.4
                                                  0.2
         0.3
                                                  0.1
         0.2
                                                   0
         0.1
                                                 −0.1

          0                                      −0.2

        −0.1                                     −0.3

                                                 −0.4
           0       12        24        36   48       0     12       24         36   48



                         Cons credit                            Inst cred/PI

                                                  0.3
         0.2
                                                  0.2
         0.1
                                                  0.1
          0

                                                   0
        −0.1

                                                 −0.1
        −0.2

           0       12        24        36   48      0      12       24         36   48




This figure provides plots of posterior IRFs for a selection of many loan indicators for the
                                     benchmark model.
66                                 P. AMIR-AHMADI, H. UHLIG


            Figure 38.— Spread Responses: Benchmark Model


                  CP−FF spread                  3 mo−FF spread                6 mo−FF spread
          0.02                           0.05                          0.05

            0                              0                             0

         −0.02                          −0.05                         −0.05

         −0.04                           −0.1                          −0.1

         −0.06                          −0.15                         −0.15

             0    12   24     36   48       0   12   24     36   48       0   12   24     36   48

                  1 yr−FF spread                5 yr−FFspread                 10yr−FF spread
                                          0.1                           0.1
            0
                                           0                             0
          −0.1
                                         −0.1                          −0.1

          −0.2
              0   12   24     36   48       0   12   24     36   48       0   12   24     36   48

                  Aaa−FF spread                 Baa−FF spread

           0.1                            0.1
          0.05
            0                              0
         −0.05
          −0.1                           −0.1
             0    12   24     36   48       0   12   24     36   48




This figure provides plots of posterior IRFs for a selection of many spread indicators for the
                                      benchmark model.
                            BFAVAR WITH SIGN RESTRICTION                                       67

                                   B.3. Figures: Variation 4
   In this subsection we analyze the data for the post Volcker period covering 1984 : 02 − 2010 :
06 including the recent financial crisis with CPI inflation and the federal funds rate in the core
VAR of the FAVAR model.
68                                                        P. AMIR-AHMADI, H. UHLIG


               Figure 39.— Output Responses: Benchmark Model


                            IP: products                             IP: final prod                            IP: cons gds                                 IP: cons dble
                    0.8                                   0.8                                            0.6                                            2
                    0.6
          Percent




                                                Percent




                                                                                               Percent




                                                                                                                                              Percent
                                                          0.6                                            0.4
                    0.4                                   0.4                                                                                           1
                                                                                                         0.2
                    0.2                                   0.2
                      0                                     0                                             0                                             0
                      0     12   24   36   48                0       12   24   36     48                   0   12   24   36    48                       0   12   24   36    48
                          iIP:cons nondble                           IP:bus eqpt                                IP: matls                                   IP: dble mats
                                                                                                                                                  1.5
                                                                2                                        0.8
                    0.3
                                                                                                         0.6
          Percent




                                                      Percent




                                                                                               Percent




                                                                                                                                        Percent
                                                                                                                                                        1
                    0.2                                                                                  0.4
                                                                1                                                                                 0.5
                    0.1                                                                                  0.2
                     0                                                                                     0                                            0
                                                                0
                      0     12   24   36   48                    0   12   24   36     48                   0   12   24   36    48                       0   12   24   36    48
                          IP:nondble mats                               IP: mfg                                 IP: res util                                  IP: fuels
                                                                                                          1
                                                          0.8                                                                                     0.4
                    0.4
          Percent




                                                Percent




                                                                                               Percent




                                                                                                                                    Percent
                                                          0.6                                            0.5                                      0.2
                    0.2                                   0.4
                                                          0.2                                                                                           0
                     0                                                                                    0
                                                            0
                                                                                                                                              −0.2
                      0     12   24   36   48                   0    12   24   36     48                   0   12   24   36    48                 0         12   24   36    48
                              IP: total                                RealGDP                                 NAPM prodn                                     Cap util
                    0.8                                                                               0.4                                         0.6
                                                          0.2
                    0.6                                                                               0.2                                         0.4
          Percent




                                                Percent




                                                                                           Percent




                                                                                                                                    Percent



                    0.4                                                                                 0
                                                          0.1                                                                                     0.2
                                                                                                     −0.2
                    0.2                                                                              −0.4                                               0
                      0                                         0
                                                                                                     −0.6                                     −0.2
                      0     12   24   36   48                   0    12   24   36     48                 0     12   24   36    48                 0         12   24   36    48




This figure provides plots of posterior IRFs for a selection of many output indicators for the
                                      benchmark model.
                                  BFAVAR WITH SIGN RESTRICTION                                                                        69


                Figure 40.— Price Responses: Benchmark Model


                   PPI: fin gds                PPI: cons gds                 PPI: int mat’ls                 PPI: crude mat’ls
                                                                    0.1
           0                            0                                                             0.5
                                                                      0
         −0.1                        −0.1                          −0.1                                0
                                     −0.2                          −0.2
         −0.2                                                      −0.3                              −0.5
                                     −0.3
            0     12 24 36        48     0      12 24 36        48     0      12 24 36 48               0     12 24 36 48
                 NAPM com price                  CPI−U: all                  CPI−U: apparel                   CPI−U: transp
                                                                    0.15                               0
           0                             0                           0.1
          −1                         −0.05                          0.05
          −2                          −0.1                             0
                                     −0.15                         −0.05                             −0.5
            0      12 24 36       48      0     12 24 36        48      0     12 24 36 48                0     12 24 36 48
                  CPI−U: comm.                  CPI−U: dbles                 CPI−U: ex food                  CPI−U: ex shelter
           0                                                                                           0
                                     0.05                              0
                                        0                          −0.05                             −0.1
         −0.2                                                       −0.1
                                    −0.05                          −0.15                             −0.2
            0     12 24 36 48            0      12 24 36        48      0     12 24 36 48                0     12 24 36          48
                 CPI−U: ex med                 CPI−U: medical                CPI−U: services                     PCE defl

            0                         0.1                           0.1                                0
        −0.05                        0.05                          0.05                             −0.05
         −0.1                           0                             0
        −0.15                                                                                        −0.1
             0    12 24 36 48            0      12 24 36 48            0      12 24 36 48                0     12   24   36      48
                 PCE defl: dlbes              PCE defl: nondble             PCE defl: services
                                        0                           0.08
         0.05                        −0.1                           0.06
                                                                    0.04
           0                         −0.2                           0.02
                                                                       0
        −0.05                        −0.3                          −0.02
            0     12   24    36   48     0      12   24   36    48      0     12   24   36     48




This figure provides plots of posterior IRFs for a selection of many price indicators for the
                                     benchmark model.
70                                          P. AMIR-AHMADI, H. UHLIG


      Figure 41.— Unemployment Responses: Benchmark Model
                                                 for the benchmark model.


                       U: all                    U: mean duration                U < 5 wks                 U 5−14 wks
                                            0                                                        1.5
                                                                           2
            0                             −0.2                                                        1
                                                                          1.5
                                          −0.4                             1                         0.5
         −0.05
                                          −0.6                            0.5                         0

          −0.1                            −0.8                             0                        −0.5
             0   12     24      36   48      0     12   24   36     48      0   12   24   36   48      0   12   24   36   48

                 U 15+ wks                         U 15−26 wks                   U 27+ wks                  UI claims
           0.5                             1.5                                                        2
                                                                          0.2
                                            1                               0
            0                                                                                         1
                                           0.5                           −0.2
                                                                         −0.4
                                            0
          −0.5                                                           −0.6                         0
                                          −0.5                           −0.8

             0   12     24      36   48      0     12   24   36     48      0   12   24   36   48      0   12   24   36   48

                      Avg hrs                     Overtime: mfg                 Avg hrs: mfg

                                          0.06
          0.04                                                           0.04
                                          0.04
          0.02                                                           0.02
                                          0.02

            0                               0                              0

                                        −0.02
             0   12     24      36   48      0     12   24   36     48      0   12   24   36   48




This figure provides plots of posterior IRFs for a selection of many unemployment indicators
                                 BFAVAR WITH SIGN RESTRICTION                                                             71


        Figure 42.— Employment Responses: Benchmark Model


                 Emp CPS total               Emp CPS nonag                Emp: total                Emp: gds prod

          0.15                        0.15
                                                                   0.2                        0.4
           0.1                         0.1
          0.05                        0.05                         0.1                        0.2
            0                           0                           0                          0
             0    12   24   36   48      0    12   24   36   48      0   12   24   36   48      0    12   24   36    48
                  Emp: mining                 Emp: const                  Emp: mfg                  Emp: dble gds
                                       0.8
           0.4                                                     0.4                        0.6
                                       0.6
                                       0.4                                                    0.4
           0.2                                                     0.2
                                       0.2                                                    0.2
            0
                                         0                          0                          0
             0    12   24   36   48      0    12   24   36   48      0   12   24   36   48      0    12   24   36    48
                 Emp: nondbles               Emp: services                Emp: TTU                  Emp: wholesale
                                       0.2
           0.2                                                                                0.3
                                                                   0.2
                                                                                              0.2
           0.1                         0.1
                                                                   0.1                        0.1
            0                                                       0                          0
                                        0
             0    12   24   36   48      0    12   24   36   48      0   12   24   36   48      0    12   24   36    48
                  Emp: retail                  Emp: FIRE                 Emp: Govt                   NAPM empl

           0.2                                                    0.08                        0.4
                                      0.15                                                    0.2
                                                                  0.06
           0.1                         0.1                        0.04                          0
                                      0.05                        0.02                       −0.2
            0                                                        0                       −0.4
                                        0
             0    12   24   36   48      0    12   24   36   48      0   12   24   36   48      0    12   24   36    48




This figure provides plots of posterior IRFs for a selection of many employment indicators for
                                     the benchmark model.
72                                 P. AMIR-AHMADI, H. UHLIG


                Figure 43.— Loan Responses: Benchmark Model

                         LoansRealEst                            C&I loans
          0.5

                                                    2
          0.4


          0.3                                      1.5


          0.2                                       1

          0.1
                                                   0.5

           0
                                                    0
            0       12        24        36   48      0      12       24         36   48



                          Cons credit                            Inst cred/PI
                                                   0.3

          0.3
                                                   0.2

          0.2
                                                   0.1

          0.1
                                                    0

           0
                                                  −0.1
            0       12        24        36   48      0      12       24         36   48




 This figure provides plots of posterior IRFs for a selection of many loan indicators for the
                                      benchmark model.
                              BFAVAR WITH SIGN RESTRICTION                                           73


            Figure 44.— Spread Responses: Benchmark Model


                  CP−FF spread                  3 mo−FF spread                 6 mo−FF spread
                                                                       0.06
          0.04
                                         0.04
                                                                       0.04
          0.02                           0.02                          0.02

            0                              0                             0

                                                                      −0.02
                                        −0.02
             0    12   24     36   48       0   12   24     36   48       0    12   24     36   48

                  1 yr−FF spread                5 yr−FFspread                  10yr−FF spread
                                         0.05
          0.06
          0.04                                                           0
                                           0
          0.02
            0                                                         −0.05
                                        −0.05
         −0.02
         −0.04                                                         −0.1
              0   12   24     36   48       0   12   24     36   48        0   12   24     36   48

                  Aaa−FF spread                 Baa−FF spread
                                         0.05

            0                              0

                                        −0.05
         −0.05
                                         −0.1
          −0.1
                                      −0.15
             0    12   24     36   48      0    12   24     36   48




This figure provides plots of posterior IRFs for a selection of many spread indicators for the
                                      benchmark model.
74                              P. AMIR-AHMADI, H. UHLIG

                                   B.4. Figures: Variation 5
   In this subsection we analyze the data for the post Volcker period covering 1984 : 02 − 2010 :
06 including the recent financial crisis with the federal funds rate in the core VAR of the FAVAR
model.
                                              BFAVAR WITH SIGN RESTRICTION                                                                                                             75


                   Figure 45.— Output Responses: Benchmark Model


                               IP: products                                IP: final prod                            IP: cons gds                                 IP: cons dble
                    0.8
                                                                 0.8                                           0.6                                            2
                    0.6
         Percent




                                                       Percent




                                                                                                     Percent




                                                                                                                                                    Percent
                                                                 0.6                                           0.4
                    0.4                                          0.4
                    0.2                                                                                        0.2                                            1
                                                                 0.2
                      0                                            0                                            0                                             0
                   −0.2
                       0       12   24   36   48                       0   12   24   36     48                   0   12   24   36    48                       0   12   24   36    48
                             iIP:cons nondble                              IP:bus eqpt                                IP: matls                                   IP: dble mats
                                                                       2                                    0.8                                         1.5
                       0.3
                                                                                                            0.6                                               1
             Percent




                                                             Percent




                                                                                                 Percent




                                                                                                                                              Percent
                       0.2                                                                                  0.4
                                                                       1                                                                                0.5
                       0.1                                                                                  0.2
                         0                                                                                    0                                               0
                                                                       0
                                                                                                           −0.2
                         0     12   24   36   48                       0   12   24   36     48                 0     12   24   36    48                       0   12   24   36    48
                             IP:nondble mats                                  IP: mfg                                 IP: res util                                  IP: fuels

                                                              0.8                                           0.8
                       0.4                                                                                                                              0.4
         Percent




                                                   Percent




                                                                                                 Percent




                                                                                                                                          Percent
                                                              0.6                                           0.6
                       0.2                                    0.4                                           0.4                                         0.2
                                                              0.2                                           0.2
                        0                                       0                                             0                                               0
                   −0.2                                      −0.2                                          −0.2                                     −0.2
                       0       12   24   36   48                 0         12   24   36     48                 0     12   24   36    48                 0         12   24   36    48
                                 IP: total                                   RealGDP                                 NAPM prodn                                     Cap util
                    0.8                                          0.2                                        0.4                                      0.6
                    0.6                                                                                     0.2                                      0.4
         Percent




                                                   Percent




                                                                                                 Percent




                                                                                                                                          Percent


                                                                 0.1
                    0.4                                                                                       0
                                                                                                                                                     0.2
                    0.2                                                0                                   −0.2
                                                                                                           −0.4                                        0
                      0
                                                             −0.1                                          −0.6                                     −0.2
                   −0.2
                       0       12   24   36   48                 0         12   24   36     48                 0     12   24   36    48                 0         12   24   36    48




This figure provides plots of posterior IRFs for a selection of many output indicators for the
                                      benchmark model.
76                                       P. AMIR-AHMADI, H. UHLIG


                 Figure 46.— Price Responses: Benchmark Model


                    PPI: fin gds                PPI: cons gds                  PPI: int mat’ls                 PPI: crude mat’ls
           0.1                                                                                       1.5
                                       0.1                           0.1                               1
             0                           0                             0                             0.5
          −0.1                        −0.1                          −0.1
                                                                    −0.2                               0
                                      −0.2
          −0.2                                                      −0.3                            −0.5
                                      −0.3
              0    12 24 36        48     0      12 24 36        48     0       12 24 36         48     0       12 24 36 48
                  NAPM com price                  CPI−U: all                   CPI−U: apparel                   CPI−U: transp
                                      0.05                              0.1
            0                                                                                             0
                                         0
           −1                        −0.05                               0                             −0.2
                                      −0.1                             −0.1                            −0.4
           −2
             0      12 24 36 48           0      12 24 36        48       0     12 24 36 48               0      12 24 36 48
                   CPI−U: comm.                  CPI−U: dbles                  CPI−U: ex food                  CPI−U: ex shelter
                                                                     0.05
                                          0
             0                                                          0                                0
                                      −0.05                         −0.05
          −0.1
                                       −0.1                          −0.1                              −0.1
          −0.2
                                      −0.15                         −0.15                              −0.2
             0     12 24 36        48      0     12 24 36        48      0      12 24 36 48                0     12 24 36          48
                  CPI−U: ex med                 CPI−U: medical                 CPI−U: services                     PCE defl
          0.05                         0.1                              0.1
             0                                                         0.05                              0
         −0.05                           0                                0
          −0.1                                                                                        −0.05
                                      −0.1                            −0.05
         −0.15                                                                                         −0.1
              0    12 24 36 48            0      12 24 36 48              0     12 24 36 48                0     12   24   36      48
                  PCE defl: dlbes              PCE defl: nondble              PCE defl: services
          0.05                         0.1                             0.05
             0                           0
         −0.05                        −0.1                               0
          −0.1                        −0.2
                                                                      −0.05
         −0.15                        −0.3
              0    12   24    36   48     0      12   24   36    48       0     12   24   36     48




 This figure provides plots of posterior IRFs for a selection of many price indicators for the
                                      benchmark model.
                                     BFAVAR WITH SIGN RESTRICTION                                                           77


      Figure 47.— Unemployment Responses: Benchmark Model
                                                 for the benchmark model.


                       U: all                    U: mean duration                U < 5 wks              U 5−14 wks

                                                                           2                        2
            0                              0.5
                                                                          1.5
                                                                                                    1
         −0.05                              0                              1

          −0.1                                                            0.5                       0
                                          −0.5
                                                                           0
             0   12     24      36   48      0     12   24   36     48      0   12   24   36   48   0   12   24   36   48

                 U 15+ wks                         U 15−26 wks                   U 27+ wks               UI claims
                                                                           6
            4                               4                                                       2
            3                                                              4
            2                               2                                                       1
                                                                           2
            1
            0                                                                                       0
                                            0                              0

             0   12     24      36   48      0     12   24   36     48      0   12   24   36   48   0   12   24   36   48

                      Avg hrs                     Overtime: mfg                 Avg hrs: mfg

          0.04                                                           0.04
                                          0.04

          0.02                            0.02                           0.02

            0                               0                              0

                                        −0.02                          −0.02
             0   12     24      36   48      0     12   24   36     48      0   12   24   36   48




This figure provides plots of posterior IRFs for a selection of many unemployment indicators
78                                       P. AMIR-AHMADI, H. UHLIG


        Figure 48.— Employment Responses: Benchmark Model


                  Emp CPS total                Emp CPS nonag                 Emp: total                 Emp: gds prod
                                                                      0.2                         0.4
           0.1                          0.1
                                                                      0.1                         0.2
            0                            0                             0
                                                                                                   0
                                     −0.1                            −0.1
          −0.1                                                                                 −0.2
              0    12   24   36   48     0      12   24   36   48       0    12   24   36   48     0     12   24   36    48
                   Emp: mining                  Emp: const                    Emp: mfg                  Emp: dble gds
                                        0.6                           0.4                         0.6
           0.6
                                        0.4                                                       0.4
           0.4                                                        0.2
                                        0.2                                                       0.2
           0.2
                                          0                            0                           0
            0
                                       −0.2                       −0.2                         −0.2
             0     12   24   36   48      0     12   24   36   48     0      12   24   36   48     0     12   24   36    48
                  Emp: nondbles                Emp: services                  Emp: TTU                  Emp: wholesale
                                                                      0.2
                                        0.1                                                       0.2
           0.1                                                        0.1
                                                                                                  0.1
            0                            0                             0                           0
          −0.1                                                       −0.1                        −0.1
                                     −0.1
             0     12   24   36   48     0      12   24   36   48       0    12   24   36   48      0    12   24   36    48
                   Emp: retail                   Emp: FIRE                   Emp: Govt                   NAPM empl
                                                                                                  0.4
           0.1                          0.1                          0.05
                                                                                                  0.2
            0                                                                                      0
                                         0                             0
          −0.1                                                                                   −0.2
                                       −0.1                         −0.05
             0     12   24   36   48       0    12   24   36   48        0   12   24   36   48      0    12   24   36    48




This figure provides plots of posterior IRFs for a selection of many employment indicators for
                                     the benchmark model.
                            BFAVAR WITH SIGN RESTRICTION                                   79


               Figure 49.— Loan Responses: Benchmark Model

                        LoansRealEst                            C&I loans

         0.4
                                                   1.5
         0.3

         0.2                                        1

         0.1
                                                   0.5
          0

                                                    0
        −0.1
           0       12        24        36   48       0     12       24         36   48



                         Cons credit                            Inst cred/PI
         0.2                                       0.1

                                                  0.05
         0.1
                                                    0

          0                                      −0.05

                                                  −0.1
        −0.1
                                                 −0.15
        −0.2
            0      12        24        36   48       0     12       24         36   48




This figure provides plots of posterior IRFs for a selection of many loan indicators for the
                                     benchmark model.
80                                 P. AMIR-AHMADI, H. UHLIG


            Figure 50.— Spread Responses: Benchmark Model


                  CP−FF spread                  x 10 3 mo−FF spread
                                                    −3                              6 mo−FF spread
          0.02

          0.01                             0                                  0

            0                            −10
                                                                           −0.02
         −0.01
                                         −20
         −0.02                                                             −0.04
              0   12   24     36   48       0        12    24    36   48        0   12   24     36   48

                  1 yr−FF spread                     5 yr−FFspread                  10yr−FF spread

            0                              0                                  0

         −0.02                          −0.05                              −0.05

         −0.04                                                              −0.1
                                         −0.1
                                                                           −0.15
         −0.06
              0   12   24     36   48       0        12    24    36   48       0    12   24     36   48

                  Aaa−FF spread                      Baa−FF spread
          0.05                           0.05
            0                              0
         −0.05                          −0.05

          −0.1                           −0.1
                                        −0.15
         −0.15
             0    12   24     36   48       0        12    24    36   48




This figure provides plots of posterior IRFs for a selection of many spread indicators for the
                                      benchmark model.
                            BFAVAR WITH SIGN RESTRICTION                                       81

                                   B.5. Figures: Variation 6
   In this subsection we analyze the data for the post Volcker period covering 1984 : 02 − 2007 :
01 including the recent financial crisis with CPI inflation and the federal funds rate in the core
VAR of the FAVAR model.
82                                              P. AMIR-AHMADI, H. UHLIG


            Figure 51.— Output Responses: Benchmark Model


                    IP: products                     IP: final prod                   IP: cons gds                 IP: cons dble
                                                                                                          0.8
           0.2                                 0.2                                                        0.6
                                                                               0.2                        0.4
            0                                                                                             0.2
                                                0                               0                           0
                                                                                                         −0.2
          −0.2                              −0.2                            −0.2                         −0.4
              0    12      24       36   48     0    12     24      36   48     0     12   24    36   48     0     12     24       36   48
                  iIP:cons nondble                   IP:bus eqpt                       IP: matls                   IP: dble mats
           0.2
                                               0.2                                                          0.4
                                                                               0.2
           0.1                                                                                              0.2
                                                0
                                                                                0                            0
            0
                                              −0.2                            −0.2                         −0.2
          −0.1
              0    12      24       36   48      0   12     24      36   48      0    12   24    36   48      0    12     24       36   48
                  IP:nondble mats                         IP: mfg                      IP: res util                  IP: fuels

           0.2                                 0.2                                                          0.1
                                                                               0.4
                                                                                                             0
            0                                   0
                                                                               0.2                         −0.1
          −0.2                                −0.2                                                         −0.2
                                                                                0
              0    12      24       36   48      0   12     24      36   48      0    12   24    36   48       0   12     24       36   48
                        IP: total                      RealGDP                        NAPM prodn                        Cap util
                                               0.2                             0.2                          0.2
           0.2                                                                  0
                                               0.1                                                           0
                                                                              −0.2
            0
                                                0                             −0.4
          −0.2                                                                −0.6                         −0.2
              0    12      24       36   48      0   12     24      36   48       0   12   24    36   48      0    12     24       36   48




This figure provides plots of posterior IRFs for a selection of many output indicators for the
                                      benchmark model.
                                  BFAVAR WITH SIGN RESTRICTION                                                                         83


                Figure 52.— Price Responses: Benchmark Model


                  PPI: fin gds                 PPI: cons gds                    PPI: int mat’ls               PPI: crude mat’ls
           0                             0                                0                              0
         −0.1                          −0.1                             −0.1
                                                                                                       −0.2
         −0.2                          −0.2                             −0.2
                                                                        −0.3                           −0.4
         −0.3                          −0.3

            0     12   24   36    48      0     12   24   36      48       0     12   24   36     48      0     12   24   36      48
                NAPM com price                   CPI−U: all                     CPI−U: apparel                 CPI−U: transp
          0.2                            0                                0                              0
            0                          −0.1                                                            −0.1
                                                                       −0.05
         −0.2
                                       −0.2                                                            −0.2
         −0.4
                                                                        −0.1
         −0.6                                                                                          −0.3
                                     −0.3
            0     12   24   36    48     0      12   24   36      48       0     12   24   36     48      0     12   24   36      48
                 CPI−U: medical                CPI−U: comm.                     CPI−U: dbles                  CPI−U: services
           0                             0                                0                              0
                                       −0.1                             −0.1
         −0.1                                                                                          −0.1
                                       −0.2                             −0.2
                                                                                                       −0.2
         −0.2
                                     −0.3                            −0.3
            0     12   24   36    48     0      12   24   36      48     0       12   24   36     48      0     12   24   36      48
                 CPI−U: ex food               CPI−U: ex shelter                 CPI−U: ex med                     PCE defl
           0                             0                                0                              0

         −0.1                          −0.1                             −0.1                           −0.1

         −0.2                          −0.2                             −0.2
                                                                                                       −0.2
                                                                        −0.3
            0     12   24   36    48      0     12   24   36      48        0    12   24   36     48      0     12   24   36      48




This figure provides plots of posterior IRFs for a selection of many price indicators for the
                                     benchmark model.
84                                            P. AMIR-AHMADI, H. UHLIG


      Figure 53.— Unemployment Responses: Benchmark Model
                                                    for the benchmark model.


                        U: all                      U: mean duration                 U < 5 wks                  U 5−14 wks
                                                                              0.6
                                                                              0.4                         2
            0                                0.5
                                                                              0.2
         −0.05                                                                 0                          1
                                              0
                                                                             −0.2
          −0.1                                                                                            0
                                            −0.5                             −0.4
             0    12     24      36   48        0     12   24   36     48       0   12   24   36   48      0    12   24   36   48

                  U 15+ wks                           U 15−26 wks                    U 27+ wks                   UI claims
                                              4
                                                                               3
                                                                                                          1
            2                                 3
                                                                               2
                                              2                                                          0.5
            1                                                                  1
                                              1
                                                                                                          0
            0                                                                  0
                                              0
                                                                                                        −0.5
             0    12     24      36   48       0      12   24   36     48       0   12   24   36   48       0   12   24   36   48

                       Avg hrs                       Overtime: mfg                  Avg hrs: mfg
          0.02
                                            0.01
                                                                             0.01
          0.01
                                              0                                0
            0
                                           −0.01                            −0.01
         −0.01
                                                                            −0.02
         −0.02                             −0.02
              0   12     24      36   48        0     12   24   36     48       0   12   24   36   48




This figure provides plots of posterior IRFs for a selection of many unemployment indicators
                                  BFAVAR WITH SIGN RESTRICTION                                                                  85


        Figure 54.— Employment Responses: Benchmark Model


                  Emp CPS total                 Emp CPS nonag                 Emp: total                  Emp: gds prod
                                        0.02                                                       0.1
            0                              0                            0
         −0.02                         −0.02                                                        0
         −0.04                         −0.04                         −0.05
                                                                                                  −0.1
         −0.06                         −0.06                          −0.1
             0     12   24   36   48       0     12   24   36   48        0   12   24   36   48      0     12   24   36    48
                   Emp: mining                   Emp: const                    Emp: mfg                   Emp: dble gds
                                                                                                   0.2
            0                             0                            0.1

                                                                        0                           0
          −0.2                          −0.1
                                                                      −0.1
          −0.4                          −0.2                                                      −0.2
              0    12   24   36   48        0    12   24   36   48       0    12   24   36   48       0    12   24   36    48
                  Emp: nondbles                 Emp: services                  Emp: TTU                   Emp: wholesale
                                        0.02                        0.02
          0.05                                                                                      0
                                                                       0
                                          0                                                     −0.02
            0                                                      −0.02
                                       −0.02                       −0.04                        −0.04
         −0.05                                                                                  −0.06
                                                                   −0.06
                                       −0.04                                                    −0.08
          −0.1                                                     −0.08
              0    12   24   36   48       0     12   24   36   48      0     12   24   36   48      0     12   24   36    48
                   Emp: retail                    Emp: FIRE                   Emp: Govt                    NAPM empl
          0.02                                                                                     0.2
                                          0                            0.1
             0                                                                                      0
         −0.02                         −0.02                          0.05                        −0.2
         −0.04
                                       −0.04                                                      −0.4
         −0.06                                                          0
              0    12   24   36   48       0     12   24   36   48       0    12   24   36   48      0     12   24   36    48




This figure provides plots of posterior IRFs for a selection of many employment indicators for
                                     the benchmark model.
86                                 P. AMIR-AHMADI, H. UHLIG


                Figure 55.— Loan Responses: Benchmark Model

                         LoansRealEst                            C&I loans
           0                                        0.1

                                                   0.05
        −0.05
                                                     0

         −0.1                                     −0.05

                                                   −0.1
        −0.15
                                                  −0.15

                                                   −0.2
            0       12        24        36   48       0     12       24         36   48



                          Cons credit                            Inst cred/PI

         0.05                                      0.15


                                                    0.1
           0

                                                   0.05
        −0.05
                                                     0

         −0.1
                                                  −0.05

            0       12        24        36   48       0     12       24         36   48




 This figure provides plots of posterior IRFs for a selection of many loan indicators for the
                                      benchmark model.
                              BFAVAR WITH SIGN RESTRICTION                                          87


            Figure 56.— Spread Responses: Benchmark Model


                  CP−FF spread                  3 mo−FF spread                6 mo−FF spread
                                                                       0.04
                                         0.02                          0.02
          0.01
                                           0                             0
                                        −0.02                         −0.02
            0
                                        −0.04                         −0.04
                                        −0.06                         −0.06
         −0.01
              0   12   24     36   48       0   12   24     36   48       0   12   24     36   48

                  1 yr−FF spread                5 yr−FFspread                 10yr−FF spread
          0.04
                                         0.05                          0.05
          0.02
            0                              0                             0
         −0.02
                                                                      −0.05
         −0.04                          −0.05
         −0.06                                                         −0.1
             0    12   24     36   48       0   12   24     36   48       0   12   24     36   48

                  Aaa−FF spread                 Baa−FF spread


          0.05                           0.05

            0                              0

         −0.05                          −0.05

          −0.1                           −0.1

             0    12   24     36   48       0   12   24     36   48




This figure provides plots of posterior IRFs for a selection of many spread indicators for the
                                      benchmark model.
88                              P. AMIR-AHMADI, H. UHLIG

                                   B.6. Figures: Variation 7
   In this subsection we analyze the data for the post Volcker period covering 1984 : 02 − 2003 :
1212 including the recent financial crisis with CPI inflation and the federal funds rate in the
core VAR of the FAVAR model.




  12 The   end period of the sample is consistent with Stock and Watson (2005).
                                         BFAVAR WITH SIGN RESTRICTION                                                                       89


            Figure 57.— Output Responses: Benchmark Model


                    IP: products                      IP: final prod                   IP: cons gds               IP: cons dble
                                                                                                             2
           0.4                                 0.4                              0.4
           0.2                                 0.2                              0.2                          1
            0                                   0                                0
          −0.2                                −0.2                                                           0
                                                                               −0.2
              0    12      24       36   48       0   12     24      36   48       0   12   24    36   48     0   12     24       36   48
                  iIP:cons nondble                    IP:bus eqpt                       IP: matls                 IP: dble mats
           0.2                                                                   1
                                                1                                                            2
                                               0.5                              0.5
            0                                                                                                1
                                                0                                0
                                                                                                             0
          −0.2
              0    12      24       36   48      0    12     24      36   48      0    12   24    36   48     0   12     24       36   48
                  IP:nondble mats                          IP: mfg                      IP: res util                IP: fuels
           0.6
                                               0.8                              0.2                        0.6
           0.4                                 0.6                               0                         0.4
           0.2                                 0.4
                                               0.2                             −0.2                        0.2
             0
                                                 0                             −0.4                          0
          −0.2                                −0.2                                                        −0.2
             0     12      24       36   48      0    12     24      36   48      0    12   24    36   48     0   12     24       36   48
                        IP: total                       RealGDP                        NAPM prodn                      Cap util
                                                                                0.5                          1
           0.6                                 0.4
           0.4                                                                                              0.5
                                               0.2                               0
           0.2
             0                                  0                                                            0
                                                                               −0.5
          −0.2
                                              −0.2
             0     12      24       36   48       0   12     24      36   48      0    12   24    36   48     0   12     24       36   48




This figure provides plots of posterior IRFs for a selection of many output indicators for the
                                      benchmark model.
90                                        P. AMIR-AHMADI, H. UHLIG


                 Figure 58.— Price Responses: Benchmark Model


                    PPI: fin gds                 PPI: cons gds                   PPI: int mat’ls                PPI: crude mat’ls
           0.1                           0.1                              0.4
                                                                                                         0.5
            0                             0                               0.2
          −0.1                          −0.1                                                              0
                                                                           0
          −0.2                          −0.2
          −0.3                                                         −0.2                           −0.5
              0    12   24    36   48      0      12   24   36      48     0      12   24   36     48     0       12   24   36      48
                  NAPM com price                   CPI−U: all                    CPI−U: apparel                  CPI−U: transp
                                          0                                                               0
                                                                           0
            0                           −0.1
                                                                                                        −0.2
                                        −0.2                             −0.1
          −0.5
                                        −0.3                                                            −0.4
           −1                                                            −0.2
             0     12   24    36   48      0      12   24   36      48       0    12   24   36     48      0      12   24   36      48
                  CPI−U: medical                 CPI−U: comm.                    CPI−U: dbles                   CPI−U: services
                                          0                                0                              0
            0
          −0.1                          −0.1
                                                                         −0.2                           −0.2
          −0.2                          −0.2
          −0.3                          −0.3                                                            −0.4
                                                                         −0.4
             0     12   24    36   48      0      12   24   36      48       0    12   24   36     48       0     12   24   36      48
                  CPI−U: ex food                CPI−U: ex shelter                CPI−U: ex med                      PCE defl
            0                             0                                0                              0
          −0.1                                                           −0.1
                                        −0.1
                                                                                                        −0.1
          −0.2                                                           −0.2
                                        −0.2
          −0.3                                                           −0.3                           −0.2
                                        −0.3
             0     12   24    36   48       0     12   24   36      48      0     12   24   36     48      0      12   24   36      48




 This figure provides plots of posterior IRFs for a selection of many price indicators for the
                                      benchmark model.
                                      BFAVAR WITH SIGN RESTRICTION                                                              91


      Figure 59.— Unemployment Responses: Benchmark Model
                                                    for the benchmark model.


                        U: all                      U: mean duration                 U < 5 wks              U 5−14 wks
                                                                               6
                                              3                                                         8
          0.05
                                                                               4                        6
                                              2
            0                                                                                           4
                                              1                                2
                                                                                                        2
         −0.05                                0
                                                                               0                        0
             0    12     24      36   48       0      12   24   36     48       0   12   24   36   48   0   12   24   36   48

                  U 15+ wks                           U 15−26 wks                    U 27+ wks               UI claims


                                                                              40                        4
           20                                20

                                                                                                        2
           10                                10                               20

                                                                                                        0
            0                                 0                                0
             0    12     24      36   48       0      12   24   36     48       0   12   24   36   48   0   12   24   36   48

                       Avg hrs                       Overtime: mfg                  Avg hrs: mfg
                                            0.02
          0.02
                                                                             0.02
                                              0
            0                                                                  0

         −0.02                             −0.02                            −0.02

                                           −0.04                            −0.04
         −0.04
              0   12     24      36   48        0     12   24   36     48       0   12   24   36   48




This figure provides plots of posterior IRFs for a selection of many unemployment indicators
92                                        P. AMIR-AHMADI, H. UHLIG


        Figure 60.— Employment Responses: Benchmark Model


                  Emp CPS total                 Emp CPS nonag                Emp: total                 Emp: gds prod
                                         0.1
           0.1                                                        0.1
                                                                                                  0.2
                                          0                            0
            0                                                                                      0
                                                                     −0.1
          −0.1                          −0.1                                                     −0.2
                                                                     −0.2
              0    12   24   36   48       0     12   24   36   48       0   12   24   36   48      0    12   24   36    48
                   Emp: mining                   Emp: const                   Emp: mfg                  Emp: dble gds
           0.5                                                        0.4
                                         0.2                                                      0.6
                                                                      0.2                         0.4
            0                             0                                                       0.2
                                                                       0
                                        −0.2                                                        0
                                                                     −0.2                        −0.2
          −0.5
              0    12   24   36   48       0     12   24   36   48      0    12   24   36   48      0    12   24   36    48
                  Emp: nondbles                 Emp: services                 Emp: TTU                  Emp: wholesale
           0.1                                                        0.1                         0.1
                                        0.05
            0
                                          0                            0                           0
          −0.1
                                       −0.05
          −0.2                                                       −0.1                        −0.1
                                        −0.1
              0    12   24   36   48        0    12   24   36   48      0    12   24   36   48      0    12   24   36    48
                   Emp: retail                    Emp: FIRE                  Emp: Govt                   NAPM empl
                                          0                           0.2                       0.4
           0.1                                                                                  0.2
                                       −0.05                                                      0
                                                                      0.1
            0                                                                                  −0.2
                                        −0.1                                                   −0.4
          −0.1                                                         0                       −0.6
              0    12   24   36   48       0     12   24   36   48      0    12   24   36   48     0     12   24   36    48




This figure provides plots of posterior IRFs for a selection of many employment indicators for
                                     the benchmark model.
                            BFAVAR WITH SIGN RESTRICTION                                   93


               Figure 61.— Loan Responses: Benchmark Model

                        LoansRealEst                            C&I loans

         0.5
                                                  0.4
         0.4

         0.3
                                                  0.2
         0.2

         0.1                                       0

          0
                                                 −0.2
        −0.1

        −0.2
            0      12        24        36   48      0      12       24         36   48



                         Cons credit                            Inst cred/PI

         0.3
                                                  0.4
         0.2
                                                  0.3

         0.1                                      0.2

          0                                       0.1

        −0.1                                       0

        −0.2                                     −0.1

           0       12        24        36   48      0      12       24         36   48




This figure provides plots of posterior IRFs for a selection of many loan indicators for the
                                     benchmark model.
94                                 P. AMIR-AHMADI, H. UHLIG


            Figure 62.— Spread Responses: Benchmark Model


                  CP−FF spread                  3 mo−FF spread                6 mo−FF spread
          0.02                           0.05                          0.05

            0                              0                             0

         −0.02                          −0.05                         −0.05

         −0.04                           −0.1                          −0.1

         −0.06                          −0.15                         −0.15

             0    12   24     36   48       0   12   24     36   48       0   12   24     36   48

                  1 yr−FF spread                5 yr−FFspread                 10yr−FF spread
                                          0.1
                                                                        0.1
            0
                                           0                             0
          −0.1
                                         −0.1                          −0.1

          −0.2
              0   12   24     36   48       0   12   24     36   48       0   12   24     36   48

                  Aaa−FF spread                 Baa−FF spread


           0.1                            0.1


            0                              0


          −0.1                           −0.1
             0    12   24     36   48       0   12   24     36   48




This figure provides plots of posterior IRFs for a selection of many spread indicators for the
                                      benchmark model.
