                     NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                 MEASURING THE EFFECT OF SUBSIDIZED
                   TRAINING PROGRAMS ON MOVEMENTS
                      IN AND OUT OF EMPLOYMENT




                            David Card

                         Daniel Sullivan




                      Working Paper No. 2173




                NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                      1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                         Cambridge, MA 02138
                            February 1987




We are grateful to Angus Deaton, John Ham, Robert LaLonde, and
seminar participants at Columbia University, Princeton University,
and the National Bureau of Economic Research for comments on
earlier drafts. The research reported here is part of the NBERs
research program in Labor Studies. Any opinions expressed are
those of the authors and not those of the National Bureau of
Economic Research.
                                                 NBER Working Paper #2173
                                                 February 1987




              Measuring the Effect of Subsidized Training Programs
                     on Movements In and Out of Employment




                                   ABSTRACT




     We present a variety of alternative estimates of the effect of

training on the probability of employment for adult male participants in

the 1976 Comprehensive Employment and Training Act (CETA) program. Our

results suggest that CETA participation increased the probability of

employment in the three years after training by from 2 to 5 percentage

points. Classroom training programs appear to have had significantly

larger effects than on-the--job programs, although the estimated effects

of both kinds of programs are consistently positive. We also find that

movements in and out of employment for the trainees and a control group

of nonparticipants are reasonably well described by a first—order Markov

process, conditional on individual heterogeneity. In the context of

this model, CETA participation appears to have increased both the proba-

bility of moving into employment, and the probability of continuing

employment.


    David Card                            Daniel Sullivan
    Department of Economics               Department of Economics
    Princeton University                  Northwestern University
     Princeton, NJ 08544                   Evanston, IL 60201
     (609) 452—4045                        (312) 491—8225
      During the past two decades the U.S. government has sponsored a

 series of large-scale subsidized training programs for unemployed and

 low-income workers.-" The precise impact of these programs, however,

 remains a source of continuing controversy. At issue are the effects of

training on the earnings of participants. The measurement of training

effects in the absence of classical random assignment into treatment and

control groups has proved exceedingly difficult: in part because of the

difficulty of modelling the process of selection into training; and in

part because of the difficulty of specifying a model of earnings in the

absence of training or selection effects.

     For any training program, the effect on participant earnings can be

decomposed into an effect on the probability of employment, and an

effect on the level of earnings, conditional on employment. In this

paper, we provide estimates of the former effect for adult male par-

ticipants in the 1976 Comprehensive Employment and Training Act (CETA)

programs. Our motivation for focussing on the employment probabilities

is threefold. First, the data that we employ are nonexperimental. In a

nonexperimental setting it is imperative to have an adequate model of

the process generating the data. Past attempts to directly specify

models for the level of earnings, however, have not been entirely suc-

cessful. When, as in Ashenfelter and Card (1985), goodness-of-fit tests

are available, the models are usually rejected. Moreover, the admi-

nistrative earnings records that form the basis for our analysis exhibit

a variety of features not easily incorporated in the simple variance

components and time series models used in the literature. Many indivi-

duals in our sample report spells of zero earnings, while the earnings

records for a significant fraction of the sample are censored. Indeed,
                                  -2—


it is our belief that the simplest way to specify an acceptable model of

these data may be to combine the kind of employment probability models

presented in this paper with some relatively simple model for the level

of earnings conditional on employment.

     Secondly. we believe that it may be easier to model the effects of

training on the employment probabilities of the trainees than on the

level of their earnings. We focus on two distinct training effects on

post-training employment probabilities. The first is an effect on the

labor market status of trainees at the completion of training. To the

extent that subsequent employment probabilities are affected by this

status, training provides a one-time shift in the pattern of post-

training employment probabilities. The second is an effect of training

on the probability that trainees remain employed, or move from

unemployment to employment. By modelling these two effects separately,

we can provide a more complete description of the overall training

effect.

     Finally, there is evidence from a randomized trial evaluation of

one recent training program that most of the measured training effect in

that program resulted from increases in the post-training employment

rates of the trainees. Thus our analysis of employment probabilities

for CETA trainees can be expected to capture a significant fraction of

the total effect of training.

     Our empirical analysis uses Social Security Administration records

on annual earnings from 1970 to 1979 for a sample of trainees who

entered the CETA program in 1976, and a comparison group of nontrainees
                                     —3—


 drawn from the March 1976 Current Population Survey. As is usual in any

 nonexperiment evaluation, the analysis of training effects on employment

probabilities is made more difficult by the fact that trainees are a

 rtonrandom sample of the population. We use a variety of techniques to

to control for differences between the trainees and controls. In the

first section of the paper, we perform a simple comparison between the

pre— and post—training employment probabilities of the trainees and the

controls. If the probability of remaining employed from one year to the

next (the retention probability) and the probability of moving from

unemployment to employment (the accession probability) are the same,

then a simple comparison of relative changes in employment probabilities

among the trainees and controls provides a consistent estimate of the

training effect in the context of a linear probability model. With

state dependence or with nonlinear probability specifications, this

technique will not necessarily eliminate permanent differences between

trainees and controls. Methods are presented in the third section of

the paper to handle both problems.

     Before presenting these methods, however, we consider some

estimates of the training effect obtained by conditioning on the entire

pre-tralning employment history. That is, we compare the post-training

employment outcomes of trainees and controls with exactly the same pre—

training history. Overall estimates are obtained by weighting the

results for the individual histories by the trainee sample fractions.

This simple technique also highlights many of the difficulties involved

in using observational data to evaluate the effects of training.
                                  —4--




     In the third section we explore a number of relatively parsimonious

models for the employment histories of the trainees and controls. These

all express the log odds of employment in terms of year, individual,

state, and training effects. The discrete nature of the data allow for

simple goodness—of—fit tests that indicate the relative success of

alternative models. In modelling the effects of training, we allow for

separate effects on the accession and retention rates of trainees. We

also allow for a one—time impact of training on the probability of

employment in the year after training. A distinction between the one-

time effect and the permanent effect of training is important because,

we argue, there are potentially important biases that affect the former

but not the latter.

     We initially treat the individual—specific variables as fixed

effects. The resulting incidental parameter problem renders conven-

tional maximum likelihood estimates inconsistent. For the simplest

model of employment probabilities with no state dependence, this problem

can be overcome by maximizing a conditional version of the likelihood,

as suggested by Raasch (1960) and Chamberlain (1980). Unfortunately,

this technique cannot be extended to the more complex models of state—

dependence which we believe are necessary to describe the data. We turn

instead to a random effects specification. Rather than specify some

simple parametric form for the unobserved heterogeneity, however, we

treat the distribution of the individual effects as discrete. Our

method is similar to and is motivated by Heckman and Singer's (1984)

implementation of the technique of nonparametric maximum likelihood.
                                   —5-


      The results obtained in the first and second sections suggest that

 CETA participation had a small but significantly positive impact on the

 post—training employment probabilities of the trainees. The more

 sophisticated methodology employed in section III, on the other hand,

points to somewhat larger increases in trainee employment rates.

 Irrespective of the methodology employed, we find that the estimated

effects are larger for classroom trainees than for other CETA par-

ticipants. The results also suggest that movements in and out of

employment are reasonably well described by a first-order Markov pro-

cess. conditional on individual heterogeneity. Judging by their fit to

the data, relatively simple models of the distribution of individual

effects are quite successful in describing the employment histories of

both trainees and controls.


I. Data Description and Comparisons of Changes in Employment Probabilities

     The CETA programs were federally-funded training and employment

programs administered through some 450 city, county and state agencies

across the         The Comprehensive Employment and Training Act pro-

vided funding for two district types of programs: vocational and

retraining programs for unemployed or disadvantaged workers (members of

households with incomes below the federal poverty standard) admi-

nistered under Title I of the Act; and countercyclical job creation

programs for recent job—losers in high unemployment areas, administered

under Titles II and VI of the Act. Participants under Title I were

mainly disadvantaged workers, and tended to have relatively lower levels

of schooling and labor market experience. A majority of these par-
                                  -6—


ticipants were enrolled in classroom training (short—term vocational

courses), on-the--job training, and "work experience' programs

(subsidized public sector jobs emphasizing work habits and skills

development). Participants under Titles II and VI, on the other hand,

tended to have characteristics fairly similar to the overall population

of unemployed workers. These participants were mainly enrolled in

public sector employment programs, which, for the most part, offered

little or no formal training, and provided subsidized employment in the

local public sector.

     Total CETA enrollment in June 1976 was 806,000. At that time,

roughly 20 percent of participants were enrolled in classroom training,

25 percent in work experience programs, and 35 percent in public sector

employment programs. The costs of the CETA program to the Federal

government in 1976 were $882 per participant in the Title I programs,

and $3049 per participant in Title II and VI programs."

     Table 1 contains information on the characteristics and employment

histories of our sample of 1976 CETA trainees, as well as a comparison

sample of individuals in the March 1976 Current Population Survey (CPS).

The trainee data are drawn from the Continuous Longitudinal Manpower

Survey (CLMS). The comparison sample represents a merged file of CPS

records with longitudinal earnings information from the Social Security

Administration. A detailed description of the data sources is provided

in the Data Appendix.

     In this paper we focus exclusively on the effects of CETA par-

ticipation on adult male trainees. The sample described in the first
                                   —7—


 column of Table 1 represents male CETA participants who were 21 years of

 age or older at enrollment, and who entered and left the program in

l976.!" The "employment rates" in rows 4—13 of the Table give the frac-

 tion of the sample reporting nonzero social security earnings in each

year from 1970 to l979. Unfortunately, we have no way of knowing

whether an observation of zero earnings in this data represents a year-

long spell of unemployment, withdrawal from the labor force, employment

in the untaxed sector of the economy, or missing data.' This is a

major limitation of the Social Security earnings records, which nonethe-

less represents the only source of times—series earnings information for

CETA participants.

     The second and third columns of Table I present the characteristics

of two distinct groups of trainees: participants in classroom training

programs, and other trainees)- Classroom trainees were slightly

younger than other participants and had slightly worse employment

records prior to training. After training, however, the classroom

trainees appear to have fared as well as or better than other

participants.

     For comparison with these trainee samples, the fourth column of

Table 1 presents demographic characteristics and employment histories

for a sample of adult males in the March 1976 Current Population Survey.

This sample, which we designate the "eligible" CPS sample, includes only

those adult males who were in the labor force during the week of the

Current Population Survey and who reported individual and household

incomes for 1975 of less than $20,000 and $30,000 respectively.1—1"
                                  -8—


Evidently, CETA trainees differ from other members of the population in

terms of age, education, marital status, and employment history. Since

the trainees are younger, however, a larger fraction of the trainee

group may have been out of the labor force in the pre-training period.

To control for this important difference in years of labor force attach-

ment, we have drawn a stratified random sample of the CPS with the same

distribution of potential labor market experience (age minus education)

as the trainees.-" The characteristics of this sample, which we

designate as the "control sample", are displayed in the fifth column of

Table 1.

     From 1970 to 1977 the fraction of the eligible and control samples

with nonzero Social Security earnings was approximately constant and

equal to the fraction of paid workers in the economy covered by the

Social Security system. In 1978 and 1979, however this fraction fell

sharply. A similar decline occurred among both groups of trainees. We

believe that this measured decline is due to long delays in filing and

recording Social Security earnings.1' In the empirical analysis

reported below we control for reporting delay and other sources of year—

to—year variation in the fraction of nonzero earnings by a series of

year effects, which we assume to have identical effects on the

employment probabilities of the trainees and the controls.

     Some indication of the relative changes in employment probabilities

is provided in Table 2, which compares pre--1976 and post-1976 probabili-

ties for trainees and controls. For the control group and for the

trainees as a whole, average employment probabilities fell after 1976.
                                     -9—


The drop is smaller for the trainees, providing some evidence of a posi-

tive training effect. Comparing Columns 3 and 4 of the table, it is

clear that most of the improvement in the trainees relative position is

concentrated among the classroom trainees. Non-classroom trainees'

employment levels follow those of the control sample rather closely.

        An obvious question is whether the simple technique presented in

Table 2 of comparing relative changes in employment probabilities bet-

ween trainees and controls leads to a consistent estimate of the training

effect in the presence of unobserved differences between the two groups.

Ashenfelter (1978) showed that a similar comparison of relative changes

in earnings for trainees and controls leads to a consistent program

estimate for the level of earnings provided that (1) shocks in pre—

training and post-training earnings are uncorrelated with their own

lagged values and with the decision to participate in training and (2)

the unobserved individual effects enter linearly into the earnings

equation.

    The equivalent formulation for employment probabilities expresses

        the probability that individual    i   is employed in period t , as

a simple linear components—of-variance structure:


(1) pit =         +   +
             ai

where    a1 is an individual-specific component,         is a year-specific

component, D1t is an indicator for post-1976 trainee status, e is

the training effect, and employment outcomes are assumed to be indepen-

dent (conditional on the individual effect) across years. Suppose
                                                 -10-


further that pre—training employment outcomes are independent of

conditional on the individual effects a1                  Let E1t represent
an indicator variable whose value is equal to unity if I                        Is employed

in t , and let                  and E12 represent the individual-specific means

of E1t in the pre-training (1970—75) and post—training (1977-79)

periods, respectively.              Then the expected change in average employment

rates for the trainees from the pre—training to the post—training period

is

     E(E.2 —   il    1
                         D176
                                =   1) =        +e

where I3' represents the difference in the means of the year effects

before and after training. The expected change in employment rates for

the controls, on the other hand, is


     E(E.2 -   il        Dm =       0)   =



The expected "difference—in-differences" of the average pre— and post-

training employment rates for trainees and controls is


           —                             —           —         =   0)   =   0
               E11       D76 = 1)            E(E12       D76

A consistent estimate of 8 is therefore provided by the corresponding

difference in sample average changes iii pre- and post-training

employment rates for trainees and controls.1 For CETA classroom par-

ticipants, the difference—in—difference estimate in row 6 of Table 2 is

6.0 percentage points, with a standard error of 1.7, while the estimate

for non-classroom participants is 1.5 points, with a standard error of 0.9.

     There are a number of difficulties with the assumptions leading to

the difference-in—difference estimators presented in Table 2. First,
                                  —11--



experience suggests that models that explicitly incorporate the

restrictions        0 and         1 tend to better summarize discrete

data than the linear probability model (1). For example, models such as


(2) F1(Ptt) =               eD
where   F is a logistic or Gaussian distribution function are guaranteed

to produce fitted probabilities inside the unit interval, while (1) is

not. Unfortunately, the simple differencing schemes employed here will

not completely eliminate the individual effects in a nonlinear model

such as (2). In the third section of this paper, we develop several

models that incorporate a logistic specification for the employment pro-

babilities and that a1low for individual effects.

     A more fundamental difficulty is the assumption that the par-

ticipation decision is independent of pre—training outcomes. Various

authors have pointed out that pre-training earnings may be contaminated

by transitory shocks that contributed toward the decision to enter

trainingJ- Evidence of this shows up in Table 1 as a sharp decline in

trainee employment rates in 1975. This evidence suggests that 1975

employment probabilites are not independent of training status, given

the individual effects. If we maintain the structure of equation (1),

and assume that employment probabilities prior to 1975 are independent

of training status, then a consistent program estimate is obtained by

forming the difference—in—differences without 1975 data. Such estimates

are shown in row 7 of Table 2. For both groups of trainees, the esti-

mated training effects are smaller when 1975 data is excluded. For the
                                  —12—


classroom group the new estimate is 5.7 points with a standard error of

1.7, while for the non—classroom trainees the estimate drops to essen-

tially zero.

     This procedure can also be repeated to test the independence of

training status and pre-1975 employment probabilities.'' For example,

if 1974 data is omitted from the pre—training averages, the estimated

training effects change only slightly to .058 and .004, respectively,

for classroom and non—classroom trainees. These results suggest that

1974 employment probabilities are not significantly biased by transitory

effects that contributed toward the decision to enter training in 1976.

     An final difficulty with the specification of equation (1) is the

assumption that employment probabilities are independent of previous

employment outcomes. A simple tabulation of retention probabilities

(the probability of employment conditional on employment last period)

and accession probabilities (the probability of employment conditional

on unemployment last period) shows that these are two very different.

For the control sample, retention probabilities average .96 while

accession probabilities average .31. (Averages for the trainee samples

are similar). These results suggest a lack of independence in

employment probabilities over time that complicates the interpretation

of the simple difference—in—differences estimators. To begin with, if

there is individual-specific heterogeneity (i.e., if the c vary

across people), then the expectation of the average employment probabi-

lity for a fixed sample of individuals in a particular year depends on

the distribution of individuals between employment and unemployment in
                                  -13--



the previous year. This phenomenon is especially relevant to the tran-

sitions immediately after training. During the training period many

more trainees than usual may be counted as employed, thereby increasing

the expected employment probabilities immediately after training for

CETA participants. On the other hand, many jobs held by CETA trainees

in 1976 were automatically terminated with the end of program par-

ticipation. Thus, state dependence in employment probabilites together

with the unknown effects of program participation on employment status

in late 1976 introduce unknown biases on the post-training employment

probabilities of the trainees.

     State dependence also implies that selection bias in the program

estimates cannot be eliminated by simply dropping 1975 data, even if

1975 employment status is the only determinant of program participation.

Given a particular value for the individual effect, and given that the

probability of training is higher for those unemployed in 1975, the pro-

bability of employment is lower for trainees in all previous years,

since unemployed workers in 1975 are more likely to have experienced

unemployment in the previous years. In Section III, we present

estimators that allow for selection bias with state dependence as well

as individual-specific heterogeneity.
                                   —14—


II. Comparisons of Exact Matches

     As motivation for the estimates presented in this Section, observe

that if assignment to training were random, then unbiased and consistent

estimates of the effect of training could be obtained by simply comparing

trainee and control post—training employment rates. Such estimates

obtained from our data would seem most unreliable: CETA participants

are obviously a nonrandom sample of the population and we therefore

suspect that they differ from the controls in ways other than par-

ticipation in training. Indeed, this suspicion can be immediately con-

firmed by an examination of the pre—training data--trainees had

considerably worse employment histories prior to training than did

controls.

     While it clearly does not make sense to directly compare the post-

training employment rates of trainees and controls who had markedly dif-

ferent pre—training employment histories, comparisons of trainees and

controls with exactly the same pre-training history have a definite

intuitive appeal. Such comparisons are made in Table 3. Each row of

the table corresponds to a different pre-training history. For each

history we have calculated the average post-training employment rates for

the controls and the trainee groups. The estimated training effect for a

given history is simply the difference of the trainee and control

employment rates. The total effect (in the last row of the Table) is

calculated by weighing the results for the individual histories by the

trainee sample fractions. There are four histories, containing a total

of 12 trainees, with no observations from the control group. For pur-
                                  -15—


poses of calculating average training effects we have ignored these

cells and re—weighted the remaining cells accordingly.

     Compared to the difference—in—difference estimates, the estimates

in Table 3 show a smaller effect for classroom participants (.036 with a

standard error of .013 versus .056 with a standard error of .017) and a

larger effect for non—classroom participants (.012 with a standard error

of.009 versus .006 with a standard error of .009), although the overall

training effects from the two methods are identical. Both methods

attribute the larger training effect to classroom participants.

     The overall estimates do not, however, convey all the information

in Table 3. Turning to the individual pre-training histories, it is

evident that there is a great deal of variation in the size and even the

direction of the training effect. For instance, for trainees with a

000000 employment history (corresponding to no Social Security earnings

in the entire pre—training period) the estimated training effects are

very large. Recall, however, that zero Social Security earnings can mean

that a worker is unemployed, that he is employed in the uncovered sec—

tor, or even that his data are missing.11" Thus one explanation for the

size of the training effect for workers with the 000000 history is that

a large fraction of the controls with this pre—training history were

actually in the uncovered sector. Most of these workers would be

expected to remain in the uncovered sector after training, thereby

depressing their measured employment rates in the post-training period.

     The estimated effects for trainees with a 111111 employment history

(corresponding to positive Social Security earnings in every period)
                                   -16-


are, on the other hand, actually negative. It is quite likely, however,

that many trainees in this category suffered some setback before they

elected to enter training. Trainees who became unemployed part way

through 1975, for example, are still recorded as employed in 1975. In

the absence of training such individuals would be expected to have lower

post-training employment rates than other individuals with the 111111

history and the training effect for this history is therefore biased

downward.

     Similar interpretations can be offered for many of the other

histories. In particular, the comments about the 000000 history also

seem to apply to histories 1000000, 110000, and 111000, while those for

the 111111 history may also apply to histories 011111, 001111, and

000111. In these cases and others we have reason to suspect that there

are important differences between trainees and controls with exactly the

same pre-training histories. We cannot, however, verify these suspicions

using the present data. For a given history, trainees and controls are

identical with respect to all measured characteristics.

     One might hope that the overall training effects would be insen-

sitive to any individual history. Unfortunately, this is not the case.

If the 000000 history is deleted from the totals, the training effect

declines substantially. For classroom trainees it becomes .018, while

for non-classroom trainees it becomes - .006.   On the other hand, without

the 111111 history, the overall effects increase to .1114 for classroom

and .123 for non-classroom participants. This sensitivity must be kept

in mind when interpreting the results of this or any obervational study
                                  —17—


of training effects.

     Table 4 contains separate exact match estimates of the training

effect for each post--training year. To save space only the total

effects are shown)— As can be seen, there is substantial variation in

the effect for the three post-training years. For trainees as a whole

the effects are .026 with a standard error of .009 in 1977, .0004 with a

standard error of .010 in 1978, and .026 with a standard error of .011

in 1979. The time pattern is quite different, however, among classroom

and non-classroom trainnees. While the two groups show approximately

equal effects in 1977, the non-classroom trainees drop to a negative

effect in 1978 before recovering somewhat in 1979. The classroom

trainees, on the other hand, show a marginal increase in the training

effect in 1978 and relatively substantial 5.6 percentage point training

effect in 1979.

     The technique of exact-match comparisons can easily be extended to

measure the separate effects of training on accession and retention

rates. By using only post-1977 transitions, we can also control for

any one-time effects of training on employment status in the year imme-

diately after training. Exact—match comparisons of transition proba-

bilities for trainees and controls are presented in Table 5. The

training effect reported for the 1977-78 retention rate, for example,

compares the retention rates between 1977 and 1978 for trainees and

controls with identical pretraining histories. The differences in

retention rates for each pretraining history are then weighted by the

fraction of trainees with each history to arrive at an average estimated
                                           -18-


training effect.

     Formally, let P(1l0'Ih) represent the probability of the sequence

of post-training employment indicators '110" (i.e., employed in 1977,

employed in 1978, unemployed in 1979) conditional on the    jth history

of pretraining employment indicators. Then the retention rate between

1977 and 1978 for the jth history is the probability


                         p(ll0'jh.)   i-

                                            P(lllh)
          —
              P(ll0Ih)   P(lllIh) +p(lOOh.) ÷P(lOlIh)

An estimate of r(7778) can be obtained from estimates of the sample

probabilities of the various post-training outcomes. The difference in

the weighted averages of these estimated retention rates between trainees

and controls (weighted by the sample fraction of trainees with the jth

history) represents the estimated training effect for the 1977—78 reten-

tion rate)-' Standard errors are obtained for the average retention

and accession rates from the estimated standard errors for the retention

and accession rates for each pretraining history. These. in turn, are

estimated by the delta method using the sampling variability of the

estimated probabilities of the post-training outcomes, conditional on

the pretraining history."

     An estimate of the average post-training retention rate for the

th pretraining history is obtained by forming a weighted average of

r(7778) and r(7879) .           The weights are simply the relative frac-

tions of individuals with the th pretraining history who were at risk

of remaining employed between 1977-78, and 1978-79, respectively. The

weighted average retention rate is therefore
                                   -19—


                 p(1lO h) ÷ 2p(lll
 —                                   h) + p(Oll h)
                                          I            I



 r 2p(l1O h) + 2p(ll] h) + p(lOc h) ÷ p(lOlj h) + p(OllI h) + p(O1O        I
                                                                               h)
 where each of the probabilities is conditioned on the th pretraining

 history.

      An estimate of the average training effect on post-training reten-

 tion rates is obtained by forming a weighted average of the differences

 between average retention rates of trainees and controls with each

 pretraining history. Standard errors for the average training effect

can be obtained from standard errors for the estimates of the average

retention rates for each pretraining history, which in turn are

constructed by the delta method from the sampling variability of the

estimated probabilities of the various post—training outcomes.'

     For all three groups of trainees the estimated training effects

obtained by pooling the 1977-78 and 1978-79 transitions are smaller than

their standard errors. The training effects for the individual years

are somewhat poorly determined and tend to change signs between 1978-78

and 1978-79. The classroom trainees show a large positive training

effect for the 1978—79 retention rate and a large but imprecisely esti-

mated negative training effect for the 1978-79 accession rate. Overall,

these results suggest that the main effect of training may have worked

through the accession rate of the classroom trainees. This finding is

confirmed by a naive difference—in—differences of post-training and

pretraining transition rates between trainees and controls.' Such an

analysis shows a sharp decrease in accession rates for the controls

between the pretraining and post-training period (from an average of .36
                                  -20--



over the 1970—74 period to an average of .25 in the 1977-79 period) with

no corresponding drop for the classroom trainees (an average accession

rate of .35 in both periods).

     The strategy of these exact match procedures is somewhat different

from that of the other methods presented in this paper. Rather than

specifying a distribution of employment outcomes in terms of unobser-

vable individual effects, the exact match procedure specifies the most

general possible model of post—training outcomes in terms of the obser-

vable data (pretraining outcomes and training status). In contrast to

the training effect estimates derived from equations (1) or (2), which

rely on essentially arbitrary functional form assumptions, the exact

match procedure relies on the assumption that the participation decision

is independent of any unobservable determinants of the probability of

employment, conditional on the observable pretraining   data." As

Heckman and Robb (1986) have observed, this is a strong (and in the con-

text of the model, untestable) assumption. In the next section we pre-

sent a model of training that allows for a limited form of dependence

between the unobservable components of the probability of employment and

the unobservable determinants of the decision to participate in

training.

     Finally, we note two other difficulties with the exact match proce-

dures presented here. First, exact match estimators of the training

effect use many degrees of freedom, and result in potentially inef-

ficient estimates. Second, the exact match methodology cannot be used

when there are continuous covariates, and would be impractical when
                                  —21—


there were many more discrete variables than we have here. Indeed,

even in the present application, the sample sizes for many of the in-

dividual histories are too low to give useful results. Nevertheless,

approximate match methods which group similar individuals into the same

cells might still prove useful in some program evaluation settings.&4/


III. Nonlinear Models for the Effect of Training on Employment Probabilities

     In Section I we noted that when employment probabilities are

modelled as nonlinear functions of the individual effects, or when state

dependence is allowed, the simple difference-in—differences estimator is

not necessarily consistent for the training effect. rn this section we

present estimators of the training effect that allow for these complica-

tions. Specifically, we present a logistic regression model of the

employment probabilities that includes individual effects and state

dependence effects. We also present a model of participation in

training that permits interactions between the unobservable components

of the employment probabilities and the individual-specific determinants

of training status.

     We first present a logistic regression model that assumes indepen-

dence over time in successive employment probabilities. Although this

model incorporates a very general specification of the individual

effects, it provides a relatively poor fit to either the control group

or the trainee data. We then go on to present a class of logistic

regression models that include state dependence and a random—effects

specification of individual heterogeneity. We find that these models

are much more successful in describing the employment histories of the
                                        —22—


control group. This gives us somewhat more confidence in their applica-

tion to the problem of determining training effects from nonexperimental

data.

        As a starting point, consider a model for the controls that assumes

independence of successive employment probabilities and is linear in the

log—odds of employment:


(3) Logit (Pa) = a1

where     logit(z) =   log(z/(l-z))   is the inverse logistic distribution

function, and            is, as before, that probability that individual i

is employed in period t .        For a sample of T observations on each of

N individuals, this model can be estimated by maximum likelihood,

treating a. and             as parameters. It can be shown, however, that

the resulting estimates are inconsistent as the number of individuals

(N) tends to infinity. The problem is that the number of parameters

(N÷T—1) tends to infinity with the size of the samp1e.-"

        Raasch (1960), Andersen (1973), and Chamberlain (1980) show that

consistent estimates of           can be obtained by maximizing a conditional

version of the likelihood function in which the likelihood of a given

employment sequence is calculated conditional on the total number of

years of positive earnings in the sequence. In particular, equation (3)

implies that the likelihood of a sequence of employment indicators

          E12
                       EIT} for individual i ,      conditional on Si =      is:

                                         exp(E E1tt)
(4)     f(E11 E             E1T S1) =     E       exp(E d t   t
                                        dcD(S.)       t
                                            -23—


where D(S1) is the set of alternative sequences of employment indica-

tors with exactly Si years of positive earnings.- Since the number

of "successes" is, for every fixed set of 's , a sufficient statistic

for a in the logistic regression model (3), the conditional likelihood

does not depend on a1 .           Consistent   estimates of the year effects may

therefore be obtained by maximizing equation (4).

        In the absence of individual-specific time-varying covariates in

equation (3), the right-hand side of equation (4) is constant for every

individual with a given sequence of employment indicators. Maximization

of the conditional log-likelihood is therefore equivalent to maximizing



    s=o
        T
        z       i
                kcD(s)
                         '1k   log 11k ()

where ks denotes the number of individuals with the kth employment

history in the 5th sufficiency class (i.e., with the same number of

years of nonzero earnings) and                     is the predicted probability of

the kth alternative within the 5th sufficiency class, as determined

by (4).

     An appropriate goodness—of-fit statistic for the model of equation

(3) is therefore the likelihood ratio statistic

            T
        2
         s=o kcD(s)
                          ks
where               represents the fraction of observations with the kth

employment history in the sth sufficiency class, and                is the vector

of conditional maximum likelihood estimates of the year effects." For

the case of the 10 year employment histories of the control sample, the
                                     -24--



degrees of freedom of the test statistic are 1024 minus the number of

sufficiency classes (11) minus the number of estimated year effects      (9)/
        The value of this test statistic for the fit of equation (4) to the

control group data is reported in the first column of Table 6.

Evidently, the model does a relatively poor job of describing the

distribution of employment outcomes among the controls. Inspection of

the model's residuals suggests that a major difficulty is the inability

to predict serial correlation in the observed sequences of zeros and

ones. Except for the influence of the year effects, the model predicts

that sequences of employment indicators with the same total number of

years of employment are equally likely. As the data in Table 3 shows,

however, a serially correlated sequence of indicators like 000111 or

111000 is far more likely than an    alternating   sequence like 001011 or

l010l0.!" An obvious explanation for this finding is that individual

retention probabilities are significantly higher than accession probabi—

lities. Individuals who are employed or unemployed are therefore more

likely to remain in their previous state in the next year.

        Before turning to models that incorporate state dependence,

however, we give the results of extending the model of equation (3) to

the trainees. The complete model can be written as


(5) Logit(P1) = a1      +    +



where          is an indicator for post-1976 trainee status and the other

variables are the same as in (3). Following the discussion in Section

I, we also assume that the probability that an individual entered
                                   -25—


training depends on his 1975 employment status and/or the value of his

 fixed effect. In the absence of state dependence, this assumption

implies that pre-1975 and post-1976 employment outcomes are independent

of the decision to enter training, conditional on     .   The model can

then be estimated by maximizing the conditional likelihood function,

using employment outcomes from 1970—74 and 1977-79 for the trainees and

from 1970-79 for the controls. The likelihood for the trainees is con-

ditional on the number of periods of nonzero earnings in 8 years, while

the likelihood for the trainees is conditional on the number of periods

of nonzero earnings in 10 years.

     Estimation results for equation (5) are presented in columns 2-4 of

Table 6. For both groups of trainees the estimated training effect is

positive and statistically different from zero. The implied increases

in the average post-training employment probabilities are 8.7 and 3.5

percent for the classroom and non-classroom trainees, respectively.

These estimates are somewhat higher than the estimates from either the

exact match or difference-in-differences procedures of the previous sec-

tions. The increasing magnitude of the estimated training effects over

the post-training period is due to the sharp decrease in the estimated

year effects in 1978 and 1979. Assuming that the training effect on the

log-odds of employment is constant, the effect on the probability of

employment is higher, the lower the average probability of employment

(provided that the average probability is greater than one-half). The

goodness-of—fit statistics for the joint model of the trainees and

controls, however are very unfavorable, suggesting that the estimated
                                                 —26—


training effects must be interpreted cautiously.

        State dependence can be introduced into the employment probability

model for the controls by including a term in the lagged employment

indicator


(6) Logit (Pft) = a1              +      +            for   t > 1970.


The parameter y represents the increase in the log—odds of employment

in t , conditional on employment in t—l .                      If   retention probabilities

are higher than accession probabilities then we expect y > 0                        .   The

model of equation (6) is completed by specifying the distribution of

employment probabilities in 1970. For simplicity we assume that the

probability of employment in 1970, conditional on a ,                       is   equal to the

"steady-state" employment probability implied by equation (6):"



                                                t = 1970
(7) Pit =                         A
              1 -             +




where          and                refer to the accession and retention probabilities

for     i   in period t ,             respectively,   as determined by equation (6).

        Unfortunately, estimation of the model implied by equations (6) and

(7) is not as straightforward as estimation of the model implied by

equation (3).        In the Appendix we show that in the presence of state

dependence the minimal sufficient statistic for a1 is, for all but a

few exceptional values of the other parameters, the entire data vector

for individual        i   .       Thus the conditional likelihood approach cannot be

extended to the logistic probability model with state dependence.-"
                                   -27-


     We turn instead to a random effects specification. That is, we

make the additional assumption in equation (6) (and all subsequent

models) that the a1 are independent and identically distributed random

variables with some common distribution function F      Rather than spe-

cify a parametric form for F , however, we assume that F is a

discrete distribution with a small number of mass points. We allow the

positions of the mass points and the associated probabilities to be

parameters of the likelihood function. This specification is intended

to be an approximation to the nonparametric maximum likelihood estimator

of Kiefer and Wolfowitz (1956). Actual nonparametric maximum likelihood

estimates would be obtained by jointly choosing F (unconstrained by any

parametric restrictions) and the structural parameters to maximize the

likelihood function. Laird (1978) and Lindsay (1983a, l983b) show that

for problems of the type considered here, the maximum will occur at a

distribution with finite support. The technique has been applied to

econometric models for duration data by Heckinan and Singer (1984).

     After some experimentation we chose to use four mass points in the

distribution function of the individual effects. For example, the first

row of Table 7 summarizes the results of applying equation (6) to the

control data with    = 0   and four mass points. The estimated year-

effects (not shown in the Table) are identical, to two decimal places,

to the estimates obtained from the conditional maximum likelihood proce-

dure summarized in the first column of Table 6. The addition of extra

mass points to this model brought only slight increases in the maximized

likelihood function, and negligible changes in the estimated year
                                  —28—



effects. The four estimated mass points, and the estimated fractions
of the control group associated with each mass point, are described in

the right hand columns of Table 7. The restriction y = 0     implies that

the estimated log-odds of employment are independent of previous

employment status: therefore the log—odds in rows (la) and (ib) are

identical.

     The second row of Table 7 summarizes the estimates of equation (6)

obtained by our random effects technique with y unrestricted. The

addition of one extra parameter for state dependence reduces

the goodness-of-fit statistic shown in the second column of Table 7 by

1746.3. The new value is actually below the mean of the appropriate

chi—squared distribution under the null hypothesis of a correct model.

The estimate of y is 2.75 with an estimated standard error of 0.07."

Clearly the model of equation (6) provides a better description of the

control group data than the model of equation (3).

     The third and fourth rows of Table 7 summarize the estimation

results for two additional models, both of which allow for interactions

between the individual effects and the state effects. The estimates in

the third row allow a "one degree of freedom" interaction:


(8) Logit ()     =
                                  1
                                       +
                                           5a Et_i for t >   1970,


while the estimates in the fourth row allow a full interaction between

the two:



(9) Logit (Pft) =     +    + Y1Eft_1       for t > 1970
                                    -29-


Both models again assume that 1970 employment probabilities for indivi-

dual     i are given by the steady state probabilities corresponding to

the transition probabilities for that year.

       The log-odds of the retention and accession probabilities for each

of the four types are presented in the right—hand columns of Table 7.

The model of equation (9) (in row 4 of the Table) imposes no restrictions

on the relative transition probabilities, while the other models impose

various degrees of constraint. Comparison of the goodness-of—fit

statistics suggests that the constrained models do not do a particularly

good job of matching the unconstrained fit. The model of equations (6)

and (8) can both be easily rejected in favor of the unrestricted model

in equation (9).

       These goodness-of-fit comparisons suggest that the unrestricted

model of equation (9) should be used as the basis for a joint model of

the trainees and controls. On the other hand, the goodness-of-fit of

the simplest state-dependence model (equation (6)) is acceptable by

conventional standards, and the computational burden is considerably

lower. We have therefore chosen to use this specification as our basic

model.

       The extention of the employment probability model represented by

equation (6) to the trainee data requires three steps. The first is a

specification of the training effects on the employment probabilities.

We assume that the effects of training are captured by four parameters:

two parameters representing the once—for-all effects of training on

employment status in 1977; and two parameters representing the permanent
                                                        -30—


effects of training on the accession and retention rates of the trainees

after 1977.

     Formally, we assume that the employment probabilities of the

trainees are given by


(ba) logit(P1) =                     t                    ,   1971        t         1975,



(lob) logit(P.77) =                                                  =    1)
                         E751logit(P177                  )    E75

                     +   (1      —
                                      E.75)logit(p177               1    E175
                                                                                =   0)       +
                                                                                                     0
(lOc) log(P) = T0            +
                                 a1                 (+              — TO)Et_i            ,       t       11978.



In equation (lob),                              =   1    refers to the probability that indi-
                                     1
                                         E175
vidual   i    is employed in 1977, given that he was employed in 1975,

while P177 E75 =         0       refers to the probability that                                      i   is employed in

1977, given that he was unemployed in 1975.-" The parameters                                                      and

01 measure the once—for-all effects of training on the log-odds of

employment in 1977, conditional on unemployment and employment in 1975

(using equation (lOa)), respectively. The parameters T0 and T1 , on

the other hand, measure the permanent effects of training on the

post—1977 accession and retention rates. We continue to assume that

1970 employment probabilities are equal to the steady state employment

probabilities implied by equation (ba).

     The second component of the model for the trainee data consists of

a model of the determinants of training status in 1976. We assume that

the decision to enter training is determined entirely by employment sta-

tus in 1975 (and perhaps by the value of the unobservable individual
                                            —31—


effects). In the presence of state dependence, however, it is not suf—

ficient to simply drop the 1975 employment outcome in order to avoid

selection bias in the pretraining data. Instead, we explicitly para—

meterize the dependence of the training decision on employment status in

1975. As a first alternative, we assume that


(11) P(training ) E175 = 0    ,
                                      a1)   p P(training E175 = 1                      ,
                                                                                               a)
where p represents the relative likelihood of entering training from

unemployment, as compared to employment. Using the facts that



                                            P(Trairking)E.70,..E.75, ) P(E7Ø,. .E1751a)
P(E7O         E175 iTraining, a1) =                                       P(Traininga.)
and


P(Training a.) =     P(Training   I
                                      E7    = 1    ,
                                                       a)       •
                                                                    P(E175
                                                                             = 1   I
                                                                                           a1)
                 +   P(Training       E.75 = 0     ,
                                                       a)       •
                                                                    P(E       = 0
                                                                                               a1)


we can write the probability of an observed sequence of pretraining

employment outcomes, conditional on training (and the value of the

individual effect) as:

                                                        P(E.70,...E.75 I                   a)
(12) P(E.70,...E175 )Training, a1) =                        =                                                E175=l
                                              P(E75                 ha1)     p P(E175 =              1)a)
                                                        p P(E....0,. .
                                                                             .E175         I
                                                                                               a)
                                             P(E.75 = 1Ja1) + p P(E175 =                             0ai)   E.75=o.



The probabilities in the numerator and denominator of equation (12) may

be readily calculated from equation (ba).

      This parameterization of the participation decision assumes that
                                    —32—


selection into training is independent of individual characteristics,

conditional on observable employment status in 1975. A more general

model is one that allows for differing relative selection probabilities

for different values of the individual effect:


(13) P(Training 1 E,75 = 0   a) = p(a1)      •
                                                 P(Training            E175=l , a1)


This model implies that the probability of an observed sequence of pre—

training employment outcomes, conditional on training and the individual

effect, is

                                             P(E.70, . . .E175         I
                                                                           a.)
(14) P(e.70, .. .E175 Training, ai) =
                                         P(E.75=1    1    a.)    +    p(a.)      P(E175=O I   a1)'    E.75=l,

                                                 p(a.) P(E17Ø, . . .E175           I
                                                                                       a1)
                                     =
                                                                                                     E.75=o.
                                         P(E.75=1        a1) ÷       p(a1)    P(E175=O I     a1)'

In our second model of training status we assume that the p(a1) are

completely unrestricted. If the individual effects take on 4 discrete

values, this specification introduces 3 extra parameters relative to the

selection model of equation (11).

     The final step in building a model for the trainee data is the spe-

cification of the distribution of the a1's .             One alternative is to

allow completely separate discrete distributions for the trainees and

controls. On the other hand, a very parsimonious alternative is to

model the trainees as a sample from the control group population, with

the relative fractions of trainees and controls of each type determined

by the trainee selection process. We compromise here and force the mass

points to have the same positions for the trainees and controls, while
                                  -33-


allowing arbitrary sets of weights for the two groups.

     The two alternative models of the trainee data were estimated

jointly with the model for the control group data (equation (6)) by

maximum likelihood. The results are summarized in Tables 8, 9, and 10.

For simplicity, we refer to the model for the trainees consisting of

equations (ba), (lob), (bc) and (12) as model Ti, and to the model con-

sisting of equations (lOa), (lOb), (bc) and (14) as model T2. These

two models differ only in their specification of the relative selection

probabilities of employed and unemployed workers into training.

     Estimates of the training effects, the state—dependence parameters

(y) and the goodness-of-fit statistics for the two models are presented

in Table 8. We have estimated each model three times: once with the

controls and all the trainees: once with the controls and the classroom

trainees only; and once with the controls and the non-classroom

trainees. An obvious extension of our analysis would be to model both

groups of trainees simultaneously with some model of the relative proba-

bility of entering classroom and non-classroom training.

     The estimates of the state dependence parameter y are very simi-

bar across models and across trainee groups and are also very similar to

the estimate obtained on the control group alone. The estimated

training effects, by comparison, vary somewhat between the models and

between the different trainee groups. In general the estimated training

effects on the post—1977 accession and retention rates (T0 and Ti) are

significantly positive, with the larger effect being on the accession

rate. On the other hand, the estimated training effects on employment
                                     -34-


status in 1977 (8 and          are significantly positive only for workers

who had no Social Security earnings in 1975. For workers with positive

earnings in 1975, the estimated training effects on employment status in

1977 are negative and small relative to their standard errors.

     This last result may reflect the potential bias identified in

Section II with respect to the 111111 pretraining history. That is, many

of the individuals who showed positive Social Security Earnings in 1975

but who entered training in 1976 may have become unemployed during late

1975 or early 1976. Conditional on employment in 1975, therefore,

trainees would have been expected to fare worse than nontrainees in

1977. One of the advantages of the training model presented here is

that this kind of bias does not affect the estimated permanent effects

of training. It merely complicates the interpretation of the parameters

81 and      .   In   particular, the parameter      measures not only the

effects of training per Se. but also the effects of any other events

between 1975 and 1977 whose probabilities are increased conditional on

the knowledge that an individual entered training.     (For example, the

probability of unemployment in late 1975). The same is true of 00

although the impact of other events for trainees who were unemployed in

1975 is less clear. The important point is that the estimates of

and T0 , the parameters describing the permanent effects of training,
should not be affected. The permanent effects of training should,

moreover, dominate in the long run.

     As in the previous sections, the results in Table 8 suggest that

the training effects are larger for the classroom participants than
                                   -35-


other CETA participants. The implied increases in the employment proba—

bilities for both groups of trainees are summarized in Table 9. The

estimated training effects from both models are quite similar, and are

very close to the estimates presented in Table 6 from the conditional

logit model. Since these effects incorporate both the permanent

training effects (To and T1), as well as the once-for—all effects

(0 and 1),   their   interpretation is difficult. For comparison rows

(le) and (2e) of Table 9 present estimates of the long-run effects of

training that depend only on T0 and T1 .      These estimates are again

larger for the classroom than non-classroom trainees, although the com-

bined training effect is a relatively substantial 6.3 percent increase

in employment probabilities from either model Tl or T2.

     The evidence on the goodness—of-fit of models Ti and T2 suggests

that the latter model gives a statistically better fit, although the

implied training effects are very similar. The estimates of the rela-

tive selection probability parameters       and the values and probabili-

ties of the individual effects are presented in Table 10. The estimated

mass—points (the a11s) and the estimated fractions of the control and

trainee groups of each type are very similar for the two models. The

estimated selection ratios for model Ti range from 1.37 (for the

classroom trainees) to 1.74 (for the non-classroom trainees). The esti-

mated selection ratios for model T2 vary with the value of the individual

effects, and suggest that the relative probability of entering training

from employment is lower for individuals with higher value of the indi-

vidual effects. The exception to this pattern is the highest effect type
                                  -36--



(Type 4 in the table), for whom the estimated selection ratios are close

to unity. For both groups of trainees the fraction of the trainee group

assigned to the highest type is very small, however.

     In summary, our estimates from the nonlinear employment probability

models suggest three conclusions regarding the impact of training

on the 1976 CETA cohort. First, the estimated effects of CETA par-

ticipation on subsequent employment probabilities range from 3 to 8

percent, on average, with most of the increase concentrated among

classroom trainees. Second, the effects of CETA participation include

both transitory effects on 1977 employment status, and permanent effects

on post—training transition rates. We have argued that estimates of the

former effects are potentially biased by the presence of other unobser-

vable determinants of post-training employment status that are neverthe-

less correlated with training. Our estimates of the permanent effects of

training are on the order of 5 to 10 percentage points, with the larger

effects again concentrated among classroom trainees. Third, we find no

evidence that the estimated training effects are biased by failure to con-

sider the interaction between individual-specific effects in the proba-

bility of employment and individual effects in the probability of

entering training.


Conc lus ions

      The results in this paper suggest that participation in CETA had a

small to moderately large positive impact on the post—training

employment probabilities of the 1976 cohort of adult male trainees. Our

estimates of the effect of training on the average probability of
                                  -37-


employment during 1977-79 range from 2 to 5 percentage points. The

lower range of these estimates is obtained by a comparison of relative

pre— and post-training employment probabilities of the CETA trainees and

a control group, and also by a comparison between trainees and controls

with identical pretraining histories. The upper range of these estima-

tes is obtained by a series of logistic probability models of the

employment histories of the trainees and controls.

     The methods all point to significantly larger training effects for

participants in classroom training programs, as compared to on-the-job

programs, although the estimated effects of both types of programs are

consistently positive. Many of the on-the-job CETA programs involved

little or no formal training, however, and their relatively smaller

effect on subsequent employment probabilities is therefore understan-

dable. Since the costs of the classroom training programs were substan-

tially lower than the costs of the non-classroom programs, our results

suggest that the classroom programs were superior in a cost-benefit

sense. Assuming that the CETA trainees earned approximately $5800 per

year in the post-training period, if employed, and that CETA par-

ticipation increased the probability of employment in every year after

training by 2 to 5 percent, training may have increased participant

earnings by $100-S300 per year. This increase compares favorably to

the cost of CETA training, which averaged about $1500 per participant in

l976.
    Given that the available data are nonexperimental, there is, of

course, ample reason to be cautious in interpreting these results.
                                  -38-


Nonexperimental methods of program evaluation have recently come under

attack for their lack of reliability, and our discussion of the com-

parisons between observationally identical trainees and controls high-

lighted many of the difficulties in a nonexperimental evaluation.

Nevertheless we have presented several highly overidentified models of

employment determination and trainee status that appear to fit the

observed data quite well. We have also presented a variety of less

heavily parameterized program estimators that give fairly similar esti-

mates of the effectiveness of training. Finally, we have argued that many

of the biases that enter an observational study of training effects can

be isolated in the once-for-all effects of training on employment status

at the end of program participation. Our estimates of the effect of

training, abstracting from these one—time effects, give similar but

slightly higher estimates of the training effects on employment

probabilities.
                                    -39—


                                 Footnotes



     iLThese programs were initiated by the Manpower Development and

Training Act of 1962, modified and expanded by the Comprehensive

Employment and Training Act of 1973, and recently restructured by the

Job Partnership Training Act of 1982.


     "Many of these difficulties were pointed out by Ashenfelter (1975).

The reliability of various econometric techniques for program evaluation

has been studied by LaLonde (1986), who applies nonexperimental estima—

tors to data from the National Supported Work Demonstration. Comparing

the nonexperimental program estimates to the experimentally determined

training effect, LaLonde finds that the nonexperimental methods are sen-

sitive to specification, and that conventional specification tests do

not always provide a clear basis to choose between the diverse non—

experimental estimates.


     'The idea of separating out the effects of training on the proba-

bility of employment and the level of earnings, conditional on

employment, was suggested to us by Lars Muus. An earlier analysis of

training effects on employment probabilities is presented by Kaitz (1979).

     4/
     — This
         .           .                       .             .       .
              conclusion emerges from experimentally determined training

effects for participants in the National Supported Work Demonstration,

and was pointed out to us in personal communication from Robert LaLonde.


     'An overview of the CETA programs in place during 1976 is presented

in Employment and Training Report of the President (1976, pp. 87-103).
                                  -40-


     6/
     —  Data on enrollments and costs of the CETA programs in 1976 is

summarized in Employment and Training Report of the President (1977,

Tables F—2 and F—3, pp. 262—3.


     'Not all CETA participants actually completed their assigned

training program. From the CLMS data we know only the data of

enrollment, the date of program termination, and the kind of program into

which the participant was enrolled. Evidence from administrative records

on end-of--program placements (Employment and Training Report of the

President (1977, p.43) suggests that 5-10 percent of participants moved

to unsubsidized employment after only "intake, assessment and/or job

referral services from CETA'. Another 30-40 percent dropped out of

training.


     !1Social Security earnings refer to earnings for which the indivi-

dual (and his employer) paid Social Security taxes.


     According to the Social Security Administration approximately

89.1 percent of wage and salary and self-employed workers in 1970 were

covered by Old-Age, Survivors, and Disability Insurance (OASDI), and

presumably reported Social Security earnings (Social          Bulletin

Annual Statistical Supplement 1983, p. 61). This percentage was 89.3 in

1975, 89.3 in 1977, and 89.8 in 1979. The major group of untaxed

employees work in state and local governments.
                                    -41—


     10/Non-classroom          .           .
     —                   .
                      trainees include participants in on-the-job

training programs, work experience programs, and public-sector

employment programs. The classroom trainees were mainly (over 95 per-

cent) funded under Title I of CETA. The non-classroom trainees were

mainly (63 percent) funded under Titles II and VI of CETA.


     11"This comparison sample was provided to us by SRI International

and was used by Dickinson, Johnson and West (1984) and Ashenfelter and

Card (1985) to analyze the 1976 cohort of CETA trainees. The restric-

tions on labor force status and individual and household income elimi-

nate approximately 21 percent of the overall CPS sample of adult males.


            trainee and eligible CPS samples were divided into 26 poten-

tial experience categories: 0, 1, 2        14 years; 15-16 years; 17-18

years; 19-20 years; 21-22 years; 23-24 years; 25-27 years; 28-30 years;

31-34 years; 35—38 years; 39—43 years; and 44 or more years. The

experience distributions of trainees and eligible CPS members were com-

puted, and then the control sample was drawn from the eligible CPS

sample by random sampling within experience strata so as to generate the

largest possible control sample with the same distribution of potential

experience as the trainee sample.


            earnings information for both trainees and controls was

updated in October 1983 and represents the most recent publicly

available data.


            difference—in-differences estimator is not the most efficient
                                         -42--



linear estimator of e     in   (1). Fully efficient estimation of (1)

requires a weighted least squares approach.

     15/The
     —                               ..  .
            phenomenon of a relative dip in pretraining earnings for

participants in   subsidized   training programs was first pointed out by

Ashenfelter (1975) and has been confirmed by subsequent analysts,

including Kiefer (1979), Bassi (1983), and LaLonde (1986).


            similar specification test was suggested by Ashenf'elter (1978)

in connection with linear components-of-variance models of the level of

earnings.


             believe that the extent of missing Socia.l Security earnings

data is relatively low in the period before 1976.


              pattern of training effects across hi;tories for individual

years is similar to that of the averages shown in Table 3.     For instance,

the effects for the 000000 history are a]ways large and positive and the

effects for the 111111 history are always negative or insignificantly

different from zero.


            difficulty can arise with this estimator if there are no

observations in the control group from which to estimate an accession or

retention rate that is actually observed in the trainee sample. When

this occurred in our samples we ignored the trainee data and reweighted

the trainees with available match-groups accordingly.


     "The estimated standard errors for the accession rates are con-

siderably larger than those for the retention rates. This is due to the
                                  -43-


smaller sample sizes for measuring these rates-—in any given year more

than half the population shows positive Social Security earnings. The

problem is compounded by the use of the trainee sample fractions as

weights for the computation of the overall effect. Those histories

which had relatively more potential accessions in the post-training

period tended to be the ones that received small weights.


     -"Estimates of the average post-training accession rates and the

corresponding training effects are obtained by similar calculations.


     VDifferences in differences of transition rates must be

interpreted cautously since the expected values of the transition rates

depend on the distrubution of individuals between employment states in

the preceding year, and these distributions may in turn depend on

training status.


           this regard, the exact-match procedure is analogous to

methods of program evaluation for the level of earnings that simply

regression—adust for all observable characteristics (including

pretraining earnings). Such methods are described in Goldberger

(1972) and their relative performance is considered by LaLonde (1986).


     'Rosenbaum and Rubin (l985a, 1985b) have recently advocated the

use of the propensity score (the conditional probability of assignment

to treatment given a vector of observed covariates) in constructing

approximate matches. Heckman and Robb (1986) discuss the limitations of

this technique and its relation to more familiar methods. LaLonde and
                                     -44-


Maynard (1986) explore the relative success of matched comparison group

estimators of the effect of training for National Supported Work

Demonstration data (where a true experimental control group is

available). They conclude that the matched comparison group methods are

generally no better (and in some cases clearly worse) than other program

estimators.


       'See Chamberlain (1980, p. 228) for a more complete discussion.


                 are () elements in D(S) .      Note that the sequences

(0,0       0) and (1,1      1) are the only ways of getting zero and 10

successes, respectively. These sequences therefore have conditional

likelihoods of unity.

       -See Kendall and Stuart (1973, pp.436-7).


              are simultaneously fitting multinomial distributions to the

sets of alternative sequences within each of the sufficiency classes.

The degrees of freedom within each sufficiency class is the number of

alternatives in that class, minus one. Adding over the 11 sufficiency

classes, the degrees of freedom is 1024 minus 11 minus the number of

estimated parameters.


       'For example, of the 112 control observations with 3 periods of

employment in the first 6 years of the data, 23 have the history 111000,

7 have the history 001110, and 37 have the history 000111. The other 45

observations are distributed over the 17 remaining histories with 3 suc—

cesses in 6 periods.
                                            -45—


     "The term 'steady state" is perhaps misleading because we allow

an unrestricted year effect in the 1970 employment probability specifi-

cation.


     -'The situation is analogous to estimation of a linear model of

the form y =    a1
                     ÷
                          x1   -            +          .     If   y=0 ,   then j      is    a

sufficient statistic for aj and the conditional like1ihood approach

leads to the usual analysis of covariance (see Chamberlain (1980)). If

     however, other methods are required to obtain consistent estimates

of


     ?iWith six mass points the estimated year effects are the same as

the conditional likelihood estimates to four decimal places.


            estimation of appropriate standard errors for nonparametric

maximum likelihood parameter estimates is unsettled. We report esti-

mated standard errors based on the inverse of the sample information

matrix, which are approximate under the assumption that the distribution

of the fixed effects is in fact a four—point distribution on a closed

and bounded interval.


            probability P.77           E175 =      1       is equal to

P6P7 ÷ (l—P6)            (P'77) ,   where              and           are the accession and

retention probabilities of individual              i       in period t ,    respectively,
as determined by equation (ba). The probability P.77 E75 = 0                          is


equal to                  (1-P'76) P'77


     -Average earnings of the trainees in 1977 and 1978 were $4750

and $5140 (in 1976 dollars) respectively. Assuming an average probabi-
                                  -46—


lity of employment of .85 among the trainees, the average earnings of

trainees, conditional on employment, were approximately $5800 in the

post—training period. The figure for CETA cost per participant is taken

from Employment and Training Report of the President (1977, Tables F-2

and F—3, pp. 262-3).
                                   -47-


                                References



Anderson, E.B. (1973) Conditional Inference and Models for Measuring.

     Copenhagen; Mentalhygejnisk Forlag.


Ashenfelter, 0. (1975). "The Effect of Manpower Training on Earnings:

     Preliminary Results.'    Proceedings of the Twenty—Seventh Annual

     Winter Meetings of the Industrial Relations Research Association:

     252-260.



_______________________   "Estimating   the Effect of Training Programs on

     Earnings." Review of Economics and Statistics, 60 (1): 47—57.


____________________ and D. Card (1985). "Using the Longitudinal
     Structure of Earnings to Estimate the Effect of Training Programs."

     Review of Economics and Statistics, 67 (4): 648—660.


Bahadur, RR. (1954). "Sufficiency and Statistical Decision Functions."

    Annals of Mathematical Statistics, 25: 423—462.


Bassi, L. (1983). "The Effect of CETA on the Post-Program Earnings of

    Participants." The Journal of Human Resources, 18 (Fall 1983):

     539-556.


Chamberlain, G. (1980). "Analysis of Covariance with Qualitative Data."

     Review of Economic Studies, 47:225—238.
                                        -48-


Dickinson, K., T. Johnson and R. West (1984). "An Analysis of the

      Impact of CETA Programs on Participants' Earnings." Final Report

     prepared for the U.S. Department of Labor Employment and Training

     Administration. Menlo Park, CA: SRI International.


Goldberger, A. (1972).      'Selection Bias in Evaluating Treatment Effects."

      Discussion Paper No. 123-72. Institute for Research on Poverty,

     University of Wisconsin.


Heckman, J. (1979). "Sample Selection Bias as a Specification Error."

     Econometrica, 47:l53—161.


_________________ and B. Singer (1984). "A Method for Minimizing the

     Impact of Distributional Assumptions in Econometric Models for

     Duration Data.' Econometrica, 52:271—320.


________________ and R. Robb (1986). "Alternative Methods for
     Solving the Problem of Selection Bias in Evaluating the Impact of

     Treatments on Outcomes." Unpublished manuscript.


Kaitz (1979). "Potential Use of Markov Process Models to Determine

     Program Impact." In Research in Labor Economics, Supplement         ed.

     by Farrell Bloch. Greenwich, CT:          JAI Press.


Kendall, M. and A. Stuart (1973). The Advanced Theory of Statistics.

     New York: Hafner Publishing Co.


Kiefer, J. and J. Wolfowitz (1956).        'Consistency of the Maximum

     Likelihood Estimator in the Presence of Infinitely Many Incidental

     Parameters." Annals of Mathematical Statistics, 27:887-906.
                                     -49-


Kiefer, N. (1979). The Economic Benefits of Four Employment and

     Training Programs. New York: Garland Publishing Inc.


Lindsay, B. (1983a). "The Geometry of Mixture Likelihoods, Park 1."

     Annals of Statistics, 1:86—94.


__________________ (1983b).     "The Geometry of Mixture Likelihoods,

     Part 11." Annals of Statistics 11.


Laird, N. (1978).    "Nonparametric Maximum Likelihood Estimation of a

     Mixing Distribution." Journal of the American Statistical

     Association, 73:805—811.


LaLonde R. (1986). "Evaluating the Econometric Evaluations of Training

     Programs with Experimental Data." American Economic Review, 76 (4):

     604-620.



_______________ and R. Maynard (1986). "How Precise are Evaluations
     of Employment and Training Programs: Evidence from a Field

     Experiment." Unpublished manuscript, University of Chicago.


Raasch, G. (1960).    Probabilistic Models for Some Intelligence and

     Attainment Tests. Copenhagen: Denmarks Paedogogiske Institute.


Rosenbaum, P. and D. Rubin (1984). "Reducing Bias in Observational

     Studies Using Subclassification on the Propensity Score." .Journal

     of the American Statistical Association, 79:516—524.


Rosenbaum, P. and D. Rubin (1985).     "Constructing a Control Group Using

     Multivariate Matched Sampling Methods that Incorporate the

     Propensity Score." The American Statistician, 39 (1):33—38.
                                  -50—


Socia1 Security Bulletin Annual Statistical Supplement (1983).

     Washington, D.C.   Government Printing Office.
                                     -51—


                                Data Appendix



     In this appendix we describe the sources of the trainee and control

group data used in the paper.


1. Trainees

     The trainee data are taken from the Continuous Longitudinal

Manpower Survey (CLMS). The CLMS sample is drawn from participants in

programs operated by a stratified random sample of CETA prime sponsors,

and contains Social Security Administration earnings records as well as

demographic data collected at the date of enrollment. We used CLMS data

for the 1976 cohort of trainees, provided to us by SRI International.

We included only those members of the sample who were male, 21 years of

age or older at enrollment, and who reported enrollment and termination

dates between January 1 and December 31, 1976.


2. Comparison Group

     The comparison group data are drawn from the March 1976 Current

Population Survey (CPS). Members of the CPS were matched, by their social

security numbers, to Social Security Administration records of earnings

from 1966 to 1979. The comparison group sample was provided to us by

SRI International, and includes male CPS members who were 21 years of

age or older in March 1976, who reported being in the labor force during

the survey week in March, and who reported individual and family ear-

flings during 1975 of less than $20,000 and $30,000, respectively.

Further detailed on the construction of the comparison sample are pre-

sented in Dickinson, Johnson and West (1984, pp. 37-45).
                                                    —52-

                                                Appendix


        In this appendix we demonstrate that the minimal sufficient sta-

tistic for the fixed effect a in the logistic probability model with

state dependence is in general the entire vector of observed outcomes

for the th individual. Following equations (6) and (7) of the text,

let E1t represent an indicator for whether i                            is employed in t , and

assume that


P(E1t = 1) = exp(a1             t +       yEt_i)     / (1 +   exp(a     ÷    +
                                                                                 YE.ti))      t > 1



                         exp(a1) (1+ exp(a1 +
        =   1) =
p(E11                +   2exp(a.)     +
                                           exp(a1) exp(a1 +

Dropping      i    subscripts, the probability of an observed sequence of

indicators E = (E1          ,
                                E     .   . . ET)   is



                                                                                          + yE))
(4.1) p(E
                        exp(a) + exp(E1(2a
                   a) = 1 -
                                             y))
                            2exp(a) + exp(2a +                '   T exp(E(a +
                                                                   11

                                                                  t=2   1   exp(a +          'Ft_i)
We now construct a minimal sufficient statistic T(E) for a                                  It can

be shown that if p(E, a0) > 0                   for all E , then the mapping from E

to p(E, a) / p(E, a0) , regarded as a function of a ,                            is   a minimal

sufficient statistic (for example, Bahadur (1954)). Using (A.1), a

minimal sufficient statistic for a is
                                                                                   -53—


(A.2) T(E)a = p(E, a) / P(E, 0)

                                                  3                                            exp(a)   +
                                                                                                             exp(E1(2a
                                                                                                                               +   y)
                             =                                             _________
                                                                                                      1 ÷
                                     1        2exp(a)                    exp(2a   y)
                                                                                                              exp(E       y)

                                                                 T
                                              exp(a J2 E1)
                                     T 1 +        exp(a              +
                                                                                   yEt_i)
                                 t=2
                                                  +
                                                           exp(t          +
                                                                              yEti)
In case y = 0                        ,    (A.2)            can be written as


                                                       -
                    exp(cz                t E)
T(E)a
               '         i               exp(a +
              t=1                    1
                                              exp()
(defining                        =       0)   ,   which is a function only of the total number of

years of employment                                         Et

        In the general case, if there is a minimally sufficient statistic

of dimension smaller than the data vector (E1 ,                                                             E,1,)
                                                                                                                    ,   then there

                                                      and                      .ET) such that T(E)a =                               for
exist (E1            ,
                                                                 (E                                                     T(E')a
all real            a and E
Making use of the fact that
                                                           E'             Let S =             E and S =
                                                                                                                        tl E
exp(a) ÷ exp(E1(2a -                              y))                exp(aE1) (1            exp(a -
                                                                                                      yE1))
                                                             -
   1 ÷                                                                         1
          exp(E1y)                                                                    exp(yE1)

equality of T(E)a and T(E)a implies



(A.3)           eas (1                        ea exp(yE1)) (1 +                       expyE1))

                                                                                     (1 ÷ ea
               t=2
                                 (1 ÷
                                              exp(               ÷
                                                                         yEti))                exp(t yEti))

          =     e                (1 + ea exP(YE)) (1 +
                                                                                      exp(yE1))
                T
                II               (1 ÷         exp(t              ÷ 7E
                                                                     t        i) (1 + ea exp(t + yEt                —i
               t=2
                                                        -54-


This is a polynomial expression in ea .                          If       the right-hand and left-

hand sides of (A.3) are equal for all real a                                    then the polynomials

must have the same degree, implying S = 5'                            .
                                                                               Similarly,   the polyno-

mials must have the same constant terms, implying




                          T                                                              T
(1 +
       exp(yE1))TT            (1       exp(t yEti)) =            1
                                                                              exp(yE1)) t—2 (1 +   exp(t   yEt_i))

Simplifying (A.3), we have

           a                  T                  a
(1 + e
               exp(yE1)) t=2 +               e       exP( +    E1))
                              I
   =   (1       ea exp(yE1)) t2 (1                    ea exP( yEti))

for all real a .              Thus we must have equality of the                     sets
                    yE1                yE2                    yE11) and
                +
                    yE1
                                   +
                                       yE2             T + yE11}          .    Provided that y        0

and that the year effects are not all zero, this requires Et =                                   Et
(t =   1            T — 1)      for all but exceptional values of the structural

parameters. Thus (A.3) implies that E = E'                                ,   so there can be no

nontrivial sufficient statistic.
                                       Table 1

  Demographic Characteristics and Employment Rates: Trainees and Controls


                                   Classroom     Non—Classroom   Eligible   Control
                         Trainees Trainees"        Trainees/                Simp1e.
                           (1)        (2)             (3)          (4)



Demographic Characteristics:

 1. Age in 1976            30.8     29.1            31.3           38.9     32.4
 2. Education              11.5     11.1            11.6           12.0     12.8
 3. Fraction Married         .50       .48             .51           .83       .78
      in 1976


Employment Rates

 4.   1970                   .81      .77              .83           .89       .88
 5.   1971                   .83      .82              .83           .89       .89
 6.   1972                   .87      .85              .88           .90       .90
 7.   1973                   .88      .86              .89           .91       .91
 8.   1974                   .87      .82              .88           .91       .92
 9.   1975                   .81      .81             .81            .90       .91
10.   1976                   .93      .86             .94            .90       .90
11.   1977                   .87      .86             .87            .88       .90
12.   1978                   .83      .85             .82            .84       .87
13.   1979                   .78      .79             .77            .76       .80

Sample Size                 2153      481             1672          15245     4207


NOTES: 1"Male CETA trainees 21 years of age or o]der who entered and
          completed traning in 1976.

             Trainees enrolled in classroom training programs.

         "Trainees enrolled in on-the—job training and public sector
           employment programs.

         -Males 21 years of age and older in the March 1976 Current
             Population Survey, who were in the labor force during the survey
             week and reported individual and household incomes in 1975 less
             than $20,000 and $30,000, respectively.

         Stratiuied random sample of eligible ('PS, drawn to have the same
           distribution of potential experience (age minus education) as the
             trainees.

         'Proportion of sample reporting positive Social Security earnings.
                                           Table 2

         Changes in the Employment Probabilities: Trainees versus Controls

                           (Standard errors in parentheses)


                                                             .     Classroom Non—Classroom
                                            Controls     Trainees Trainees
                                                                      .
                                                                               Trainees
                                                                                    .




1.   Average 1970—74                              .900     .853       .821      .862
                                             ( .004)      (.006)     (.013)    (.006)

2.   Average 1970-75                              .901     .846       .819      .854
                                             ( .003)      (.005)     (.012)    (.006)

3.   Average 1977—79                              .855     .826       .833      .823
                                             ( .004)      (.006)     (.014)    (.007)

4.   Difference:                             - .046       - .021      .014     - .031
       1977--79 less 197O-74                 ( .004)      (.007)     (.016)    (.008)
                                ,




5.   Difference:                             -.
                                                  .045    - .027      .011     -.039
       1977-79 less 970 74                   (    .004    (008)      (.017)    (.009)

6.   Difference Relative to    Cont.'os:          ---      .025       .060      .015
       1977--79 less 197075                               (.008)     (.017)    (.009)

7.   Difference Relative to Controls:             ----     .018       .056      .006
       1977-79 less 1970-74                               (.009)     (.017)    (.009)


NOTE: See notes to Table 1. Standard errors are based on sample variances of
       the averages and differences reported in each row.
                                                   Table 3

          Average Post-Trainirç EmDloment Rate' and Training Effect2
                         S Pre-Training EmDtoment Histor

                          (Standard errors3 in parentheses)

   J08
 HIST?
           0LS                    OR6M0O1                    QSM                                    iTI
 012345    fl    F71      N                                  II        FETE       FF.i_T        N fETE EFFECT

 000000   109     .099
                (.4)      13        .799
                                  (.004) (.008)
                                                .671    33          .636
                                                                  (.076) (.079)
                                                                                  .530     45
                                                                                                    (.)  . 674     . 576
                                                                                                                 (.004)
 000001   27      .716    19        .899        . 179   23             754        .030     42            .8 I?    . 101
                (.073)            (.) (.009)                      (.074) (.199)                     (.046) (.088)
000010      3     .444
                (.240)
                              2     .667 .
                                  (.236) (.336)
                                                         4         .917           .472          6        .3       .399
                                                                  (.072) (.251)                     (.104) (.252)
000011    21
                (.)
                  .841        2     .      -. 008
                                  (.l18)(.129)
                                                        12         .806 —. 036
                                                                  (.073)(.090)
                                                                                           14            .810 — .033
                                                                                                    (.065)(.004)
000100     7     . 190    2        .000 -. 190           3         .              . 143                  .200     .010
                (.0)              (.006)(.092)                    (.272)(.287)                      (.t7Q) (.201)
000101     4     .667     3        . -.111               0                                  3        .006        —Ill
                (.118)            (.240)(.267)                                                      (.240) (.257)
000110           .667     2        .667         .000                .371 -.099              9
                                                                                                    (..393l) -.074
            1                                            7
                (.000)            (.236) (.236)                   (.111) (.111)                              C. 1)
000111    37     .806
                (.035)
                          5 1.006 .136
                                  (.000) .065)
                                                        24         .819 -.045
                                                                  t (.0600
                                                                                           29         .1 -.014
                                                                                                    (.046)       (.000)
001000     4
                (.)
                 .333         I    .667
                                  (.006) (.204)
                                                333      2         .000 — .
                                                                  (.000) (.204)
                                                                                            3        .

                                                                                                    (.181) (.273)
                                                                                                                 —.111


001001     4 1.000            I    .000 - 1.000              I     .667 - .333              2        .333 — .667
                (.000)            (.000) (.)                      (.) (JXE)                         (.236) (.236)
001010     0              0                              1         .060                     1            060
                                                                  (.006)                            (.006)
001011     3     .089                                    3          .889 .060               3        .909         .006
                (.091)                                            (.091) C. 128)                    (.091)       C. 128)

001100           .667                                    4
           1
                (.()      1       1.000
                                  (.)(.060)
                                            .                      .917
                                                                  (.072)(.072)
                                                                              .             5        .
                                                                                                    (.060) (.000)
                                                                                                                  .257

001101     1    1.000     I         .667 -.333           4         .393 -.417              5         .606 -.400
                (.000)            (.000)(.000)                    (.1)(.I82)                        (.146)(.146)
001110     7     .371     5        .900    .229          9         .630       .000         14        .690         .119
                (.146)            (.179) (.231)                   (.122) (.191)                     (.104) (.179)
061111    71     .908
                (.013)
                         tO        .833 -.124
                                  (.l00)(.109)
                                                        39         .Q -.129
                                                                  (.047)(.048)
                                                                                           49        .E   -.128
                                                                                                    (.043) (.045)
010000     3     .667     0                             0                                  0
                (.15?)
010001     I    1.000     0                              I         .333 -.667               I         .333 -.667
                (.000)                                            (.000)(000)                       (.000) (.000)
010010     1
                (.)
                 .333     0                             0                                  0

010011


010100


010101
          3

          0

          2
                 .006
                (.240)



                 .000
                          1




                          1




                          0
                                   .
                                   667



                                  (.000)
                                           . III
                                  (.000)(.240)
                                                        2 1.000




                                                        0
                                                         1
                                                                  C.000)(.240)
                                                                   .333
                                                                  (.C)
                                                                              .444         3


                                                                                           2


                                                                                           0
                                                                                                     .333
                                                                                                         809
                                                                                                    (.091) (.257)

                                                                                                    (.000)
                                                                                                                  .333




                (.006)
010110     I    1.000     0                              I        1.000       .000          1       1.000         .000
                (.006)                                            (.000) (.000)                     (.000) (.000)
'((if,
0I5
         cS
         H       TE1      H !E
                               ct       Table 3 (con't)
                                                 u*-aini
                                                 H                 EFFECT    H
                                                                              qj TF ps
                                                                                 TE tirtCT
010111    II      .758     I 100         .242    3     . .131                4     .917     .159
                 (.114)        (.)(.114)              (.091)(.146)                (.072)(.133)
011000    3       .333     1 1.000       . 667   3         778     .444      4     .833     .500
                 (.272)        (.000)(272)            (.091)(.287)                (.083) (.283)

011001    4       .583     1 1.000       .417    6     .889        .306      7     .900     .321
                 (.182)        (.000)(.182)           (.004)(.183)                (.057)(.190)
011010    2       .333    0                      2     .667        .333      2     .667     .333
                 (.256)                               (.)(.256)                   (.000) (.000)
011011    I       .875
                 (.082)
                           1     .333 -.542
                               (.000)(.082)
                                                  1    . -.542
                                                      (.X0)(.082)
                                                                             2     .333    -.542
                                                                                  (.000) (.082)
011100    0               2 .500                 3     .333                  5     .400
                               (.118)                 (.157)                      (.112)
011101       I    .000    2 .167         .167    7     .810        .910      9     .667     .657
                 (.000)        (.118) (.118)          (.082) (.082)               (.117) (.117)
011110    8       .282    9 .778 .466            13    .615        .324            .682     .392
                 (.124)     (Ii?) (.171)              (.088) (. 152)              (.073) (.144)
011111   149      . 881
                 (.019)        (.) (.)
                          28 .872 - .016         76    .860 - .028
                                                      (.031) (.027)
                                                                            102    863 - .028
                                                                                  (.027) (.033)
100000   32       . 146   2 .667         .521    9     .630        .404      It    .636     .491
                 (.044)        (.000) (.044)          (.172) (.130)               (.100) (.109)
100001


110
          6

             1    .
                  .833
                 (.104)

                 (.)
                           1    .667 -. 167
                               (.000) (.104)
                           I (.)(.)
                             . .000
                                                 4

                                                 0
                                                       . 750 - 083
                                                      (.138) (.173)
                                                                             5

                                                                              1     .
                                                                                    .733 - 100
                                                                                  (.112) (.228).

                                                                                  (.) (.)
                                                                                   .333


100011


100100
          3

          0
                  .
                 (.119)
                          2     . 333 -. 467
                               (.230)(.284)
                                                  3


                                                  4    .
                                                       .667 —. 133
                                                      (.272)(.297)

                                                      (.118)
                                                       .917 .
                                                                             5

                                                                             4     .. (.)
                                                                                   .533 -. 287
                                                                                  (.202)

                                                                                  (.118)
100101       I
                 (.)
                  .333    0                       4
                                                      (.072)(.0?2)
                                                                             4     .917
                                                                                  (.072) (.072)
100110    6       .500     I   I .000    .500     3    .          -. 167     4     .500         000
                 (.204)        (.000) (.204)          (.157) (.258)               (.186) (.276)
100111   24       .975     I    .000 -.875       19     .799 - 086          20     . 750   -. 125
                 (.047)        (.) (.047)             (.071) (.083)               (.078) (.091)
101000    3       .775    0                       1    .         - I .000     I     333    - .444
                 (.091)                               (.000)(.091)                (.)(.091)
101010       I   1.000     0                      I    .333 — 807             1     333 -.867
                 (.000)                               (.)(.009)                   (.000) (.000)
101011       1    .067    0                       6    .772         .        6     .772     .
                 (.000)                               (.106)(.l05)                (.165) (.165)
101100       I    .000     0                      4    .
                                                      (.138)(.13S)
                                                                    .r       4     .750     .
                                                                                  (.136) (.138)
                 (.000)
101101       1    .667     1 1.000 .              5    .400 —.287            6      .500 - 167
                 (.000)        (.000) (.000)          (.174) (.174)               (.171) (.171)
101110       5    .733     3      333 - 400      ii    .667 - .088           14    .590    -. 138
                                                                                  (.113) (.158)
                 (.112)        (.272) (.294)          (.113) (.159)
101111   67
                 (.)
                  .966          .g713    .104
                               (.029)'(.043)
                                                 33    .839 -.007
                                                      ( 038) (.)
                                                                            44
                                                                                  (.)
                                                                                   .886         021
                                                                                           (.044)
110000   21       . 190    2    .000 -. 190       9    .067         .4       11    .545     .
                 (.073)        (.)(.073)              (.100)(.128)                (.116)C.137)
110001    9       .741     I    .067 - .074       3    .778         .027     4     .780     .009
                 (.136)        (.t)(.i36)             (.OQI)(.164)                (.072)(.154)
                                                         Table 3(cont)

 ((((((
            LS                                                          M0Pa.1                            LTIS
 015        N
                                    ,

                                    N                                   N TE EFFECT                   N              EFFECT

 110010         2     . 167                 1 1.000       .             2     . 167     .000          3     .444     .279
                     C 118)                      (.) (.118)                  (.118) (.108)                 (.240) (.267)
 110011     I?        .904              2I.      . 196                  8     .936      .029      10        .857     .053
                     (.088)              (.000)(.08B)                        (.059) (. 106)               (.052) (.102)
 110100         4     .583                  1     .000 —.583            I     .333 —.250              2    .167 -.417
                      .072                       (.000) (.072)              (.000) (.072)                 (.117) (.138)
 110101     5         .900              0                               3    .889       .089          3    .889      .089
                     (.073)                                                 (.091)(.117)                  (.OgI)(.117)
 110110     S         .600    .         I 1.000 .400                5        .856       .267      6        .889      .299
                    (.174)                (.000) (.174)



 110111


111000
           43


           23
                     .
                    (.)
                     .406
                                    7

                                    5
                                                 .2 .030
                                                (.044) (.)
                                                 . .129
                                                                    18


                                                                    9
                                                                              .778 -. 145
                                                                            (.079) (.085)
                                                                             .704      .298
                                                                                                 25


                                                                                                 14
                                                                                                            .837 -.096
                                                                                                          (.060) (.068)
                                                                                                           .643      .237
                    (.004)                      (.202) c.m)                 (.097) (.135)                 (.098) (.136)
                                                                             .4 -.
111001


111010


111011
           14


            3

           40
                     ..
                     .782
                    (.071)

                    (.240)
                                    2


                                    6
                                        1        . —.762
                                                (.000) (.071)
                                                 .333 —. 7 .810 .
                                                (.236) (.336)
                                                 . . 15
                                                                    9
                                                                            (.110) (.131)

                                                                            (.132) (.274)
                                                                              .857 -.025
                                                                                                 10


                                                                                                  9
                                                                                                            .633 -.129
                                                                                                          (.120) (.136)
                                                                                                           .704      .148
                                                                                                          (.133) (.274)
                                                                                                 21        .973 -.019
                    (.034)                      (.101) (.107)               (.061) (.070)                 (.053) (.063)
111100


111101


111110
          36

          27

          106
                     .
                     .483
                    (.068)

                    (.068)
                     .538
                                    7

                                   14



                                   28
                                                 .524    .061
                                                (.148) (.163)
                                                 .690 —.112
                                                (.079) <.104)
                                                 .857    .319
                                                                   24


                                                                   23

                                                                  136
                                                                             .694



                                                                            (.064) (.)
                                                                             .814
                                                                                       .231
                                                                            (.061) (.106)
                                                                             .725-078

                                                                                       .276
                                                                                                 31


                                                                                                 37


                                                                                                164
                                                                                                           .668      .193
                                                                                                          (.072) (.099)
                                                                                                            .712 -.091
                                                                                                          (.050) (.064)
                                                                                                           831 .
                    (.040)                      (.054) (.068)               (.027) (.048)                 (.024) (.047)
1t11110
  .                  .9T9         267            .883 -. 1                   .854 -.054
                                                                            (.) (.009)
                                                                                               1272        .f -.048
                                                (.015) (.015)                                             (.007) (.)
to.4 4183                         476                    .036    1663                  .012    2141                 .018
                                                        (.013)                        (.009)                       (.008)

Notes;      'Average employment rate in the post training period (1g77-7g).

           2 Difference between trainee and control rates.

                Standard errors are the maximum likelihood estimates under the
                assumption of random sampling from an uriestricted multinornial
                for the eight possible post training outcomes.

           ' Total effect is the weighted average of the effects for the
                individual histories using the trainee sample fractions as
                weights.
                                  Table 4
                                          St



            Estimated   Employment Iaeel Training Effects

                         Based on Exact Matches

                     (Standard errors in parentheses)



                              \1i. Tririees    Classroom   Non-Classroom



1.   1977                          .026
                                  (.009)        (.015)        (.010)

2. 1978                            .0004         .027         —.007
                                  (.010)        (.016)        (.011)

3.   1979                          .026          .056          .018
                                  (.011)        (.018)        (.012)

4. Average Post-Triining           .018          .03G          .012




NOTE: See notes to   Table   3.
                                   Table 5

                  Estimated Transition Rate Training Effects

                            Based on Exact Matches

                       (Standard errors in parentheses)



                              All Trainees    Classroom   Non-Classroom

1977—78:

1. Retentions                     - 018          .019          -.024
                                  (.010)        (.015)         (.011)

2. Accessions                      .033          .031           .025
                                  (.044)        (.067)         (.046)

1978-79:

3.   Retentions                    .023          .098          - .015
                                  (.011)        (.017)         (.012)

4. Accessions                    -. .014        - .081         —.012
                                  (.034)        (.062          (.036)
Pooled 1977-78, 1978—79:

5. Retentions                      .006          .002          -.0005
                                 (.008)         (.012)         (.008)

6. Accessions                     .003           .01()         -.009
                                 (.029)         (.055)         (.031)




NOTE: See text for discussion. Estimates are maximum likelihood for
       the unrestricted multinomial model for post-training outcomes.
       Estimated standard errors are obtained by the delta method.
                                                 Table 6

              Goodness—of--Fit Estimated Training Effects and Implied Changes

                in the Probability of Employment: Conditional Logit Model -'


                                                                      Controls and      Controls and
                                      Controls      Controls and
                                                                        Classroom       on—C1assroom
                                       Alone        All    Trainees
                                                              .


                                                                       Trainees
                                                                           .
                                                                                          TraInees
                                                                                              .




1,   Goodness—of-fit
       Control Contribution            2637.6             2697.8          2690.4           2694.5
       Trainees Contribution            --                1426.4           516.6           1054.9
       Total                           2687.6             4124.2          3206.9           3749.3
       (Degrees of freedom)            (1004)             (1250)          (1250)           (1250)


2.   Estimated Training
       Effect ()                             -                .467              .860               .350
       (Standard error)                                      (.097)            (.164)             (.104)

3.   Estimated Increase in
       Employment Probabil ities
       Due to Tra.i nirIg'

       (a)
       (b)
       (c)
             1977
             1978
             1979
                                        -  --
                                             -                .037
                                                              .013
                                                              .062
                                                                                .069
                                                                                .078
                                                                                .114
                                                                                                    027
                                                                                                   .032
                                                                                                   .046
       (d)   Average 1977-79           -                      .047              .087               .035


NOTES: 'Estimated on 1970—79 employment outcomes for the control sample and
          1970—74 and 1977—79 outcomes for the trainee samples.

          'Weighted average of predicted changes in employment                 prohabi1ites       within
             sufficiency   classes.
                                                               Table 7

                           Ssry of Alternative Rando.-EffectsLogisticNode1JcontrolGroupOn1y)
                                        Goodness-of-Fit
                    Mode1"                  Statistic'                               Description of Estimated Mass             PointsC,,
                                       (degrees of freedom)                                            Type       1   Type 2    Type 3     Type    4

1.   No State Dependence                      2695.4                                                   -3.39
                                                                 (a) Log-odds of employment                           -0.34       1.51      4.12
     logit       =                             (1007)
                   aj +                                              (unemployed last year)
                                                                 (b) Log-odds of employment            --3.39         -0.34       1.51      4.12
                                                                     (employed last year)
                                                                 (c) Estimated weight                      0.032       0.065      0.213     0.691

2.   One—Parameter State Dependence            949.1                                                   -507           -1.66      -0.48
                                                                 (a) Log-odds of employment                                                 1.21
     logit       =    +    + TE               (1006)                   1                  last. yeai
                           t                                               iiiiu] ''yed
                                                                 (b) Log-odds of employment                -2.32       1.09       2.27      3.96
                                                                       (employed last year)
                                                                 (c)   Estimated weight                    0.017       0.051      0.274     0.659
3.   Two-Parameter State Dependence            900.4             (a) Log--odds of employment           -2.50          -0.53      5.25      11.23
     logit (Pa) = a1 +     + (y÷               (1006)                (unemployed last year)
                                 6a1)Ej.1
                                                                 (b) Log-odds of employment                2.26        2.30       2.42      2.54
                                                                     (employed last year)
                                                                 (c) Estimated weight                      0.080      0.310       0.064     0.545

4.   Four—Parameter State Dependence           832.5             (a) Log-odds of employment            -2.61          -0.90     22.97      -0.41
     logit (Pa) = a1 +     +                  (10003)                (unemployed last year)
                               1E11                              (b) Log-odds of employment                4.75       0.66        2.81      3.08
                                                                     (employed last year)
                                                                 (c) Estimated weight                      0.360      0.048      0.179      0.413


NOTES:   !"See text for more complete discussion.

         "Likelihood ratio test statistic against an unrestricted mu1tinomial model of the distribution of control group
             earnings histories into 1024 cells.
         'Log-odds are evaluated    at the value of     the year effect corresponding to           1970.
                                               Table 8

                        Estl.ated   TraininE   Effects   for Nodels   Ti   and T2

                               (Standard   errors in parentheses)


                                                                             Classroom      Non-Classroom
                                                         All Trainees
                                                                             Trainees         Trainees

Model TI:

 1. Training Effect on 1977 Employment,                     -.074               —.067          -.085
    Conditional on Employment in 1975                       (.123)              (.216)         (.126)

 2. TrainIng Effect on 1977 Employment.                       .671               .999           .616
    Conditional on Unemployment in 1975                     (.153)              (.320)         (.168)

 3. Training Effect on Post-1977                             .274                   .591        .169
    Retention Rates (T1)                                    (.084)              (.152)         (.088)

 4. TrainIng Effect on Post-1977                              .599                  .907        .552
    Accession Rates (T0)                                    (.113)              (.212)         (.124)

 5. Estimated State Dependence Parameter (y)                2.56                2.67           2.64


6. Goodness—of—Fit Stat.istic'
      (degrees of freedom)

    Controls                                             968.0 (1023)      954.1 (1023)      965.0 (1023)
    Trainees                                              656.7 (511)    379.7 (511)   518.8 (511)
    Total                                                1624.6 (1509) 1333.8 (1509) 1493.8 (1509)


Model T2:

7. Training Effect on 1977 Employment,                      -0.34               —.039          —.024
   Conditional on Employment in 1975                        (.092)              (.191)         (.083)

 8. Training Effect on 1977 Employment,                       .543                  .922        .463
    Conditional on Unemployment in 1975                     (.143)                  .276)      (.155)

 9. Training Effect on Post-1977                             .235                .578           .124
    Retention Rates (-r1)                                   (.109)              (.149)         (.084)

10. Training Effect on Post-1977                              .681                  .936        .676
    Accession Rates (r0)                                    (.109)              (.210)         (.115)

11. Estimated State Dependence Parameter (y)                2.57                    2.67       2.61



12. Goodness—of—Fit Statistic"
      (degrees of freedom)

    Controls                                             967.5 (1023)      954.9 (1023)      964.3 (1023)
    Trainees                                              636.2 (511)   376.5 (511)    509.3 (511)
    Total                                                1603.8 (1506) 1331 4 (1506) 1473.6 (1506)


NOTES: "Degrees of freedom for controls and trainees are unidjusted for parameter estima-
          tion. Degrees of freedom for total are adjusted for parameter estimation.
                                          Table 9

            Estimated Training Effects on the Probability of Employment:

                         Random Effects Logit Models Ti and T2


                                                           Classroom   Non-Classroom
                                            All Trainees   Trainees       Trainees

Estimated Increase In Employment
  Probabilities Due to Training/

1. oaei     ii:


    (a)    1977                                .020          .036           .017
    (b)    1978                                .049          .089           .032
    (c)    1979                                .071          .130           .056
    (d) Average 1977-79                        .047          .085           .035
    (e) Steady-state/                          .063          .115           .047


2. Model    T2:

    (a)    1977                                .030          .031           .014
    (b)    1978                                .063          .084           .034
    (c)    1979                                .082          .126           .047
    (d) Average 1977-79                        .058          .080           .032
    (e) Steady--state/                         .063          .114           .051



NOTES: Difference between fitted probability of employment using estimated
          training effects, and fitted probability of employment setting
            training   effects to zero.
          b / Difference
          —    .                                        . .  .
                         between state employment probabilities wtli and without
            training effects, evaluated at the 1970 year effect.
                                      Table 10

               Estliated Individual Effects. Type Probabilities, and

         Relative Selection Ratios: Randoa    Effects   Logit Nodels Ti and T2


                                              Description of Estimated Mass Points
                                          Type      1   Type 2      Type 3       Type 4

Model Ti:

1. All Trainees

   (a) Log odds of employment (aj)"       -3.70           -.90        .49         1.72
   (b) control weight/                        .026         .184       .352         .438
   (c) Trainee weight/                        .001         .374       .625         .000
   (d) Selection ratio ()/                   1.74         1.74       1.74         1.74

2. classroom Trainees

   (a) Log odds of employment (a)'        -4.50         -1.14         .37         1.86
   (b) control weight/                      .020          .145        .469         .363
   (c) Trainee weight/                      .000           .395       .605         .000
                         d/                1.37           1.37       1.37         1.37
   (d) Selection ratio (p)—

3. Non—classroom Trainees

   (a) Log odds of employment (a)            3.44         -.79         51         1.43
   (b) Control weightP/                       .028         .220        206         .546
   (C) Trainee weight/                        .003         .394       .603         .000
   (d) Selection ratio (p)                   1.83         1.83         83         1.83


Model Tl:

1. All Trainees

   (a) Log odds of employment (aY"         -3.70           .86       .85          2.28
   (b) Control weight/                       .026          .202        371         .201
   (c) Trainee weight./                      .002          .446        352         .000
                           d/                 .63         1.19      4 0           1.17
   (d) Selection ratio (p.)—

2. Classroom Trainees

   (a) Log odds of employment (a) -4.70                   1.16         14         2.04
   (b) Control weight/                        .019         .144       .527         .000
   (C)   Trainee weight       d/
                                              .000         .396       .604         .000
   (d) Selection ratio (p1)—                  .64         1.07      2.26          1.15

3. Non-Classroom Trainees

   (a) Log odds of employment (a.)        -3.28           -.69       1.24         1.26
   (b) Control weightP/                       .030         .259       .515         .196
   (c) Trainee weight                         .006         .541       .353         .000
   (d) Selection ratio (p.)                   .33         1.25      6.72          1.11


NOTES: 1Log odds of employment, conditional on unemployment in the previous
          year and assuming a 1970 year effect.

         "Estimated fraction of control group of each type.
         cl                .
            Estimated fraction
               .
                               of trainee group of each type.

         "Estimate ratio of the probaility of entering trdining conditional on
           unemployment in 1975 to the probability of entering training con-
           ditional on employment in 1975.
