NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

DYNAMICS OF THE U.S. PRICE DISTRIBUTION
David Berger
Joseph Vavra
Working Paper 21732
http://www.nber.org/papers/w21732
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
November 2015

We are grateful to Nick Bloom, Eduardo Engel, Nir Jaimovich, Giuseppe Moscarini and Emi Nakamura
for helpful comments and Rozi Ulics and Randal Verbrugge for support at the BLS. Finally, we thank
Chiara Maggi and Yuta Takahashi for being wonderful RAs. All remaining errors are our own. The
views expressed herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National
Bureau of Economic Research.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peerreviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.
© 2015 by David Berger and Joseph Vavra. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed
two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice,
is given to the source.

Dynamics of the U.S. Price Distribution
David Berger and Joseph Vavra
NBER Working Paper No. 21732
November 2015
JEL No. E3,E31,E32,E5,E52,L16
ABSTRACT
We use microdata underlying U.S. consumer, producer and import price indices to document how
the distribution of price changes evolves over time. Two striking features characterize pricing at each
stage of production: 1) Frequency is countercyclical. 2) Frequency is correlated with variance. Conversely,
other statistics which have received recent attention, like kurtosis, do not exhibit uniform patterns
across our datasets. What implications do our empirical results have for monetary policy? Using a
flexible accounting framework which collapses the high-dimensional distribution of price changes
into a single measure of aggregate price flexibility, we show that flexibility is highly variable and
countercyclical.
David Berger
Department of Economics
Northwestern University
2001 Sheridan Road
Evanston, IL 60208
and NBER
david.berger@northwestern.edu
Joseph Vavra
Booth School of Business
University of Chicago
5807 South Woodlawn Avenue
Chicago, IL 60637
and NBER
joseph.vavra@chicagobooth.edu

1

Intro

A growing literature argues that the
for

microeconomic

distribution of price changes matters

macroeconomic price exibility and thus monetary policy.

In this paper, we extend the

existing empirical literature by systematically documenting the time-series evolution of the
entire distribution of U.S. price changes at various stages of production.

Using the Bureau

of Labor Statistics (BLS) microdata that underlies the Consumer, Producer and Import
Price Indices we show that there are important common patterns in the distribution of price
changes over time.

We then explore the implications of this variation for aggregate price

exibility. Using a simple, exible accounting framework we argue that price exibility rises
in recessions.
While there has been widespread attention to "rst moments"

2

of the price change distri-

bution, there has been much less empirical study of higher moments of the distribution and
their relationship to the broader business cycle.

3

Furthermore, existing studies have focused

on particular moments and data sets in isolation, which makes it more challenging to identify
robust features of pricing behavior.

4

In this paper, we show that there are striking common

patterns in the distribution of price changes collected at dierent stages of production, but
there are also certain features which are unique to particular data sets.
We systematically report time-series statistics for numerous moments and percentiles
that go well beyond the existing literature, and several empirical regularities emerge from
this analysis: 1) There are large movements across time in all percentiles of the distribution
of price changes.

2) The frequency of adjustment is positively correlated with the variance

of price changes. 3) The frequency of adjustment and variance of price changes are strongly
countercyclical. We show that these basic facts hold across each of our data sets and regardless of how price series are ltered.
2
3
4

5

Conversely, some patterns related to higher moments

Studies typically focus on e.g. the frequency and size of price changes and their relationship to ination.
Klenow and Malin (2010) and Vavra (2014) are exceptions
For example, using CPI data, Vavra (2014) and Alvarez and Lippi (2014) explore the implications of the variance

of price changes for monetary policy while Midrigan (2011) and Alvarez et al. (2014) focus on the implications of
kurtosis. Berger and Vavra (2015) focus on the implications of variance in IPP import price data.

5

It is important to note that many, but not all of these empirical facts are new. In particular, all of the empirical

facts relating to centered moments of the CPI from an earlier draft of this paper were subsumed in Vavra (2014).
In particular, Table 1 in Vavra (2014) documents that the frequency is countercyclical as well as the business cycle
co-movement of the variance, skewness and kurtosis of the distribution of price changes. Berger and Vavra (2015)
document the positive correlation between the frequency of adjustment and the standard deviation of price changes
in IPP data. All remaining statistics are to the best of our knowledge new to this paper.

of the distribution of price changes dier across CPI, PPI and IPP data, or are sensitive to
measurement issues. In particular: 4) Various measures of price change kurtosis are strongly
procyclical and are negatively correlated with frequency in the CPI, but not in PPI or IPP
data. 5) Statistics related to skewness are highly sensitive to the particular measure used
and also vary substantially across data sets.
Why is it important to study the distribution of price changes and what should we take
from the array of statistics computed in the rst half of the paper?

Microeconomic price-

setting behavior inuences the degree of aggregate price exibility, which will in turn have
strong implications for the real response of the economy to nominal shocks. In the second
half of the paper, we introduce an accounting framework which allows us to collapse the
complicated high dimensional distribution of price changes at each point in time into a
single, easily interpretable measure of aggregate price exibility.
This step necessarily requires introducing additional structure, but we try to do so in a
highly exible way.

For example, in a Calvo model, rms are selected to adjust prices at

random so aggregate price exibility is completely determined by the average frequency of
adjustment.

At the opposite extreme, in the Caplin and Spulber (1987) model, adjusting

rms change prices by such large amounts that the aggregate price level is fully exible
regardless of the underlying frequency of adjustment.

Rather than taking a strong stand

on a particular price-setting environment, we use a version of the generalized Ss model of
Caballero and Engel (2007), which nests many of these extremes. Furthermore, we estimate
this model using a highly exible functional form which imposes minimal restrictions on the
distribution of desired price changes at a point in time and no restrictions on the evolution
across time.
The exible modeling framework of Caballero and Engel (2007) is useful for summarizing
our somewhat complicated pricing facts and their implications for how price exibility varies
over time.

We show that greater frequency, greater variance and smaller kurtosis are all

associated with greater price exibility in this model.

In contrast, the skewness of rms'

desired price changes has little relationship with aggregate price exibility.

Thus, movements

across time in the frequency of adjustment, variance or kurtosis of price changes should be
associated with movements in aggregate price exibility. When viewed through the lens of
our model, we nd that most of the time-series correlations we document in the BLS data
imply time-varying exibility which rises during recessions. That is, aggregate price exibility
is highly variable and strongly countercyclical. Furthermore, we nd that a large fraction of

2

this time-variation in price exibility arises from changes in the distribution of price changes
rather than through time-variation in the frequency of adjustment.

This implies that a

Calvo model which exogenously matched the frequency of adjustment across time would
substantially understate the time-variation in price exibility in the data.
Many recent papers have used fully specied structural models to argue that the distribution of price changes has important implications for aggregate price exibility. For example,
Midrigan (2011) and Alvarez et al. (2014) show that theory assigns a large role to the price
change distribution in shaping the average response of inaction to nominal shocks and Vavra
(2014) argues that similar mechanisms lead to increases in price exibility during recessions.
Such structural models necessarily impose strong assumptions on the shocks which hit rms
and thus on the evolution of desired price changes across time.

This in turn implies that

they are unable to fully replicate the complicated evolution of the distribution of observed
price changes across time. In contrast, our model is exible. It imposes no restrictions on
the evolution of rms' desired price changes across time but still allows us to construct a
measure of price exibility at a point in time. This exibility comes at a cost: our framework
is less useful for making predictions (aside from the fact that pricing moments are somewhat
persistent, so that knowledge of the distribution today is informative for the distribution tomorrow) or for assessing counterfactuals under alternative policy environments. We have no
theory for the evolution of price gaps and instead simply estimate their distribution period
by period. So while our methodology provides a useful way of summarizing the complicated
distribution of price changes and how this will respond to shocks on impact, we have less
to say about how variables will evolve after impact or how distributions will potentially
change in response to changes in policy. That is, our framework provides a historical view of
price exibility which requires minimal structure, but is somewhat sensitive to lucas critique
arguments when trying to do predictive analysis.
While specifying a full structural model is important if one wants to understand what
drives rms' pricing decisions or for performing counterfactual analysis, one contribution of
our paper is showing that an important component of the nominal transmission mechanism
can be measured with more minimal structural assumptions.

Measuring aggregate price

exibility at a particular point in time can be done without an explicit model of the evolution
of price distributions across time. In particular, given a specication for the hazard of price
adjustment and the distribution of rms' desired price changes at a moment in time, aggregate
price exibility is fully revealed by the observed distribution of rms' actual price changes at

3

that same point in time. We apply this identication procedure to BLS CPI, PPI and IPP
micro data to create a time-series for price exibility in each data set and nd that in all
cases it is strongly countercyclical.
Our work relates to many existing, largely empirical papers which document facts about
the distribution of price changes. Typically, these papers focus on one data set, whereas we
focus on the time-series properties of a broad set of statistics in multiple data sets covering
dierent points in the supply chain. For example, Klenow and Malin (2010) document many
interesting facts about prices, but concentrate solely on CPI data and do not focus on the
time-series properties of higher moments of the price change distribution. Chu et al. (2015)
study the distribution of price changes in the U.K., but exclusively study the CPI and do not
discuss implications for price exibility and monetary policy. Vavra (2014) is the most closely
related paper, and our work is distinguished in several ways: Vavra (2014) studies only CPI
data and focuses mostly on the variance of price changes rather than broader features of the
price distribution studied in our analysis. On the theoretical front, as mentioned above, his
model imposes much stronger structural assumptions while our analysis uses a more exible
accounting framework to describe price exibility.
The remainder of the paper proceeds as follows: Section 2 contains our main empirical
ndings.

Section 3 discusses the implications for time-varying exibility using the simple,

exible structure of Caballero and Engel (2007) . Section 4 lays out our main results which
are that price exibility varies signicantly over time and his strongly countercyclical. Finally,
Section 5 concludes.

2

Data

2.1 Data Sources
We analyze three sources of micro data collected by the BLS, and we describe each data
set in brief. The restricted access

CPI research database collected by the Bureau of Labor

Statistics (BLS) contains individual price observations for the thousands of non-shelter items
underlying the CPI and spans the period 1988-2012.

4

Prices are collected monthly only in

New York, Los Angeles and Chicago, and we restrict our analysis to these cities
sure the representativeness of our sample.

6

to en-

The database contains thousands of individual

"quote-lines" with price observations for many months.

Quote-lines are the highest level of

disaggregation possible and correspond to an individual item at a particular outlet.

An ex-

ample of a quote-line collected in the research database is 2-liter coke at a particular Chicago
outlet.

These quote-lines are then classied into various product categories called "Entry

Level Items" or ELIs.

The ELIs can then be grouped into several levels of more aggregated

product categories nishing with eleven major expenditure groups: processed food, unprocessed food, household furnishings, apparel, transportation goods, recreation goods, other
goods, utilities, vehicle fuel, travel, and services.

For more details on the structure of the

database see Nakamura and Steinsson (2008).
We use condential micro data on import prices collected by the Bureau of Labor Statistics
for the period 1994-2011. This data is collected on a monthly basis and contains information
on import prices for very detailed items over time. This data set has previously been used by
Gopinath and Rigobon (2008), Gopinath and Itskhoki (2010), Neiman (2010), Berger et al.
(2012) and Berger and Vavra (2015). Below, we provide a brief description of how the data is
collected. The target universe of the price index consists of all items purchased from abroad
by U.S. residents (imports). An "item" in the data set is dened as a unique combination
of a rm, a product and the country from which a product is shipped. The target universe
of the price index consists of all items purchased from abroad by U.S. residents (imports).
An "item" in the data set is dened as a unique combination of a rm, a product and the
country from which a product is shipped. Price data are collected monthly for approximately
10,000 imported items. The BLS collects "free on board" (fob) prices at the foreign port of
exportation before insurance, freight or duty are added, and almost 90% of U.S. imports have
a reported price in dollars. Following the literature, we restrict our analysis to these dollar
denominated prices. The BLS collects prices monthly using voluntary condential surveys,
which are usually conducted by mail. Respondents are asked for prices of actual transactions
that occur as close as possible to the rst day of the month. For more details about the IPP
data set seeGopinath and Rigobon (2008).
The PPI Research Database contains a panel of raw data from the productions rms used
to construct the PPI. The earliest prices in the database are from the late 1970s. For most
6

Prices were also collected monthly in San Francisco and Philadelphia from 1988-2012. We do not include these

cities because we want to have a consistent sample for the entire life of the data set (1988-2009).

5

categories, however, the sample period begins some time during the early to mid 1980s. For
the period 1981-2012 (the period we focus on), the PPI Research Database contains data for
categories that constitute greater than 90% of the value weight for the Finished Goods PPI.
For more details see Nakamura and Steinsson (2008).
Like the IPP, the PPI is collected by BLS through a representative survey of rms. This
methodology introduces greater concerns about data quality than in the CPI where BLS
agents actually observe prices of products on the shelf. In order to address these concerned
the BLS focuses on only collecting actual transaction prices. Specically, the BLS requests
the price of actual shipments transacted within a particular time frame. It is important to
note that many of the transactions for which prices are collected as part of the IPP and
PPI are a part of implicit or explicit long-term contracts between rms and their suppliers.
The presence of such long-term contracts makes interpreting the IPP and PPI data more
complicated than interpreting CPI data. This is less of a concern in the IPP because we only
use market based transactions, however, this concern remains in the PPI data.

2.2 Variable denitions
Much of the recent literature has discussed the dierence between sales, regular price changes
and product substitutions.
and product substitutions.

In our analysis, we focus on regular price changes, excluding sales
We use the series excluding sales and product substitutions as

our benchmark for two reasons:

1)

Eichenbaum et al. (2011) and Kehoe and Midrigan

(2015) argue that the behavior of sales is often signicantly dierent from that of regular or
reference prices and that regular prices are likely to be the important object of interest for
aggregate dynamics.

Thus, we choose to exclude sales in our benchmark analysis. However,

it is important to note that sales are infrequent in IPP and PPI data, and our results are
largely similar if we include sales in the CPI analysis rather than excluding them.

2)

Product substitutions require a judgement on what portion of a price change is due to quality
adjustment and which component is a pure price change.

Thus, this introduces measurement

error in the calculation of price changes at the time of product substitution.
shows that these errors can be substantial.

Bils (2009)

For this reason, we exclude product substitutions

from our benchmark analysis.

6

We dene the price change of item

pi,t 7
i at time t as dpi,t = log pi,t−1
.

Then, using aggregation

weights provided by the BLS, it is straightforward to calculate the cross-sectional distribution
of log price changes for each month and investigate how it varies over the business cycle.
Following Vavra (2014), we focus separately on the distribution of non-zero price changes
and frequency rather than computing statistics for the distribution of price changes including
zeros.

2.3 Data facts
Figure 1 plots the distribution of (non-zero) price changes across time for the CPI, IPP and
PPI. In particular, we plot the 10th, 25th, 37.5th, 50th, 62.5th, 75th and 90th percentiles
of the distribution of price changes for all three data sets along with (gray) NBER recession
bars.

The rst observation is that the average size of a price change is large in all three

datasets:

the mean interquartile range (the 75th percentile minus the 25th percentile) is

around 7%.

Second, the distribution of price changes varies signicantly over time.

variation is most dramatic for the CPI, but is still substantial for the IPP and PPI.

8

This
These

time-series movements do not occur at random; they are correlated with the business cycle.
In particular, the average size of price changes falls, and the frequency and dispersion of price
changes rises during recessions.
Table 1 formally documents the business cycle properties of price-setting at quarterly
frequencies.

9

Since there is some high frequency noise in the data, and because low frequency

trends can introduce spurious correlation, our preferred specications focus on variation at
business cycle frequencies.

In particular, the top panel shows how bandpass ltered (BP)

frequency and the rst four moments of price changes vary with GDP growth rates.

The

middle panel reports the same correlations using a Hodrick-Prescott lter (HP) to eliminate
low frequency trends and a 3-quarter moving average lter (MA) to eliminate high frequency
7

In addition to this measure of the size of a price change, we also computed the price change size as

which has the advantage of being bounded and thus less sensitive to outliers.

(p −p

)

t−1
dp = 2 (ptt +pt−1
,
)

We also investigated using residuals

from a regression of the current price on the previous price as a measure of the size of price changes.

Results with

these two alternative measures are very similar to the results reported below and so are excluded for brevity.

The

results are available from authors upon request.

8
9

The larger time variation in the CPI might be related to the fact that CPI is not aected by long-term contracts.
In Appendix A we report results for various percentiles of the distribution. We also show that the same time-series

relationships that we document below are also present in monthly data.

7

Figure 1:
variation.

Distribution of price changes across time

Finally, the bottom panel reports results for unltered data and shows that all

patterns are largely similar.

10

In the Appendix, we also show that similar conclusions obtain

when regressing variables on recession indicators.
We document two main facts. The rst fact is that the frequency of adjustment is countercyclical. Vavra (2014) rst documented this fact for the CPI but we see here that it holds at
all stages of production. The second fact is that price dispersion is strongly countercyclical.
Table 1 presents results for three measures of price change dispersion: the standard deviation
(XSD), the interquartile range (IQR) and the dierence between the 90th and 10th percentile
of the distribution of price changes, and all three measures tell the same story. In almost
10

In the unltered specication, we detrended all data with a quadratic trend to eliminate spurious trend correla-

tions, but results are similar with no detrending.

8

Table 1: Business Cycle Correlations of Pricing Moments
Freq

XSD

IQR

90-10

CPI
IPP
PPI

-0.53***
-0.36**
-0.35***

-0.59***
-0.66***
-0.57***

-0.65***
-0.61**
-0.48***

CPI
IPP
PPI

-0.52***
-0.40**
-0.28***

-0.61***
-0.63***
-0.40***

CPI
IPP
PPI

-0.35***
-0.26
-0.27***

-0.46***
-0.52***
-0.27

Skew

Robust-Skew

Kurt

Robust-Kurt

Obs

BP Filtered
-0.52*** 0.20
0.14
-0.68*** 0.16
0.55***
-0.56*** 0.04
-0.20

0.39***
0.25***
0.17**

0.40***
-0.17
-0.08

76
51
105

-0.64***
-0.62***
-0.31*

HP +
-0.64***
-0.65***
-0.39**

0.38***
0.20
0.06

0.34***
0.01
-0.09

96
71
125

-0.45***
-0.54***
-0.22*

Unltered
-0.44*** 0.10
0.14***
-0.51**
0.12
0.35**
-0.24
0.09
-0.10

0.14*
0.05
-0.02

0.07
0.11
-0.02

96
71
125

MA Filtered
0.15** 0.12
0.24
0.50***
0.09
-0.17

Each cell displays the correlation of a particular pricing moment in a particular data set with GDP growth. BP uses
a baxter king(6,32,10) lter. HP+MA uses a hodrick-prescott lter with smoothing parameter 1600 and a 3 quarter
moving average.
Robust-Skew=

Unltered data uses no lters but detrends series using a quadratic trend.

All data is quarterly.

(P90 +P10 −2P50 )/((P90 −P10 ). Robust-Kurt = (P90 −P62.5 +P37.5 −P10 )/((P75 −P25 ). Standard errors

are computed using a Newey-West correction with optimal lag length. *=10%, **=5%, ***=at least 1% signicance.

all of the specications, the dispersion of price changes is signicantly negatively correlated
with the business cycle. This fact is consistent with the large body of evidence presented in
Bloom et al. (2012) documenting that many variables exhibit countercyclical dispersion and
shows that this fact holds in a variety of pricing series.

11

The last four columns of Table 1 show that, across datasets, there is a less consistent
relationship between the third and fourth moments of the distribution of price changes and
the business cycle. The standard moment-based skewness exhibits no notable cyclicality in
any data set. The robust, quantile based measure of skewness is strongly procyclical in the
IPP but not in the CPI or PPI. The kurtosis of price changes measured using both moments
and more robust percentiles is strongly procyclical in the CPI but is not robustly so in
11

Vavra (2014) showed it held in the CPI; Berger and Vavra (2015) showed it holds in the IPP. In this paper we

show it holds in the PPI as well.

9

IPP or PPI. This shows the importance of jointly analyzing pricing data at various stages
of production, as facts gleaned in one data set may not be representative of more general
price-setting patterns. A large recent literature has emerged trying to match features of the
kurtosis of price changes in CPI data, but here we show that the time-series behavior of
kurtosis in the CPI is somewhat unique.

12

Table 2: Correlation of Pricing Moments with Frequency of Adjustment
XSD

IQR

90-10

Skew

Robust-Skew

CPI
IPP
PPI

0.52***
0.44*
0.41***

0.55***
0.47**
0.40***

0.43***
0.43*
0.40***

BP Filtered
0.16 0.18
-0.24 -0.41**
-0.16 0.47*

CPI
IPP
PPI

0.50***
0.19
0.26**

0.55***
0.23
0.30**

0.41***
0.22
0.30**

CPI
IPP
PPI

0.36***
0.12
0.18**

0.43***
0.16
0.33**

0.35***
0.16
0.25**

HP + MA Filtered
-0.10 0.09
-0.20 -0.24*
-0.04 0.38***
Unltered
-0.06 0.01
-0.15 -0.18**
-0.02 0.20**

Kurt

Robust-Kurt

Obs

-0.54***
-0.05
0.08

-0.44*
-0.09
0.13

76
51
105

-0.54***
-0.09
0.01

-0.52**
-0.01
0.12

96
71
125

-0.35***
-0.04
-0.04

-0.27*
0.01
0.03

96
71
125

Each cell displays the correlation of the frequency of adjustment in a particular data set with the corresponding
moment in the same data set.

BP uses a baxter king(6,32,10) lter.

smoothing parameter 1600 and a 3 quarter moving average.
using a quadratic trend.

All data is quarterly.

(P90 − P62.5 + P37.5 − P10 )/((P75 − P25 ).

HP+MA uses a hodrick-prescott lter with

Unltered data uses no lters but detrends series

Robust-Skew=

(P90 + P10 − 2P50 )/((P90 − P10 ).

Robust-Kurt

=

Standard errors are computed using a Newey-West correction with optimal

lag length. *=10%, **=5%, ***=at least 1% signicance.

Table 2 documents the correlation of pricing moments with the frequency of adjustment.
In price-setting models, the frequency of adjustment is typically closely related to the amount
of aggregate price exibility, so it is useful to explore the relationship between the price change
distribution and frequency. The rst three columns of Table 2 show that the frequency of
adjustment is signicantly and positively correlated with price dispersion in all specications
12

All data sets exhibit excess kurtosis on average, as emphasized by Midrigan (2011).

10

for the CPI and PPI. The relationship is less consistent for the IPP, however, the point
estimates are always positive even when not statistically signicant. The next two columns
document the relationship between skewness and frequency.

Overall, the relationship is

idiosyncratic to the specic data set: skewness and frequency are positively correlated in the
PPI, negatively correlated in the IPP and there is no time-series relationship in the CPI.
Finally, the last two columns of table 2 show that there is a strong negative relationship
between kurtosis and frequency in the CPI, but again, this pattern is unique to the CPI:
frequency and kurtosis are uncorrelated in the IPP and PPI.
To summarize the more robust patterns in the above tables:

we nd strong evidence

that the frequency and price dispersion are both countercyclical and positively related to
each other in all three data sets. Conversely there is no robust relationship between higher
moments and the business cycle across data sets: we nd that skewness is procyclical only
in the IPP and kurtosis is procyclical only in the CPI.
While we nd it informative to highlight these particular patterns, it is clear that there
are many moments of the price distribution upon which one could focus. In Appendix A, we
report additional patterns for ten percentiles of the price change distribution. What should
we take away from these empirical facts, and why should we care about matching them?
In the next section, we explore the implications of these price facts for the eectiveness
of monetary policy, and show that the complicated high-dimensional distribution of price
changes at a point in time can be summarized by a useful measure of price exibility. When
viewed through the lens of this price exibility measure, matching the distribution of price
changes across time has important implications for the cyclicality of aggregate price exibility.

3

Accounting framework

3.1 Basic setup
We use the generalized Ss model developed by Caballero and Engel (2007) to formalize the
link between changes in the timing of individual price adjustments and macro price exibility.
The main appeal of this framework is that it exibly encompasses several pricing mechanisms
commonly used in macroeconomic applications in a parsimonious way as well as providing a
good t to the micro data.
First, some preliminaries. There are both aggregate and idiosyncratic shocks, We assume

11

∆mt are i.i.d with mean µA
2
and variance σA . Firms also face idiosyncratic (productivity and demand) shocks, vit , which
2
are i.i.d. with potentially time-varying variance σI . No assumptions are made regarding the
that shocks to the growth rate of money (or nominal demand)

common distribution of idiosyncratic shocks. These shocks are independent across rms and
from the aggregate shock. Given these assumptions, the optimal exible price for rm

i

(the

desired price) is:

∆p∗it = ∆mt + vit
i adjusts to innovations in all the shocks since it last
x ≡ pi,t−1 − p∗it , the dierence between rm i's, current

That is, conditional on adjusting, rm
adjusted.

Dene the price gap as

price and the price it would choose if it temporarily faced no adjustment costs. The price
gap is the relevant state variable in this pricing model since rms are more likely to adjust
the larger the absolute size of the gap.
We further assume that there are i.i.d. idiosyncratic shocks to adjustment costs,
from a distribution

G($)

.

$, drawn

Integrating over all possible realizations of these adjustment

costs, we obtain an adjustment hazard,Λ(x), dened as the probability of adjustingprior
to knowing the current adjustment cost drawby a rm that would adjust by
adjustment cost draw were zero. It is straightforward to prove that

x < 0

and increasing for

x > 0.

Λ(x)

x,

if its

is decreasing for

This is referred to by Caballero and Engel (2007) as the

increasing hazard property: the probability of adjusting is increasing in the absolute size of
a rm's price gap.
A nice feature of this generalized Ss framework is that it nests many standard models as

G($) has all of its
when G($) has mass λ

special cases. For example, a standard menu cost model is obtained when
mass at one point. The Calvo model (Λ(x)
at

$=0

and mass

1−λ

=λ

for all

at a very large value of

$.

x)

is obtained

The model also has empirical relevance:

it gives rise to infrequent and lumpy price adjustment, which is a central feature of the price
data that we seek to reproduce.

It can also well match the observed distribution of price

changes, and it is consistent with the evidence in Eichenbaum et al. (2011) that rms are
more likely to adjust prices that are out of line with marginal cost.

ft (x) the cross section of price gaps immediately before any adjustments take place at time t. Ination is given by the simple formula:
ˆ
πt = − xΛt (x)ft (x)dx
The model also aggregates nicely. Denote by

12

Dene

F =

∂πt
as the price exibility index. It measures the price response upon impact to
∂4mt

a nominal shock. When log nominal demand follows a random walk, a common assumption in
the literature (Woodford (2003) Nakamura and Steinsson (2010); Vavra (2014)), the exibility
index is a summary measure of monetary non-neutrality because the larger is the (price)
exibility index, the smaller is the output response. Thus knowledge of the exibility index
is a useful proxy for the current ecacy of monetary policy. Fortunately, Caballero and Engel
(2007) show how to derive the exibility index for the generalized Ss model:

∂πt
F = lim4mt →0
=
∂4mt

ˆ

ˆ
Λt (x)ft (x)dx +

xΛ0t (x)ft (x)dx

(1)

The exibility index can be decomposed into two components: an intensive margin and an
extensive margin. The rst term is the intensive margin, which measures the part of ination
coming from rms that would have adjusted even absent the monetary shock. This margin
is present in both the
models.

Ss

and Calvo models. The second term is unique to state-dependent

The extensive margin refers to the amount of ination coming from rms whose

decisions to adjust are altered by the monetary shock. This includes both rms who would
have kept their price constant and instead change it, as well as rms who would have changed
prices but now choose not to. The extensive margin is only present in Ss models since in a
Calvo model

Λ0t (x) = 0.

When will each of these margins be more important? Inspecting the expression for the
intensive margin shows that this component is equal to the frequency of adjustment. The
more rms that are adjusting absent the aggregate shock, the greater the aggregate price
response to that shock through the intensive margin. The extensive margin grows with the
number of rms near the margin of adjustment (rms with large

Λ0t (x)

). In addition, the

extensive margin is amplied if rms near the margin of adjustment also have large values
of

|x|:

if the dierence between adjusting and not adjusting grows, then triggering rms to

switch their adjustment decisions will have a bigger eect on the overall price level.
The exibility index is our main object of interest as it tells us how the the price response
upon impact to a nominal shock varies over time.

Moreover, it is also potentially useful

for discriminating between price setting models. Equation (1) shows that if one knew both
the hazard function,

Λt (x),

and the distribution of price gaps,

ft (x),

one could estimate the

exibility index at each moment of time. Of course, both of these objects are unobservable.
However, with some minimal structure and data on observed price changes, we are able to

13

identify this object. First, the product of
size

x

Λt (x)

and

ft (x)

relates unobservable price gaps of

to the observable distribution of price changes of size

x.

We put further structure on

the problem by assuming that the hazard rate is quadratic (until the point at which rms
adjust with probability 1), since this parsimoniously captures the state-dependence of the Ss
model while also nesting the Calvo model.

Λ(x) = min(at + bt x2 , 1)
What determines the distribution of price gaps
one assumes some simple process for
the evolution of

ft (x).

vit ,

ft (x)?

In traditional structural approaches,

Λ(x)
that v

and combines this assumption with

For example, Caballero and Engel (2006) assume

to derive
is drawn

from a time-invariant normal distribution, while Midrigan (2011) assumes a time-invariant
leptokurtic distribution. Perumuting these shock processes with the adjustment hazard produces some distribution of price gaps

f (x).

One then estimates the underlying shock process

to match the stationary distribution of price changes. This approach has the advantage of
being highly parsimonious since it estimates a limited number of parameters. It is also useful
for performing counterfactual exercises in response to changes in the policy environment,
under the assumption that the distribution of

v

is policy invariant. However, it also has an

important disadvantage: the imposition of this structure implies strong restrictions on the
evolution of price gaps and thus the distribution of price changs across time. Given these
tight restrictions and the small number of parameters estimated, this means these models
can at best very roughly capture the complicated evolution of the price change distribution
documented in the previous section.
In order to try to more directly assess the implications of this complicated price distribution for aggregate price exibility, we take a dierent approach that tries to estimate
outcomes rather than the underlying shock process. In particular rather than trying to esti-

v , we instead directly estimate a
exible functional form for the distribution of price gaps ft (x). Given that we have much less

mate underlying structural parameters of some shock process

theoretical guidance for shape of distribution of price gaps, we leave it largely unrestricted.
In our primary specication, we allow

ft (x)

to follow a Pearson Type 7 Distribution, which

means it has an unrestricted mean, variance, skewness and kurtosis. Given these 4 parameters together with the 2 parameters of the adjustment hazard, equation (1) delivers the price
response upon impact at each moment in time. In addition to this functional form, we also

14

provide additional results following Guvenen, Ozkan and Song (2014) in using a mixture of

ft (x). While it might seem that there is
little dierence between estimating the distribution of v and that of ft (x), the key distinction
13
is that the distribution of v is assumed to be time-invariant , while we estimate a separate
ft (x) in each period.14 That is, the main distinction between the two approaches is on the
restrictions placed on parameter variation across time. Our approach estimates 6 × t parameters while a structural approach assuming a time-invariant Pearson distribution for v and a
stationary hazard Λ would estimate only 6 parameters.
normals to provide a exible parameteric form for

0.8
Frequency
Flexibility

0.6
0.4
0.2
0

0

0.01

0.02

0.03
0.04
Standard Deviation

0.05

0.06

0.07

0.8
0.6
0.4
0.2
0
-0.5

0
Skewness

0.5

0.8
0.6
0.4
0.2
0
1.5

Figure 2:

2

2.5

3

3.5
4
Kurtosis

4.5

5

5.5

Eect of parameters on Frequency and Price Flexibility

How does underlying variation in the parameters governing

Λand f

served distribution of price changes and aggregate price exibility?
13
14

6

aect both the ob-

We illustrate this by

Or to only vary across time in extremely simple ways.
These approaches are exactly equivalent if one allows the distribution ofv and

degrees of freedom.

15

Λ to vary across time with equivalent

picking some sample parameters,

15

and then varying moments of the price gap distribution

and reporting both the frequency of adjustment and the price response upon impact for these
various parameter values. The top panel of Figure 2 shows how the frequency and aggregate
exibility vary with the standard deviation of

f.

It is obvious from the gure that increases

in the stdandard deviation of desired price changes increase both frequency and aggregate
price exibility. Importantly the eect is non-linear: the eect on aggregate price exibility
is highly convex in the std. deviation of the price gap distribution. The logic behind these
eects is that an increase in standard deviation of the distribution of price gaps means that
there is more mass in the region of the state space where there is a higher probability of
adjustment. That is, both the intensive and extensive margins are strengthened.

16

In contrast, the middle panel of Figure 2 shows that there is little relationship between
the skewness of

ft (x)

and either the frequency of adjustment or price exibility.

Finally,

the bottom panel shows that there is a negative relationship between kurtosis and both the
frequency of price changes and price exibility.

17

Why?

Higher kurtosis means that the

distribution of price gaps has fatter tales relative to a normal distribution. That is, there are
both more price gaps near zero and more price gaps at extreme values. Since the hazard of
adjustment as a function of the price gap is bounded above by 1, this limits the degree to
which the price gaps at the extremes can raise frequency. That is, rms with large price gaps
will adjust anyway, while simultaneously pushing more mass towards zero lower the frequency
of adjustment.

Higher kurtosis also reduces the fraction of intermediate rms who are on

the margin of adjustment, which lowers price exibility through a decline in the extensive
margin.

Identication
Thus far, we have show that variation in the moments of the (unobservable) distribution
of price gaps can be mapped through our exible parametric model into the frequency of
adjustment and aggregate exibility.

The next step is to show that there is a mapping

from the unobservable distribution of gaps to the observable distribution of price changes.
15

We choose [mean,std.

deviation, skewness,kurtosis,a,b]=[.005,.05,0,6,90,.01] for this illustration, as it produces

moments in line with the average distribution of price changes.

16

17

This conforms with the more structural results in Vavra (2014).
This is consistent with Midrigan (2011).

16

Table 3 shows the relationship between parameters of the gap distribution and the (observed)
distribution of price changes.

Table 3:

Correlation between

Gap Parameter
Mean
Std. Deviation
Skewness
Kurtosis

f (x)

parameters and distribution of price changes

Observed Price Change Moment
Frequency Ination Std. Deviation Skewness
-0.00
0.99*** -0.00
-0.65***
0.99***
-0.02
1.00***
-0.01
-0.05
1.00*** -0.01
0.79***
-0.70***
-0.04
0.96***
0.05

Kurtosis
0.00
-0.83***
0.02
0.92***

The rst column shows that variation in the mean and skewness of the gap distribution
does not aect the frequency of adjustment. In contrast, the standard deviation of the gap
distribution is strongly positively correlated with frequency while the kurtosis of the distribution is strongly negatively correlated with frequency. This reinforces what we observed in
gure 2. The next fact which jumps out is that changes in each moment of the gap distribution are strongly positively correlated with the same moment in the distribution of observed
price changes.

For example, variation in the mean of the gap distribution implies similar

variation in the level of ination in the distribution of observed price changes. This shows
that we can use variation in the moments of the distribution of price changes to identify
movements in the unobserved distribution of price gaps. Finally, we see that while variation
in each parameter is strongly informative for a particular moment, it also induces variation
in other moments of the distribution. For example, variation in the mean of the distribution
of price gaps aects skewness, while variation in the standard deviation of the price gap
distribution aects kurtosis. In sum, Table 3 shows that there is a tight mapping between
moments of the unobserved distribution of price gaps and various moments of the observed
distribution of price changes so that the latter is useful for identying the former.
How restrictive are our identifying assumptions that within each month, the hazard is
quadratic and that the distribution of price gaps follows a four parameter Pearson Type
7 distribution?

It is clear that our approach is more exible than more typical structural

models, but it is more restrictive than a fully non-parametric approach. However, it is also
clear that identication requires

some

parametric assumptions, as a fully non-parametric

gap distribution and hazard is unidentied.

This is because if one allows for a fully non-

17

parametric gap distribution, then one can always perfectly replicate the data with a Calvo
model by setting

b = 0,

choosing the frequency of adjustment to be equal to

a,

and picking

the gap distribution to correspond to the actual observed distribution of price changes in
each period. However, this is not a particularly appealing model of price-setting for several
reasons. First, this model would have essentially no actual predictive content. A model which
allows for a completely arbitrary distribution of shocks to explain observable data essentially
explains nothing.

Similarly, it would be extremely dicult to construct any model that

generates such complicated distributions of rms' desired price changes.

Finally, there is

strong empirical evidence of state-dependence in micro pricing data, so that a Calvo model
with a complicated gap distribution seems at odds with the data.

18

Conversely, our approach is substantially more exible than more traditional structural
approaches such as those in Vavra (2014) and Alvarez and Lippi (2014). We think there is
signicant value in exploring the implications of a less restrictive model for aggregate price
exibility. Thus, while our assumption that the gap process is determined by a parametric
distribution at each point is restrictive relative to a fully non-parametric gap distribution, it is
signicantly less restrictive than previous structural frameworks. Within a period, we impose
a highly exible parametric functional form for price gaps

19

, but across periods this object

can evolve in a fully unrestricted way. Standard structural models impose strong restrictions
on the relationship between distributions at a point in time and how they evolve across
time.

20

We believe it is interesting to take an intermediate approach between fully structural

and completely non-parametric approaches and explore its implications for aggregate price
exibility.

18

Midrigan (2010) argues that U.S. manufacturing pricing data are much more consistent with state dependent

models than with time dependent ones. Midrigan (2012) and Nakamura and Steinsson (2010) use structural approachs
and nd that micro price data are consistent with state dependent pricing. Gagnon (2010) and Alvarez and Lippi
(2013) use evidence from high ination episodes from Mexico and Argentina respectively and provide very strong
empirical evidence that price setters exhibit state dependence in price. Most directly, Eichenbaum, Jaimovich and
Rebelo (2011) show that prices are much more likely to adjust when rms' price gaps (as measured by the deviation
in their markup from average) are large.

19

In our baseline we use a Pearson Type 7 distribution, but we also show that results are similar using a time-varying

mixture of normals.

20

For example, the closest structural analogue is contained in Caballero and Engel (2006).

They use the same

accounting framework as in Caballero and Engel (2007) and impose the structural assumption that idiosyncratic
shocks are normal with mean zero and constant variance, which they try to estimate to match the average distribution
of price changes in the CPI. If one instead allows for an arbitrary shock process then these more structural models
also have essentially no content.

18

4

Results and implications

We now use the theoretical framework to explore the level and time-variation in aggregate
price exibility for the CPI, IPP and PPI. We assume that the hazard function is a quadratic
in price gaps

x

which is consistent with both the increasing hazard property of Ss models

while also nesting the Calvo model.

Since we have less guidance for the structure of the

distribution of price gaps, we assume in our baseline results that the distribution follows a
Pearson Type 7 distribution, which leaves the rst 4 moments unrestricted. This means we
have six parameters to estimate: the intercept and slope coecient of the hazard function
and the rst four moments of the price gap distribution. We also show below that a version of
the model where we assume that the distribution of price gaps is given by the mixture of two
normal distributions instead of a Pearson Type 7 distribution delivers similar conclusions.
In our baseline specication, we estimate these six parameters period-by-period using
seven moments,

Mt ,

for identication:

Mt = [f reqt , meant , vart , skewnesst , kurtosist , mediant , IQRt ]
The seven moments are the frequency of adjustment as well as the mean, median, variance,
skewness, kurtosis and interquartile range of the distribution of price changes.
we minimize a quadratic form of these moments

22

the best t.
matrix.

M

21

Each period

and nd the parameters which provide

That is we nd the parameters which minimize

M 0W M ,

where

For our baseline specication we weight each moment equally.

23

W

is a weight

Once we have

specied the quadratic form, we minimize it period-by-period. Then we compute aggregate
price exibility - the price response upon impact to a nominal shock - using equation (1) and
analyze how it co-varies with the business cycle and the frequency of adjustment.
21

Results are similar if instead on uses 10 rather than 7 moments. The moments we added were the 10th, 25th,

75th and 90th percentile of the distribution of price changes, and the interquartile range was removed because it was
redundant.

22

We experimented with multiple quadratic forms but we found the most stable results when the odd moments
2
2
sim
msim −mdata
and the even moments as m
− mdata . The reason is the even
mdata

were specied in percentages,







moments can be either positive or negative and are often centered around zero. If we specied all the moments in
percentage terms, this would lead to us dividing by a number near zero, which lead to unstable estimated. However,
most results were robust to specifying all the moments symmetrically, either in percentage terms or as raw quadratic
forms.

23

Altonji and Segal (1996) argue that simulated minimum distance estimation often performs better in small samples

if an identify weight matrix is used rather than the optimal weight matrix.

19

We conduct this exercise for all three price series and for all three price lters. Appendix
Table 13 reports mean parameter results and goodness of t for our baseline specication
using a Pearson Type 7 distribution to match the seven pricing moments across the three
data sets. The t is slightly worse for PPI data, but is in general quite good for all three
data sets. The most important takeaway is that the estimation identies high values for the
quadratic adjustment hazard parameter

b in all three data sets.

This will imply an important

role for extensive margin eects in generating price exibility.

Table 4: Cyclicality and Time-Variation in Price Flexibility: Matching Moments
Cyclicality
CPI -0.57***
IPP -0.27**
PPI -0.28*
CPI -0.56***
IPP -0.37***
PPI -0.30**
CPI -0.37***
IPP -0.31**
PPI -0.30***

Time-Variation
Mean Std. Dev. 5th
BP Filtered
0.11
0.014
0.22
0.020
0.40
0.045
HP + MA
0.11
0.22
0.40

95th

0.085 0.140
0.184 0.253
0.317 0.462

Filtered
0.013
0.018
0.050

0.096 0.137
0.188 0.246
0.316 0.475

Unltered
0.11
0.020
0.22
0.025
0.40
0.087

0.084 0.150
0.172 0.258
0.278 0.541

This table shows results for the Pearson Type 7 distribution targeting

M

moments of the price change distribution.

The rst column shows the correlation between the price exibility index and GDP growth. In the rst panel, series
are ltered using a Baxter King (6,32,10) lter. In the second panel, series are ltered using a Hodrick-Prescott(1600)
lter and a 3 quarter moving average. In the third panel, series are unltered but are detrended with a quadratic trend.
Mean shows the mean price exibility over the entire sample. This is computed prior to ltering, since ltered data
is mean zero. Std. Dev., 5th and 95th shows the standard deviation, 5th and 95th percentile of price exibility
across time, after ltering. Standard errors for the cylicality calculation are adjusted for serial correlation using a
Newey-West correction with optimal lag length. *=10% signicance, **=5% signicance, ***=1% signicance.

Given this set of parameters, how does price exibility vary across time? We have two
main results, both of which are shown in Table 4.

20

The rst fact is that aggregate price

exibility varies substantially across time. Column 2 shows the mean level of price exibility
while columns 3-5 show the time-series standard deviation of price exibility together with
the fth and ninety-fth percentile.

The rst two panels lter the price exibility series,

leaving only price exibility variation at business cycle frequencies. Even with this ltering,
there is still substantial time-series variation: the 95th percentile of price exibility is 30-60%
larger than the 5th percentile of price exibility. The time-series standard deviation of price
exibility is typically around 10% of the mean level of price exibility. The bottom panel
shows that, unsurprisingly, price exibility variation is even larger when using variation at
all time frequencies. The 95th percentile of unltered price exibility is 50-95% higher than
the 5th percentile of the same series.
The second important fact shown in Table 4 is that price exibility is strongly countercyclical, so that this variation in price exibility does not occur at random. Column 1 shows
that our exibility index is higher when the growth rate of gdp is lower in all nine specications.

Since this exibility index measures how reponsive prices are to a nominal shock

at a moment in time, this implies that monetary policy which increases nominal output by
a given amount will be less eective at stimulating real output during recessions.

24

Thus

monetary policy is least eective during the times when policy makers most want to conduct
expansionary policy.
One concern with our estimation approach thus far is that it might be sensitive to the particular pricing moments we chose to target. Targeting centered moments of the distribution
of price changes utilizes all information, but it also makes results more sensitive to outliers.
In particular, some of the higher moments we choose to target are dicult to estimate in
small samples. Targeting these moments in our estimation could thus lead us astray. In order
to explore the robustness of our results to these concerns, we run our estimation targeting
nine percentiles of the distribution of price changes rather than centered moments of this
distribution. In particular, we target the following ten moments:

Mt = [f reqt , p1t , p5t , p10t , p25t , p50t , p75t , p90t , p95t , p99t ]
These moments robustly summarize the distribution of price changes while at the same
24

Statements about recessions vs. general cyclicality can be somewhat more sensitive to the exact timing of recession

dates. Nevertheless, regressing price exibility on recession dummies implies signicant increases for all CPI and IPP
specications and for PPI specications with the HP+MA lter. Point estimates are positive but insignicant for the
other two PPI lters.

21

Table 5: Cyclicality and Time-Variation in Price Flexibility: Matching Percentiles
Cyclicality
CPI -0.36
IPP -0.27***
PPI -0.35***
CPI -0.37**
IPP -0.29***
PPI -0.34**
CPI -0.26*
IPP -0.28***
PPI -0.25**

Time-Variation
Mean Std. Dev. 5th
BP Filtered
0.13
0.011
0.20
0.019
0.29
0.031
HP + MA
0.13
0.20
0.29

Filtered
0.011
0.018
0.032

Unltered
0.13
0.017
0.20
0.030
0.29
0.053

95th

0.110 0.144
0.172 0.232
0.248 0.348
0.111 0.147
0.171 0.230
0.237 0.342
0.101 0.153
0.151 0.249
0.200 0.384

This table shows results for the Pearson Type 7 distribution targeting 10 percentiles of the price change distribution
plus frequency. The rst column shows the correlation between the price exibility index and GDP growth. In the rst
panel, series are ltered using a Baxter King (6,32,10) lter. In the second panel, series are ltered using a HodrickPrescott(1600) lter and a 3 quarter moving average. In the third panel, series are unltered but are detrended with
a quadratic trend. Mean shows the mean price exibility over the entire sample. This is computed prior to ltering,
since ltered data is mean zero. Std. Dev., 5th and 95th shows the standard deviation, 5th and 95th percentile
of price exibility across time, after ltering.

Standard errors for the cylicality calculation are adjusted for serial

correlation using a Newey-West correction with optimal lag length. *=10% signicance, **=5% signicance, ***=1%
signicance.

time being less susceptible to outliers. The results are shown in Table 5 which has the same
structure as Table 4.
moments:

We see that both our stylized facts hold up to targeting dierent

aggregate price exibility is highly countercyclical and the magnitude of this

variation is economically large, especially from peak to trough.

25

How sensitive are our results to the functional form we have chosen for the distribution
of price gaps
25

f?

In our baseline results, we assume that this distribution follows a Pearson

Heteroscedasticity is more substantial for the bandpass ltered CPI specication under this specication so that

while point estimates remain strongly negative, p-values are approximately 0.15.

22

Type 7 distribution which allows us to independently choose values for the mean, variance,
skewness and kurtosis.

Following Guvenen et al. (2014), we have also experimented with

instead using a gap distribution which is a mixture of normals. In this case, we have ve
parameters to estimate: the mean and variance of each normal distribution together with
the weight placed on each of the two normal distributions. This mixed normal specication
allows for substantial exibility. For example, it is straightforward to generate distributions
with excess kurtosis or to allow for bimodal distributions.

Table 6 shows that again, our

conclusions are unchanged by using a dierent functional form for our price gap distribution.

Table 6: Cyclicality and Time-Variation in Price Flexibility: Mixed Normal Gap Distribution
Cyclicality
CPI -0.66***
IPP -0.54***
PPI -0.50***
CPI -0.67***
IPP -0.54***
PPI -0.40***
CPI -0.43***
IPP -0.31**
PPI -0.33***

Time-Variation
Mean Std. Dev. 5th
BP Filtered
0.07
0.014
0.17
0.014
0.38
0.056
HP + MA
0.07
0.17
0.38

0.055 0.103
0.154 0.199
0.310 0.486

Filtered
0.013
0.015
0.057

0.056 0.102
0.152 0.202
0.303 0.483

Unltered
0.07
0.018
0.17
0.021
0.38
0.102

This table shows results for the mixed normal distribution targeting

95th

0.048 0.111
0.142 0.221
0.245 0.564
M

moments of the price change distribution.

The rst column shows the correlation between the price exibility index and GDP growth. In the rst panel, series
are ltered using a Baxter King (6,32,10) lter. In the second panel, series are ltered using a Hodrick-Prescott(1600)
lter and a 3 quarter moving average. In the third panel, series are unltered but are detrended with a quadratic trend.
Mean shows the mean price exibility over the entire sample. This is computed prior to ltering, since ltered data
is mean zero. Std. Dev., 5th and 95th shows the standard deviation, 5th and 95th percentile of price exibility
across time, after ltering. Standard errors for the cylicality calculation are adjusted for serial correlation using a
Newey-West correction with optimal lag length. **=5% signicance, ***=1% signicance.

The results thus far show that price exibility varies substantially across time and is

23

countercyclical, but they tell us little about the forces which drive this variation. Recall from
Section 3.1 that our price exibility index can be decomposed into both an intensive margin
and an extensive margin component. The intensive margin is given by

IM =

which is just equal to the frequency of adjustment. The extensive margin is

´

xΛ0t (x)ft (x)dx.

´

Λt (x)ft (x)dx,
given by EM =

The intensive margin gives the response of ination to monetary shocks

driven by rms which would adjust prices independently of the shock. The extensive margin
reects the additional ination eects which arise from changes in the mix of adjusting
rms.

In a Calvo model,

Λ0t =0

so that only the intensive margin is active.

Put slightly

dierently, knowledge of the frequency of adjustment is sucient for determining aggregate
price exibility.

In contrast, standard Ss models such as Golosov and Lucas (2007) imply

very important roles for the extensive margin. Recall that our hazard is parameterized as

Λ(x) = min(at + bt x2 , 1),

so that our framework nests a Calvo model as well as models with

strong extensive margin eects, depending on the estimated value of

b.

Thus, the relative

strength of these eects in our framework depends on the particular parameters which are
identied to match observed price change behavior.
Is the variation we nd in
movements in

IM

and

EM

EM ?

F = IM + EM

then driven mainly by movements in

IM

or

In Table 7, we rst show that there is a positive correlation between

but this correlation is far less than 1. This implies that there are signicant

movements in the extensive margin which occur independently of movements in frequency of
adjustment. We can assess the relative importance of movements in frequency versus higher
moments using a formal variance decomposition.

V AR(EM ) + 2COV (IM, EM ).

By denition,

V AR(F ) = V AR(IM ) +

If movements in price exibility are driven by movements

in the intensive margin, as in a Calvo model, then

V AR(IM )/V AR(F )

should be equal to

1. Table 7 shows that this is clearly not the case. Pure movements in the intensive margin
explain only around 20-30% of overall movements in price exibility.

If we also include

covariance terms, in which movements in the intensive margin and extensive margin amplify
each other, then the share of explained variance rises.

However, it remains the case that

30-40% of movements in price exibility are explained by independent movements in the
extensive margin.
Thus, extensive margin eects driven by changes in the distribution of price changes are
crucial for understanding price exibility in our data. It is worth stressing again that this
did not have to be the case. For certain parameters, our model nests a Calvo model where
all exibility is driven by time-variation in the frequency of adjustment. However, our model

24

Table 7: Intensive Margin and Aggregate Price Flexibility
Match Moments
corr(IM, EM )

CPI
IPP
PPI
CPI
IPP
PPI
CPI
IPP
PPI

0.68***
0.80***
0.46***
0.69***
0.61***
0.47***
0.70***
0.45***
0.49***

V AR(IM )
V AR(F )

Match Percentiles

V AR(IM )+2COV (IM,EM )
V AR(F )

corr(IM, EM )

BP Filtered

V AR(IM )
V AR(F )

V AR(IM )+2COV (IM,EM )
V AR(F )

0.22
0.15
0.17

0.61
0.52
0.61

0.69***
0.83***
0.80***

0.19
0.29
0.28

0.58
0.74
0.68

0.21
0.16
0.26

HP + MA Filtered
0.60
0.67***
0.50
0.84***
0.60
0.67***

0.20
0.30
0.32

0.59
0.76
0.71

0.24
0.31
0.35

0.57
0.77
0.76

0.17
0.22
0.31

Unltered

0.56
0.51
0.61

0.49***
0.83***
0.68***

This table assesses the contribution of the extensive margin for price exibility.

The rst two columns Match

Moments do this for the Pearson version of the model which matches centered moments while the Match Percentiles
columns do this for the version of the model which matches percentiles of the observed price distribution. In the rst
panel, series are ltered using a Baxter King (6,32,10) lter. In the second panel, series are ltered using a HodrickPrescott(1600) lter and a 3 quarter moving average. In the third panel, series are unltered but are detrended with
a quadratic trend. Correlations are computed using standard errors which are adjusted for autocorrelation using a
Newey-West correction with optimal lag length. ***=1% signicance.

prefers alternative regions of the parameter space in order to t the observed distribution
of price changes, and these alternative parameters imply a crucial role for extensive margin
eects.

Thus, our quantitative results imply that while one could exogenously calibrate a

Calvo model to match the time-series for frequency, this exercise would grossly understate
the extent of time-variation in price exibility. Higher moments of the distribution of price
changes vary across time and play a crucial role in determining exibility.

25

5

Conclusion

In this paper, we synthesized many new and existing facts on the evolution of price changes
across time using a consistent empirical methodology to simultaneously study pricing at three
stages of production. Our empirical results are unique in the variety of moments collected
as well as in the unication of moments across data sets. This simultaneous study of data
from the CPI, IPP and PPI is important: we show that several price-setting statistics are
idiosyncratic to particular stages of production. For example, patterns related to skewness
and kurtosis are quite sensitive to particular data sets. However, there are also several robust
patterns which hold across all three data sets: the frequency of adjustment and all measures
of price change dispersion are always positively correlated with each other and negatively
correlated with output.

More generally, there are large movements in the distribution of

price changes across time in each of these data sets.
While our paper is largely empirical, we also use a exible version of the Caballero and
Engel (2007)) generalized

Ss

model to summarize the implications of these complicated

pricing moments for aggregate price exibility and the eectiveness of monetary policy. While
there is a large and growing literature using structural models to explore the implications
of various pricing moments for aggregate price exibility, our paper is unique in exploring
these implications using a much broader set of moments with more minimal identifying
assumptions. Using this generalized

Ss

framework, we show that in all three data sets: 1)

Aggregate price exibility is counterycyclical and 2) The level of time-variation is signicant.
The 95th percentile of the price exibility index is often 50% or more larger than the 5th
percentile of the price exibility index. This suggests that the ecacy of monetary policy
varies signicantly over time with policy being much less eective in recessions than in booms.

26

References
Altonji, Joseph G and Lewis M Segal,
Covariance Structures,

 Small-Sample Bias in GMM Estimation of

Journal of Business & Economic Statistics, 1996, 14 (3), 353366.

Alvarez, Fernando and Francesco Lippi,  Price Setting With Menu Cost for Multiproduct Firms,

Econometrica, 2014, 82 (1), 89135.

, Hervé Le Bihan, and Francesco Lippi,
Propagation of Monetary Shocks,

Series, 2014, No. 20155.

 Small and Large Price Changes and the

National Bureau of Economic Research Working Paper

Berger, David and Joseph S Vavra,  Volatility and Pass-through,

Economic Research Working Paper Series, 2015, No. 19651.

National Bureau of

, Jon Faust, John H. Rogers, and Kai Steverson,  Border prices and retail prices,

Journal of International Economics, sep 2012, 88 (1), 6273.

Bils, Mark,  Do Higher Prices for New Goods Reect Quality Growth or Ination?,

Quarterly Journal of Economics, may 2009, 124 (2), 637675.

The

Bloom, Nicholas, Max Floetotto, Nir Jaimovich, Itay Saporta-eksten, and
Stephen J Terry,  Really Uncertain Business Cycles, NBER Working Paper #18245,
2012.

Caballero, Ricardo J. and E. M R Engel,  Price Stickiness in Ss Models:
erties,

and

unpublished, MIT, 2006.

Basic Prop-

,  Price stickiness in Ss models: New interpretations of old results,

Monetary Economics, 2007, 54 (SUPPL.), 100121.

Journal of

Caplin, Andrew S and Daniel F Spulber,  Menu Costs and the Neutrality of Money,

The Quarterly Journal of Economics, nov 1987, 102 (4), 703725.

Chu, Ba H., Kim P Huynh, David Jacho-Chavez, and Oleksiy Kryvtsov,

 Func-

tional Principal Component Analysis of Density Families with Complex Survey Data on
UK Prices,

Working Paper, 2015.

27

Eichenbaum, Martin, Nir Jaimovich, and Sergio Rebelo,

 Reference Prices, Costs,

American Economic Review, 2011, 101 (1), 234262.
Golosov, M and Robert E. Lucas,  Menu Costs and Phillips Curves, Journal of Political
Economy, apr 2007, 115 (2), 171199.
and Nominal Rigidities,

Gopinath, Gita and Oleg Itskhoki,  Frequency of Price Adjustment and Pass-Through,

The Quarterly Journal of Economics, may 2010, 125 (2), 675727.
and Roberto Rigobon,  Sticky Borders, The Quarterly Journal of Economics, may
2008, 123 (2), 531575.

Guvenen, Fatih, Ozkan Serdar, and Jae Song,  The Nature of Countercyclical Income
Risk,

Journal of Political Economy, jun 2014, 122 (3), 621660.

Kehoe, Patrick and Virgiliu Midrigan,  Prices are sticky after all, Journal of Monetary

Economics, oct 2015, 75, 3553.

Klenow, Peter J. and Benjamin A. Malin,  Microeconomic Evidence on Price-Setting,
in Handbook of Monetary Economics, Vol. 3 2010, pp. 231284.

Midrigan, Virgiliu, Is Firm Pricing State or Time Dependent?
ufacturing,

Review of Economics and Statistics, 2010.

Evidence from U.S. Man-

,  Menu Costs, Multiproduct Firms, and Aggregate Fluctuations,

Econometrica, 2011, 79

(4), 11391180.

Nakamura, Emi and Jón Steinsson,  Five Facts about Prices:

A Reevaluation of Menu

The Quarterly Journal of Economics, nov 2008, 123 (4), 14151464.
and ,  Monetary Non-neutrality in a Multisector Menu Cost Model, The Quarterly
Journal of Economics, aug 2010, 125 (3), 9611013.
Neiman, B,  Stickiness, synchronization, and passthrough in intrarm trade prices, Journal
of Monetary Economics, 2010, 57 (3), 295308.
Cost Models,

Vavra, Joseph,  Ination Dynamics and Time-Varying Volatility:

New Evidence and an Ss

The Quarterly Journal of Economics, sep 2014, 129 (1), 215258.
Woodford, Michael, Interest and Prices, Princeton University Press, 2003.
Interpretation*,

28

Appendix
This appendix provides a number of robustness checks and results which are suppressed
from the body of the text. In Table 1 in the body of the text, we report a number of statistics
on the business cycle properties of price moments. We prefer these measures both because
they are less sensitive to slight changes in the timing of recessions, and more importantly,
because we do not have a large number of recessions in our data set. Using more general
correlations with output allows us to exploit much more variation.

Nevertheless, Table 8

shows that similar conclusions are obtained when regressing price-setting statistics on recession dummies. For these specications, we do not perform any ltering beyond a simple
quadratic detrending, so they are most comparable to Unltered panel in Table 1.

The

coecients in these tables are reported in units which reect the proportionate change in
statistics during recessions relative to average. For example, in CPI data, during recessions
the frequency of adjustment is 20% above the average over the whole sample.

Table 8: Regression of pricing moments on recession dummies
Freq
XSD
IQR
90-10
Skew Q-Skew Kurt Q-Kurt Obs
CPI 0.20*** 0.19*** 0.33*** 0.24***
-0.58
-0.06
-0.28** -0.08** 96
IPP
0.05
0.10*** 0.12** 0.12*** 1.62*** 9.32** -0.013
0.004
71
PPI
0.10
0.11**
0.11
0.118**
0.23
-0.40
-0.07
-0.005 125
Data is quadratically detrended but otherwise unltered. Coecients represent the relative change
in recessions: (Recession Value / Average Value)-1. *=10%, **=5%, ***1% signicance.
Tables 9 and 10 extend the analysis in Tables 1 and 2 to a number of additional pricing
percentiles. (See also Figure 1 in the text). We concentrate on centered moments in the text
since they are more easily interpretable, but the various percentiles in Table 9 and Table 10
are less sensitive to outliers and could potentially be useful targets for business cycle models.
In Table 5 in the text, we present results for a version of our pricing model which targets
these percentiles instead of the pricing moments in Table 1 and show that we obtain similar
conclusions.

29

Table 9: Business Cycle Correlations of Percentiles of the Price Change Distribution
p1

p5

p10

p25

p375

p50

p625

p75

p90

p95

p99

Obs

BP Filtered
CPI

0.36**

0.65***

0.58***

0.63***

0.58***

0.34***

0.25**

-0.00

-0.15

-0.38**

0.15

76

IPP

0.38*

0.64***

0.65***

0.58***

0.49***

0.42***

0.33***

0.28**

0.17

0.01

-0.22

51

PPI

0.36**

0.54***

0.55***

0.46***

0.39***

0.43***

0.34***

0.17

-0.09

-0.13

-0.01

105

HP + MA Filtered
CPI

0.33***

0.60***

0.57***

0.56***

0.52***

0.28**

0.11

-0.12

-0.21***

-0.37***

0.06

96

IPP

0.48**

0.62***

0.64***

0.57***

0.50***

0.44***

0.35***

0.27*

0.16

0.05

-0.08

71

PPI

0.30*

0.36**

0.39**

0.35***

0.28***

0.34***

0.33***

0.17*

-0.03

-0.07

0.04

125

Unltered
CPI

0.22***

0.46***

0.46**

0.38**

0.36**

0.17*

0.05

-0.06

-0.13

-0.18*

0.00

96

IPP

0.37*

0.48**

0.52**

0.48**

0.40*

0.34*

0.28

0.21

0.16

0.02

-0.05

71

PPI

0.22

0.20

0.21

0.16*

0.11

0.14*

0.14

0.00

-0.07

-0.06

-0.01

125

Each cell displays the correlation of a particular pricing moment in a particular data set with GDP growth. BP uses
a baxter king(6,32,10) lter. HP+MA uses a hodrick-prescott lter with smoothing parameter 1600 and a 3 quarter
moving average.

Unltered data uses no lters but detrends series using a quadratic trend.

All data is quarterly.

Standard errors are computed using a Newey-West correction with optimal lag length. *=10%, **=5%, ***=at least
1% signicance.

30

Table 10: Correlations of Percentiles of the Price Change Distribution with the Frequency of Adjustment
p1

p5

p10

p25

p375

p50

p625

p75

p90

p95

p99

Obs

BP Filtered
CPI

-0.13

-0.51***

-0.37**

-0.41*

-0.35

-0.20

-0.04

0.30*

0.35***

0.56***

0.03

76

IPP

-0.43**

-0.40**

-0.40**

-0.33*

-0.23

-0.21

-0.14

-0.04

-0.08

0.00

0.42***

51

PPI

-0.28*

-0.18*

-0.27**

-0.30**

-0.26*

-0.23

-0.19

-0.02

0.24*

0.14

-0.23*

105

HP + MA Filtered
CPI

-0.19

-0.48***

-0.35**

-0.34*

-0.30*

-0.15

0.08

0.38***

0.30**

0.42***

-0.13

IPP

-0.21

-0.22

-0.21

-0.16

-0.10

-0.09

-0.06

-0.02

-0.05

-0.06

0.04

96
71

PPI

-0.11

-0.03

-0.14

-0.17*

-0.14

-0.15

-0.11

0.08

0.27**

0.20**

-0.13

125

0.22***

0.24***

-0.10

96

0.02

-0.03

0.01

71

0.29***

0.19**

-0.07

125

Unltered
CPI

-0.02

-0.34***

-0.28**

-0.23*

-0.17

-0.05

0.08

0.25**

IPP

-0.16

-0.14

-0.12

-0.06

0.00

0.03

0.04

0.04

PPI

-0.00

0.05

-0.05

-0.06

0.01

0.02

0.03

0.22*

Each cell displays the correlation of a particular pricing moment in a particular data set with GDP growth. BP uses
a baxter king(6,32,10) lter. HP+MA uses a hodrick-prescott lter with smoothing parameter 1600 and a 3 quarter
moving average.

Unltered data uses no lters but detrends series using a quadratic trend.

All data is quarterly.

Standard errors are computed using a Newey-West correction with optimal lag length. *=10%, **=5%, ***=at least
1% signicance.

31

All results in the body of the paper are reported using quarterly data since this is the
frequency with which GDP is measured and is less sensitive to high frequency noise. However,
the raw pricing data is available monthly, so Tables 11 and 12 repeat our analysis at the
monthly frequency, using industrial production instead of GDP as our measure of the business
cycle.

Table 11: Business Cycle Correlations of Pricing Moments: Monthly
Freq

XSD

IQR

90-10

CPI
IPP
PPI

-0.57***
-0.20
-0.23**

-0.71***
-0.44**
-0.57***

-0.76***
-0.42*
-0.37**

CPI
IPP
PPI

-0.47***
-0.35***
-0.15*

-0.60***
-0.52***
-0.36**

CPI
IPP
PPI

-0.12**
-0.01
-0.13**

-0.33***
-0.33***
-0.19**

Skew

Robust-Skew

Kurt

Robust-Kurt

Obs

BP Filtered
-0.63*** 0.18**
0.15
-0.48*** 0.26**
0.55***
-0.57*** 0.08
0.07

0.37***
0.07
0.26

0.37**
-0.22
-0.21

222
147
306

-0.62***
-0.59***
-0.27**

HP +
-0.56***
-0.56***
-0.39***

0.28***
0.10
0.12

0.25**
0.13
-0.13

288
213
372

-0.33**
-0.38**
-0.17***

-0.34***
-0.37***
-0.18**

0.14***
0.08
0.01

0.06
-0.00
-0.00

288
213
372

MA Filtered
0.15**
0.16**
0.32*** 0.49***
0.10
0.01

Unltered
0.07
0.20***
0.06

0.06
0.19**
-0.03

Each cell displays the correlation of a particular pricing moment in a particular data set with industrial production
growth.

BP uses a baxter king(18,96,33) lter.

HP+MA uses a hodrick-prescott lter with smoothing parameter

129,600 and a 5 month moving average. Unltered data uses no lters but detrends series using a quadratic trend. All
data is monthly. Robust-Skew=

(P90 +P10 −2P50 )/((P90 −P10 ). Robust-Kurt = (P90 −P62.5 +P37.5 −P10 )/((P75 −P25 ).

Standard errors are computed using a Newey-West correction with optimal lag length. *=10%, **=5%, ***=at least
1% signicance.

32

Table 12: Correlation of Pricing Moments with Frequency of Adjustment: Monthly
XSD

IQR

90-10

Skew

Robust-Skew

BP Filtered

CPI
IPP
PPI

0.54*** 0.56*** 0.47**
0.32** 0.37** 0.31**
0.38*** 0.41** 0.38**

0.14 0.21
-0.12 -0.30**
-0.12 0.39**

CPI
IPP
PPI

0.41*** 0.43*** 0.34*** -0.12 0.05
0.16
0.23
0.24
-0.19 -0.21
0.18** 0.26*
0.26** -0.00 0.17**

CPI
IPP
PPI

0.24*** 0.28*** 0.25*** 0.01
0.03
0.10
0.13*
0.02
0.04
0.14
0.11*
0.08

HP + MA Filtered

Unltered

-0.03
-0.05
0.10**

Kurt

Robust-Kurt

Obs

-0.52*** -0.38
-0.04
-0.04
0.03
0.07

222
147
307

-0.35*** -0.33**
-0.25*
0.06
-0.06
0.15*

288
213
373

-0.23*** -0.12
-0.20** 0.07
-0.07
0.06

288
213
373

Each cell displays the correlation of the frequency of adjustment in a particular data set with the corresponding
moment in the same data set. BP uses a baxter king(6,32,10) lter. BP uses a baxter king(18,96,33) lter. HP+MA
uses a hodrick-prescott lter with smoothing parameter 129,600 and a 5 month moving average. Unltered data uses no
lters but detrends series using a quadratic trend. All data is monthly. Robust-Skew=
Robust-Kurt

= (P90 − P62.5 + P37.5 − P10 )/((P75 − P25 ).

(P90 +P10 −2P50 )/((P90 −P10 ).

Standard errors are computed using a Newey-West correction

with optimal lag length. *=10%, **=5%, ***=at least 1% signicance.

33

Table 13 displays the mean parameters and goodness of t for our primary pricing model
whose results are shown in Table 4.

Table 13:

Mean Parameter Values and Goodness of Fit
Parameters

Fit

mean

xsd

skew

kurtosis

slope

intercept

mean squared error

std. dev errors

0.0008

0.042

0.016

6.74

16.01

0.026

0.014

0.01

IPP

0.0043

0.053

0.081

9.78

22.25

0.043

0.0085

0.005

PPI

0.0047

0.050

-0.038

6.87

46.44

0.093

0.037

0.19

CPI

34

