PIKETTY'S BOOK AND MACRO MODELS OF WEALTH
INEQUALITY
Mariacristina De Nardi
Giulio Fella
Fang Yang
WORKING PAPER 21730

NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

PIKETTY'S BOOK AND MACRO MODELS OF WEALTH INEQUALITY
Mariacristina De Nardi
Giulio Fella
Fang Yang
Working Paper 21730
http://www.nber.org/papers/w21730
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
November 2015

Fella is grateful to UCL for their generous hospitality while he was working on this paper. We thank
Devesh Raval, Matthew Rognlie, Emmanuel Saez, and Marshall Steinbaum for comments. The views
expressed herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau
of Economic Research, any agency of the Federal Government, or the Federal Reserve Bank of Chicago.
This paper has been written as a chapter for the book “The Global Ramifications of Thomas Piketty's
Capital in the 21st Century,” edited by Heather Boushey, Bradford DeLong, and Marshall Steinbaum.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peerreviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.
© 2015 by Mariacristina De Nardi, Giulio Fella, and Fang Yang. All rights reserved. Short sections
of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full
credit, including © notice, is given to the source.

Piketty's Book and Macro Models of Wealth Inequality
Mariacristina De Nardi, Giulio Fella, and Fang Yang
NBER Working Paper No. 21730
November 2015, Revised December 2015
JEL No. D14,E21,H2
ABSTRACT
Piketty's book, Capital in the Twenty-First Century, discusses several factors affecting wealth inequality:
rates of return on capital, output growth rates, tax progressivity, top income shares, and heterogeneity
in saving rates and inheritances. This paper studies the role of various forces affecting savings in quantitative
models of wealth inequality, discusses their successes and failures in accounting for the observed facts,
and compares these model's implications with Piketty's conclusions.
Mariacristina De Nardi
Federal Reserve Bank of Chicago
230 South LaSalle St.
Chicago, IL 60604
and University College London
and Institute For Fiscal Studies - IFS
and also NBER
denardim@nber.org
Giulio Fella
Mile End Road
London E1 4NS, UK
g.fella@qmul.ac.uk

Fang Yang
Louisiana State University
Department of Economics, 2322
Business Education Complex,
Nicholson Extension
Baton Rouge, LA 70803
fyang@lsu.edu

1

Introduction

Piketty’s “Capital in the Twenty-First Century” is, in the author’s own words, “...primarily
a book about the history of the distribution of income and wealth.” It documents the
evolution of the distributions of income and wealth since the Industrial Revolution for a
significant number of countries and offers a framework to account for the common patterns
of the long-run evolution of within-country wealth inequality across a number of developed
economies.
This chapter takes stock of the existing literature on models of wealth inequality through
the lens of the facts and ideas in Piketty’s book and highlights both what we have learned
so far and what we still need to learn in order to reach more definitive conclusions on the
mechanisms shaping wealth concentration. Differently from the chapter by Devesh Raval
which discusses the determinants of between inequality related to the division of aggregate
income between capital and labor, this chapter deals with the distribution of wealth; i.e.,
with inequality within wealth.
The chapter starts by introducing some important stylized facts about the distribution
of wealth (Section 2), which are:
1. Wealth is highly concentrated. Its distribution is highly skewed with a long right tail.
2. Overall, there is significant mobility within the wealth distribution, both within an
individual lifetime and across generations. Wealth mobility is substantially lower,
though, at the top and the bottom of the distribution.
3. Wealth concentration—the share of aggregate wealth in the hands of the richest people—
displays a U shape, trending downward for most of the twentieth century and then
increasing from the 1980s onward.
The chapter then turns (Section 3) to a discussion of the main mechanisms affecting
wealth inequality according to Piketty’s book. More specifically, the book stresses the im2

portance of the difference between the post-tax rate of return on capital and the rate of
aggregate output growth as the crucial force shaping wealth concentration.1 The book also
discusses, to a lesser extent, the role of tax progressivity, top income shares, and heterogeneity in saving rates and inheritances.
Section 4 presents a simple framework to better understand and categorize various mechanisms behind individual wealth accumulation that can account for wealth inequality. From
there, the chapter moves onto surveying the existing macroeconomic literature on wealth
inequality with an emphasis on the forces that hold most promise to account for the high
degree of wealth concentration observed in the data (Sections 5 and 6).
More specifically, in Section 5 we discuss the (mostly analytical) literature aiming to
account for the observation that the right tail of the wealth distribution is well approximated by a Pareto distribution. This strand of the literature provides the main theoretical
underpinning for the mechanism, emphasized in Piketty’s book, according to which wealth
concentration increases with the difference between the average net rate of return on wealth
r and the trend rate of growth of aggregate output g. Multiplicative random shocks to the
wealth accumulation process are the main mechanism that generates wealth concentration in
this class of models. While Piketty sees the rate of output growth as unambiguously reducing
wealth concentration, according to some of these models output growth due to total factor
productivity (TFP) increases can either reduce or increase wealth concentration depending
on the environment.
For reasons of analytic tractability, with the exception of Benhabib, Bisin and Zhu (2015)
and Aoki and Nirei (2015), the literature on models with multiplicative shocks abstracts
from endogenous heterogeneity in saving rates and endogenous rates of return—in the form
of entrepreneurial income—as a source of persistence in saving rates. Furthermore, it does
not consider life cycle aspects and non-homotheticity in bequest behavior that affect wealth
accumulation across generations and are important to explain why rich people have higher
1

In this respect, Piketty writes (p. 25) “In a sense, it sums up the overall logic of my conclusions.”

3

saving rates during both their working life and retirement (Dynan, Skinner and Zeldes 2004).
Endogenous heterogeneity in saving to insure against earnings and expenditure shocks
(including, possibly, medical and nursing home expenditures during retirement) is instead at
the center of the quantitative models that we discuss in Section 6. The comparative advantage of this literature is its emphasis on understanding the forces that shape differences in
saving behavior and rates of return and on quantifying the importance of such heterogeneity
in accounting for wealth inequality in rich quantitative models. The section argues that previous work has convincingly emphasized that entrepreneurial activity, voluntary bequests,
heterogeneity in preferences across families, and compensation risk for top earners can help
explain the high degree of wealth concentration. However, it is not clear to what extent each
of these forces quantitatively contributes to wealth inequality because, at least so far, most
of these forces have been studied in isolation. There is also much work to do in determining
to what extent these quantitative frameworks can match the observed large differences in
wealth inequality both across countries and over time.
To go from the static understanding of what determines inequality at a point in time to
how inequality changes over time, Section 7 studies the smaller literature that analyzes the
transitional dynamics of the wealth distribution.
To quantitatively assess Piketty’s conjecture that changes in the difference between the
post-tax rate of return on wealth and the rate of output growth may drive the evolution of
wealth concentration, Section 8 performs some numerical simulations in a rich quantitative
model that generates the observed inequality in both wealth and earnings. It shows that
the effect of the rate of return on wealth concentration is small and that it is essential to
distinguish between TFP and population when considering the effects of the output growth
rate. While the effect of the TFP growth rate is symmetric to that of the rate of return—
both have a small effect on wealth inequality—changes in the rate of population growth have
a very large effect on wealth concentration. Thus, the rate of return on capital and the rate
4

of output growth are not perfect substitutes in their effect on wealth concentration when
output growth is due to population growth.
We conclude with a discussion of fruitful areas for future research in Section 9.

2

Stylized facts

It is well established that the cross-sectional wealth distribution is right-skewed, unlike the
normal distribution, and that its right tail is well approximated by a Pareto distribution.
A Pareto distribution implies a linear relationship between the logarithm of wealth w and
the logarithm of the proportion of individuals P (w) with wealth above w.2 Figure 2 plots
this relationship for the top 10 percent of the wealth distribution in a selected number of
countries, with the circles denoting the actual observations and the dashed and solid lines
the fitted Pareto model for respectively the 10 and 1 percent of the distribution.

Figure 1: Pareto tails for selected countries: actual values (circles) and average slopes over the top
10 (dashed line) and 1 (solid line) percent of the distribution (source: Cowell 2011).

The evidence that wealth is much more concentrated than labor earnings and income is
vast. Wold and Whittle (1957) cite early evidence for the U.S. More recently, this fact has
been documented by Atkinson (1983), Wolff (1998) and Wolff (1992), Kennickell (2003),
2

It was this very observation that prompted Pareto to propose his eponymous distribution (Pareto 1897).

5

Dı́az-Giménez, Quadrini and Rı́os-Rull (1997), and Rodriguez, Dı́az-Giménez, Quadrini and
Rı́os-Rull (2002).
How wealth is distributed at a point in time is important, but equally important is
how much churning there is within the distribution, both at the individual/household level
and across generations. At the individual level, Hurst, Luoh and Stafford (1998) document
significant mobility across the 20-80 percentile range in the U.S. (they use the Panel Study
of Income Dynamics (PSID) data over the period 1984-94), but substantial persistence in
the top and bottom deciles. For these two groups, the probability of remaining in the same
decile ranged between 40 and 60 percent, depending on the sub-periods.3 This latter finding
implies that 60 percent of total wealth—the share owned by the top decile in Hurst et al.
(1998)—is quite persistent.
Concerning the evidence on inter-generational wealth mobility, Mulligan (1997) estimates
an elasticity of children’s to parents’ wealth for the U.S. between 0.32 and 0.43. Charles and
Hurst (2003) find a value of 0.37 in the PSID, which falls to 0.17 when controlling for
children’s age, education, and income. Due to data limitations,4 these estimates are for the
inter-generational wealth elasticity for parent-child pairs in which parents are still alive, i.e.,
before the transfer of bequests. For this reason, they possibly underestimate the overall
degree of inter-generational wealth persistence. This problem is addressed in the studies
by Adermon, Lindahl and Waldenström (2015) for Sweden, Boserup, Kopczuk and Kreiner
(2015) for Denmark, and Clark and Cummins (2015) for England and Wales, all using wealth
data spanning more than one generation. The first two studies use wealth tax data; Adermon
et al. (2015) find a parent-child rank correlation of 0.3 to 0.4, while Boserup et al. (2015)
estimate a wealth elasticity between 0.4 and 0.5. Clark and Cummins (2015) instead exploit
a long (1858-2012) panel of families with rare surnames whose wealth is observed at death
3

Klevmarken, Lupton and Stafford (2003) find that overall wealth-quintile mobility, though not wealth
inequality, in Sweden is comparable to that in the U.S.
4
The age of children in Mulligan’s (1997) sample is below 35, while the number of parent-child pairs in
which both parents have died is very small in Charles and Hurst’s (2003) sample.

6

and find an inter-generational elasticity of 0.4-0.5 for the subsample in which they can match
parents and children and about 0.7 when grouping individuals by surname cohort.
Overall, the evidence of significant wealth mobility suggests that shocks to economic
circumstances are an important determinant of wealth dynamics. This feature lies at the
heart of a large literature, surveyed in Section 6, that emphasizes wealth accumulation as a
way to smooth consumption in the face of idiosyncratic shocks to income.
A third important feature of the wealth distribution is its evolution over time. Until
recently, studies documenting the evolution of wealth inequality over time were few and
covered relative short time spans.5 One important contribution of Piketty’s book is to bring
together a number of recent studies and document the evolution of the wealth distribution
since the Industrial Revolution for a significant number of countries. The main finding,
common to the various countries, is that the share of aggregate wealth in the hands of the
richest people displays a U-shaped curve starting from very high levels at the beginning of
the twentieth century, falling dramatically during the two World Wars to reach its minimum,
typically between the the Second World War and the 1970s, and then increasing again from
the 1980s onwards (see Figure 2).
There is some debate over the actual magnitude of the increase in the share of wealth
held by the top 1 percent of the distribution since the 80s. Figure 2 reports the estimates
from tax data in Saez and Zucman (2015) that imply that the share has increased by about
13 percentage points, effectively reverting to its 1930 peak. Estimates from the SCF imply a
substantially smaller increase of about 5 percentage points.6 Despite the uncertainty around
the actual magnitude of the increase, understanding its causes and likely future evolution
have become an important research topic. Section 7 discusses the extent to which alternative
models of wealth inequality can account for the evolution of top wealth concentration.
5
Early efforts to document the evolution of the wealth distribution in the twentieth century are Lampman
(1962) for the U.S. and Atkinson and Harrison (1983) for the UK.
6
Kopczuk (2015) discusses differences among the available estimates and possible explanations for their
divergence.

7

Figure 2: The evolution of wealth inequality in Europe and the United States (source: Piketty and
Zucman 2014).

3

Piketty’s mechanisms

Piketty’s book offers a framework—rooted in the Pareto-tail literature surveyed in Section
5—to explain the evolution of wealth inequality in the course of the twentieth century.
According to this framework, wealth inequality increases with the difference between the net
of tax average rate of return on wealth r̄ and the trend rate of growth of aggregate output g.
This mechanism is consistent with the simultaneous fall in wealth concentration and (r̄ − g)
over the course of the twentieth century. Between 1914 and the 1980s, the after-tax rate of
return of capital fell both as a result of the capital losses stemming from the Great Depression
and the two World Wars and as a result of the progressive tax policies that have their roots
in the shocks of the 1914-1945 period. At the same time, the rate of output growth over the
second half of the twentieth century was dramatically larger that at the beginning of the
century.
The intuition behind this “(r̄ − g)” mechanism is that a higher rate of return r̄ increases
the rate at which existing wealth is capitalized, amplifying any initial heterogeneity in the
wealth distribution. On the other hand, a higher rate of growth g increases the rate of
8

accumulation of “new” wealth through saving out of labor earnings, which tends to reduce
inequality. Whether existing wealth has been saved by current generations or inherited from
previous ones, a higher rate of return increases the importance of wealth relative to current
labor income.
Though this mechanism plays an important role in Piketty’s book and has drawn a lot of
attention, the book mentions other important forces. The first force—related to the previous
one because it affects the inter-generational rate of of wealth accumulation—is inheritance,
both of financial and human wealth, and its interplay with demographics.
A second one is the heterogeneity of rates of return and the fact that wealthy people, who
invest large amounts of capital, typically obtain higher returns, for instance because they
can take on riskier and less liquid investments, or because they have bigger incentives to hire
financial managers and, more generally, to spend time and money to obtain higher returns.
In addition, there is also heterogeneity in saving rates, with people with higher initial wealth
saving more.
Another important aspect discussed in the book is the rise of the super-managers—highlevel managers—whose share of profits has increased faster than anyone else’s, especially
in the United States. The book argues that this is an important source underpinning the
observed increase in inequality in total income. It should be noted that the United States is
also the country in which wealth inequality increased the fastest over the same time period.
Finally, the book highlights the importance of government taxes, transfers, and government regulations such as the minimum wage, and market structure in affecting income and
wealth inequality across countries and over time for a given country.

4

Accounting for wealth concentration

We now introduce a simple accounting framework, originally due to Meade (1964), to better
organize our discussion both of Piketty’s (r − g) insight and of the literature on the de9

terminants of wealth inequality. To this end, consider an economy in which the aggregate
capital stock grows at the exogenous rate g. At birth, individuals are endowed with a possibly individual-specific fraction of the contemporaneous, aggregate capital stock. The only
source of income in the economy is an idiosyncratic rate of return on individual wealth.
In a given period, individual wealth, normalized by the average capital stock, accrues at
the exponential rate rti − g + sit , where rti is the realized rate of return for individual i of
current age t and sit is the ratio between the individual’s flow of (dis)saving7 and her wealth
at the beginning of the period. In this economy, there are three main forces that shape the
distribution of individual wealth normalized by the average capital stock.
1. The individual history of saving rates sit , or equivalently the average saving rate over an
individual’s lifetime. Ceteris paribus, individuals with a higher average lifetime saving
rate have accumulated wealth at a faster rate.
2. The individual history of the growth adjusted rate of return rti − g, or equivalently its
average rate over the individual’s lifetime. Ceteris paribus, individuals with a larger
average lifetime return—i.e., a history of high intra-period returns—have seen their
wealth grow faster than individuals with a low average return. Conversely, for a given
cross-sectional distribution of individual returns rti , a higher rate of growth g reduces
the rate of growth of normalized individual wealth, by reducing the rate at which
individual wealth grows relative to the aggregate economy.
3. The distribution of wealth at birth. Even abstracting from individual differences in
rates of return and saving rates, the wealth differential between two individuals within
the same cohort born with heterogeneous wealth endowments increases with age at the
common rate of accumulation. An increase in the difference between the common rate
of return r and the growth rate g increases this rate of divergence.
7

To be precise the flow of saving out of non-capital income equals minus the flow of consumption in the
present setup with zero non-capital income.

10

This last effect captures the essence of Piketty’s (r − g) insight. For given saving rates,
the power of exponential compounding suggests that the persistent changes in the difference
(r − g), increase substantially the rate of divergence in the wealth distribution. Therefore,
“growth or multiplicative” effects are crucial to account for why a minority of individuals
hold a disproportionate share of aggregate wealth. This basic mechanism lies at the heart of
the, mostly analytical, literature on multiplicative models of wealth accumulation surveyed
in Section 5.

5

Analytical models generating Pareto tails in the wealth
distribution

Since Pareto, this feature of the wealth distribution has been further documented and has
motivated a number of studies proposing economic mechanisms generating a wealth distribution with a right Pareto tail.
These mechanisms require multiplicative random shocks to the wealth accumulation process and fall into two main categories. The first type requires individual wealth to grow
exponentially at some—positive—average rate until an exponentially distributed stopping
time (e.g., death). In the absence of intergenerational transmission of wealth, this class
of models8 implies, counterfactually, that all wealth heterogeneity is between, rather than
within, age cohorts. The individuals with higher wealth are the survivors from older cohorts
that have accumulated wealth over a longer horizon. Allowing for (stochastic) intergenerational transmission of wealth, as in Benhabib and Bisin (2006), introduces additional
heterogeneity: within a cohort, individuals belonging to a dynasty with a longer history of
bequests are wealthier. To sum up, the general mechanism implies that the Pareto coefficient
that indexes the thickness of the right tail of the distribution of wealth (relative to the size
8

Wold and Whittle (1957) is an early example featuring an exogenous rate of wealth accumulation. The
latter is endogenized in the optimizing models of Benhabib and Bisin (2006) and Jones (2015).

11

of the economy) is increasing in the growth rate of individual wealth relative to aggregate
wealth, and decreasing in the probability of death and in those forces, such as redistributive
estate taxation, that compress the wealth distribution at birth.
The second type of mechanism generating Pareto tails is, to some extent, conceptually
opposite to the previous one and requires that the exponential rate of growth of individual wealth follows an appropriate stochastic process with a negative mean. The negative
mean growth rate implies that, on average, individual wealth reverts to the mean of the
distribution. Yet, the lucky few with a long history of (above average) positive rates of
wealth growth escape this mean reversion force and accumulate large fortunes. Some inflow
mechanism—e.g., transfers, positive additive income shocks, precautionary saving, and/or
borrowing constraints—is necessary to provide a reflecting barrier that ensures that the mean
of the wealth distribution is bounded away from zero. Models in this class9 generate both
within- and between- cohort inequality. They imply that the Pareto coefficient is larger: (1)
the larger the variance of shocks, which increases the probability of long histories of positive
shocks; (2) the weaker the offsetting inflow mechanism, which increases the mean of the
stationary distribution.
In common with the first class of models, they imply that wealth concentration, as
measured by the Pareto coefficient, is decreasing in the rate of wealth mean reversion; i.e.,
it is increasing in the average rate of growth of individual relative to aggregate wealth. Such
a rate equals the sum, on the one hand, of the difference (r̄ − g) between the average posttax rate of return r̄ and the rate of aggregate growth and, on the other hand, the average
ratio sw between saving out of non-capital income and wealth. The logic of exponential
growth implies that, in all models with multiplicative shocks, small variations in (r̄ − g) or
s̄w generate large changes in the Pareto coefficient.
Benhabib et al. (2011) build a partial equilibrium, overlapping-generation model with
9

Champernowne (1953) is an early, purely statistical, contribution. Benhabib, Bisin and Zhu (2011),
Benhabib et al. (2015), Aoki and Nirei (2015), Piketty and Zucman (2014), and Gabaix, Lasry, Lions and
Moll (2015) exploit the original insight in the context of economic models with optimizing agents.

12

a (homothetic) bequest motive in which individuals are born with idiosyncratic and independently distributed (i.i.d) earnings and rates of return to wealth, which remain constant
over an individual’s lifetime. They find that in their framework it is rate of return socks
rather than earnings shocks across individuals that affect the shape of the right tail of the
stationary wealth distribution. This is best understood in the case in which individuals have
logarithmic preferences and wealth bequeathed equals a common share of wealth at birth but
capitalized at the individual-specific rates of return. Wealthy dynasties have a long history
of above average rates of return. This mechanism is isomorphic to the model in Piketty
and Zucman (2014), where each generation draws a bequest share and wealthy dynasties
have a long history of above average draws. For this reason, capital and bequest taxes can
significantly reduce wealth inequality, the former through its effect on the net rates of return
and the latter through the share of wealth that is transferred from one generation to the
other. The propensity to leave bequests has a similar effect.
Benhabib et al. (2015) and Aoki and Nirei (2015) show that a similar mechanism generates
a wealth distribution with an (asympotically) Pareto right tail in the general equilibrium
of a Bewley model in which, in addition to the usual additive earnings risk, individuals
face idiosyncratic multiplicative rate-of-return risk, in the form of shocks to their backyard
production technology and can self-insure by lending and borrowing up to a limit, using a
risk-free asset. The introduction of individual-specific risk introduces a precautionary saving
motive that is absent from all the models discussed above. Yet, as wealth gets large enough,
the precautionary saving motive goes to zero, as individuals can perfectly insure against
the (bounded) earnings risk and saving is linear in wealth. Therefore, the multiplicative
rate-of-return shock tends to dominate the distribution of wealth at high levels.
Because the presence of a borrowing constraint makes it difficult to characterize the
Pareto coefficient in closed form, Aoki and Nirei (2015) use numerical simulations to confirm
some of the insights from Benhabib et al. (2011) in such a fremework, but also obtain
13

some new results. First, they show that the presence of a precautionary saving motive
implies that an increase in additive earnings risk reduces the thickness of the right tail of the
wealth distribution by increasing the (precautionary) saving of low-wealth relative to highwealth individuals. They also find that, contrary to the intuition from partial equilibrium
models, an increase in the rate of TFP growth (which is zero in Benhabib et al. (2011) and
Benhabib et al. (2015)) has the effect of increasing, rather than reducing, wealth inequality.
In general equilibrium, a higher rate of TFP growth increases the steady-state capital stock,
thus reducing the average return to detrended capital and reducing inequality. On the other
hand, higher TFP growth increases the variability of the idiosyncratic return to the backyard
technology, thus increasing inequality. This second effect prevails and implies that higher
TFP growth increases inequality, as measured by the Pareto coefficient.
A similar reversal of the partial equilibrium insight into the effect of TFP growth on
wealth inequality is also in Jones (2015), who studies a version of Blanchard-Yaari’s model
with logarithmic preferences and accidental bequests distributed uniformly to newborns. The
model generates a Pareto wealth distribution across cohorts through a deterministic, positive
growth rate of individual wealth. In general equilibrium, the Pareto coefficient is independent
of the rate of TFP growth and is fully determined by the demographic parameters.
The results in Aoki and Nirei (2015) and Jones (2015) suggest that a negative relationship
between the rate of growth and wealth concentration is not a robust features of models with
multiplicative shocks in general equilibrium.

6

Bewley models

In this framework, precautionary saving against earnings risk is the key force driving wealth
concentration. However, the strength of the precautionary motive for saving declines with
wealth relative to labor earnings; it declines with one’s ability to self-insure against earnings
risk. It follows that if agents are impatient—a necessary condition to ensure stationarity
14

of the wealth distribution—the saving rate is positive below, and turns negative above, the
(target) value of networth relative to labor earnings for which the precautionary saving
motive is exactly offset by impatience. Hence, the saving rate in these models is declining
in wealth.
In contrast, Saez and Zucman (2015), among others, find that saving rates tend to rise
with wealth, with the bottom 90 percent of wealth holders saving on average 3 percent of
their income, compared with 15 percent for the next 9 percent and 20-25 percent for the
top 1 percent of wealth holders. The basic version of the model thus fails to generate the
high concentration of wealth in the hands of the richest few—and therefore the emergence
and persistence of their very large estates—because it misses the fact that rich people keep
saving at high rates.
Saving behavior crucially depends on rates of return, patience, and earnings risk. High
rates of return tend to increase savings. However, rates of return are not exogenous, which
raises the question of how rates of return are determined, especially at the top of the wealth
distribution. For entrepreneurs, they are endogenous as a result of the decision to start a
business and of the share of their wealth invested in their own risky activity; and for investors
they are endogenous as a result of portfolio choice.
Patience is not only affected by how much people discount their utility from future
consumption, but also by whether households care about leaving bequests to others after
their own death and even how long they expect to live.
Taken together, the two points above imply that, if people differ in their patience and
risk tolerance, they might also select into different occupations and portfolio compositions
and thus different returns, which will be correlated with their patience and risk attitude. As
a result, more patient and less risk-averse people will take on riskier positions; and while
some of them will fail, some of them will succeed and enjoy very high returns. This implies
that there will be a larger fraction of more patient and less risk-averse people among the rich,
15

partly because they represent those who got lucky and partly because they have different
preferences and their observed returns depend on their past occupational and saving decisions
and on their preferences.
The third element in our list concerns high and heterogenous earnings risk. Moderately persistent and skewed earnings shocks have the potential to generate heterogenous
savings rates. In fact, Castañeda, Dı́az-Giménez and Rı́os-Rull (2003) show that a specific
form of earnings risk for top earners can generate a very large wealth concentration in the
hands of the richest few. This relates to the finding discussed by Piketty on the rising
importance of the super-managers, especially in the U.S., and the volatility of their total
compensation.
In the rest of this section, we discuss the mechanisms that appear to hold the most
promise for offsetting the fall of the saving rate as a function of wealth in the standard
Bewley model and, therefore, can better account for the observed high top wealth share.

6.1

Endogeneity of rates of return

An important choice generating endogenous rates of return is entrepreneurial activity. Quadrini
(2009) provides a nice survey of the factors affecting the decision to become an entrepreneur
and the aggregate and distributional implications of entrepreneurship for saving and investment. In addition, Quadrini (2000), Gentry and Hubbard (2004), De Nardi, Doctor and
Krane (2007), and Buera (2008), argue convincingly that entrepreneurship is a key element
in understanding wealth concentration among the richest households.
Cagetti and De Nardi (2006) show that entrepreneurs constitute a large fraction of rich
people in the data. For example, in the 1989 Survey of Consumer Finances, among the richest
1 percent of people in terms of net worth, 63 percent were entrepreneurs and they held 68
percent of the total wealth in the hands of the wealthiest 1 percent of people. Cagetti and
De Nardi (2006) also build a model of entrepreneurship in which altruistic agents care about
16

their children and face uncertainty about their time of death and thus leave both accidental
and voluntary bequests. Every period, agents decide whether to run a business or work for
a wage, and borrowing constrains generate a need for collateral and thus increase savings as
long as the entrepreneur is constrained.
In Cagetti and De Nardi (2006)’s calibration, the optimal firm size is large and the
entrepreneur is borrowing constrained. Thus, even rich entrepreneurs want to keep saving
to accumulate collateral to grow their firm and reap higher returns from capital. This is the
mechanism that, in this framework, keeps the rich people’s saving rate high and generates
a high wealth concentration. As a result, their model generates wealth concentration that
matches that in the data well, including the right tail of the distribution. In addition,
the model implies plausible returns to capital in the range of those found by Moskowitz
and Vissing-Jørgensen (2002) and Kartashova (2014). Finally, the model generates entry
probabilities into the entrepreneurial sector as a function of one’s wealth that are consistent
with those estimated by Hurst and Lusardi (2004) on micro-level data and also implies that
inheritances are a strong predictor of business entry.
Kitao (2008) studies the effect of taxation on entrepreneurial choice in a model with
multiple entrepreneurial ability levels.
Among the models studying portfolio choice and wealth inequality, Kacperczyk, Nosal
and Stevens (2015) quantitatively evaluate portfolio choice in the presence of endogenous
information acquisition and heterogeneity in investor sophistication and asset riskiness. They
show that an increase in aggregate information technology can explain the observed increase
in wealth concentration among investors since 1990.

6.2

Earnings risk and the rise of the super-managers

There is a large literature studying precautionary savings as a mechanism to self-insure
against earnings shocks. Carroll (2007) shows that the marginal propensity to consume out
17

of a permanent income shock is close to, though lower than, one in a precautionary saving
model with both transitory and permanent income shocks. This implies that the saving rate
out of wealth is hardly affected by permanent earnings shocks. Instead, in the case in which
income shocks are purely transitory, consumption smoothing implies that individuals will
save most of the income change. On the other hand, the transitory nature of the shocks,
and therefore of the associated saving response, implies that the effect averages out. Hence,
these forces do not imply a first-order persistent growth effect on savings and cannot generate
substantial wealth concentration.
Precautionary saving behavior to self-insure against earnings risk, however, can generate
a top wealth concentration (right skewness) if the stochastic process for labor earnings is
appropriately skewed and persistent.

Castañeda et al. (2003) were the first to (numeri-

cally) generate this result in a model economy with perfectly altruistic agents going though
a stochastic life cycle of working age, retirement, and death. Their paper calibrates the parameters of the income process to match some features of the U.S. data, including measures
of both earnings and wealth inequality. The key force generating large wealth holdings in
the hands of the richest is a productivity shock process calibrated so that the highest productivity level is more than 100 times higher than the second highest. Thus, there is a large
discrepancy between the highest productivity level and all of the others. Moreover, an agent
in the highest productivity state has a roughly 20 percent chance of becoming more than 100
times less productive during the next period. Intuitively, high-earnings households have very
high (precautionary) saving rates for two reasons. First, they face a large downside earnings
risk and, therefore, they accumulate a large wealth buffer to self-insure against the possibly
very large fall in earnings. As a result, they have a large target ratio of wealth relative to
earnings. Second, a high wealth-to-earnings target corresponds to a very large target wealth
level for agents with high earnings.
It is important to note that the steady-state fraction of high-earners that drive the top
18

wealth shares in Castañeda et al. is extremely small (on the order of 0.04 percent). This
feature is consistent with the following findings by Saez and Zucman (2014): First, that the
large increase in wealth inequality in the U.S. over the last 30 years has been mostly driven
by the three-fold increase in the wealth share of the top 0.1 percent of wealth holders. And
second, that the main driver of the rapid increase in wealth at the top has been the large
increase in the share of earnings earned by top wealth holders.
From a theoretical standpoint, the “economics of superstars” (Rosen (1981)) rationalizes
the emergence of a small number of highly compensated individuals and a highly skewed
distributions of earnings with very large rewards at the top.

Gabaix and Landier (2008)

propose a model to rationalize increased CEO compensation between 1980 and 2003, while
Lee (2015) develops a model of occupational choice for workers, entrepreneurs, and managers
that endogenously generates high managerial wages.
Starting with Piketty and Saez (2003), a series of papers by Thomas Piketty and Emmanuel Saez, together with a number of coauthors, have documented the skewness of the
earnings (and income) distribution.10 Recently, Guvenen, Karahan, Ozkan and Song (2015)
have exploited a large panel dataset of earnings histories drawn from U.S. administrative
records and documented that earnings shocks display significant negative skewness and that
for very high earners—individuals in the top fifth percentile of the income distribution—the
increase in the (absolute value of) skewness over the lifetime is entirely driven by an increase
in the risk of negative shocks, rather than a lower risk of positive ones.
More empirical support for this modeling assumption and calibration is provided by
Parker and Vissing-Jørgensen (2009), who find that incomes at the top are highly cyclical
because of the labor component and bonuses in particular.
10
The complete set of studies is collected in Atkinson, Piketty and Saez (2010). The dataset is available
at Alvaredo, Atkinson, Piketty and Saez (2015).

19

6.3

The importance of intergenerational wealth transmission

Piketty’s book also stresses the importance of inherited wealth. Intergenerational transfers
account for at least 50-60 percent of total wealth accumulation (Gale and Scholz (1994)) in
the U.S. and potentially represent an important transmission channel of wealth inequality
across generations. Furthermore, a luxury-good-type bequest motive can help to explain
why rich households save at much higher rates than the rest (Dynan et al. (2004), Carroll
(2000)), why the portfolios of the rich are skewed towards risky assets (Carroll (2002)) and,
possibly in conjuction with medical expenses, the low rates of dissaving of the (rich) elderly
(De Nardi, French and Jones (2010)).
De Nardi (2004) introduces two types of intergenerational links in the overlappinggeneration, life-cycle model used by Huggett (1996): voluntary bequests and transmission of
human capital. She models the utility from bequests as providing a “warm glow”. In this
framework, parents and their children are thus linked by voluntary and accidental bequests
and by the transmission of earnings ability. The households thus save to self-insure against
labor earnings shocks and life-span risk, for retirement, and possibly to leave bequests to
their children. In De Nardi’s model, therefore, voluntary and accidental bequests coexist
and their relative size and importance are determined by the calibration. The calibration
adopted implies that bequests are a luxury good, generates a realistic distribution of estates,
and is also quantitatively consistent with the elasticity of the savings of the elderly to permanent income that has been estimated from microeconomic data by Altonji and Villanueva
(2002).
De Nardi’s work shows that voluntary bequests can explain the emergence of large estates,
which are often accumulated in more than one generation and characterize the upper tail of
the wealth distribution in the data. The calibration implies a much stronger bequest motive
to save for the richest households, who, even when very old, keep some assets to leave to their
children. The rich leave more wealth to their offspring, who, in turn, tend to do the same.
20

This behavior generates some large estates that are transmitted across generations because
of the voluntary bequests. Transmission of ability between parents and children also helps
generate a concentrated wealth distribution. More productive parents accumulate larger
estates and leave larger bequests to their children, who, in turn, are more productive than
average in the workplace. The presence of a bequest motive also generates lifetime saving
profiles that imply slower wealth decumulation in old age for richer people, consistent with
the facts documented by De Nardi et al. (2010), using micro-level data from the Health and
Retirement Survey.11 Yet, although modeling explicitly intergenerational links helps explain
the savings of the richest, the model by De Nardi is not capable of matching the wealth
concentration of the richest 1 percent without adding complementary forces generating a
high wealth concentration for the rich.12
Thus, De Nardi and Yang (2015) merge a version of the model with intergenerational
links with the high earnings risk for the top earners mechanism proposed by Castañeda et al.
(2003) (discussed in Section 6.2) and find that these two forces together match important
features of the data well. Interestingly, they distinguish between the contribution to wealth
inequality of the stochastic earnings process and that of bequests. They show that bequests
account for about 10 percentage points in the share of wealth held by individuals in the top
twenty percentiles.
As Piketty’s book points out, wealth inequality is also large within various age and demographic groups. Venti and Wise (1988) and Bernheim, Skinner and Weimberg (2001),
for instance, show that wealth is highly dispersed at retirement, even for people with similar
lifetime incomes, and argue that these differences cannot be explained only by events such as
family status, health, and inheritances, nor by portfolio choice. Hendricks (2007b) focuses
11

De Nardi et al. (2010) suggest that medical expenses are another important mechanism that can generate
this kind of slow decumulation. Lockwood (2012) argues that both medical expenses and a luxury bequest
motive are necessary to account for both the low rate of asset decumulation and the low rate of insurance
against medical expenses.
12
Nishiyama (2002) obtains similar results in an overlapping-generation model with bequests and intervivos transfers in which households in the same family line behave strategically.

21

on the ability of a basic overlapping-generations model to match the cross-sectional wealth
inequality at retirement age. He shows that the model overstates wealth differences at retirement between earnings-rich and earnings-poor, while it understates the amount of wealth
inequality conditional on similar lifetime earnings. Instead, De Nardi and Yang (2014) show
that an overlapping-generations model augmented with voluntary bequests and intergenerational transmission of earnings also matches the observed cross-sectional differences in wealth
at retirement and their correlation with lifetime incomes quite well.

6.4

Preference heterogeneity

An additional plausible avenue to help explain the vastly different amounts of wealth held by
individuals is exogenous heterogeneity in saving behavior. The source of this heterogeneity
in saving behavior is an important issue. There is enough micro-level empirical evidence
of preference heterogeneity to suggest that preference heterogeneity might be a plausible
avenue to help explain the vastly different amounts of wealth held by people. For example,
Lawrance (1991) and Cagetti (2003) find large heterogenity in preferences across people.
Krusell and Smith (1998) study the impact of preference heterogeneity, in the form of
persistent (with an average persistence of one generation) shocks to the time-preference rate
in an infinite-horizon model with idiosyncratic, transitory earnings shocks.13 They find that
a small amount of preference heterogeneity dramatically improves the model’s ability to
match the variance of the cross-sectional distribution of wealth.14 However, while capturing
the variance of the wealth distribution, their model and calibration fail to match the extreme
degree of concentration of wealth in the hands of the top 1 percent of wealth holders.
Hendricks (2007a) studies the effects of preference heterogeneity in a life-cycle framework
with persistent earnings shocks and only accidental bequests. He shows that time preference
13

Though the model also allows for aggregate shocks, they do not have quantitatively important implications for the wealth distribution.
14
They also find that heterogeneity in risk aversion does not affect the results much, however, Cagetti
(2001) shows that this result is sensitive to chosen utility parameter values.

22

heterogeneity makes a modest contribution in accounting for high wealth concentration if
the heterogeneity in discount factors is chosen to generate realistic patterns of consumption
and wealth inequality as cohorts age.
In sum, previous work indicates that preference heterogeneity, and especially patience
heterogeneity, can generate increased wealth dispersion. It would be interesting to deepen
the previous analysis by both studying richer processes for patience and allowing for richer
formulations of the utility function in which, for instance, risk aversion and intertemporal
substitution do not have to coincide (see Wang, Wang and Yang (2015) for some interesting
findings on this).

7

Transitional dynamics of the wealth distribution

An important contribution of Piketty’s book is to document the evolution of wealth inequality
over a long span of time.
In the absence of (big) shocks, one may expect the concept of stationary state to provide
a useful reference to describe where an economy will settle down in the long run. In fact,
the whole line of research discussed above studies the impact of alternative mechanisms on
the shape of the stationary wealth distribution and mostly abstracts from both stochastic
and deterministic aggregate changes in the economy’s fundamentals in driving either the
stochastic steady state, or the transition of the economy as some force such as government
policy, for instance, changes over time.
Yet, one question that naturally arises when observing, for example, the evolution of the
top wealth shares for Europe and the U.S. reported in Figure 2 is the extent to which there
were no big shocks, nor other deterministic changes, in the fundamentals driving inequality
during that long period. For instance, the top 1 and 10 percent wealth shares in Figure 2
display an upward trend up to 1910 for Europe and up to 1930 for the U.S., and an upward
trend for both areas after 1970. In addition, during the pre-1910 period the transitional
23

dynamics seem to be quite slow, while the post-1970 U.S. experience points to rapid changes
in the concentration of wealth in its upper tail. Two recent contributions tackle the question
of whether existing models can account for the fast increase in U.S. top wealth inequality
after 1970.
Gabaix et al. (2015) study this question in a partial equilibrium model with multiplicative
and idiosyncratic rate-of-return shocks that give rise to a wealth distribution with a Pareto
right tail, of the type discussed in Section 5. They find that, without additional amplifying
mechanisms, the model implies a transitional dynamic of wealth inequality in response to a
one-off shock, for example a change in the tax rate on capital, that is too slow compared with
the post-1980 rise in U.S. top wealth inequality as documented in the Survey of Consumer
Finances, let alone compared with the much faster rate of increase documented by Saez and
Zucman (2015). On the basis of their findings, they conjecture that a positive correlation
between wealth and either saving rates or rates of return is necessary to account for the
observed speed of the change in wealth inequality in terms of an increase in post-tax rates
of returns or a fall in the aggregate rate of growth. As we have seen in sections 6.1 and 6.3,
both models of entrepreneurship and a non-homothetic bequest motive can generate this
type of correlation.
Kaymak and Poschke (2015) study the transitional dynamics associated with the changes
in the U.S. tax and transfer system over the past 50 years within a Bewley economy with
an income process à la Castañeda et al. (2003), calibrated to match the income and wealth
(including the top) distributions in the 1960s. They find that the increase in wealth inequality
over the period can be accounted for by the increase in wage inequality, the changes in the tax
system, and the expansion of Social Security and Medicare. More specifically, the increase
in wage inequality accounts for more than half of the increase in top wealth inequality, as
the increase in downside risk for workers in the top income states substantially boosts their
precautionary saving. The remaining share of the increase in top wealth inequality is due
24

Data (SCF 1998)
Benchmark

Gini
0.63
0.62

1
14.8
14.7

Percentile (%)
5
20
40
31.1 61.4 84.7
31.3 63.0 85.0

60
97.2
93.4

80
100.00
100.00

Table 1: Percentage of earnings in the top percentiles.

to the fall in taxes—that increases the net return to saving—and the expansion of Social
Security and Medicare—that reduces precautionary saving by poorer households. The latter
effect increases the equilibrium interest rate and wealth accumulation by the rich. They also
show that, assuming no further shocks after 2010, the top 1 percent wealth share would take
roughly 50 years to increase by about 10 percentage points toward its new steady state value
of about 50 percent.
One lesson to draw from comparing Kaymak and Poschke’s (2015) results with those
by Gabaix et al. (2015) and our findings in Section 8 is that an important advantage of
a quantitative framework is the ability to model in a more realistic way the evolution of
important determinants of wealth inequality. For example, on the fiscal side the whole
set of changes to the progressivity of taxes and Social Security modelled by Kaymak and
Poschke (2015) accounts for a substantially larger change in wealth inequality than the
stylized experiments conducted in our Section 8 and in Gabaix et al. (2015).

8

A simulation exercise

This section uses the quantitative model of wealth inequality in De Nardi and Yang (2015)
to test some of the predictions in Piketty’s book. The model is calibrated to the U.S.
economy (see the Appendix for a description of the model and a discussion of the calibration
choices) and the crucial features that allow it to match the U.S. wealth distribution are the
combination of a voluntary bequest motive and a stochastic earnings process similar to that
in Castañeda et al. (2003) (see Section 6.2 for more discussion).
Table 1 reports the earnings distribution at selected percentiles in the SCF data (reported
25

by Castañeda et al. 2003) and that generated by the model. Comparing the first two lines
in the table reveals that benchmark calibration matches the earnings distribution very well.
Table 3 reports the wealth distribution at selected percentiles in the SCF data and the
various versions of the model studied. The comparison of the first two lines in the table shows
that the benchmark calibration matches the wealth distribution in the SCF well. This is
especially true for the share of wealth held by the top percentile. The model also matches, by
construction, a bequest flow-GDP ratio of 2.8 percent15 and the 90th percentile of the bequest
distribution normalized by income. Thus, the model is capable of accounting for a number
of data moments that should be informative on the contribution of the various motives for
saving to individual wealth accumulation and to the cross-sectional wealth distribution.
We use the model to conduct two experiments to discuss the (r̄−g) mechanism highlighted
in Piketty’s book, in particular, the conjecture that it is only the difference between the
average net rate of return on wealth and the rate of GDP growth that matters for wealth
inequality. Note that the (steady state) rate of GDP growth is the sum of the TFP growth
rate and the rate of population growth. It is straightforward to verify that a change in
the TFP growth rate is fully equivalent to an opposite change in the rate of return on
wealth, at least in partial equilibrium. The same cannot be said for a change in the rate
of population growth, since the latter changes the demographic composition. To investigate
the quantitative importance of this distinction, we compare the effect of an increase in the
post-tax rate of return to capital r̄ and of a fall in the rate of population growth n by the
same amount.
For simplicity, we conduct our experiments in partial equilibrium, keeping factor prices
constant. Allowing for general equilibrium implies only minor quantitative differences in the
equilibrium response of the wealth distribution. In all experiments, the proportional rate
of contribution to Social Security adjusts to balance the Social Security budget, while the
15

In the data, this fraction increases to 3.8 percent if inter-vivos transfers and college expenses are also
included.

26

Benchmark
(1) ∆n = −1.2%
(2) ∆r = 1.2%

τSS
0.12
0.17
0.12

τl
0.19
0.18
0.14

Y
1.0
-

A/Y
3.1
4.1
4.7

B/Y
2.8%
4.5%
5.1%

r̄ − g
3.3
4.5
4.5

r̄
4.5
4.5
5.7

Table 2: Aggregate effects, adjusting the labor income tax. Aggregate labor is expressed as a ratio
to that in the benchmark. Aggregate output is expressed as a ratio to that in the benchmark.

proportional labor income tax adjusts to balance the rest of the government budget. The
calibrated value of the coefficient of relative risk aversion is 1.5, while the subjective discount
factor β = 0.945. Table 2 reports the values of the Social Security tax τSS , the proportional
labor tax rate τl , output Y , and the ratios of the aggregate stock of assets A and flow of
bequests B to output, as well as factor prices, in the benchmark and the experiments. In
what follows, r denotes the gross (pre-tax) rate of return on capital and r̄ = (1 − τa )r the
rate of return net of the proportional capital income tax τa = 0.2. The value of τa is 0.2 in
the benchmark calibration.

8.1

Lower rate of population growth

In experiment (1), we consider the effect of reducing the rate of population growth n from
1.2 percent a year to zero.
Comparing the first two rows in Table 3 reveals that a fall in the population growth
rate marginally increases overall wealth inequality as measured by the Gini coefficient and
substantially increases the share of aggregate wealth accruing to the top 20th percentile of
the wealth distribution. The effect is particularly pronounced for the top percentile, whose
share increases by about 5 percentage points. The fall in the rate of population growth
increases the average age of the labor force and, since the share of super-rich increases with
age, the top shares of earnings and the wealth-GDP ratio. In addition, the higher ratio of
deaths to births increases the aggregate flow of bequests to GDP (cf. the first two rows
in Table 2) and the average bequest size. Since the calibration implies that bequests are a
luxury good, this last effect increases wealth concentration at the top.
27

Data (SCF 1998)
Benchmark
(1) ∆n = −1.2%
(2) ∆r = 1.2%

Gini
0.80
0.80
0.81
0.79

1
34.7
35.7
40.3
35.9

Percentile
5
20
57.8 69.1
52.0 65.9
54.8 67.4
51.2 64.1

(%)
40
81.7
82.8
83.3
80.2

60
93.9
95.4
95.7
94.1

80
98.9
99.5
99.4
98.9

Table 3: Percentage of total wealth held by households in the top percentiles.

8.2

Higher return on wealth

In experiment (2), we increase the yearly post-tax rate of return on wealth by 1.2 percentage
points, so that the difference between the yearly post-tax rate of return on capital and the
rate of population growth increases by the same amount as in the previous experiment.
Given the partial equilibrium assumption, the increase in the interest rate is thus associated
with a higher wealth-income ratio and share of capital relative to labor income. This is
exactly the kind of scenario discussed in Piketty’s book.
Comparing rows 2 and 3 in Table 2 reveals that the increase in the return to capital has
an even larger effect on the aggregate stock of wealth and the flow of bequests than the fall
in population growth. Conversely, and contrary to the conjecture that it is the difference
between the two rates that matters for inequality, the higher interest rate increases the
share of wealth owned by the top 1 percent only marginally and actually reduces wealth
concentration in the top 20th percentile.
Intuitively, the increase in the rate of return on capital reduces impatience by raising
β(1 + r̄) and thus increases precautionary saving by individuals with low wealth relative to
earnings. The negative wealth effect associated with the higher rate at which future earnings
are discounted also boosts saving for these individuals. This increases the average wealth
holding and reduces inequality. Conversely, in the case of wealthy savers for which capital
is the main source of income, the precautionary saving and wealth effects are small and the
income and substitution effect are roughly offsetting. As a consequence, the ratio between
consumption and wealth is not much affected and the higher interest rate translates into a
28

higher rate of capital accumulation.

8.3

What we have learned

To sum up, our findings confirm Piketty’s insight that, qualitatively, an increase in the rate
of return on capital or a fall in the rate of growth of output due to a demographic change
both increase wealth concentration. Contrary to his conjecture, though, we find that the
rate of return on wealth and the rate of population growth are not perfect substitutes in
their effect on wealth concentration. For the same change in the difference between the two
rates, an increase in the rate of return has a much smaller effect on wealth concentration
than a fall in the rate of population growth by the same amount. The intuition is that a
lower rate of population growth is associated with a higher ratio of deaths to births and, as
a consequence, a higher average bequest size. To the extent that bequests are a luxury good,
this last effect has a significant impact on wealth concentration at the top.

9

Where do we go (in terms of modeling) and what
data do we need?

In addition to providing many important facts and ideas, Piketty’s book has revitalized interest in inequality, and especially wealth inequality, and in understanding the determinants
of savings across all levels of the wealth and earnings distributions. This raises the question
of where we go from here both in terms of modeling and in terms of data needed to better
discipline these models.
As we have argued, quantitative Bewley models can generate realistic wealth inequality
both in steady state and along the transition path. In addition, they offer the possibility of exploring quantitatively the contribution of various competing mechanisms shaping
the dynamics of individual wealth accumulation, as well as of modeling detailed features of
29

the institutional environment. In this framework, entrepreneurship, intergenerational links,
earnings risk, medical expenses, and heterogenous preferences have been shown to be important to understanding saving behavior and wealth inequality. They should be studied more
closely so we can better understand how they work, and jointly, so we can better understand
how they interact and their relative importance.
Thinking more about modeling entrepreneurial heterogeneity is both empirically reasonable and potentially important. Campbell and De Nardi (2009) find, for instance, that
aspirations about the size of the firm that one would like to run are different for men and
women and that many people who are trying to start a business also work for an employer
and thus work very long hours in total. It would be interesting to generalize the model to
allow, for instance, for heterogeneity in entrepreneurial total factor productivity and optimal firm size (or decreasing-returns-to-scale parameters) and convincingly take the model to
data to estimate those additional parameters. Given the data on time allocation, it would
also be interesting to think more about the time allocation decision between working for an
employer, starting and running one’s own firm, working on home production, and enjoying
leisure.16
More work is also warranted to evaluate the role of intergenerational links. How should we
model bequests? How important are inter-vivos transfers, and do they provide an important
dimension of wealth heterogeneity early on in life that is then amplified by shocks and
individual saving behavior later on?
De Nardi, French and Jones (2010) have shown that medical expenses have large effects
on old age savings throughout the income distribution. How do lifespan risk and out-ofpocket medical expenses interact and to what extent does heterogeneity in out-of-pocket
medical expenses—which rise quickly with age and income during retirement—coupled with
heterogeneous lifespan risks, contribute to wealth inequality?
16

For quantitative works that highlight the importance of home production in lifecycle settings, see, for
example, Dotsey, Li and Yang (2014) and Dotsey, Li and Yang (2015).

30

Is the type of top-earnings risk necessary to account for the observed degree of top wealth
concentration on the basis of precautionary behavior consistent with the empirical, microlevel evidence from earnings data. This question has been notoriously difficult to address,
given that the usual survey datasets of individual earnings are either top coded or do not
oversample the rich. Comprehensive administrative data on earnings that have recently
become available provide a way to address this problem. De Nardi, Fella and Paz Pardo
(2015) provide a first attempt to tackle this question by studying the implications for wealth
inequality of an income process that is consistent with the skewness and kurtosis documented
by recent studies (Guvenen et al. (2015)) relying on U.S. Social Security administrative data.
Finally, to what extent does preference heterogeneity amplify and interact with the mechanisms above? How much preference heterogeneity is needed to understand the data once
other observable factors, such as entrepreneurial choice, for instance, are accounted for and
properly calibrated or estimated?

References
Adermon, Adrian, Lindahl, Mikael and Waldenström, Daniel (2015), Intergenerational
wealth mobility and the role of inheritance: Evidence from multiple generations. Mimeo.
Altonji, Joseph G. and Villanueva, Ernesto (2002), The effect of parental income on wealth
and bequests. NBER Working Paper 9811.
Alvaredo,

Facundo,

Atkinson,

Anthony B.,

Piketty,

Thomas and Saez,

Em-

manuel (2015), ‘The word top incomes database’, http://topincomes.g-mond.
parisschoolofeconomics.eu/.
Aoki, Shuhei and Nirei, Makoto (2015), Pareto distribution in Bewley models with capital
income risk. mimeo, Hitotsubashi University.
31

Atkinson, Anthony B. (1983), The Economics of Inequality, Clarendon Press, Oxford.
Atkinson, Anthony B. and Harrison, Allan J. (1983), Distribution of Personal Wealth in
Britain, 1923-1972, Cambridge University Press, Cambridge.
Atkinson, Anthony B., Piketty, Thomas and Saez, Emmanuel (2010), ‘Top incomes in the
long run of history’, Journal of Economic Literature 49, 3–71.
Benhabib, Jess and Bisin, Alberto (2006), The distribution of wealth and redistributive
policies. mimeo, NYU.
Benhabib, Jess, Bisin, Alberto and Zhu, Shenghao (2011), ‘The distribution of wealth and
fiscal policy in economies with finitely lived agents’, Econometrica 79, 123–157.
Benhabib, Jess, Bisin, Alberto and Zhu, Shenghao (2015), ‘The wealth distribution in Bewley
models with capital income risk’, Journal of Economic Theory 159, 459–515.
Bernheim, B. Douglas, Skinner, Jonathan and Weimberg, Steven (2001), ‘What accounts for
the variation in retirement wealth among U.S. households?’, The American Economic
Review 91(5), 832–857.
Boserup, Simon Halphen, Kopczuk, Wojciech and Kreiner, Claus Thustrup (2015), Stability
and persistence of intergenerational wealth formation: Evidence from Danish wealth
records of three generations. Mimeo.
Bosworth, Barry P. and Anders, Sarah (2011), Saving and wealth accumulation in the PSID,
1984-2005. NBER Working Paper 17689.
Buera, Francisco (2008), Persistency of poverty, financial frictions, and entrepreneurship.
Working paper, Northwestern University.
Cagetti, Marco (2001), ‘Interest elasticity in a life-cycle model with precautionary savings’,
American Economic Review 91(2), 418–421.
32

Cagetti, Marco (2003), ‘Wealth accumulation over the life cycle and precautionary savings’,
Journal of Business and Economic Statistics 21(3), 339–353.
Cagetti, Marco and De Nardi, Mariacristina (2006), ‘Entrepreneurship, frictions and wealth’,
Journal of Political Economy 114(5), 835–870.
Campbell, Jeffrey R. and De Nardi, Mariacristina (2009), ‘A conversation with 590 entrepreneurs’, Annuals of Finance 5, 313–327.
Carroll, Christopher D. (2000), Why do the rich save so much?, in Joel B.Slemrod, ed., ‘Does
Atlas Shrug? The Economic Consequences of Taxing the Rich’, Harvard University
Press.
Carroll, Christopher D. (2002), Portfolios of the rich, in LuigiGuiso, MichaelHaliassos and
TullioJappelli, eds, ‘Household Portfolios: Theory and Evidence’, MIT Press, Cambrdige MA.
Carroll, Christopher D. (2007), ‘Precautionary saving and the marginal propensity to consume out of permanent income’, Journal of Monetary Economics 56, 780–790.
Castañeda, Ana, Dı́az-Giménez, Javier and Rı́os-Rull, José-Vı́ctor (2003), ‘Accounting for
u.s. earnings and wealth inequality’, Journal of Political Economy 111(4), 818–857.
Champernowne, D. G. (1953), ‘A model of income distribution’, Economics Journal 63, 318–
351.
Charles, Kerwin Kofi and Hurst, Erik (2003), ‘The correlation of wealth across generations’,
Journal of Political Economy 111(6).
Clark, Gregory and Cummins, Neil (2015), ‘Intergenerational wealth mobility in England,
1858-2012: Surnames and social mobility’, The Economic Journal 125(582), 61–85.
Cowell, Frank K. (2011), Inequality among the wealthy. CASE Working Paper No. 150.
33

De Nardi, Mariacristina, Fella, Giulio and Paz Pardo, Gonzalo (2015), Fat tails in life-cycle
earnings and wealth inequality. Mimeo, UCL.
De Nardi, Mariacristina, French, Eric and Jones, John B. (2010), ‘Why do the elderly save?
The role of medical expenses’, Journal of Political Economy 118, 39–75.
DeBacker, Jason, Panousi, Vasia and Ramnath, Shanthi (2012), The properties of income
risk in privately held businesses. Federal Reserve Board Working Paper 2012-69.
Dı́az-Giménez, Javier, Quadrini, Vincenzo and Rı́os-Rull, José-Victor (1997), ‘Dimensions
of inequality: Facts on the U.S. distributions of earnings, income and wealth’, Federal
Reserve Bank of Minneapolis Quarterly Review 21(2), 3–21.
Dotsey, Michael, Li, Wenli and Yang, Fang (2014), ‘Consumption and time use over the life
cycle’, International Economic Review 55(3), 665692.
Dotsey, Michael, Li, Wenli and Yang, Fang (2015), ‘Home production and social security
reform’, European Economic Review 73, 131150.
De Nardi, Mariacristina (2004), ‘Wealth inequality and intergenerational links’, Review of
Economic Studies 71(3), 743–768.
De Nardi, Mariacristina and Yang, Fang (2014), ‘Bequests and heterogeneity in retirement
wealth’, European Economic Review 72, 182–196.
De Nardi, Mariacristina and Yang, Fang (2015), Wealth inequality, family background, and
estate taxation. Working Paper 21047, National Bureau of Economic Research.
De Nardi, Mariacristina, Doctor, Phil and Krane, Spencer D. (2007), ‘Evidence on entrepreneurs in the United States: Data from the 1989-2004 Survey of Consumer Finances’, Economic Perspectives 4, 18–36.

34

De Nardi, Mariacristina, French, Eric and Jones, John B. (2010), ‘Why do the elderly save?
The role of medical expenses’, Journal of Political Economy 118(1), 39–75.
Dynan, Karen E., Skinner, Jonathan and Zeldes, Stephen P. (2004), ‘Do the rich save more?’,
Journal of Political Economy 112(2), 397–444.
Gabaix, Xavier and Landier, Augustin (2008), ‘Why has CEO pay increased so much?’,
”Quarterly Journal of Economics” 123(1), 49–100.
Gabaix, Xavier, Lasry, Jean-Michel, Lions, Pierre-Louis and Moll, Benjamin (2015), The
dynamics of inequality. NBER Working Paper No. 21363.
Gale, William G. and Scholz, John Karl (1994), ‘Intergenerational transfers and the accumulation of wealth’, Journal of Economic Perspectives 8(4), 145–160.
Gentry, William M. and Hubbard, R. Glenn (2004), ‘Entrepreneurship and household savings’, Berkely Economic Journal: Advances in Macroeconomics 4(1). Article 1.
Guvenen, Fatih, Karahan, Fatih, Ozkan, Serdar and Song, Jae (2015), What do data on
millions of U.S. workers reveal about life-cycle earnings risk? Mimeo.
Hendricks, Lutz (2007a), ‘How important is preference heterogeneity for wealth inequality?’,
Journal of Economics Dynamics & Control 31, 3042–3068.
Hendricks, Lutz (2007b), ‘Retirement wealth and lifetime earnings’, International Economic
Review 48(2), 421–56.
Huggett, Mark (1996), ‘Wealth distribution in life-cycle economies’, Journal of Monetary
Economics 38(3), 469–494.
Hurst, Erik and Lusardi, Annamaria (2004), ‘Liquidity constraints, wealth accumulation and
entrepreneurship’, Journal of Political Economy 112(2), 319–347.
35

Hurst, Erik, Luoh, Ming Ching and Stafford, Frank P. (1998), ‘The Wealth Dynamics of
American Families, 1984-94’, Brookings Papers on Economic Activity 29(1), 267–338.
Jones, Charles I. (2015), ‘Pareto and Piketty: The macroeconomics of top income and wealth
inequality’, Journal of Economic Perspectives 29, 29–46.
Kacperczyk, Marcin, Nosal, Jaromir and Stevens, Luminita (2015), Investor sophistication
and capital income inequality. Mimeo Boston College.
Kartashova, Katya (2014), ‘The returns to entrepreneurial investment: A private equity
premium puzzle?’, American Economic Review 104(10), 3297–3394.
Kaymak, Bari s and Poschke, Markus (2015), The evolution of wealth inequality over half a
century: the role of taxes, transfers and technology. Mimeo, McGill University.
Kennickell, Arthur B. (2003), A rolling tide: Changes in the distribution of wealth in the
U.S., 1989-2001. Mimeo.
Kitao, Sagiri (2008), ‘Entrepreneurship, taxation, and capital investment’, Review of Economic Dynamics 11(1), 44–69.
Klevmarken, N. Anders, Lupton, Joseph P. and Stafford, Frank P. (2003), ‘Wealth dynamics in the 1980s and 1990s: Sweden and the United States’, The Journal of Human
Resources 38(2), 322–353.
Kopczuk, Wojciech (2015), ‘What do we know about the evolution of top wealth shares in
the united states?’, Journal of Economic Perspectives 29(1), 47–66.
Krusell, Per and Smith, Jr., Anthony (1998), ‘Income and wealth heterogeneity in the
macroeconomy’, Journal of Political Economy 106(5), 867–896.
Lampman, Robert J. (1962), The Share of Top Wealth-Holders in National Wealth 19221956, Princeton University Press, Princeton.
36

Lawrance, Emily (1991), ‘Poverty and the rate of time preference: Evidence from panel
data’, Journal of Political Economy 99, 54–77.
Lee, Sang Yoon (2015), Entrepreneurs, managers and inequality. Mimeo.
Lockwood, Lee (2012), Incidental bequests: Bequest motives and the choice to self-insure
late-life risks. Mimeo.
Meade, James E. (1964), Efficiency, Equality and the Ownership of Property, Allen and
Unwin, London.
Moskowitz, Tobias J. and Vissing-Jørgensen, Annette (2002), ‘The returns to entrepreneurial
investment: A private equity premium puzzle?’, American Economic Review 92(4), 745–
778.
Mulligan, Casey B. (1997), Parental Priorities and Economic Inequality, Chicago: University
of Chicago Press.
Nishiyama, Shinichi (2002), ‘Bequests, inter vivos transfers, and wealth distribution’, Review
of Economic Dynamics 5(4), 892–931.
Pareto, Vilfredo (1897), Cours d’Economie Politique, Vol. II, F. Rouge, Lausanne.
Parker, Jonathan A. and Vissing-Jørgensen, Annette (2009), ‘Who bears aggregate fluctuations and how?’, American Economic Review 99(2), 399–405.
Piketty, Thomas and Saez, Emmanuel (2003), ‘Income inequality in the United States, 19131998’, The Quarterly Journal of Economics 118, 1–39.
Piketty, Thomas and Zucman, Gabriel (2014), Wealth and inheritance in the long run, in
Anthony J.Atkinson and FrancoisBourguignon, eds, ‘Handbook of Income Distribution’,
Vol. 2B, Elsevier B. V., chapter 15, pp. 1303–1368.
37

Quadrini, Vincenzo (2000), ‘Entrepreneurship, saving and social mobility’, Review of Economic Dynamics 3(1), 1–40.
Quadrini, Vincenzo (2009), ‘Entrepreneurship in macroeconomics’, Annals of Finance
5(3), 295–311.
Rodriguez, Santiago Budria, Dı́az-Giménez, Javier, Quadrini, Vincenzo and Rı́os-Rull, JoséVictor (2002), ‘Updated facts on the U.S. distributions of earnings, income, and wealth’,
Federal Reserve Bank of Minneapolis Quarterly Review 26(3), 2–35.
Rosen, Sherwin (1981), ‘The economics of superstars’, American Economic Review
71(5), 845–858.
Saez, Emmanuel and Zucman, Gabriel (2015), Wealth inequality in the United States since
1913: Evidence from capitalized income tax data. Mimeo, LSE.
Tauchen, George (1986), ‘Finite state markov-chain approximations to univariate and vector
autoregressions’, Economic Letters 20(2), 177–181.
Venti, Steven F. and Wise, David A. (1988), ‘The cause of wealth dispersion at retirement:
Choice or chance?’, American Economic Review 88(2), 185–191.
Wang, Chong, Wang, Neng and Yang, Jinqiang (2015), ‘Optimal consumption and savings
with stochastic income and recursive utility’, Mimeo.
Wold, Herman O. and Whittle, Peter (1957), ‘A model explaining the Pareto distribution of
wealth’, Econometrica pp. 591–595.
Wolff, Edward N. (1992), ‘Changing inequality of wealth’, American Economic Review
82(2), 552–558.
Wolff, Edward N. (1998), ‘Recent trends in the size distribution of household wealth’, Journal
of Economic Perspectives 12(3), 131–150.
38

Yang, Fang (2013), ‘Social security reform with impure intergenerational altruism’, Journal
of Economic Dynamics and Control 37, 52–67.

A

Appendix: The model used for the simulations in
Section 8

A.1

The Model

The model is a discrete-time, incomplete-markets, overlapping-generations economy with an
infinitely lived government.

A.1.1

The Government

The government taxes capital at rate τa , labor income and Social Security pay-outs at rate
τl , and estates at rate τb above the exemption level xb to finance government spending G.
Social Security benefits, P (e
y ), are linked to one’s realized average annual earnings ye, up to a
Social Security cap yec , and are financed through a labor income tax τs . The two government
budget constraints, one for Social Security and the other one for government spending, are
balanced during each period.

A.1.2

Firm and Technology

There is one representative firm producing goods according to the aggregate production
function F (K; L) = K α L1−α , where K is the aggregate capital stock and L is the aggregate
labor input. The final goods can either be consumed or invested in physical capital, which
depreciates at rate δ.

39

A.1.3

Demographics and Labor Earnings

Each model period lasts five years. Agents start their economic life at the age of 20 (t = 1).
By age 35 (t = 4), the agents’ children are born. The agents retire at age 65 (t = 10). From
that period on, each household faces a positive probability of dying, given by (1 − pt ), which
only depends on age.17 The maximum life span is age 90 (T = 14), and the population
grows at a constant rate n. The online appendix (on Science Direct) graphically illustrates
the demographic structure of our overlapping generations model.
i

Total labor productivity of worker i at age t is given by yti = ezt +t , in which t is
the deterministic age-efficiency profile. The process for the stochastic earnings shock zti is:
i
zti = ρz zt−1
+ µit , µit ∼ N (0, σµ2 ).

To capture the intergenerational correlation of earnings, we assume that the productivity
of worker i at age 55 is transmitted to children j at age 20 as follows: z1j = ρh z8i + ν j , ν j ∼
N (0, σh2 ), as parents are 35 years (seven model periods) older than their children.
A.1.4

Preferences

Preferences are time separable, with a constant discount factor β. The period utility function
from consumption is given by U (c) = (c1−γ − 1)/(1 − γ).
People derive utility from holding onto assets because they turn into bequests upon death.
This form of ‘impure’ bequest motive implies that an individual cares about total bequests
left to his/her children, but not about the consumption of his/her children.
The utility from bequests b is denoted by
"

#

φ(b) = φ1 (b + φ2 )1−γ − 1 .
The term φ1 measures the strength of bequest motives, while φ2 reflects the extent to which
bequests are luxury goods. If φ2 > 0, the marginal utility of small bequests is bounded,
17

We make the assumption that people do not die before age 65 to reduce computational time. This
assumption does not affect the results since in the U.S., the number of adults dying before age 65 is small.

40

while the marginal utility of large bequests declines more slowly than the marginal utility
of consumption. In the benchmark model, we set b as bequest net of estate tax, bn . We
also consider the case in which gross bequests, bg , enter the utility function. In that case,
we set b = bg . Our formulation is thus more flexible than in De Nardi (2004), Yang (2013),
and De Nardi and Yang (2014) because we allow for two kinds of bequest motives. In the
first one, parents care about bequests net of taxes. In the second one, parents care about
bequests gross of taxes. A more altruistic parent would take into account that some of the
estate is taxed away, but parents might just care about what assets they leave, rather than
how much their offspring receive.

A.1.5

The Household’s Recursive Problem

We assume that children have full information about their parents’ state variables and infer
the size of the bequests that they are likely to receive based on this information. The potential
set of a household’s state variables is given by x = (t, a, z, ye, Sp ), where t is household age
(notice that in the presence of a fixed age gap, one’s age is also informative about one’s
parents’ age), a denotes the agent’s financial assets carried from the previous period, z is
the current earnings shock, and ye stands for annual accumulated earnings, up to a Social
Security cap yec , which are used to compute Social Security payments. The term Sp stands
for parental state variables other than age and, more precisely, is given by Sp = (ap , zp , yep ).
It thus includes parental assets, current earnings, and accumulated earnings. When one’s
parent retires, zp or current parental earnings becomes irrelevant and we set it to zero with
no loss of generality.
From 20 to 60 years of age (t = 1 to t = 9), the agent works and survives for sure to
next period. Let Vw (t, a, z, ye, Sp ) and VwI (t, a, z, ye) denote the value functions of a workingage person whose parent is alive and dead, respectively, where I stands for “inherited.” In
the former case, the household’s parent is still alive and might die with probability pt+7 , in
41

which case the value function for the orphan household applies, and assets are augmented
by inheritances in per-capita terms. That is,

(

Vw (t, a, z, ye, Sp ) = max
U
(c)
+
βp
E
Vw (t + 1, a0 , z 0 , ye0 , Sp0 )
t+7
0

(1)

c,a

)

+β(1 − pt+7 )E VwI (t + 1, a0 + bn /N, z 0 , ye0 ) ,


subject to
(2)
(3)
(4)
(5)
(6)

c + a0 = (1 − τl )wy − τs min(wy, 5yec ) + [1 + r(1 − τa )]a,
a0 ≥ 0,


ye0 = (t − 1)e
y + min(wy/5, yec ) /t,




 (t + 6)yep + min((wyp /5, yec ) /(t + 7)
yep0 =

 yep

if t < 3






otherwise 

bn = bn (Sp ),

where N is the average number of children determined by the growth rate of the population.
The expected values of the value functions are taken with respect to (z 0 , zp0 ), conditional on
(z, zp ). The agent’s resources depend on labor endowment y and asset holdings a.
Average yearly earnings for children and parents evolve according to equations (4) and
(5), respectively. Since current income y refers to a five-year period, current income is divided
by five when the yearly lifetime average labor income (e
y ) is updated. Equation (6) is the
law of motion of bequest for the parents, which uses their optimal decision rule.
The value function of an agent who is still working but whose parent is dead is
(
)


(7)
VwI (t, a, z, ye) = max
U (c) + βE VwI (t + 1, a0 , z 0 , ye0 ) ,
0
c,a

subject to (2), (3), and (4 ).
From 65 to 85 years of age (t = 10 to t = 14), the agent is retired and receives Social
42

Security benefits and his parent is already deceased. He faces a positive probability of dying,
in which case he derives utility from bequeathing the remaining assets.

(

)

Vr (t, a, ye) = max
U (c) + βpt Vr (t + 1, a0 , ye) + (1 − pt )φ(b) ,
0

(8)

c,a

subject to (3),
(9)

c + a0 = [1 + r(1 − τa )]a + (1 − τl )P (e
y ),

(10)



 a0
if a0 < xb ,
=

 (1 − τb )(a0 − xb ) + xb otherwise,

bn







and, in the case of net bequest motives,
(11)

b = bn ,

while in the case of gross bequest motives,
b = bg = a0 ,

(12)

regardless of the structure of the estate tax.
We focus on a stationary equilibrium concept in which factor prices and age-wealth
distribution are constant over time. Due to space constraints, the definition of a stationary
equilibrium for our economy is in the online appendix in De Nardi and Yang (2015).

A.1.6

Calibration

The calibration table 4 summarizes the parameters that are either taken from other studies
or can be solved independently of the endogenous outcomes of the model. See De Nardi and
Yang (2015) for a discussion of these choices. Our calibration of the labor earnings process
is based on the observation that the Panel Study of Income Dynamics (PSID) provides
43

Demographics
Preferences
Labor earnings

Production
Government policy

Parameters
n
annual population growth
pt
survival probability
γ
risk aversion coefficient
t
age-efficiency profile
ψ
labor earnings levels
Qy
labor earnings transition matrix
ρh
AR(1) coef. of prod. inheritance process
2
σh
innovation of prod. inheritance process
α
capital income share
δ
depreciation
τa
capital income tax
P (e
y ) Social Security benefit
τs
Social Security tax

Value
1.2%
see text
1.5
see text
see text
see text
0.50
0.37
0.36
6.0%
20%
see text
12.0%

Table 4: Exogenous parameters used in the benchmark model.

excellent data on the earnings dynamics for much of the population, but not for those of the
richest households (see, for instance, Bosworth and Anders (2011)). To match the earnings
dynamics of all the population, we thus proceed as follows.
1. We assume four possible earnings states: low, middle, high, and super-high. We take
the support of the earnings shocks from Castañeda et al. (2003). The resulting grid
points for ψ are [1, 3.15, 9.78, 1,061].
2. We take the persistence ρh of the earnings inheritance process to be 0.5 and the variance
σh2 , both are from De Nardi (2004). We then discretize the earnings inheritance process
as proposed by Tauchen (1986).
3. We take PSID estimates on the persistence (0.92) and variance (0.38) over five-year
periods from Table A.1 in appendix A in De Nardi De Nardi (2004); and we discretize
this process for the lowest three grid points using Tauchen (1986) to make sure that
our process accurately represents the estimated earnings dynamics for much of the
population. This gives us a three by three transition matrix.
4. We pick the remaining six elements of our four by four transition matrix to match the
44

following aspects of the earnings distribution: The Gini coefficient and the share of
total earnings earned, respectively, by the top 1%, 5%, 20%, 40%, 60%, and an earnings
persistence at the top of 80%. The latter is consistent with work by DeBacker, Panousi
and Ramnath (2012), which reports that the persistence of both labor and business
income at the top of the labor and business income distributions is high and that,
in particular, the probability of staying there, both after one year and five years (the
latter results are available from the authors on request), is around 80%. We also impose
adding-up restrictions.
The transition matrix for Qy is:



 0.8239 0.1733 0.0027


 0.2171 0.6399 0.1428


 0.0067 0.2599 0.7334


0.0720 0.0000 0.1252

0.000112 


0.000200 
.

0.000000 


0.802779

The transition matrix for Qyh in the benchmark model is



 0.8272 0.1704 0.0024


 0.5000 0.4696 0.0304


 0.1759 0.6513 0.1728


0.0000 0.0018 0.9678

0.0000000000 


0.0000000000 
.

0.0000000051 


0.0304357624

The transition matrices induce an initial distribution of earnings with probability masses
over the respective earnings levels, given by [59.89% 35.88% 4.24% 0.00154845%].
Table 5 lists the parameters we use to calibrate the model; see De Nardi and Yang (2015)
for a discussion of these targets and the implied parameter values.

45

No Bequest
Moment
Data Benchmark
Motives
Wealth-output ratio
3.10
3.10%
3.10%
Bequest-wealth ratio
0.88-1.18%
0.87%
0.56%
90th perc. bequest distribution
4.34
4.36
4.53
Fraction of estates paying taxes
2.0%
1.85%
1.89%
Revenue from estate tax/output
0.33%
0.33
0.11%
Government spending/output
18%
17.99%
17.76%
Parameters
β
discount factor
0.9453
0.9513
φ1 bequest utility
-5.3225
0.0000
φ2 bequest utility shifter (in $ 2000)
1116K
0.0000
τb tax on estates
21.52%
21.52%
xb estate exemption level (in $ 2000)
782K
782K
τl tax on labor income
19.19%
19.19%
Table 5: Parameters calibration for the benchmark model and the model with no voluntary bequests.

46

