                                NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                                  AGENCY BUSINESS CYCLES

                                          Mikhail Golosov
                                           Guido Menzio

                                        Working Paper 21743
                                http://www.nber.org/papers/w21743


                      NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                               1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                 Cambridge, MA 02138
                                    November 2015




We are grateful to Paul Beaudry, David Berger, Katarina Borovickova, V.V. Chari, Veronica Guerrieri,
Christian Haefke, Kyle Herkenhoff, John Kennan, Philipp Kircher, Narayana Kocherlakota, Ricardo
Lagos, Rasmus Lentz, Igor Livschits, Nicola Pavoni, Thijs van Rens, Guillaume Rocheteau, Karl Shell,
Robert Shimer and Randy Wright for comments. The views expressed herein are those of the authors
and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research. Golosov thanks
the NSF for support.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.

© 2015 by Mikhail Golosov and Guido Menzio. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed
two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice,
is given to the source.
Agency Business Cycles
Mikhail Golosov and Guido Menzio
NBER Working Paper No. 21743
November 2015
JEL No. D86,E24,E32

                                              ABSTRACT

We propose a new business cycle theory. Firms need to randomize over firing or keeping workers
who have performed poorly in the past, in order to give them an ex-ante incentive to exert effort. Firms
have an incentive to coordinate the outcome of their randomizations, as coordination allows them to
load the firing probability on states of the world in which it is costlier for workers to become unemployed
and, hence, allows them to reduce overall agency costs. In the unique robust equilibrium, firms use
a sunspot to coordinate the randomization outcomes and the economy experiences endogenous, stochastic
aggregate fluctuations.


Mikhail Golosov
Department of Economics
Princeton University
111 Fisher Hall
Princeton, NJ 08544
and NBER
golosov@princeton.edu

Guido Menzio
Department of Economics
University of Pennsylvania
467 McNeil Building
3718 Locust Walk
Philadelphia, PA 19104
and NBER
gmenzio@econ.upenn.edu
1     Introduction
We present a new business cycle theory, where aggregate ‡uctuations are caused by the
fact that the agents in the economy randomize over some individual decision in a correlated
fashion. We consider a model where …rms need to randomize over …ring or keeping workers
who have performed poorly in the past, in order to give them an ex-ante incentive to exert
e¤ort. Firms have a desire to coordinate the outcome of their randomizations, as coordination
allows them to load the …ring probability on states of the world in which it is costlier for
workers to become unemployed and, hence, it allows them to reduce the overall agency
costs. In the unique robust equilibrium of the model, …rms use a sunspot to coordinate
outcome of their randomization and the economy experiences aggregate ‡uctuations that
are endogenous— in the sense that they are not driven by exogenous shocks to fundamentals
or by exogenous shocks to the selection of equilibrium— and stochastic— in the sense that
they follow a non-deterministic path. Our theory of business cycles implies a novel view
of recessions which is opposite to view of recessions as “rainy days” proposed by the Real
Business Cycle theory of Kydland and Prescott (1982).

    The theory is cast in the context of a search-theoretic model of the labor market in the
spirit of Pissarides (1985) and Mortensen and Pissarides (1994). In particular, we consider
a labor market populated by identical risk-averse workers— who look for vacancies when
unemployed and produce output when employed— and by identical risk-neutral …rms— that
attract new workers by posting vacancies and produce according to a technology that has
constant returns to scale in labor. Unemployed workers and vacant …rms come together
through a frictional process that is summarized by a matching function. Matched worker-
…rm pairs produce under moral hazard: the …rm does not observe the worker’s e¤ort but
only his output, which is a noisy signal of e¤ort. Matched …rm-worker pairs Nash bargain
over the terms of an employment contract that speci…es the level of e¤ort recommended to
the worker, the wage paid by the …rm to the worker, and the probability with which the
worker is …red by the …rm conditional on the output of the worker and on the realization of
a sunspot, an inherently meaningless signal that is observed by all market participants.

    The theory builds on two assumptions. First, the theory needs some decreasing returns to
matching in the labor market. Decreasing returns to matching may either come directly from
decreasing returns to scale in the matching function, or they may come from a vacancy cost
that increases with the total number of vacancies in the market. Second, the theory needs
employment contracts to be incomplete enough that …ring takes place along the equilibrium
path. In this paper, we simply assume that current wages are paid before observing output

                                             2
and employment contracts are renegotiated period by period, so that …ring is the only tool
that …rms can use to give workers an incentive to exert e¤ort.

   In the …rst part of the paper, we characterize the properties of the optimal employment
contract. We show that the optimal contract is such that the worker is …red with positive
probability only when the output of the worker is low and the realization of the sunspot is
such that the gains from continued trade accruing to the worker are su¢ ciently high relative
to the gains from continued trade accruing to the …rm. The result is intuitive. Firing is
costly— as it destroyed a valuable …rm-worker relationship— but it is necessary— as it is the
only way for the …rm to give the worker an incentive to exert e¤ort. However, when …ring
takes place, it is only the value of the destroyed relationship that would have accrued to the
worker that gives incentives. The value of the destroyed relationship that would have accrued
to the …rm is just “collateral damage.”The optimal contract minimizes the collateral damage
by loading the …ring probability on the realizations of the sunspot for which the worker’s
continuation gains from trade are highest relative to the …rm’s. In other words, the optimal
contract loads the …ring probability on the states of the world where the cost to the worker
from losing the job is highest relative to the cost to the …rm from losing the worker.

   In the second part of the paper, we characterize the relationship between the realization
of the sunspot and …ring in general equilibrium. We …nd that there is an equilibrium in
which …rms …re all of their non-performing workers for some realizations of the sunspot,
and …rms do not …re any of their non-performing workers for the other realizations. There
is a simple logic behind this …nding. Suppose that …rms load up the …ring probability on
some realizations of the sunspot. In those states of the world, unemployment is higher
and, because of decreasing returns to matching, the job-…nding probability of unemployed
workers is lower. In turn, if the job-…nding probability is lower, the workers have a worse
outside option when bargaining with the …rms and their wage is lower. If the wage is lower,
the workers’marginal utility of consumption relative to the …rms’is lower and, according to
Nash bargaining, the workers’gains from trade relative to the …rms’are higher. Hence, if the
other …rms in the market load the …ring probability on some realizations of the sunspot, an
individual …rm has the incentive to load the …ring probability on the very same states of the
world. In other words, …rms have a desire to coordinate the outcome of the randomization
between …ring and keeping their non-performing workers, and the sunspot allows them to
achieve coordination.

   Naturally, alongside the equilibrium in which …rms use the sunspot to coordinate on
…ring or keeping non-performing workers, there are also equilibria in which …rms (fully or

                                              3
partially) ignore the sunspot and randomize on …ring or keeping non-performing workers
independently. However, these equilibria are an artifact of the simplifying assumption that
all …rms randomize simultaneously. Indeed, we …nd that, in a version of the model where
…rms …re sequentially, only the equilibrium with perfect coordination survives. In this version
of the model, the perfect coordination equilibrium takes the form of a …ring cascade where the
…ring decisions of the …rst few …rms uniquely determine the …ring decision of all subsequent
…rms.

   In the equilibrium where …rms coordinate on …ring or keeping non-performing workers,
the economy experiences aggregate ‡uctuations. These aggregate ‡uctuations are endoge-
nous. Indeed, they are not caused by exogenous shocks to fundamentals, nor by exogenous
shocks to the selection of the equilibrium played by market participants. Instead, aggregate
‡uctuations in our model are caused by coordinated randomization— i.e. every …rm needs
to randomize on …ring or keeping its non-performing workers, and di¤erent …rms want to
coordinate their randomization outcomes. The aggregate ‡uctuations in our model are sto-
chastic. Indeed, the economy does not follow a deterministic limit cycle or a deterministic
chaotic map as in previous theories of endogenous business cycles. Instead, the economy fol-
lows a stochastic process, in which the probability of a …ring burst and, hence, of a recession
is an equilibrium outcome.

   In the last part of the paper, we calibrate the model to measure the magnitude and
properties of Agency Business Cycles (ABC), i.e. the aggregate ‡uctuations experienced by
the economy in the equilibrium where …rms coordinate on …ring or keeping non-performing
workers. We …nd that ABC feature ‡uctuations in unemployment, in the rate at which
unemployed workers become employed (UE rate), and in the rate at which employed workers
become unemployed (EU rate) that are approximately half as large as those observed in the
US labor market and that— as it has been the case in the US labor market since 1984— are
uncorrelated with labor productivity.

   We then test some of the distinctive features of ABC. First, in ABC, a recession starts
with an increase in the EU rate which leads to an increase in the unemployment rate. In
turn, the rise in the unemployment rate leads, because of decreasing returns to scale in
matching, to a fall in the UE rate. Hence, the EU rate leads both the unemployment rate
and the UE rate. We …nd that the US labor market features the same pattern of leads
and lags. Second, in ABC, the probability of a recession is endogenous and depends on the
aggregate state of the economy. Speci…cally, the lower is the unemployment rate, the higher
is the probability with which …rms need to …re their non-performing workers in order to give

                                              4
them an incentive to exert e¤ort and, hence, the higher is the probability of a recession. We
…nd that the US labor market also features a negative relationship between unemployment
and the probability of a recession. Third, in ABC, a recession is a period when the value
of time in the market relative to the value of time at home is abnormally high. Using an
admittedly basic approach, we construct a time-series for the net value of a job to a worker
and we …nd this series to be strongly countercyclical. The …nding is consistent with Davis
and Von Wachter (2011) who document that the cost to a worker from losing a job is strongly
countercyclical.

   The …rst contribution of the paper is to advance a novel theory of business cycles, where
aggregate ‡uctuations are endogenous and stochastic and emerge because di¤erent market
participants have to randomize over some decision and …nd it optimal to coordinate the
randomization outcomes. In the business cycle literature, there are theories where aggre-
gate ‡uctuations are driven by exogenous shocks to the current value of fundamentals (e.g.,
Kydland and Prescott 1982 or Mortensen and Pissarides 1994), to the future value of funda-
mentals (e.g., Beaudry and Portier 2004 or Jaimovich and Rebelo 2009), or to the stochastic
process of fundamentals (e.g., Bloom 2009). In our theory, all fundamentals are …xed. There
are theories where aggregate ‡uctuations are driven by exogenous shocks to the selection of
the equilibrium played by market participants (e.g., Heller 1986, Cooper and John 1988 or
Benhabib and Farmer 1994). In our theory, market participants always play the same, unique
equilibrium. There are theories where aggregate ‡uctuations emerge endogenously as limit
cycles (e.g., Diamond 1982, Diamond and Fudenberg 1989, Mortensen 1999 or Beaudry, Gal-
izia and Portier 2015) or as chaotic dynamics (e.g., Boldrin and Montrucchio 1986 or Boldrin
and Woodford 1990). In our theory, the economy follow a stochastic process. There are the-
ories where aggregate ‡uctuations are driven by common shocks to higher-order beliefs (e.g.,
Angeletos and La’O 2013). In our theory there are no such shocks.

   The second contribution of the paper is to advance a new view of recessions. In theories
where business cycles are caused by ‡uctuations in productivity— such as in the Real Business
Cycle theory of Kydland and Prescott (1982) or in Mortensen and Pissarides (1994)— a
recession is a period when the value of time in the market relative to the value of time at
home is abnormally low. Indeed, in these theories, a recession is a period when the output of
a worker in the market is unusually low. In our theory, a recession is a period when the value
of time in the market relative to the value of time at home is abnormally high. Indeed, in our
theory, a recession is a period when the output of a worker in the market is not relatively low,
but the value of staying at home looking for a job is unusually low. At …rst glance, the data
says that the net value of employment for a worker is countercyclical. But if the net value

                                               5
of employment is countercyclical, why is there more unemployment in recessions? And why
is the rate at which workers lose their job higher and the rate at which unemployed workers
…nd a job lower? That is, if recessions are times when the gains from trade are high, why is
there less trade? Our theory provides an answer to this puzzle: when the gains from trade
in the labor market are high, …rms …nd it optimal to get rid of their non-performing workers
and this creates congestions in the labor market that lowers the speed at which unemployed
workers …nd jobs.



2         Environment and Equilibrium
2.1        Environment
Time is discrete and continues forever. The economy is populated by a measure 1 of identical
                                                     P t
workers. Every worker has preferences described by        [ (ct )   et ], where 2 (0; 1) is
the discount factor, (ct ) is the utility of consuming ct units of output in period t, and                                      et
is the disutility of exerting et units of e¤ort in period t. The utility function ( ) is strictly
increasing and strictly concave, with a …rst derivative                        0
                                                                                   ( ) such that      0
                                                                                                          ( ) 2 [ 0 ; 0 ], and a
                       00                   00                  00                  0                       00
second derivative           ( ) such that        ( ) 2 [ 00 ;        ], with            >   0
                                                                                                > 0 and          >   00
                                                                                                                          > 0. The
consumption ct is equal to the wage wt if the worker is employed in period t, and to the
value of home production b if the worker is unemployed in period t.1 The coe¢ cient                                             is
strictly positive, and the e¤ort et is equal to either 0 or 1. Every worker is endowed with
one indivisible unit of labor.

   The economy is also populated by a positive measure of identical …rms. Every …rm has
                         P t
preferences described by     ct , where 2 (0; 1) is the discount factor and ct is the …rm’s
pro…t in period t. Every …rm operates a constant returns to scale production technology
that transforms one unit of labor (i.e. one employee) into yt units of output, where yt is a
random variable that depends on the employee’s e¤ort et . In particular, yt takes the value yh
with probability ph (e) and the value y` with probability p` (e) = 1                               ph (e), with yh > y`          0
and 0 < ph (0) < ph (1) < 1. Production su¤ers from a moral hazard problem, in the sense
that the …rm does not directly observe the e¤ort of its employee, but only the output.

        Every period t is divided into …ve stages: sunspot, separation, matching, bargaining and
production. At the …rst stage, a random variable, zt , is drawn from a uniform distribution
    1
    As the reader can infer from the notation, we assume that workers are banned from the credit market and,
hence, they consume their income in every period. The assumption is made only for the sake of simplicity.



                                                          6
with support [0; 1].2 The random variable is aggregate, in the sense that it is publicly
observed by all market participants. The random variable is a sunspot, in the sense that it
does not directly a¤ect technology, preferences or any other fundamentals, although it may
serve to coordinate the behavior of market participants.

       At the separation stage, some employed workers become unemployed. An employed
worker becomes unemployed for exogenous reasons with probability                     2 (0; 1). In addition,
an employed worker becomes unemployed because he is …red with probability s(yt 1 ; zt ),
where s(yt 1 ; zt ) is determined by the worker’s employment contract and it is allowed to
depend on the output of the worker in the previous period, yt 1 , and on realization of the
sunspot in the current period, zt . For the sake of simplicity, we assume that a worker who
becomes unemployed in period t can search for a new job only starting in period t + 1.

       At the matching stage, some unemployed workers become employed. Firms decide how
many job vacancies vt to create at the unit cost k > 0. Then, the ut                   1   workers who were
unemployed at the beginning of the period and the vt vacant jobs that were created by the
…rms search for each other. The outcome of the search process is described by a decreasing
return to scale matching function, M (ut 1 ; vt ), which gives the measure of bilateral matches
formed between unemployed workers and vacant …rms. We denote vt =ut                         1   as   t,   and we
refer to    t   as the tightness of the labor market. We denote as ( t ; ut 1 ) the probability that
an unemployed worker meets a vacancy, i.e.                 ( t ; ut 1 ) = M (ut 1 ; t ut 1 )=ut 1 . Similarly,
we denote as ( t ; ut 1 ) the probability that a vacancy meets an unemployed worker, i.e.
 ( t ; ut 1 ) = M (ut 1 ; t ut 1 )= t ut 1 . We assume that the job-…nding probability ( t ; ut 1 )
is strictly increasing in     t   and strictly decreasing in ut     1   and that the job-…lling probability
 ( t ; ut 1 ) is strictly decreasing in both     t   and ut 1 . That is, the higher is the labor market
tightness, the higher is the job-…nding probability and the lower is the job-…lling probabil-
ity. However, for a given labor market tightness, both the job-…nding and the job-…lling
probabilities are strictly decreasing in unemployment.3

       At the bargaining stage, each …rm-worker pair negotiates the terms of a one-period em-
ployment contract xt . The contract xt speci…es the e¤ort et recommended to the worker
in the current period, the wage wt paid by the …rm to the worker in the current period,
and the probability s(yt ; zt+1 ) with which the …rm …res the worker at the next separation
   2
     Assuming that the sunspot is drawn from a uniform distribution with support [0; 1] is without loss in
generality.
   3
     Given any constant returns to scale matching function, the job-…nding and the job-…lling probabilities
are only functions of the market tightness. Given any decreasing returns to scale matching function, the
job-…nding and the job-…lling probabilities are also (decreasing) functions of unemployment.



                                                       7
stage, conditional on the output of the worker in the current period and on the realization
of the sunspot at the beginning of next period. We assume that the outcome of the bargain
between the …rm and the worker is the Axiomatic Nash Bargaining Solution.

       At the production stage, an unemployed worker home-produces and consumes b units of
output. An employed worker chooses an e¤ort level, et , and consumes wt units of output.
Then, the output of the worker, yt , is realized and observed by both the …rm and the worker.

       A few comments about the environment are in order. We assume that the employment
contract cannot specify a wage that depends on the current realization of the worker’s output.
Hence, the …rm cannot use the current wage to give the worker an incentive to exert e¤ort.
We also assume that the employment contract is re-bargained every period. Hence, the …rm
cannot use future wages to give the worker an incentive to exert e¤ort. Overall, …ring is the
only tool that the …rm can use to incentivize the worker. These restrictions on the contract
space are much stronger than what we need. Indeed, our theory of business cycles only
requires that principals sometimes …re their non-performing agents along the equilibrium
path. As we know from Clementi and Hopenhayn (2006), equilibrium …ring may obtain
under complete contracts as long as the agent is protected by some form of limited liability.

       We assume that the matching function M (u; v) has decreasing returns to scale. From the
theoretical point of view, one can justify the assumption by noting that the classic urn-ball
matching function with …nite urns and …nite balls has decreasing returns to scale (see, e.g.,
Burdett, Shi and Wright 2001). From the empirical point of view, it is easy to justify the
assumption, since estimating a Cobb-Douglass matching function for the US economy reveals
that the exponents on unemployment and vacancies sum up to less than 1.4 Moreover, the
assumption is not critical. Indeed, the equilibrium conditions of our model are identical to
those of a model in which the matching function has constant returns to scale but the cost
of a vacancy is strictly increasing in the aggregate number of vacancies.5

   4
      Petrongolo and Pissarides (2000) show that some empirical studies on the matching function have found
increasing returns to scale, some have found constant returns to scale and others have found decreasing
returns to scale depending on the data and on the estimation method. Menzio and Shi (2011) show that
the estimates of the matching functions are biased if— as most of the studies reviewed by Petrongolo and
Pissarides (2000) do— one abstracts from the fact that both employed and unemployed workers search for
and match with vacancies.
    5
      As the assumption of an increasing marginal cost of a vacancy is more common in than the assumption
of a decreasing returns to scale matching function, the reader may be more comfortable with this alternative
interpretation of the equilibrium conditions.




                                                     8
2.2     Equilibrium
We now derive the conditions for an equilibrium in our model economy. Let u denote the
measure of unemployed works at the beginning of the bargaining stage. Let W0 (u) denote
the lifetime utility of a worker who is unemployed at the beginning of the production stage.
Let W1 (x; u) denote the lifetime utility of a worker who is employed under the contract
x at the beginning of the production stage. Let W (x; u) denote the di¤erence between
W1 (x; u) and W0 (u). Let F (x; u) denote the present value of pro…ts for a …rm that, at the
beginning of the production stage, employs a worker under the contract x. Let x (u) denote
the equilibrium contract between a …rm and a worker when unemployment is u. Finally, let
 (u; z^) denote the labor market tightness at the matching stage of next period, when the
current unemployment is u and next period’s sunspot is z^. Similarly, let h(u; z^) denote the
unemployment at the bargaining stage of next period, when the current unemployment is u
and next period’s sunspot is z^.

    The lifetime utility W0 (u) of an unemployed worker is such that

            W0 (u) = (b) + Ez^ [W0 (h(u; z^)) + ( (u; z^); u)W (x (h(u; z^)); h(u; z^))] .               (1)

In the current period, the worker home-produces and consumes b units of output. At the
matching stage of next period, the worker …nds a job with probability ( (u; z^); u) in which
case his continuation lifetime utility is W0 (h(u; z^))+W (x (h(u; z^)); h(u; z^)). With probability
1     ( (u; z^); u), the worker does not …nd a job and his continuation lifetime utility is
W0 (h(u; z^)).

    The lifetime utility W1 (x; u) of a worker employed under the contract x = (e; w; s) is
such that
      W1 (x; u)   = (w)           e+
                                                                                                         (2)
                  + Ey;^z [W0 (h(u; z^)) + (1     )(1   s(y; z^))W (x (h(u; z^)); h(u; z^))je] :

In the current period, the worker consumes w units of output and exerts e¤ort e. At the
separation stage of next period, the worker keeps his job with probability (1             )(1      s(y; z^)),
in which case his continuation lifetime utility is W0 (h(u; z^)) + W (x (h(u; z^)); h(u; z^)). With
probability 1     (1        )(1   s(y; z^)), the worker loses his job and his continuation lifetime
utility is W0 (h(u; z^)).

    The di¤erence W (x; u) between W1 (x; u) and W0 (u) represents the gains from trade to
a worker employed under the contract x. From (1) and (2), it follows that W (x; u) is such


                                                   9
that
    W (x; u)     = (w)          (b)    ce+
                                                                                                               (3)
                 + Ey;^z f[(1         )(1    s(y; z^))         ( (^
                                                                  z ; u); u)]W (x (h(u; z^)); h(u; z^))jeg :

We …nd it useful to denote as V (u) the gains from trade for a worker employed under the
equilibrium contract x (u), i.e. V (u) = W (x(u); u). We refer to V (u) as the equilibrium
gains from trade accruing to the worker.

   The present value of pro…ts F (x; u) for a …rm that employs a worker under the contract
x = (e; w; s) is such that

            F (x; u) = Ey [yje] + Ey;^z [(1              )(1        s(y; z^))F (x (h(u; z^)); h(u; z^))je]     (4)

In the current period, the …rm enjoys a pro…t equal to the expected output of the worker
net of the wage. At the separation stage of next period, the …rm retains the worker with
probability (1      )(1     s(y; z^)), in which case the …rm’s continuation present value of pro…ts
is F (x (h(u; z^)); h(u; z^)). With probability 1              (1       )(1   s(y; z^)), the …rm loses the worker,
in which case the …rm’s continuation present value of pro…ts is zero. We …nd it useful to
denote as J(u) the present value of pro…ts for a …rm that employs a worker at the equilibrium
contract x (u), i.e. J(u) = F (x (u); u). We refer to J(u) as the equilibrium gains from trade
accruing to the …rm.

   The equilibrium contract x (u) is the Axiomatic Nash Solution to the bargaining problem
between the …rm and the worker. That is, x (u) is such that

                                             max W (x; u)F (x; u),                                             (5)
                                            x=(e;w;s)

subject to the logical constraints

                                       e 2 f0; 1g and s(y; z^) 2 [0; 1],

and the worker’s incentive compatibility constraints

                  (ph (1)    ph (0))Ez^ [(1        )(s(y` ; z^)        s(yh ; z^))V (h(u; z^))] , if e = 1,
                  (ph (1)    ph (0))Ez^ [(1        )(s(y` ; z^)        s(yh ; z^))V (h(u; z^))] , if e = 0.

In words, the equilibrium contract x (u) maximizes the product between the gains from
trade accruing to the worker, W (x; u), and the gains from trade accruing to the …rm, F (x; u),
among all contracts x that satisfy the worker’s incentive compatibility constraints. The …rst
incentive compatibility constraint states that, if the contract speci…es e = 1, the cost to the

                                                          10
worker from exerting e¤ort must be smaller than the bene…t. The second constraint states
that, if the contract speci…es e = 0, the cost to the worker from exerting e¤ort must be
greater than the bene…t. The cost of e¤ort is . The bene…t of e¤ort is given by the e¤ect of
e¤ort on the probability that the realization of output is high, ph (1)              ph (0), times the e¤ect
of a high realization of output on the probability of keeping the job, (1               )(s(y` ; z^) s(yh ; z^)),
times the value of the job to the worker, V (h(u; z^)).

   The equilibrium market tightness (u; z^) must be consistent with the …rm’s incentives
to create vacancies. The cost to the …rm from creating an additional vacancy is k. The
bene…t to the …rm from creating an additional vacancy is given by the job-…lling probability,
 ( (u; z^); u), times the value to the …rm of …lling a vacancy, J(h(u; z^)). The market tightness
is consistent with the …rm’s incentives to create vacancies if k = ( (u; z^); u)J(h(u; z^)) when
 (u; z^) > 0, and if k     ( (u; z^); u)J(h(u; z^)) when (u; z^) = 0. Overall, the market tightness
is consistent with the …rm’s incentives to create vacancies i¤

                               k      ( (u; z^); u)J(h(u; z^)) and (u; z^)      0,                           (6)

where the two inequalities hold with complementary slackness.

   The equilibrium law of motion for unemployment, h(u; z^), must be consistent with the
equilibrium …ring probability s (y; z^; u) and with the job-…nding probability ( (u; z^); u).
Speci…cally, h(u; z^) must be such that

                h(u; z^) = u       u (J(h(u; z^); u) + (1     u)Ey [ + (1        )s (y; z^; u)] ;            (7)

where
                                                   1
                                    (J; u) =           (minfk=J; 1g; u) ; u ,
        1
and         (minfk=J; 1g; u) is the labor market tightness that solves (6). The …rst term on
the right-hand side of (7) is unemployment at the beginning of the bargaining stage in the
current period. The second term in (7) is the measure of unemployed workers who become
employed during the matching stage of next period, which is given by unemployment u
times the probability that an unemployed worker becomes employed (J(h(u; z^); u). The
last term in (7) is the measure of employed workers who become unemployed during the
separation stage of next period. The sum of the three terms on the right-hand side of (7) is
the unemployment at the beginning of the bargaining stage in the next period.

   We are now in the position to de…ne a recursive equilibrium for our model economy.
De…nition 1: A Recursive Equilibrium is a tuple (W; F; V; J; x ; h) such that: (i) The gains
from trade accruing to the worker, W (x; u), and to the …rm, F (x; u), satisfy (3) and (4) and

                                                        11
V (u) = W (x (u); u), J(u) = F (x (u); u); (ii) The employment contract x (u) satis…es (5);
(iii) The law of motion h(u; z^) satis…es (7).

        Over the next three sections, we will characterize the properties of the recursive equilib-
rium. We are going to carry out the analysis under the maintained assumptions that the
equilibrium gains from trade are strictly positive, i.e. J(u) > 0 and V (u) > 0, and that the
equilibrium contract requires the worker to exert e¤ort, i.e. e (u) = 1. The …rst assumption
guarantees that …rms and workers trade in the labor market, and the second assumption
guarantees that …rms and workers …nd it optimal to solve the moral hazard problem.6



3         Optimal Contract
In this section, we characterize the properties of the Axiomatic Nash Solution to the bar-
gaining problem between the …rm and the worker. That is, we characterize the properties
of the employment contract that maximizes the product of the gains from trade accruing to
the worker and the gains from trade accruing to the …rm subject to the worker’s incentive
compatibility constraint.7 We refer to such contract as the optimal employment contract.
Our key …nding is that the worker is …red if and only if the realization of output is low and
the realization of the state of the world is such that the cost to the worker from losing the
job relative to the cost to the …rm from losing the worker is su¢ ciently high.

        We carry out the characterization of the optimal employment contract in four lemmas,
all proved in Appendix A. In order to lighten up the notation, and without risk of confusion,
we will drop the dependence of the gains from trade to the worker, W , and to the …rm, F , as
well as the dependence of the optimal contract, x , on unemployment in the current period,
u. We will also drop the dependence of the continuation gains from trade to the worker
and to the …rm on unemployment in the current period and write V (h(u; z^)) as V (^
                                                                                  z ) and
J(h(u; z^)) as J(^
                 z ).

Lemma 1: Any optimal contract x is such that the worker’s incentive compatibility holds
with equality. That is,

                        = (ph (1)      ph (0))Ez^ [(1        )(s (y` ; z^)   s (yh ; z^))V (^
                                                                                            z )] :            (8)
    6
     It is straightforward to verify that the …rst assumption is satis…ed as long as b is su¢ ciently low relative
to ph (1)yh + p` (1)y` , and that the second assumption is satis…ed as long as y` is su¢ ciently low relative to
yh .

    7
    As mentioned at the end of Section 2, we will carry out the analysis under the maintained assumptions
that the gains from trade are strictly positive and that it is optimal to recommend the worker to exert e¤ort.



                                                        12
   To understand Lemma 1 consider a contract x such that the worker’s incentive compat-
ibility constraint is lax. Clearly, this contract prescribes that the worker is …red with some
positive probability after a low realization of output, i.e. s(y` ; z^). If we lower s(y` ; z^) by some
small amount, the worker’s incentive compatibility constraint is satis…ed. Moreover, if the
lower s(y` ; z^), the survival probability of the match increases. Since the continuation value
of the match is strictly positive for both the worker and the …rm, an increase in the survival
probability of the match raises the gains from trade accruing to the worker, W , the gains
from trade accruing to the …rm, F , and the Nash product W F . Therefore, the contract x
cannot be optimal.

Lemma 2: Any optimal contract x is such that, if the realization of output is high, the
worker is …red with probability 0. That is, for all z^ 2 [0; 1],

                                            s (yh ; z^) = 0:                                       (9)

   To understand Lemma 2 consider a contract x such that the worker is …red with positive
probability when the realization of output is high, i.e. s(yh ; z^) > 0. If we lower the …ring
probability s(yh ; z^), the incentive compatibility constraint of the worker is relaxed. Moreover,
if we lower the …ring probability s(yh ; z^), the survival probability of the match increases. In
turn, the increase in the survival probability of the match raises the gains from trade accruing
to the worker, W , the gains from trade accruing to the …rm, F , and the Nash product W F .
Thus, the contract x cannot be optimal.

Lemma 3: Let (^
              z)           V (^     z ). Any optimal contract x is such that, if the realization
                              z )=J(^
of output is low, the worker is …red with probability 1 if (^
                                                            z) >           , and the worker is …red
with probability 0 if (^
                       z) <       . That is, for all z^ 2 [0; 1],

                                                 1, if (^
                                                        z) >        ,
                                 s (y` ; z^) =                                                    (10)
                                                 0, if (^
                                                        z) <        .

   Lemma 3 is one of the main results of the paper. It states that any optimal contract x is
such that, if the realization of output is low, the worker is …red with probability 1 in states
of the world z^ in which the continuation gains from trade to the worker, V (^
                                                                             z ), relative to
the continuation gains from trade to the …rm, J(^
                                                z ), are above some cuto¤, and the worker
is …red with probability 0 in states of the world in which the ratio V (^     z ) is below the
                                                                        z )=J(^
cuto¤. There is a simple intuition behind this result. Firing is costly— as it destroys a
valuable relationship— but also necessary— as it is the only tool to provide the worker with
an incentive to exert e¤ort. However, only the value of the destroyed relationship that
would have accrued to the worker serves the purpose of providing incentives. The value of

                                                  13
the destroyed relationship that would have accrued to the …rm is “collateral damage.” The
optimal contract minimizes the collateral damage by concentrating …ring in states of the
world in which the value of the relationship to the worker would have been highest relative
to the value of the relationship to the …rm. In other words, the optimal contract minimizes
the collateral damage by concentrating …ring in states of the world in which the cost to the
worker from losing the job, V (^
                               z ), is highest relative to the cost to the …rm from losing the
worker, J(^
          z ). Notice that this property of the optimal contract follows immediately from the
linearity of the problem with respect to the …ring probability, and it does not depend on the
fact that the optimal contract maximizes the product of the gains from trade rather than
the gains from trade to the …rm taking subject to delivering a given level of gains from trade
to the worker. In this sense, the property is rather general to contractual environments in
which …ring takes place along the equilibrium path.

   In any optimal contract x , the …ring cuto¤     is such that
                                      Z                  Z
           = (ph (1) ph (0))(1      )         V (^
                                                 z )d^
                                                     z+         s (y` ; z^)V (^
                                                                              z )d^
                                                                                  z ;                  (11)
                                                     z )>
                                                    (^                    z )=
                                                                         (^

The above equation is the worker’s incentive compatibility constraint (8) written in light
of the fact that s (yh ; z^) is given by (9) and s (y` ; z^) is given by (10). Figure 1 plots the
right-hand side of (11), which is the worker’s bene…t from exerting e¤ort, as a function of the
…ring cuto¤          . On any interval [ 0 ;   1]   where the distribution of the random variable (^
                                                                                                   z)
has positive density, the right-hand side of (11) is strictly decreasing in               . On any interval
[ 0;   1]   where the distribution of (^
                                       z ) has no density, the right-hand side of (11) is constant.
At any value          where the distribution of (^
                                                 z ) has a mass point, the right-hand side of (11)
can take on an interval of values, as the …ring probability s (y` ; z^) for z^ such that (^
                                                                                          z) =
varies between 0 and 1. Overall, the right-hand side of (11) is a weakly decreasing function
of the …ring cuto¤         .

   In any optimal contract x , the …ring cuto¤                   is such that the right-hand side of (11) is
equal to the worker’s cost          from exerting e¤ort. There are three cases to consider. First,
consider the case in which the right-hand side of (11) equals                    at a point where the right-
hand side of (11) is strictly decreasing in                 . In this case, the equilibrium …ring cuto¤ is
uniquely pinned down. Moreover, since the right-hand side of (11) is strictly decreasing in
  , the random variable (^
                         z ) has no mass point at the equilibrium …ring cuto¤. Hence, in
this case, the …rm either …res the worker with probability 0 or with probability 1. This is the
case of      1   in Figure 1. Second, consider the case in which the right-hand side of (11) equals
  at a point where the right-hand side of (11) can take on a range of values. In this case, the

                                                            14
equilibrium …ring cuto¤ is uniquely pinned down. However, the random variable (^
                                                                               z ) has a
mass point at the equilibrium …ring cuto¤. Hence, in this case, for any realization of (^
                                                                                        z)
equal to the equilibrium …ring cuto¤, the …rm …res the worker with the probability s (y` ; z^)
that satis…es (11). This is the case of    2   in Figure 1. Finally, consider the case in which there
is an interval of values of (^
                             z ) such that the right-hand side of (11) equals         . In this case,
the equilibrium …ring cuto¤ can take on any value in the interval. However, the choice of
the cuto¤ is immaterial, as the probability that the random variable (^
                                                                      z ) falls in the interval
is zero. This is the case of    3   in Figure 1. In any of the three cases, the equilibrium …ring
cuto¤ is e¤ectively unique and so is the …ring probability for any realization of the random
variable (^
          z ).

Lemma 4: Any optimal contract x is such that the wage w satis…es
                                                        0
                                          W (x )            (w )
                                                 =               .                              (12)
                                          F (x )             1
   Lemma 4 states that any optimal contract x prescribes a wage such that the ratio of
the marginal utility of consumption to the worker to the marginal utility of consumption to
           0
the …rm,       (w )=1, is equal to the ratio of the equilibrium gains from trade accruing to the
worker to the equilibrium gains from trade accruing to the …rm, W (x )=F (x ) = V =J. This

                                                   15
is the standard optimality condition for the wage in the Axiomatic Nash Solution. Lemma
4 is important, as it tells us that the relative gains from trade accruing to the worker are
higher in states of the world in which the worker’s wage is lower. Hence, it follows from
Lemma 3 that the optimal contract is such that the …rm …res the worker if and only if the
realization of output is low and the realization of the state of the world is such that the
worker’s wage next period would have been su¢ ciently low.

    We are now in the position to summarize the characterization of the optimal contract.
Theorem 1: (Contracts) Any optimal contract x is such that: (i) the worker is paid the
wage w given by (12); (ii) If the realization of output is high, the worker is …red with
probability s (yh ; z^) given by (9); (iii) If the realization of output is low, the worker is …red
with probability s (y` ; z^) given by (10), where the     is uniquely pinned down by (11).



4     Properties of Equilibrium
In this section, we characterize the properties of the equilibrium. First, we characterize
the role of the sunspot within a period. We show that there exists a Perfect Coordina-
tion Equilibrium in which all …rms …re their non-performing workers with probability 1
for some realization of the sunspot and with probability 0 for the other realizations of the
sunspot. In this equilibrium, …rms use the sunspot to randomize over keeping or …ring their
non-performing workers in a perfectly correlated fashion. There is also a No Coordination
Equilibrium in which …rms …re workers with the same probability independently of the re-
alization of the sunspot. In this equilibrium, …rms randomize over …ring or keeping their
non-performing workers independently from each other. However, we show that the No Co-
ordination Equilibrium only exists because of the …rms randomize simultaneously and have
to rely on an inherently meaningless signal to coordinate. Indeed, we show that, in a version
of the model where …rms randomize sequentially, the unique equilibrium is the one with
perfect coordination. Finally, we establish the existence and characterize the properties of
the recursive equilibrium of the economy.


4.1    Stage Equilibrium
In any Recursive Equilibrium, the probability s (y` ; z^) with which …rms …re non-performing
workers and the worker’s relative gains from trade (^
                                                    z ) must simultaneously satisfy two con-
ditions. For any z^, the …ring probability s (y` ; z^) must be part of the optimal employment
contract given the worker’s relative gains from trade (^
                                                       z ) and the probability distribution

                                                16
of the worker’s relative gains from trade across realizations of the sunspot. Moreover, for
any z^, the worker’s relative gains from trade (^
                                                z ) must be those implied by the evolution
of unemployment, given the …ring probability s (y` ; z^). Formally, in any equilibrium, the
functions (^
           z ) and s (y` ; z^) must be a …xed-point of the mapping we just described. Bor-
rowing language from game theory, we refer to such a …xed-point as the stage equilibrium,
as it describes the key outcomes of the economy within one period.

   We …rst characterize the e¤ect of the …rm’s …ring probability s (y` ; z^) on the worker’s
relative gains from trade (^
                           z ). Given that unemployment at the beginning of the period is u
and that the …ring probability at the separation stage is s(^
                                                            z ) = s (y` ; z^), the law of motion
(7) implies that unemployment at the bargaining stage is u^(s(^
                                                              z )) such that

                u^(s(^
                     z )) = u     (J(^
                                     u(s(^
                                         z ))); u) + (1         u)( + (1         )p` (1)s(^
                                                                                          z )):   (13)

We conjecture that the gains from trade accruing to the …rm are a strictly increasing function
of unemployment, i.e. J(^   z ))) is strictly increasing in u^(s(^
                        u(s(^                                    z )). Under this conjecture,
there is a unique u^(s(^
                       z )) that satis…es (13) and u^(s(^
                                                        z )) is strictly increasing in the …ring
probability s(^
              z ).

   Given that unemployment at the bargaining stage is u^(s(^
                                                           z )), the worker’s wage is w (^
                                                                                         u(s(^
                                                                                             z ))).
Then, it follows from the optimality condition (12) that the worker’s relative gains from trade
are such that                                             0
                                        V (^
                                           u(s(^
                                               z )))          (w (^
                                                                  u(s(^
                                                                      z ))))
                                (^
                                 z) =                =                       :                    (14)
                                        J(^u(s(^
                                               z )))               1
We conjecture that the wage is a strictly decreasing function of unemployment, i.e. w (^
                                                                                       u(s(^
                                                                                           z )))
is strictly decreasing in u^(s(^
                               z )). Under this conjecture, the worker’s relative gains from trade
  z ) are strictly increasing in the unemployment u^(s(^
 (^                                                    z )) and, since u^(s(^
                                                                            z )) is strictly increas-
ing in s(^
         z ), they are also strictly increasing in the …ring probability s(^
                                                                           z ). The solid red line
in Figure 2 illustrates the e¤ect of the …ring probability on the worker’s relative gains from
trade.

   The conjectures that the worker’s wage is decreasing in unemployment and the …rm’s
gains from trade are increasing in unemployment are natural and will be veri…ed in Section
4.3. Intuitively, when the matching function has decreasing returns to scale, an increase in
unemployment tends to lower the job-…nding probability of unemployed workers. In turn, a
decline in the job-…nding probability lowers the value of unemployment. Since the value of
unemployment is the worker’s outside option in bargaining, the equilibrium wage falls and
the worker’s relative gains from trade increase.


                                                  17
   Next, we characterize the e¤ect of the worker’s relative gains from trade           z ) on the
                                                                                      (^
probability s(^
              z ) = s (y` ; z^) with which …rms …re their non-performing workers. From the
optimality condition (10), it follows that the …ring probability s(^
                                                                   z ) is such that
                                         8
                                         < 0,        if (^
                                                         z) < ,
                           s (y` ; z^) =   2 [0; 1], if (^
                                                         z) = ,                             (15)
                                         :
                                           1,        if (^
                                                         z) > ,

where     is implicitly de…ned by the worker’s incentive compatibility constraint (11). As
explained in the previous section, the higher are the worker’s relative gains from trade in
z^, the stronger is the …rm’s incentive to …re its non-performing workers in that state of the
world. The dashed green line in Figure 2 illustrates the e¤ect of the worker’s relative gains
from trade (^
            z ) on the …ring probability s(^
                                           z ).

   For any realization z^ of the sunspot, the …ring probability must be optimal given the
worker’s gains from trade (i.e. we must be on the dashed green line) and the worker’s
gains from trade must be consistent with the …ring probability (i.e. we must be on the
solid red line). As it is clear from Figure 2, for any realization of z^, only three outcomes
are possible: points A, B and C. The …rst outcome, point A, is such that the …rm’s …ring
probability s(^
              z ) is zero, and the worker’s relative gains from trade (^
                                                                       z ) are smaller than

                                              18
     . The second outcome, point B, is such that the …rm’s …ring probability s(^
                                                                               z ) is greater
than zero and smaller than one, and the worker’s relative gains from trade (^
                                                                            z ) are equal to
     . The third outcome, point C, is such that the …rm’s …ring probability s(^
                                                                              z ) is one, and
the worker’s relative gains from trade (^
                                        z ) are greater than                   . The coexistence of multiple
outcomes is a consequence of the fact that …rms have a desire to coordinate the outcome
of the randomization over …ring or keeping their workers. If other …rms are more likely to
…re their workers in one state of the world than in another, an individual …rm wants to do
the same, because, in the state of the world where other …rms are more likely to …re their
workers, unemployment is higher and so are the worker’s relative gains from trade.

      Let Z0 denote the realizations of the sunspot for which …rms …re non-performing workers
with probability 0, and let          0   denote the measure of Z0 . Let Z1 denote the realizations of the
sunspot for which …rms …re non-performing workers with a probability s (y` ; z^) = s1 2 (0; 1),
and let         1   denote the measure of Z1 . Similarly, let Z2 denote the realizations of the sunspot
for which …rms …re non-performing workers with probability 1, and let                  2   denote the measure
of Z2 .

      Depending on the value of             1,   we can identify three di¤erent types of stage equilibria.
If    1    = 1, we have a No Coordination Equilibrium. In this equilibrium, …rms …re the non-
performing workers with probability s (y` ; z^) = s1 2 (0; 1) for all z^ 2 [0; 1]. Basically,
…rms ignore the sunspot and randomize over …ring or keeping their non-performing workers
independently from each other. In a No Coordination Equilibrium, the worker’s incentive
compatibility constraint (11) becomes

                                      = (ph (1)        ph (0))(1    )s1 V (^
                                                                           u(s1 )):                      (16)

When we solve the constraint with respect to s1 , we …nd that the constant probability with
which …rms …re their non-performing workers is

                                    s1 =                                           :                     (17)
                                             (ph (1)    ph (0))(1    )V (^
                                                                         u(s1 ))

      If    1   = 0, we have a Perfect Coordination Equilibrium. In this equilibrium, …rms …re their
non-performing workers with probability 0 for the realizations of the sunspot z^ 2 Z0 , and
with probability 1 for the other realization of the sunspot. Basically, …rms use the sunspot to
randomize over …ring or keeping their non-performing workers in a perfectly correlated fash-
ion. In a Perfect Coordination Equilibrium, the worker’s incentive compatibility constraint
(11) becomes
                                      = (ph (1)        ph (0))(1    ) 2 V (^
                                                                           u(1)):                        (18)

                                                          19
When we solve the constraint with respect to                 2,    we …nd that the probability with which
…rms coordinate on …ring all of their non-performing workers is given by

                                  2   =                                             :                         (19)
                                           (ph (1)     ph (0))(1        )V (^
                                                                            u(1))

   If   1   2 (0; 1), we have a Partial Coordination Equilibrium. In this equilibrium, …rms
…re workers with probability s (y` ; z^) = s1 2 (0; 1) for all z^ 2 Z1 . Hence, when z^ 2 Z1 ,
…rms randomize over …ring or keeping their non-performing workers independently from
each other. However, if z^ 2
                           = Z1 , …rms …re their workers with probability 0 if z^ 2 Z0 and
with probability 1 if z^ 2 Z2 . Hence, when z^ 2
                                               = Z1 , …rms use the sunspot to randomize over
…ring or keeping their non-performing workers in a correlated fashion. Overall, a Partial
Correlation Equilibrium is a combination of a No Coordination and a Perfect Coordination
Equilibrium. In a Partial Coordination Equilibrium, the worker’s incentive compatibility
constraint (11) becomes

                      = (ph (1)           ph (0))(1     ) [ 1 s1 V (^
                                                                    u(s1 )) +     2V    (^
                                                                                         u(1))] :             (20)

When we solve the constraint with respect to s, we …nd that the constant probability with
which …rms …re their non-performing workers for z^ 2 Z1 is
                                             (ph (1) ph (0))(1   ) 2 V (^
                                                                        u(1))
                           s1 =                                               :                               (21)
                                          (ph (1) ph (0))(1    ) 1 V (^
                                                                      u(s1 ))

   The above results are summarized in Theorem 2.
Theorem 2: (Stage Equilibrium). Three 1-Period Equilibria exist: (i) No Coordination
Equilibrium where s (y` ; z^) = s1 for all z^ 2 Z1 , where Z1 has probability measure                     1   =1
and s1 is given by (17); (ii) Perfect Coordination Equilibrium where s (y` ; z^) = 0 for all
z^ 2 Z0 and s (y` ; z^) = 1 for all z^ 2 Z2 , where Z0 has probability measure 1                          2   and
Z2 has probability measure            2   and   2   2 (0; 1) is given by (19); (iii) Partial Coordination
Equilibrium where s (y` ; z^) = 0 for all z^ 2 Z0 , s (y` ; z^) = s1 for all z^ 2 Z1 , and s (y` ; z^) = 1
for all z^ 2 Z2 , where Z1 has probability measure                0   2 (0; 1) and s1 is given by (21).

   The Perfect Coordination Equilibrium exists because …rms have an incentive to coordi-
nate the outcome of the randomization over …ring and keeping their non-performing workers
in order to minimize the “collateral damage”involved in providing workers with incentives.
Moreover, …rms are able to coordinate the outcome of the randomization because of the
sunspot. The No Coordination Equilibrium and the Partial Coordination Equilibrium exist
because the sunspot is inherently meaningless and, hence, there always exist an equilibrium

                                                        20
in which it is ignored. However, if …rms do not need to rely on an inherently meaningless
signal to coordinate, they will always be able to do so and the No Coordination and Partial
Coordination Equilibria will disappear. Indeed, in the next subsection, we consider a version
of the stage game in which …rms …re sequentially and show that its unique equilibrium is the
one with perfect coordination.

   In a Perfect Coordination Equilibrium the economy experiences aggregate ‡uctuations:
for some realizations of the sunspot, all of the …rms …re their non-performing workers and
unemployment is high; for other realizations of the sunspot, all of the …rms keep their non-
performing workers and unemployment is low. First, notice that these aggregate ‡uctuations
are endogenous. Indeed, they do not originate from exogenous shocks to fundamentals, or
from exogenous shocks to the selection of the equilibrium played by the market participants.
They are caused by the fact that, in the unique robust equilibrium, di¤erent …rms ran-
domize over …ring or not …ring in a correlated fashion. Second, notice that these aggregate
‡uctuations are stochastic. Indeed, the economy does not follow a more or less complicated
deterministic path (as in the earlier literature on endogenous cycles), but a genuinely sto-
chastic process. We believe that our model is the …rst example of a theory of endogenous
and stochastic ‡uctuations. In fact, we do not know of any other model where the stochas-
tic process for aggregate ‡uctuations is an equilibrium outcome as it is in our model (see
equation (19)).


4.2    Equilibrium Re…nement
As we discussed above, the existence of No Coordination and Partial Coordination Equilibria
is an artifact of the simplifying assumption that all …rms randomize over …ring or keeping
non-performing workers simultaneously. When …rms randomize simultaneously, they need
to rely on the sunspot to correlate the outcome of their randomization. However, since the
sunspot is inherently meaningless, there is always an equilibrium in which the sunspot is
ignored and …rms cannot correlate the outcome of their randomization. In this subsection,
we consider a version of the environment in which …rms randomize over …ring or keeping
their non-performing workers sequentially. We show that, …rms moving later can always
condition their randomization on the outcome of …rms moving earlier and, hence, the unique
equilibrium is the one with perfect coordination.

   Here is a formal description of the modi…ed environment. Let 1      u denote the measure
of employed workers at the bargaining stage of the current period. The measure of employed
workers is equally divided into a large number N K …rms, each employing one worker of

                                             21
“measure”(1 u)=N K. Firms are clustered into a large number K of groups, each comprising
a large number N of …rms. Firms and workers bargain over the terms of the one-period
employment contract knowing the group to which they belong. At the separation stage of
next period, …rm-worker pairs in di¤erent groups break up sequentially. First, the …rm-
worker pairs in group 1 simultaneously decide to separate or not. Second, after observing
the outcomes of group 1, the …rm-worker pairs in group 2 simultaneously decide to separate
or not. Third, after observing the outcomes of groups 1 and 2, the …rm-worker pairs in group
3 simultaneously decide to separate or not. The process continues until the …rm-worker pairs
in group K simultaneously decide to separate or not, after having observed the outcomes of
groups 1 through K       1. Naturally, in this version of the model, we do not need the sunspot.

   Let Ti denote the measure of workers separating from …rms in groups 1 through i. We
assume that each …rm in group i takes as given the probability distribution of Ti conditional
on Ti 1 , which we denote as Pi (Ti jTi 1 ). The assumption means that each …rm views itself as
small compared to its group. The assumption is reasonable when N is large. We also assume
that Pi (Ti jTi 1 ) is increasing, in the sense of …rst-order stochastic dominance, in Ti 1 . The
assumption means that …rms in a group view themselves as small compared to the whole
economy. The assumption is reasonable when K is large. We also approximate the worker’s
gains from trade, V (^
                     u), and the …rm’s gains from trade, J(^
                                                           u), with linear functions. The
approximation implies that the expectation of the worker’s relative gains from trade over next
period’s unemployment, E[V (^       u)], is equal to the worker’s relative gains from trade
                            u)]=E[J(^
evaluated at the expectation of next period’s unemployment, V (E[^
                                                                 u])]=J(E[^
                                                                          u]) = (E[^
                                                                                   u]).

   We can now characterize the optimal contract between a worker and a …rm in group
i = 2; 3; : : : K. The contract can condition the …ring probability si (y; Ti 1 ) on the realization
of the worker’s output y and on the measure Ti            1   of workers separating from …rms in groups
1 through i    1. As in Section 3, it is easy to show that the optimal contract is such that: (i)
the worker’s incentive compatibility constraint holds with equality; (ii) if the realization of
output is high, the worker is …red with probability 0, i.e. si (yh ; Ti 1 ) = 0 for all Ti 1 ; (iii) if
the realization of output is low, the worker is …red with probability 0 if the worker’s relative
gains from trade are below a cuto¤       i,   and with probability 1 if they are above the cuto¤, i.e.
si (y` ; Ti 1 ) = 0 if (E[^
                          ujTi 1 ]) <   i,   and si (y` ; Ti 1 ) = 1 if (E[^
                                                                           ujTi 1 ]) >   i.   The optimal
contract between a worker and a …rm in group 1 can only condition the …ring probability
on the realization of the worker’s output y. In this case, the optimal contract is such that
s1 (yh ) = 0 and s1 (y` ) = s1 , where s1 is such that the worker’s incentive compatibility
constraint holds with equality.


                                                     22
   The following lemma shows that the probability si (y` ; Ti 1 ) with which …rms in group
si (y` ; Ti 1 ) …re their non-performing workers has a threshold property with respect to Ti 1 ,
the measure of workers separating from …rms in groups 1 through Ti 1 . This property of
equilibrium is intuitive, as a higher Ti            1   leads to a higher expectation for unemployment
and, in turn, to a higher expectation for the worker’s relative gains from trade.

Lemma 5: For i = 2; : : : K, the …ring probability si (y` ; Ti 1 ) equals 0 for all Ti                 1   < Ti 1 ,
and it equals 1 for all Ti         1   > Ti 1 .

Proof : In Appendix B.

   We can now compute the equilibrium probability distribution of the measure ti of workers
separating from …rms in group i = 1; 2; : : : K, conditional on the measure Ti                   1    of workers
separating from …rms in groups 1 through i                   1. Any …rm-worker pair in group 1 separates
with probability       1    =     + (1        )p` (1)s1 . Since N is large, we can use the Central Limit
Theorem to approximate the measure t1 of workers separating from …rms in group 1 with a
Normal distribution with mean E[t1 ] =               1 (1    u)=K and variance V ar[t1 ] =     1 (1        1 )[(1

u)=K]2 =N . Conditional on Ti 1 , a …rm-worker pair in group i = 2; 3; : : : :K separates with
probability     i (Ti 1 )    =     + (1       )p` (1)si (y` ; Ti 1 ). Since N is large, we can approximate
the measure ti of workers separating from …rms in group i with a Normal distribution with
mean E[ti jTi 1 ] =         i (Ti 1 )(1    u)=K and variance V ar[ti jTi 1 ] =   i (Ti 1 )(1    1 (Ti 1 ))[(1

u)=K]2 =N . We …nd it convenient to de…ne t` = (1                  u)=K, and th = [ + (1             )p` (1)] (1
u)=K.

   The following lemma shows that, for N ! 1, there exists an equilibrium in which the
…rms in groups 2 through K either all …re or all keep their non-performing workers depending
on the measure of workers separating from …rms in group 1. Let us give some intuition for
this result in the case of K = 3. If the …rms in group 1 happen to break up with more
than T1 workers, …rms in group 2 …re their non-performing workers with probability 1. If
the …rms in group 1 happen to break up with less than T1 workers, …rms …re in group
2 …re their non-performing workers with probability 0. Since the variance of t1 and t2 is
vanishing as N ! 1, T2 = E[t1 ] + th with probability 1                      P1 (T1 ) and T2 = E[t1 ] + t`
with probability P1 (T1 ). Suppose that T2 = E[t1 ] + (th + t` )=2. Then, …rms in group 3 …re
their non-performing workers with probability 1 if T2 = E[t1 ] + th and with probability 0
if T2 = E[t1 ] + t` . Since the variance of t3 is vanishing as N ! 1, T3 = E[t1 ] + 2th with
probability 1      P1 (T1 ) and T3 = E[t1 ] + 2t` with probability P1 (T1 ). Overall, …rms in group
2 …re their non-performing workers with probability 1                   P1 (T1 ) and, in that case, expect
total separations T3 = E[t1 ] + 2th . Firms in group 3 …re their non-performing workers with

                                                            23
probability 1      P1 (T1 ) and, in that case, they expect total separations T3 = E[t1 ] + 2th .
Therefore, if T1 satis…es the incentive compatibility constraint of workers in group 2, then
T2 satis…es the incentive compatibility constraint of workers in group 3. This con…rms the
existence of the desired equilibrium for K = 3. Clearly, for K ! 1, this equilibrium
converges to the Perfect Coordination Equilibrium.

Lemma 6: For N ! 1, there is an equilibrium in which …rms in groups 2 through K
…re their non-performing workers with probability 0 if T1 < T1 , and with probability 1 if
T1 > T1 , where T1 is such that

            = (1        )(ph (1)    ph (0))(1                    ujTK = E[t1 ] + (K
                                                   P1 (T1 ))V (E[^                       1)th ]).   (22)

Proof : In Appendix B.

    Next, we rule out the existence of other equilibria. To this aim, notice that, in any
equilibrium, …rms in group 2 …re their non-performing workers with probability 0 if T1 < T1 ,
and they …re them with probability 1 if T1 > T1 , where T1 is such that the worker’s incentive
compatibility constraint is satis…ed, i.e.

                      = (1         )(ph (1)     ph (0))(1                 ujT1 > T1 ])
                                                            P1 (T1 ))V (E[^                         (23)

For N ! 1, T2 is approximately equal to E[t1 ] + t` with probability P1 (T1 ) and, it is
approximately equal to E[t1 ] + th with probability 1            P1 (T1 ).

    Now, suppose that the threshold T2 is such that P2 (T2 ) > P1 (T1 ). Then, conditional on
any T2 approximately equal to E[t1 ] + t` , …rms in group 3 …re their non-performing workers
with probability 0. Conditional on T2 being approximately equal to E[t1 ]+th , …rms in group 3
do not …re their non-performing workers with probability (P2 (T2 ) P1 (T1 ))=(1 P1 (T1 )) and
they do with probability (1        P2 (T2 ))=(1      P1 (T1 )). The incentive compatibility constraint
for workers employed by …rms in group 3 is thus given by

                      = (1         )(ph (1)     ph (0))(1                 ujT2 > T2 ])
                                                            P2 (T2 ))V (E[^                         (24)

However, the incentive compatibility constraints (23) and (24) cannot hold simultaneously
and, hence, there cannot be an equilibrium in which P2 (T2 ) > P1 (T1 ). To see why this is
the case, notice that E[^
                        ujT1 > T1 ] is equal to E[^
                                                  ujT2 > T2 ] + E[^
                                                                  ujT2 < T2 ; T1 > T1 ] and
1   P1 (T1 ) > 1    P2 (T2 ). Therefore, the right-hand side of (23) is strictly greater than the
right-hand side of (24). Following a similar argument, we can rule also out equilibria in which
P2 (T2 ) < P1 (T1 ). Hence, in any equilibrium, P2 (T2 ) = P1 (T1 ), which implies that …rms in

                                                      24
group 3 …re their non-performing workers if and only if …rms in group 2 do. Repeating the
above argument for i = 4; 5; : : : :K, we can show that, in any equilibrium, …rms in group i
…re their non-performing workers if and only if …rms in group i     1 do. Therefore, the only
equilibrium of the modi…ed environment is the one described in Lemma 6.

   We have thus completed the proof of the following theorem.

Theorem 3: (Re…nement) For K ! 1 and N ! 1, the unique equilibrium of the environ-
ment with K groups of N …rms …ring sequentially is the Perfect Coordination Equilibrium.

   The analysis of the environment where …rms …re sequentially sheds additional light on
the nature of aggregate ‡uctuations in our model. The …rms in the …rst group …nd it optimal
to randomize on whether to …re or keep their non-performing workers. If the …rst group of
…rms …re enough workers, then all the other …rms in the economy …nd it optimal to …re their
non-performing workers. Otherwise, all the other …rms in the economy …nd it optimal to
keep their non-performing workers. That is, the equilibrium is such that the …ring decision
of the …rst group of …rms leads to a “…ring cascade”. In contrast to the models of herding of
Banerjee (1992) and Bikhchandani et al. (1992), the cascades in our model do not take place
because the actions of the …rst group of …rms contain information about the realization of
an exogenous aggregate shock, but because the actions of the …rst group of …rms a¤ect the
incentive of subsequent …rms from taking the same action. Hence, cascades in our model
start from the realization of idiosyncratic shocks, absent any aggregate uncertainty. In this
sense, aggregate ‡uctuations in our model have a granular origin, as in Jovanovic (1987) and
Gabaix (2011). However, unlike Jovanovic (1987) and Gabaix (2011), idiosyncratic shocks
in our model propagate because of strategic interactions between …rms rather than because
of the input-output structure of the economy.


4.3    Recursive Equilibrium
In the previous subsections, we established the existence of a Perfect Coordination Equilib-
rium of the stage game under the conjecture that unemployment is increasing and the wage
is decreasing in unemployment. We also argued that the Perfect Coordination Equilibrium
is the only equilibrium of the stage game that is robust to a natural perturbation of the envi-
ronment. In this subsection, we show that, given a Perfect Coordination Equilibrium of the
stage game, there exists a Recursive Equilibrium such that the unemployment is increasing
in …ring and the wage is decreasing in unemployment.



                                              25
         The existence proof is an application of Schauder’s …xed point theorem. The proof is
lengthy and relegated in Appendix C. Here we outline the structure of the proof. Denote
as         the set of bounded functions (V+ ; J+ ), V+ : [0; 1]                   ! R and J+ : [0; 1] ! R, such
that for all u0 and u1 , 0               u0        u1      1, V+ (u1 )        V+ (u0 ) is greater than DV+ (u1        u0 )
                                                          +               +
and smaller than DV+ (u1                 u0 ), and J (u1 )               J (u0 ) is greater than DJ+ (u1      u0 ) and
smaller than DJ+ (u1              u0 ), where DV+ > DV+ > 0, DJ+ > 0                       DJ+ . That is,         is the
set of functions (V+ ; J+ ) that are bounded and Lipschitz continuous, with Lipschitz bounds
respectively given by DV+ and DV+ , and DJ+ and DJ+ .8 Also, we denote as                               u   and   u   the
upper and the lower bound of the partial derivative of the job-…nding probability (J; u)
with respect to u, and as            J   and       J   the upper and the lower bound of the partial derivative
of (J; u) with respect to J.

         Take an arbitrary pair of functions V+ (u) and J+ (u) from the set                     . We let V+ be the
worker’s expected gains from trade at the end of the production stage, and we let J+ be the
…rm’s expected gains from trade at the end of the production stage. First, given (V+ ; J+ ),
we use the fact that W (w; u) = (w)                           (b)        + V+ (u) and F (w; u) = E[y]       w + J+ (u)
and condition (12) for the optimal contract to compute the equilibrium wage function w(u).
We prove that w(u) is strictly decreasing in u. Intuitively, given the choice for the bounds
DV+ and DJ+ , an increase in unemployment leads to a larger increase in W (w; u) than in
 0
     (w)F (w; u) for any given wage w. For this reason, the wage must fall to make sure that
the worker’s relative gains from trade, W (w; u)=F (w; u), are equal to the worker’s relative
                                               0
marginal utility of consumption                    (w).

         Second, given the functions V+ (u) and J+ (u) and the wage function w(u), we use the
fact that V (u) = W (w(u); u) and J(u) = F (w(u); u) to compute the equilibrium gains from
trade accruing to the worker and to the …rm. We prove that J(u) is strictly increasing in
u. Intuitively, given the choice for the bound DJ+ , an increase in unemployment leads to a
decline in the wage that more than compensates the largest possible decline in J+ (u). Simi-
larly, we prove that V (u) is strictly increasing in u. Intuitively, V (u) is equal to J(u) 0 (w(u))
                            0
and both J(u) and               (w(u)) are strictly increasing in u.

         Third, given the function J(u), we use (7) to compute the law of motion for unemployment
h(u; z^). We prove that, as long as (1                     )ph (1)         (J; u) > 0, next period’s unemployment
h(u; z^) is strictly increasing in current period’s unemployment. Moreover, we prove that
next period’s unemployment h(u; z^) is strictly greater for the realization of the sunspot for
which …rms coordinate on …ring their non-performing workers, i.e. for z^ 2 Z2 , than for
     8
         The reader can …nd the expression for the Lipschitz in Appendix B.


                                                                    26
the realizations for which …rms coordinate on keeping their non-performing workers, i.e. for
z^ 2 Z0 .

      Finally, given the functions V (u), J(u) and h(u; z^), we compute updates FV+ (u) and
FJ+ (u) for the worker’s and …rm’s expected gains from trade at the end of the production
process. More precisely, we compute FV+ (u) and FJ+ (u) as

            FV+ (u) = Ez^ f[(1            )(1         p` (1)s(y` ; z^))     (J(h(u; z^)); u)]V (h(u; z^))g,
                                                                                                                   (25)
            FJ+ (u) = Ez^ [(1            )(1     p` (1)s(y` ; z^))J(h(u; z^))],

where the …ring probability s(y` ; z^) = 1 for z^ 2 Z2 and s(y` ; z^) = 0 for z^ 2 Z0 , while the
probability that z^ 2 Z2 is given by            2   in (19) and the probability that z^ 2 Z2 is          0    =1     2.

We prove that, as long as            u         J (1         +      u)   > 0, FV+ (u) is bounded and such that
FV+ (u1 )        FV+ (u0 ) is greater than DV+ (u1                 u0 ) and smaller than DV+ (u1          u0 ) for all
u0 ; u1 with 0       u0        u1   1. Similarly, we prove that FJ+ (u) is bounded and such that
FJ+ (u1 )      FJ+ (u0 ) is greater than DJ+ (u1              u0 ) and smaller than DJ+ (u1        u0 ) for all u0 ; u1
with 0      u0     u1     1.

      The above observations imply that the operator F is a self-map, in the sense that it maps
pairs of functions in the set            into pairs of functions that also belong to the set                   . The
set      is a non-empty, bounded, closed convex subset of the space of bounded continuous
functions with the sup norm (see Lemma A.1 in Menzio and Shi, 2010). We also establish
that the operator F is continuous. Finally, we establish that the family of functions F( ) is
equicontinuous. Equicontinuity, which is typically rather di¢ cult to establish, here follows
immediately because the functions FV+ and FJ+ have the same Lipschitz bounds for all
(V+ ; J+ ) 2 .

      The properties of the operator F are the conditions of Schauder’s …xed point theorem
(see Theorem 17.4 in Stokey, Lucas and Prescott 1989). Thus, there exists a pair of functions
(V+ ; J+ ) 2      such that F(V+ ; J+ ) = (V+ ; J+ ). Given the functions V+ and J+ , we construct
the associated wage function, w , the gains from trade to the worker and to the …rm, V and
J , and the law of motion for unemployment, h . These objects, together with an optimal
contract x (u) that prescribes the wage w (u) and the …ring probabilities s (yh ; z^; u) = 0,
s (yh ; z^; u) = 1 for z^ 2 Z2 and s (yh ; z^; u) = 0 for z^ 2 Z0 constitute a Recursive Equilibrium
in which, for all u, the equilibrium stage game is such that …rms perfectly coordinate on
…ring or keeping their non-performing workers.

      This completes the proof of the following theorem.


                                                              27
Theorem 4: (Recursive Equilibrium) Assume (1                   )ph (1)   (u; J) > 0 and    u         J (1
 +    u)   > 0. For all ( ; ) such that   2 (0;        ) and     2 (0;   ), where    > 0 and          > 0,
there is a Recursive Equilibrium in which the stage equilibrium is a Perfect Coordination
Equilibrium.



5     Agency Business Cycles
In a Perfect Coordination Equilibrium, the economy experiences aggregate ‡uctuations that
are endogenous and stochastic. We refer to these aggregate ‡uctuations as Agency Business
Cycles (ABC). In this section, we calibrate the model to the US economy to assess the
magnitude of ABC. We …nd that ABC can generate large ‡uctuations in unemployment,
in the rate at which employed workers become unemployed (EU rate) and in the rate at
which unemployed workers become employed (the UE rate). We then test three distinctive
features of ABC. First, in ABC, a recession starts with an increase in the EU rate which
drives up unemployment and, because of decreasing returns to scale in matching, lowers the
UE rate. This causal chain implies that the EU rate leads the unemployment rate and the
UE rate. We …nd the same pattern of leads and lags in the US data. Second, in ABC, the
probability of a recession is endogenous and, in particular, it becomes higher the lower is
unemployment. We …nd that, in the US economy, the probability of a recession depends
negatively on unemployment. Third, in ABC, a recession is a period when the value of time
in the market relative to the value of time at home is abnormally high. We …nd preliminary
evidence that this is also the case for the US economy.


5.1     Calibration
We start by calibrating the primitives of the model. Preferences are described by the worker’s
periodical utility function, (c)       e, and by the discount factor, . Market production is
described by the realizations of output, yh and y` , by the probability that output is high
given the worker’s e¤ort, ph (1) and ph (0), and by the exogenous job destruction probability
 . Home production is described by the output of an unemployed worker, b. The search and
matching process is described by the vacancy cost, k, and the matching function, M (u; v).
We specialize the utility function for consumption to be of the form (c) = c1                  =(1          ),
where      is the coe¢ cient of relative risk aversion. We specialize the matching function to be
                                                                            1=
of the form M (u; v) = A(u)m(u; v), where m(u; v) = uv(u + v )                   is a constant returns
to scale matching function with an elasticity of substitution , and A(u) = exp(                  u) is a
matching e¢ ciency function with a semi-elasticity with respect to unemployment of                     .

                                                  28
      We calibrate the parameters of the model to match some key statistics of the US labor
market between 1951 and 2014, such as the average unemployment rate, the average UE
rate, and the average EU rate. We measure the US unemployment rate as the CPS civilian
unemployment rate. We measure the UE and the EU rates using the civilian unemployment
and short-term unemployment rates from the CPS, following the same methodology as in
Shimer (2005). We measure labor productivity as output per worker in the non-farm sector.

      We calibrate the basic parameters of the model as is now standard in the literature.
We choose the model period to be one month. We set the discount factor,               , so that the
annual real interest rate, (1= )1=12    1, is 5 percent. We choose the vacancy cost, k, and the
exogenous job destruction probability, , so that the model matches the average UE and EU
rates in the US economy (respectively, 44% and 2:6%). We normalize the average value of
market production, ph (1)yh + (1     ph (1))y` , to 1. We choose the value of home production, b,
to be 70% of the average value of market production, which Hall and Milgrom (2010) argue
is a reasonable estimate for the US economy.

      We calibrate the parameters of the model that determine the extent of the agency problem
as follows. The probability that the realization of output is yh given that the worker exerts
e¤ort, ph (1), a¤ects the number of non-performing workers and, hence, the magnitude of
…ring bursts. The disutility of e¤ort, , a¤ects the frequency at which …rms need to …re non-
performing workers, hence, the frequency of …ring bursts. Therefore, we choose yh so that
the model generates the same standard deviation in the cyclical component of the EU rate
as in the US economy (9:85%). We choose           so that, on average, …rms coordinate on …ring
their non-performing workers once every 50 months. The parameters yh and y` and ph (0)
cannot be uniquely pinned down. Given that average output is 1, the realizations of output
yh and y` do not a¤ect the equilibrium, as long as it is optimal for …rms to require e¤ort
from their workers. Similarly, the probability ph (0) only a¤ects the equilibrium through the
ratio =(ph (1)     ph (0)). Therefore, we choose some arbitrary values for yh , y` and ph (0) such
that …rms …nd it optimal to require e¤ort.

      Finally, we need to choose values for the parameters in the utility and the matching
functions. We set the coe¢ cient        of relative risk aversion in the utility function      to 1.
This is a standard value from micro-estimates of risk aversion. We set the elasticity             of
substitution between unemployment and vacancy in the matching function m to 1.24. This
is the value estimated by Menzio and Shi (2011).9 We tentatively set the parameter            in the
  9
   Correctly estimating a matching function requires taking into account the fact that unemployed and
employed workers all search for vacancies to some degree. Using a model of search o¤ and on the job,


                                                 29
matching e¢ ciency function A to 6.10



                              Table 1: Calibrated Parameters
                                    Description                          Value
                            yh      high output                          1.03
                            y`      low output                            .000
                           ph (1)   probability of yh given e = 1         .967
                           ph (0)   probability of yh given e = 0         .467
                             b      UI bene…t/value of leisure            .700
                                    disutility of e¤ort                   .007
                                    exogenous job destruction             .025
                             k      vacancy cost                          .257
                                    elasticity of sub. btw u and v        1.24
                                    semi-elasticity of A wrt u            6.00




5.2     Magnitude and Properties of ABC
Table 1 reports the calibrated value of the parameters of the model. Given these values, we
simulate the model and create monthly time-series for the unemployment rate, the UE rate,
the EU rate and other labor market variables. For each variable, we construct quarterly
time-series by taking 3-month averages. We then compute the cyclical component of each
variable as the percentage deviation of its quarterly value from a Hodrick-Prescott trend
constructed using a smoothing parameter of 105 . We use the same procedure to construct
the cyclical component of labor market variables in the US data. Figure D1 in Appendix
D presents a sample of the time-series generated by the model for the cyclical component
of the unemployment rate, the UE rate and the EU rate. Figure D2 presents the cyclical
component of the unemployment rate, the UE rate and the EU rate in the US economy over
the period 1990-2014.

    Table 2 reports some statistics about the unemployment rate, the UE rate, the EU rate
and the labor productivity generated by the model and about the same variables in the data.
Menzio and Shi (2011) estimate the elasticity of substitution between searching workers and vacant jobs in
the matching function to be 1:24.
   10
      When we calibrate the model using a higher value for , we …nd that the model generates larger ‡uctua-
tions in the UE rate and, hence, larger ‡uctuations in the unemployment rate. The qualitative predictions of
the model, though, remain unchanged. We refer the reader to Footnote xx for a justi…cation of our baseline
choice of rho.


                                                    30
First, Table 2 shows that ABC can account for a signi…cant fraction of the volatility of the
US labor market. Speci…cally, the standard deviation of unemployment in the model is 55%
of what we observe in the data. Similarly, the standard deviation of the UE rate in the
model is 33% of its empirical counterpart, and the standard deviation of the EU rate in the
model is the same as in the data. When we recalibrate the model using a higher value of ,
the model generates larger ‡uctuations in the UE rate and, hence, larger ‡uctuations in the
unemployment rate.11 The reader should keep in mind that the model is calibrated under
the identifying assumption that the volatility in the EU rate observed in the data is entirely
explained by our theory.12


                              Table 2: Agency Business Cycles
                                                      u rate    UE rate    EU rate    APL
                   Model          std                  9.34      4.09       9.11        0
                                  cor. wrt u            1        -.98        .32        -
              Data: 1951-2014     std                  16.9      12.9        9.7      1.98
                                  cor wrt u             1        -.94        .80      -.37
              Data: 1984-2014     std                  17.3      13.8       6.91      1.38
                                  cor wrt u             1        -.96        .70       .09



       Second, Table 2 shows that ABC feature the same pattern of comovement between the
unemployment rate, the UE rate and the EU rate as in the data. In particular, in the model
as in the data, the unemployment rate and the UE rate are negatively correlated, while
the unemployment rate and the EU rate are positively correlated. However, in the model
unemployment and vacancies are mildly positively correlated, while in the data these two
variables are almost perfectly negatively correlated. This discrepancy between model and
data is an artifact of the simplifying and counterfactual assumption that workers search the
labor market only when they are unemployed. Indeed, under the assumption of o¤-the-job
search, an increase in unemployment causes an increase in the number of workers searching
  11
     We are not arguing that ABC are the only source of aggegate ‡uctuations in the labor market and,
hence, that it should explain all of the empirical volatility of unemployment, UE and EU rates. Indeed, we
believe that ABC can either create additional ‡uctuations relative to those caused by fundamental shocks,
or that correlated …rings might amplify fundamental shocks. However, as we want to isolate the e¤ect of
ABC, in this paper we abstract from all fundamental shocks.
  12
     Nonetheless, the …nding that ABC can create large ‡uctuations in the unemployment, the UE and the
EU rates is important. Indeed, as shown by Shimer (2005), the textbook search-theoretic model of the labor
market with productivity shocks explains less than 10% of the empirical volatility of unemployment. Hall
(2005), Menzio (2005), Hagedorn and Manovskii (2008), Kennan (2010), Menzio and Shi (2011) develop
search-theoretic models in which productivity shocks generate larger ‡uctuations in unemployment. How-
ever, these models counterfactually predict a perfect negative correlation between unemployment and labor
productivity.


                                                   31
the labor market which, in turn, gives …rms an incentive to create more vacancies. Under the
more realistic assumption of on and o¤-the-job search, an increase in unemployment does
not cause an increase in the number of workers searching the labor market and, hence, does
not give …rms a clear incentive to create more vacancies.

       Finally, Table 2 shows that the model generates relatively large ‡uctuations in unem-
ployment that are uncorrelated with ‡uctuations in labor productivity. This is an impor-
tant feature of the model. The empirical correlation between unemployment and labor
productivity— which was signi…cantly negative for the period 1951-1984— has become ba-
sically zero for the period 1984-2014. Therefore, over the period 1951-1984, ‡uctuations
in labor productivity may have driven the cyclical movements of the US labor market. In
contrast, over the period 1984-2014, ‡uctuations in labor productivity seem an unlikely
driver of cycles in the US labor market. Our theory provides an explanation for the recent
lack of comovement between labor productivity and unemployment by identifying a novel,
non-technological source of aggregate ‡uctuations.13

       Overall, Table 2 shows that Agency Business Cycles can be large. Now, we turn to
examine some of the distinctive features of ABC. According to ABC, a recession starts with
an increase in the EU rate which drives up unemployment and, because of decreasing returns
to scale in matching, lowers the UE rate. This causal chain can be seen in Figure 3, where we
display the correlation between unemployment in quarter t and other labor market variables
in quarter t + x, with x going from          5 to +5. The red solid line is the correlation between
the EU rate in quarter t + x and the unemployment rate in quarter t. The green solid line is
the correlation between the UE rate in quarter t + x and the unemployment rate in quarter t.
The black solid line is the correlation between the unemployment rate in quarter t + x and in
quarter t. It is immediate to see that the EU rate leads the unemployment rate by a quarter—
in the sense that the absolute value of the correlation between unemployment in quarter t
and the EU rate in quarter t+x is highest for x =            1— while the UE rate is contemporaneous
with unemployment– in the sense that the correlation between unemployment in quarter t
and the UE rate in quarter t + x is highest for x = 0. Moreover, the correlation between
current unemployment and the future EU rate dies o¤ much more rapidly than the correlation
between current unemployment and the future UE rate. The US labor market displays
exactly the same pattern of leads and lags, as can be seen from the dashed lines in Figure 3.
  13
    Gali and van Rens (2014) document in detail the decline in the negative correlation between unemploy-
ment and labor productivity. Gali and van Rens (2014), Kaplan and Menzio (2015) and Beaudry, Galizia and
Portier (2015) advance theories, alternative to ours, in which labor productivity does not correlate negatively
with unemployment.



                                                      32
                                                                    Figure 3: Leads and Lags
                                                1
                                              0.8
                    Correlation with u at 0   0.6
                                              0.4
                                              0.2
                                                0
                                              -0.2
                                              -0.4
                                              -0.6
                                              -0.8
                                               -1
                                                     -5   -4   -3        -2   -1     0         1   2     3        4   5
                                                               u-model              EU-model           UE-model
                                                               u-data               EU-data            UE-data




The main di¤erence between the correlation functions in the model and in the data is that,
in the model, all correlations die o¤ more quickly than in the data. This shortcoming of the
model is due to the fact that the driving force behind ABC (i.e. the coordinated …ring of
non-performing workers) has no persistence.14

       Fujita and Ramey (2009) were the …rst to point out that the EU rate leads the unemploy-
ment rate, while the UE rate is contemporaneous with the unemployment rate. Our theory
explains this pattern as a causal link from the EU rate to the unemployment rate and from
the unemployment rate to the UE rate.15 Also, Fujita and Ramey (2009) used a VAR model
to show that, once one takes into account the negative correlation between the current EU
rate and the future UE rate, ‡uctuations in the EU rate can account for approximately 60%
of the overall volatility of unemployment. Our theory can explain this …nding. Indeed, as
shown in Table 2, our theory implies that the ‡uctuations to the EU rate account for 60%
of the volatility of unemployment.16
  14
    We believe we could create persistence in …rings by assuming that …rm and workers observe output in a
staggered fashion— let’s say half in odd periods and half in even periods.

  15
     Ahn and Hamilton (2015) estimate a statistical model of ‡ows in and out of unemployment in which
workers di¤er by their job-…nding probability. They …nd that the increase in the EU rate at the onset of
the Great Recession contained a disproportionate fraction of low job-…nding probability workers and, hence,
caused the subsequent decline in the UE rate. They also …nd that the low job-…nding probability workers
are typically those …red from their job.
  16
     Since determines the e¤ect of shocks to the EU rate on the UE rate and, hence, on the unemployment


                                                                               33
    In ABC, the probability of a recession is endogenous and given by equation (19). The
lower is unemployment in (19), the lower is the cost to the worker from losing his job and,
hence, the higher is the probability with which …rms need to …re their non-performing workers
in order to give them an incentive to perform. Thus, the lower is unemployment, the higher
is the probability that a recession starts. In order to …nd out whether this feature of our
theory is borne out in the data, we take the time-series for the unemployment rate and de…ne
the start of a recession as a quarter in which the unemployment rate turns from decreasing
to increasing and keeps growing for at least two consecutive quarters.17 We then estimate a
probit model for the probability of the start of a recession as a function of the unemployment
rate. The estimated coe¢ cient on the unemployment rate is               :21, with a standard deviation
of 11%. The estimated coe¢ cient implies that the probability of a recession increases from
8% to 11% as the unemployment falls from 5:5% to 4:5%. Clearly, it is not possible to
precisely estimate the e¤ect of unemployment on the probability that a recession starts
because recessions are relatively rare events. In order to gather more observations, we take
the time-series of unemployment for Australia, Canada, Italy, Japan, France and the UK.18
After taking out the average unemployment from the time-series of each country, we merge
these data to those for the US and re-estimate the probit model. The estimated coe¢ cient
on the unemployment rate is          :20 with a standard deviation of 4%.

    We now turn to testing what is perhaps the most distinctive feature of ABC. In our theory,
a recession is a period when the value of time in the market relative to its value at home is
abnormally high. In contrast, in the Real Business Cycle theory of Kydland and Prescott
(1982), in Mortensen and Pissarides (1994) or in any other theory where business cycles are
driven by either exogenous or endogenous shocks to the value of production, a recession is a
period when the value of time in the market relative to its value at home is abnormally low.
To paint a picture, in RBC, a recession is a day when it is raining in the marketplace and,
for that reason, workers …nd it optimal to stay at home. In ABC, a recession is a day when
the TV set is broken at home and, for that reason, …rms …nd it optimal to get rid of their
non-performing workers. It is natural to wonder whether, empirically, the relative value of
labor in the market is pro or countercyclical. In order to address this question, we construct
rate, our choice for the value of rho is such that the model is consistent with the VAR …ndings of Fujita and
Ramey (2009).
  17
     The estimates are robust to alternative ways to de…ne the start of a recession.
  18
     These are countries for which the OECD provides su¢ ciently long time-series for unemployment. We
drop Germany from the sample because of the large movements in unemployment related to the uni…cation.
When estimated for each country separately, the coe¢ cient on unemployment in the probit model is always
negative. In Appendix D, we report the estimated relationships between unemployment and the probability
of a recession for each country separately and for the pool of countries.



                                                     34
some rudimentary empirical measures of the net value of employment to a worker.

   We measure the value of employment to a worker, W1;t , and the value of unemployment
to a worker, W0;t , as
                         W1;t = wt +   hEU
                                        t+1 W0;t+1 + (1    hEU
                                                            t+1 )W1;t+1 ;
                                                                                             (26)
                         W0;t = bt +   hUt+1
                                           E
                                             W1;t+1 + (1   hUt+1
                                                               E
                                                                 )W0;t+1 ;
where wt is a measure of the real wage in month t, bt is a measure of unemployment ben-
e…t/value of leisure in month t, hEU                                               UE
                                  t+1 is a measure of the EU rate in month t + 1, ht+1 is a
measure of the UE rate in month t + 1, and W1;t+1 and W0;t+1 are respectively the value of
employment and unemployment in month t + 1. We measure the net value of employment
to a worker, Vt , in month t as the di¤erence between W1;t and W0;t .

   We measure wt using the time-series for the hourly wage that have been constructed by
Haefke, Sonntag and van Rens (2013). We consider two alternative time-series: the average
hourly wage in the cross-section of all employed workers, and the average hourly wage in the
cross-section of newly hired workers after controlling for the composition of new hires. The
…rst time-series may be more appropriate when we want to interpret Vt as the cost of losing a
job to a worker, the second-time series may be more appropriate when we want to interpret
Vt as the bene…t of …nding a job to a worker. As in Shimer (2005), we measure hUt E and hEU
                                                                                         t
using, respectively, the values for the EU rate and UE rates implied by the time-series for
unemployment and short-term unemployment. In order to make the time-series for wt , hUt E
and hEU
     t  stationary, we construct their Hodrick-Prescott trend using a smoothing parameter
of 105 . We then take the di¤erence between the value of each variable and its trend and add
this di¤erence to the time-series average for that variable. Since bt is not directly observable,
we tentatively set it to be equal to 70% of the average of wt .

   We are now in the position to construct time-series for the value of employment to a
worker, W1;t , and the value of unemployment to a worker, W0;t , over the period going from
January 1979 to December 2014. We compute the values for W1 and W0 in December 2014
by assuming that, from January 2015 onwards, w, hU E , and hEU are equal to their historical
averages. Given the values for W1 and W0 in December 2014, we compute the values for W1
and W0 from November 2014 back to January 1979 by using equation (26) and the time-
series for w, b, hU E , and hEU . The reader should notice that the values of W1 and W0 thus
computed di¤er from their theoretical counterpart because they are constructed using the
realizations of future w, hU E , and hEU , rather than the expectation of these variables.

   Figure 4 presents the result of our calculations. Figure 4 displays the time-series for the
net value of employment to a worker, Vt , computed using the average wage of all employed

                                               35
                                Figure 4: Net Value of Employment
                18
                16
                14
                12
                10
                 8
                 6
                 4
                 2
                 0
                  1979   1984    1989     1994        1999     2004       2009   2014

                                        V-new          V-all          u




workers (solid black line) and the average wage of newly hired workers (dashed black line).
Figure 4 also displays the time-series for the detrended unemployment rate (solid grey line).
The …gure clearly shows that Vt is countercyclical, oin the sense that Vt moves together with
the unemployment rate. This is the case whether we measure Vt using the average wage
of all employed workers— in which the correlation between Vt and unemployment is 80%—
or whether we measure Vt using the average wage of newly hired workers— in which case
the correlation between Vt and unemployment is 71%. Mechanically, Vt is countercyclical
because, when unemployment increases, the decline in the value of being unemployed caused
by the large decline in the UE rate is larger than the decline in the value of being employed
cause by the small decline in the wage and by the short-lived increase in the EU rate. The
countercyclicality of Vt is a very robust …nding. The measure of Vt becomes even more
countercyclical if bt is assumed to be constant fraction of wt rather than a constant. The
correlation between Vt and ut remains practically unchanged if we do not …lter the data.

   The …nding that Vt is countercyclical means that recessions are times when unemployed
workers …nd it especially valuable to …nd a job, and when employed workers …nd it especially
costly to lose a job. The …nding is in stark contrast with the view of recessions as “days of
rain in the marketplace” advanced by Kydland and Prescott (1982) or by Mortensen and
Pissarides (1994). In contrast, the …nding is supportive of the view of recessions as “days
of no TV at home” advanced by our theory. Notice that our …nding that Vt should not

                                                 36
be entirely surprising. In fact, using a di¤erent, more sophisticated approach and richer
data, Davis and von Wachter (2011) show that the lifetime earning cost of losing a job is
much higher in recessions than in expansions. Even if one is skeptical about our theory
of recessions, the …nding that Vt is countercyclical represents a serious challenge for most
existing theories of business cycles.19



6      Conclusions
This paper proposed a new theory of business cycles. At a very abstract level, our theory
states that business cycles emerge because di¤erent agents in the economy …nd it optimal to
randomize over some individual decision in a perfectly correlated fashion. More concretely,
business cycles emerge because …rms need to randomize over …ring or keeping workers who
have performed poorly in the past, in order to give them an ex-ante incentive to perform.
Moreover, …rms …nd it optimal to correlate the randomization outcomes, as doing so allows
them to load up the …ring probability on states of the world in which it is costlier for
workers to become unemployed and, hence, it allows them to economize on agency costs.
In the unique robust equilibrium, …rms use a sunspot to perfectly correlate the outcome
of their individual randomizations. In this equilibrium, the economy experiences aggregate
‡uctuations that are endogenous— in the sense that they are not caused by exogenous shocks
to fundamentals or by exogenous shocks to the selection of equilibrium, but they are an
inherent feature of the unique equilibrium— and are stochastic— in the sense that they do
not follow a deterministic path, but a genuinely stochastic one. We believe that this may be
the …rst theory of endogenous and stochastic business cycles.



References
 [1] Ahn, H., and J. Hamilton. 2015. “Heterogeneity and Unemployment Dynamics.”Man-
       uscript, University of California at San Diego.

 [2] Angeletos, M., and J. La’O. 2013. “Sentiments.”Econometrica, 81: 739-780.
  19
    An alternative explanation is that business cycles are driven by productivity shocks and wages are rigid
(see, e.g., Hall 2005, Menzio 2005, Gertler and Trigari 2009, Menzio and Moen 2010 and Kennan 2010 for
search theoretic models of the labor market with rigid wages). In fact, if wages are rigid, productivity shocks
may generate, just like in our theory, a positive correlation between unemployment and Vt . However, if
wages are rigid, productivity shocks should generate a strong negative correlation between unemployment
and the value of a worker to a …rm Jt , while this correlation is positive in our theory. Applying the same
technique used to compute the time-series for Vt , we can compute a time-series for Jt . Using average labor
productivity as our measure of output per worker, we …nd that Jt is positively correlated with ut .


                                                      37
 [3] Banerjee, A. 1992. “A Simple Model of Herd Behavior.” Quarterly Journal of Eco-
    nomics, 107: 797-817.

 [4] Beaudry, P., D. Galizia, and F. Portier. 2015 “Reviving the Limit Cycle View of Macro-
    economic Fluctuations,”NBER Working Paper 21241.

 [5] Beaudry, P., and F. Portier. 2004. “Exploring Pigou’s Theory of Cycles.” Journal of
    Monetary Economics, 51: 1183-1216.

 [6] Benhabib, J., and R. Farmer. 1994. “Indeterminacy and Increasing Returns.” Journal
    of Economic Theory 63: 19–41.

 [7] Bikhchandani, S., D. Hirshleifer, and I. Welch. 1992. “A Theory of Fads, Fashion,
    Custom and Cultural Change as Information Cascades.” Journal of Political Economy
    100: 992-1026.

 [8] Bloom, N. 2009. “The Impact of Uncertainty Shocks.”Econometrica, 77: 623-685.

 [9] Boldrin, M., and L. Montrucchio. 1986. “On the Indeterminacy of Capital Accumulation
    Paths.”Journal of Economic Theory, 40: 26-39.

[10] Boldrin, M., and M. Woodford. 1990. “Equilibrium Models Displaying Endogenous
    Fluctuations and Chaos.”Journal of Monetary Economics, 25: 189-222.

[11] Burdett, K., S. Shi, and R. Wright. 2001. “Pricing and Matching with Frictions.”Journal
    of Political Economy 109: 1060-85.

[12] Clementi, G., and H. Hopenhayn. 2006. “A Theory of Financing Constraints and Firm
    Dynamics.”Quarterly Journal of Economics 121: 229-65.

[13] Cooper, R., and A. John. 1988. “Coordinating Coordination Failures in Keynesian Mod-
    els.”Quarterly Journal of Economics, 103: 441–63.

[14] Davis, S., and T. von Wachter. 2011. “Recessions and the Costs of Job Loss.”Brookings
    Papers on Economic Activity.

[15] Diamond, P. 1982. “Aggregate Demand Management in Search Equilibrium.” Journal
    of Political Economy 90: 881–94.

[16] Diamond, P., and D. Fudenberg. 1989. “Rational Expectations Business Cycles in Search
    Equilibrium.”Journal of Political Economy 97: 606–19.



                                            38
[17] Fujita, S., and G. Ramey. 2009. “The Cyclicality of Separation and Job Finding Rates.”
    International Economic Review 50: 415–30.

[18] Gabaix, X. 2011. “The Granular Origins of Aggregate Fluctuations.”Econometrica 79:
    733-772.

[19] Galí, J., and T. van Rens. 2014. “The Vanishing Procyclicality of Labor Productivity.”
    Manuscript, University of Warwick.

[20] Gertler, M., and A. Trigari. 2009. “Unemployment Dynamics with Staggered Nash Wage
    Bargaining.”Journal of Political Economy, 117: 38-86.

[21] Haefke, C., M. Sonntag, and T. van Rens, 2013. “Wage Rigidity and Job Creation.”
    Journal of Monetary Economics.

[22] Hagedorn, M., and I. Manovskii. 2008. “The Cyclical Behavior of Unemployment and
    Vacancies Revisited.”American Economic Review 98: 1692–706.

[23] Hall, R., 2005. “Employment Fluctuations with Equilibrium Wage Stickiness.” Ameri-
    can Economic Review 95: 50-65.

[24] Hall, R., and P. Milgrom. 2008. “The Limited In‡uence of Unemployment of the Wage
    Bargain.”American Economic Review 98: 1653–74.

[25] Heller, W. 1986. “Coordination Failure Under Complete Markets with Applications to
    E¤ective Demand.” Equilibrium analysis: Essays in Honor of Kenneth J. Arrow, 2:
    155–175, 1986.

[26] Jaimovich, N., and S. Rebelo. 2009. “Can News About the Future Drive Business Cy-
    cles?”American Economic Review 99: 1097-1118.

[27] Jovanovic, B. 1987. “Micro Shocks and Aggregate Risk.” Quarterly Journal of Eco-
    nomics 102: 395-409.

[28] Kaplan, G., and G. Menzio. 2015. “Shopping Externalities and Self-Ful…lling Unem-
    ployment Fluctuations.”Journal of Political Economy, Forthcoming.

[29] Kennan, J. 2010. “Private Information, Wage Bargaining and Employment Fluctua-
    tions.”Review of Economic Studies 77: 633-64.

[30] Kydland, F., and E. Prescott. 1982. “Time to Build and Aggregate Fluctuations.”
    Econometrica 50: 1345-70.

                                            39
[31] Menzio, G. 2005. “High Frequency Wage Rigidity.” Manuscript, Northwestern Univer-
    sity.

[32] Menzio, G., and E. Moen. 2010. “Worker Replacement.” Journal of Monetary Eco-
    nomics, 57: 623-36.

[33] Menzio, G., and S. Shi. 2010. “Block Recursive Equilibria for Stochastic Models of
    Search on the Job.”Journal of Economic Theory 145: 1453-94.

[34] Menzio, G., and S. Shi. 2011. “E¢ cient Search on the Job and the Business Cycle.”
    Journal of Political Economy 119: 468–510.

[35] Mortensen, D. 1999. “Equilibrium Unemployment Dynamics.”International Economic
    Review, 40: 889–914.

[36] Mortensen, D., and C. Pissarides. 1994. “Job Creation and Job Destruction in the
    Theory of Unemployment.”Review of Economic Studies 61: 397–415.

[37] Petrongolo, B., and C. Pissarides. 2001. “Looking into the Black Box: A Survey of the
    Matching Function.”Journal of Economic Literature 39: 390-431.

[38] Pissarides, C. 1985. “Short-Run Equilibrium Dynamics of Unemployment, Vacancies
    and Real Wages.”American Economic Review 75: 676–90.

[39] Shimer, R. 2005. “The Cyclical Behavior of Unemployment and Vacancies.” American
    Economic Review 95: 25–49.

[40] Stokey, N., R. Lucas, and E. Prescott, “Recursive Methods in Economic Dynamics.”
    Harvard University Press, Cambridge, Massachusetts, 1989.




                                           40
                                              Appendix
A        Proof of Lemmas 1-4
A.1         Proof of Lemma 1
Let         0 denote the Lagrange multiplier on the worker’s incentive compatibility constraint,
let (y; z^)      0 denote the multiplier on the constraint 1             s(y; z^)   0 and let (y; z^) denote
the multiplier on the constraint s(y; z^)           0.

      The …rst order condition with respect to the …ring probability s(y` ; z^) is given by

 (1         ) [F (x)V (^
                       z ) + W (x)J(^
                                    z )] =    (1         )(ph (1)   ph (0))V (^
                                                                              z ) + (y` ; z^)        (y` ; z^); (A1)

together with the complementary slackness conditions (y` ; z^) (1 s(y` ; z^)) = 0 and (y` ; z^)
s(y` ; z^) = 0. The left-hand side of (A1) is the marginal cost of increasing s(y` ; z^). This cost
is given by the decline in the product of the worker’s and …rm’s gains from trade caused
by a marginal increase in the …ring probability s(y` ; z^). The right-hand side of (A1) is the
marginal bene…t of increasing s(y` ; z^). This bene…t is given by the value of relaxing the
worker’s incentive compatibility and the s(y` ; z^)             0 constraints net of the cost of tightening
the s(y` ; z^)     1 constraint by marginally increasing the …ring probability s(y` ; z^).

      Similarly, the …rst order condition with respect to the …ring probability s(yh ; z^) is given
by

       (1      ) [F (x)V (^
                          z ) + W (x)J(^
                                       z) +        (ph (1)              z )] = (yh ; z^)
                                                              ph (0))V (^                       (yh ; z^);    (A2)

together with the complementary slackness conditions (yh ; z^) (1 s(yh ; z^)) = 0 and (yh ; z^)
s(yh ; z^) = 0. The left-hand side of (A2) represents the marginal cost of increasing s(yh ; z^).
The rigth-hand side of (A2) represents the marginal bene…t of increasing s(yh ; z^). Notice
that increasing the …ring probability s(yh ; z^) tightens the worker’s incentive compatibility
constraint and, hence, the term in           is now on the left-hand side of (A2).

      Suppose = 0. First, notice that the left-hand side of (A1) is strictly positive as V (^
                                                                                            z ) > 0,
  z ) > 0 by assumption, and W (x) > 0; F (x) > 0 at the optimum x . The right-hand side
J(^
of (A1) is strictly positive only if (y` ; z^) > 0. Hence, if                = 0, the only solution to the
…rst order condition with respect to the …ring probability s(y` ; z^) is 0. Next, notice that
the left-hand side of (A2) is strictly positive and the right-hand side is strictly positive
only if (yh ; z^) > 0. Hence, if         = 0, the only solution to the …rst order condition with
respect to the …ring probability s(yh ; z^) is 0. However, if s(y` ; z^) = s(yh ; z^) = 0, the worker’s

                                                         41
incentive compatibility constraint is violated. Therefore,                > 0 and the worker’s incentive
compatibility constraint holds with equality.


A.2        Proof of Lemma 2
The …rst order condition with respect to s(yh ; z^) is given by (A2) together with the com-
plementary slackness conditions (yh ; z^)(1             s(yh ; z^)) = 0 and (yh ; z^)s(yh ; z^) = 0. The
left-hand side of (A2) is strictly positive. The right-hand side of (A2) is strictly positive
only if (yh ; z^) > 0. Therefore, the …rst order condition is satis…ed only if (yh ; z^) > 0 and,
hence, only if s(yh ; z^) = 0.


A.3        Proof of Lemma 3
Using the de…nition of (^
                        z ), we can rewrite the …rst order condition with respect to the …ring
probability s(y` ; z^) as

       (1     )V (^
                  z ) [F (x) + W (x)= (^
                                       z)          (ph (1)       ph (0))] = (y` ; z^)   (y` ; z^);   (A3)

together with (y` ; z^) (1       s(y` ; z^)) = 0 and (y` ; z^) s(y` ; z^) = 0. The left-hand side of
(A3) is strictly decreasing in (^
                                z ). The right-hand side of (A3) is strictly positive if (y` ; z^)
is strictly positive and it is strictly negative if (y` ; z^) is strictly positive. Therefore, there
exists a     such that if (^
                           z) >         , the left-hand side is strictly negative and the solution to
(A3) requires (y` ; z^) > 0. In this case, the solution to the …rst order condition for s(y` ; z^)
is 1. If (^
          z) <       , the left-hand side is strictly positive and the solution to (A3) requires
 (y` ; z^) > 0. In this case, the solution to the …rst order condition for s(y` ; z^) is 0.


A.4        Proof of Lemma 4
The …rst order condition with respect to the wage w is given by

                                         F (x) 0 (w)        W (x) = 0:                               (A4)

The left-hand side of (A4) is the increase in the product of the worker’s and …rm’s gains
caused by a marginal increase in the worker’s wage w. A marginal increase in w, increases the
                                  0
worker’s gains from trade by          (w) and decreases the …rm’s gains from trade by 1. Therefore,
a marginal increase in w, increases the product of the worker’s and …rm’s gains from trade
by F (x) 0 (w)     W (x). The …rst order condition for w states that the e¤ect of a marginal
increase in w is zero.


                                                       42
B         Proof of Lemmas 5-6
B.1        Proof of Lemma 5
We …rst consider a …rm-worker pair in group K. Since PK (TK jTK 1 ) is strictly increasing in
TK   1   and u^ is strictly increasing in TK , E[^
                                                 ujTK 1 ] is strictly increasing in TK 1 . In turn, since
  ujTK 1 ] is strictly increasing in TK
E[^                                                  1   and (^
                                                              u) is strictly increasing in u^, (E[^
                                                                                                  ujTK 1 ]) is
strictly increasing in TK 1 . It then follows from property (iii) of the optimal contract that
there exists a TK        1   such that sK (y` ; TK 1 ) = 0 for all TK            1   < TK 1 , and sK (y` ; TK 1 ) = 1
for all TK    1   > TK 1 . This establishes that the …ring probability sK (y` ; TK 1 ) has the desired
threshold property. The threshold property implies that the measure tK of workers separating
from …rms in group K is increasing in the measure TK                       1   of workers separating from …rms in
groups 1 through K             1.

     Next, consider a …rm-worker pair in group K                         1. Since PK 1 (TK 1 jTK 2 ) is strictly
increasing in TK         2   and tK is increasing in TK 1 , it follows that E[^
                                                                              ujTK 2 ] and, in turn,
    ujTK 2 ]) are strictly increasing in TK 2 . Then property (iii) of the optimal contract
 (E[^
implies that there exists a TK             2   such that sK 1 (y` ; TK 2 ) = 0 for all TK             2   < TK 2 , and
sK 1 (y` ; TK 2 ) = 1 for all TK               2   > TK 2 .    This establishes that the …ring probability
sK 1 (y` ; TK 2 ) has the desired threshold property. The threshold property implies that the
measure tK        1   of workers separating from …rms in group K                     1 is increasing in the measure
TK   2   of workers separating from …rms in groups 1 through K                           2. By repeating the above
argument for …rm-worker pairs in groups K                          i, with i = 2; 3; : : : K     1, we can establish
that the …ring probability sK i (y` ; TK             i 1)   has the threshold property and that the measure
tK   i   is increasing in TK        i 1.




B.2        Proof of Lemma 6
Let T1 be given as in (22) and let Ti = E[t1 ] + (i                   1)(th    t` )=2 for i = 2; 3; : : : K   1. Given
the thresholds fT1 ; T2 ; :::TK 1 g, we can compute the unconditional probability distribution
of the random variable Ti . For N ! 1, T2 is approximately equal to E[t1 ]+t` if T1 < T1 , and
it is approximately equal to E[t1 ]+th if T1 > T1 . Since E[t1 ]+t` < T2 and E[t1 ]+th > T2 , T3
is approximately equal to E[t1 ] + 2t` if T1 < T1 , and T3 is approximately equal to E[t1 ] + 2th
if T1 > T1 . Similarly, for i = 4; 5; : : : K, Ti is approximately equal to E[t1 ] + (i                         1)t` if
T1 < T1 , and it is approximately equal to E[t1 ] + (i                        1)th if T1 > T1 . Hence, if T1 < T1 ,
…rms in groups 2 through K …re their non-performing workers with probability 0 and the
total measure of workers separating from …rms is TK = E[t1 ] + (K                              1)t` . If T1 > T1 , …rms


                                                              43
in groups 2 through K …re their non-performing workers with probability 1 and the total
measure of workers separating from …rms is Tk = E[t1 ] + (K                    1)th .
    The above observations imply that bene…t from exerting e¤ort for a worker employed at
a …rm in group i = 2; 3; : : : K is given by

               (1         )(ph (1)    ph (0))(1                 ujTK = E[t1 ] + (K
                                                  P1 (T1 ))V (E[^                            1)th ]).       (B1)

The bene…t in (B1) is equal to the cost             of exerting e¤ort given the choice of T1 . Thus, the
incentive compatibility for workers employed by …rms in groups i = 2; 3; : : : K is satis…ed.
The incentive compatibility constraint for workers employed by …rms in group 1 is satis…ed
given the choice of s1 .



C      Proof of Theorem 4
The existence proof is based on an application of Schauder’s …xed point theorem. In partic-
ular, we are going to take arbitrary value functions V + (u) and J + (u) denoting, respectively,
the worker’s gains from trade at the end of the production stage and the …rm’s gains from
trade at the end of the production stage. Then, we are going to use the conditions for
a Recursive Equilibrium with perfect coordination to construct a mapping F that returns
updates for V + (u) and J + (u). Using Schauder’s …xed point theorem, we are going to prove
that the mapping F admits a …xed point and we are going to show that this …xed point is
a Recursive Equilibrium with perfect coordination in the stage game.

    The functions V + (u) and J + (u) are chosen from a set              of Lipschitz continuous functions
with …xed Lipschitz bounds. These property of the set                      is critical to establish that the
operator F satis…es the conditions for Schauder’s …xed point theorem (namely, that the
family of functions F( ) is equicontinuous). Formally, let                  denote the set of bounded and
                                           +                  +
continuous functions !(u; i) = iV (u) + (1               i)J (u), with ! : [0; 1]       f0; 1g ! R, and such
                                                        +          +
that: (i) for all u0 , u1 2 [0; 1] with u0 < u1 , V (u1 ) V (u0 ) is greater than DV+ (u1 u0 ) and
smaller than DV+ (u1          u0 ); (ii) for all u0 , u1 2 [0; 1] with u0 < u1 , J + (u1 )    J + (u0 ) is greater
than DJ+ (u1        u0 ) and smaller than DJ+ (u1            u0 ). In other words,      is the set of bounded
and Lipschitz continuous functions ! = (V + ; J + ) with …xed Lipschitz bounds DV+ , DV+ ,
DJ+ and DJ+ . We choose the Lipschitz bounds to satisfy DV+ > DV+ > 0, DJ+ > 0                              D J+ ,
               0
and DV+ >          (DJ+      DJ+ ).

    Starting from V + (u) and J + (u) in          , we use the equilibrium conditions to construct the
equilibrium wage, the equilibrium gains from trade accruing to the worker and the …rm, the

                                                        44
equilibrium law of motion for unemployment and an update for V + (u) and J + (u). This
process implicitely de…nes the operator F. In order to make sure that F maps functions in
     into functions in     (which is a condition of Schauder’s …xed point theorem), we need to
verify that all equilibrium objects are Lipschitz continuous with …xed Lipschitz bounds. In
order to make sure that F is continuous (which is also a condition of Schauder’s …xed point
theorem), we need to verify that all equilibrium objects are continuous. To carry out these
tasks, we need a few more pieces of notation. In particular, we use V , V , J and J to denote
lower and upper bounds on the worker’s and …rm’s gains from trade constructed as in (??).
Also, we use     u   and   u   to denote the minimum and the maximum of the (absolute value) of
the partial derivative of the job-…nding probability (J; u) with respect to i = u. That is,
 u   denotes min j@ (J; u)=@uj for (J; u) 2 [J; J]                               [0; 1], and   u   denotes max j@ (J; u)=@uj for
(J; u) 2 [J; J] [0; 1]. Similarly, we use                     J       and        J   to denote the minimum and the maximum
on the (absolute value) of the partial derivative of (J; u) with respect to J.


C.1       Wage
Take an arbitrary pair of value functions ! = (V + ; J + ) 2                                       . For any u, the equilibrium
wage function w(u) takes a value w such that

                     (w)        (b)     + V + (u) =                        0
                                                                               (w) E[yje = 1]       w + J + (u) :           (C1)

For any u, there is a unique wage that satis…es (C1). In fact, the right-hand side of (C1) is
strictly increasing in w, as (w)               (b)                    + V + (u) is strictly increasing in w. The left-hand
                                                                  0
side of (C1) strictly decreasing in w, as                             (w) and E[yje = 1]            w + J + (u) are both strictly
decreasing in w. Therefore, there exists a unique wage w that solves (C1) for any u.

     The next lemma proves that the equilibrium wage function w(u) is Lipschitz continuous
in u with …xed Lipschitz bounds. Moreover, the lemma proves that w(u) is strictly decreasing
in u.
Lemma C1: For all u0 , u1 2 [0; 1] with u0 < u1 , the wage function w(u) is such that

                           Dw (u1       u0 )         w(u0 )                     w(u1 )    Dw (u1     u0 );                  (C2)

where the bounds Dw and Dw are de…ned as
                                                0
                                      DV+ =               D J+                                 0
                               Dw =                  00           0
                                                                       ;        D w = D V+ =        D J+ .                  (C3)
                                       2+J                =

Proof : To alleviate notation, let w0 denote w(u0 ) and w1 denote w(u1 ). First, we establish

                                                                        45
that w0 > w1 . To this aim, notice that
                                 0
                                     (w0 ) [E[yje = 1]            w0 + J + (u1 )]
                                                                                               0
                                                                                                                                     (C4)
                                 0
                                     (w0 )E[yje = 1]             w0 + J + (u0 )] +                 DJ+ (u1      u0 ).

Also, notice that

                                  (w0 )          (b)       c + V + (u1 )
                                  (w0 )          (b)       c + V + (u0 ) + DV + (u1                    u0 )
                                  0
                                                                                                                                     (C5)
                          =           (w0 )E[yje = 1]            w0 + J + (u0 ) + DV + (u1                    u0 )
                                  0                                                            0
                          >           (w0 )E[yje = 1]            w0 + J + (u0 ) +                  DJ+ (u1      u0 );
                                                                                                                           0
where the third line follows from (C1) and the last line follows from DV+ >                                                    DJ+ . Taken
together (C4) and (C5) imply that                           (w0 )                (b)       c + V + (u1 ) is strictly greater than
 0
     (w0 ) [E[yje = 1]        w0 + J + (u1 )]. Therefore, the left-hand side of (C1) is strictly smaller
than the right-hand side of (C1) when evaluated at w = w0 and u = u1 . Since the left-hand
of (C1) is strictly increasing in w and the left-hand side is strictly decreasing in w, w1 is
strictly smaller than w0 .

      Next, we derive lower and upper bounds on w0                                        w1 . From (C1), it follows that

                (w0 )         (w1 ) + V + (u0 )           V + (u1 )
                0
          =         (w0 ) [E[yje = 1]           w0 + J + (u0 )]                  0
                                                                                     (w1 ) [E[yje = 1]        w0 + J + (u0 )]        (C6)
                0
          +         (w1 ) [E[yje = 1]           w0 + J + (u0 )]                  0
                                                                                     (w1 ) [E[yje = 1]        w1 + J + (u1 )]

The above equation can be rewritten as

                w0       w1
                    V + (u1 )     V + (u0 )
           =                                           [J + (u1 )            J + (u0 )]
                              0 (w )
                                  1                                                                                                  (C7)
                                                    0                   0
                      (w0 )     (w1 )                   (w1 )               (w0 )
                          0 (w )                            0 (w )
                                                                                     (E[yje = 1]        w0 + J + (u0 )) :
                              1                                 1

The …rst term in square brackets on the right-hand side of (C6) is greater than (DV + = 0 )(u1
u0 ) and smaller than (DV + = 0 )(u1                     u0 ). The second term in square brackets is greater than
DJ+ (u1        u0 ) and smaller than DJ+ (u1                     u0 ). The third term in square brackets is greater
than zero and smaller than w1                     w0 . The last term on the right-hand side of (C6) is greater
                                          00
than zero and smaller than                     Dw J= 0 (w1          w0 ). From the above observations, it follows that

                                                                DV +
                                         w0       w1                0
                                                                                 DJ+ (u1            u0 ):                            (C8)


                                                                            46
Similarly, we have
                                                      00               1
                                                                            DV +
                        w0     w1         2+          0
                                                           Dw J                   0           DJ+ (u1               u0 ):                  (C9)

The inequalities (C8) and (C9) represent the desired bounds on w0                                                     w1 .

     The next lemma proves that the equilibrium wage function w is continuous with respect
to the value functions V + and J + . Speci…cally, consider ! 0 = (V0+ , J0+ ) and ! 1 = (V1+ , J1+ )
with ! 0 , ! 1 2 . Denote as wi the wage function computed using ! i in (C1) for i = f0; 1g.
If the distance between ! 0 and ! 1 goes to 0, so does the distance between w0 and w1 .
Lemma C2: For any              > 0 and any ! 0 , ! 1 in                      such that jj! 0 - ! 1 jj < , we have

                                     jjw0       w1 jj <           w    ,         w    = 1 + 1= 0 .                                        (C10)

Proof : Take an arbitrary u 2 [0; 1]. To alleviate notation, let w0 denote w0 (u) and w1 denote
w1 (u). From (C10), it follows that

                (w0 )        (b)     c + V0+ (u)              0
                                                                  (w0 ) E[yje = 1]                    w0 + J0+ (u) = 0,
                                                                                                                                          (C11)
                (w1 )        (b)     c + V1+ (u)              0
                                                                  (w1 ) E[yje = 1]                    w1 + J1+ (u) = 0.

Subtracting the second equation from the …rst, we obtain

                              V0+ (u)       V1+ (u) + (w0 )                           (w1 )
                        +      0
                                   (w0 ) J1+ (u)            J0+ (u) + w0                w1                                                (C12)
                        +     [ 0 (w1 )         0
                                                    (w0 )] E[yje = 1]                    w1 + J1+ (u) = 0.

Suppose without loss in generality that w0                            w1 . We can rewrite the above equation as
                                                             V1+ (u)           V0+ (u)                      (w1 )      (w0 )
         w0    w1     = J0+ (u)         J1+ (u) +                          0 (w )
                                                                                       +                         0 (w )
                                                                               0                                     0
                                                                             0                  0
                                                                                                                                          (C13)
                                                                                 (w0 )              (w1 )
                      + E[yje = 1]              w1 +       J1+ (u)                      0 (w
                                                                                                             .
                                                                                               0)

The …rst term in square brackets on the right-hand side of (C13) is strictly smaller than .
The second term in square brackets is strictly smaller than = 0 . The third term in square
brackets is strictly negative. The last term is strictly negative. Hence, we have

                                            0        w0      w1 < (1 + 1= 0 ) :                                                           (C14)

Since the above inequality holds for any u 2 [0; 1], we conclude that kw0                                                    w1 k <   w   where
 w   = (1 + 1= 0 ).


                                                                      47
C.2     Gains from trade to worker and …rm
Given V + , J + and w, the equilibrium gains from trade accruing to the …rm and to the
worker, J and V , are respectively given by

                                   J(u) = E[yje = 1]                     w(u) + J + (u),
                                                                                                                                       (C15)
                                   V (u) = (w(u))                        (b)         + V + (u)


   The next lemma proves that the equilibrium gains from trade J(u) and V (u) are Lipschitz
continuous in u with …xed Lipschitz bounds. Moreover, the lemma proves that J(u) and V (u)
are strictly increasing in u.

Lemma C3: For all u0 , u1 2 [0; 1] with u0 < u1 , the equilibrium gains from trade accruing
to the …rm, J(u), and to the worker, V (u), are such that

                           DJ (u1         u0 )   J(u1 )               J(u0 )         DJ (u1        u0 );
                                                                                                                                       (C16)
                           DV (u1         u0 )   V (u1 )              V (u0 )         DV (u1        u0 );

where the bounds are de…ned as
                 DJ = Dw + DJ + > 0, DJ = Dw + DJ + ;
                                                                                                                                       (C17)
                            0                                                  0                            00
                 DV =           (Dw + DJ + ) > 0;                  DV =            (Dw + DJ + ) +                Dw J:

Proof : To simplify notation, let w0 denote w(u0 ) and w1 denote w(u1 ). Then J(u1 )                                                   J(u0 )

is given by
                           J(u1 )         J(u0 ) = w0                w1 + J + (u1 )            J + (u0 ):

From the above expression, it follows that

                                 J(u1 )       J(u0 )           (Dw + DJ+ )(u1                   u0 );
                                                                                                                                       (C18)
                                 J(u1 )       J(u0 )           (Dw + DJ+ )(u1                   u0 ):

The di¤erence V (u1 )       V (u0 ) is given by
                                   0                       0
       V (u1 )   V (u0 )    =          (w1 )J(u1 )             (w0 )J(u0 )
                            = [ 0 (w1 )J(u1 )                  0
                                                                   (w1 )J(u0 )] + [ 0 (w1 )J(u0 )                   0
                                                                                                                        (w0 )J(u0 )]

From the above expression, it follows that
                                                 0
                    V (u1 )        V (u0 )           (Dw + DJ+ )(u1                    u0 );
                                                     0                                00
                                                                                                                                       (C19)
                    V (u1 )        V (u0 )               (Dw + DJ+ ) +                     Dw J (u1         u0 ):

Lemma 7 follows directly from the inequalities in (C18) and (C19).

                                                                    48
       The next lemma proves that the …rm’s and worker’s gains from trade are continuous with
respect to V + and J + . Speci…cally, consider ! 0 = (V0+ , J0+ ) and ! 1 = (V1+ , J1+ ) with ! 0 ,
! 1 in     . For i 2 f0; 1g, denote as wi the equilibrium wage computed using ! i , and as Ji
and Vi the equilibrium gains from trade computed using ! i and wi in (C15). If the distance
between ! 0 and ! 1 goes to 0, so does the distance between J0 and J1 and between V0 and
V1 .
Lemma C4: For any             > 0 and any ! 0 , ! 1 in               such that jj! 0 - ! 1 jj < , we have

                                 jjJ0      J1 jj <        J   ,     J    =1+      w,
                                                                                  0
                                                                                               .                (C20)
                                 jjV0      V1 jj <        V   ,      V   =1+              w.

Proof : Take an arbitrary u 2 [0; 1]. The di¤erence J0 (u)                        J1 (u) is such that

                      jJ0 (u)    J1 (u)j          jw0 (u)          w1 (u)j + J0+ (u)               J1+ (u)
                                                                                                                (C21)
                                             <(       w   + 1) .

The di¤erence V0 (u)        V1 (u) is such that

                  jV0 (u)   V1 (u)j        j (w0 (u))               (w1 (u))j + V0+ (u)               V1+ (u)
                                              0
                                                                                                                (C22)
                                        <(        w   + 1) :

Since the inequalities (C21) and (C22) hold for all u 2 [0; 1], we conclude that kJ0                            J1 k <
                                                                                      0
  J0    and kV0    V1 k <   V0   , where      J   =       w   + 1 and     V   =            w   + 1.


C.3        Law of motion for unemployment
Given J, the law of motion for unemployment h(u; z^), is such that— for any current period’s
unemployment u and any realization of the sunspot z^— next period’s unemployment takes
on a value u^ such that

                     u^ = u      u (J(^
                                      u); u) + (1                 u)[ + (1        )p` (1)s(y` ; z^)],            (28)

Since we are trying to construct a Recursive Equilibrium in which there is perfect coordina-
tion in the stage game, we set s(y` ; z^) = 0 if z^ 2 Z0 and s(y` ; z^) = 1 if z^ 2 Z2 .

       Next period’s unemployment u^ is uniquely determined by (28). In fact, the left-hand
side of (28) equals zero for u^ = 0, it is strictly increasing in u^ and it equals one for u^ = 1.
The right-hand side of (28) is strictly positive for u^ = 0 and it is strictly decreasing in u^,
as the worker’s job …nding probability                is strictly increasing in the …rm’s gains from trade
J, and J is strictly increasing in u^. Therefore, there exists one and only one u^ that satis…es

                                                              49
(28). Next period’s unemployment u^ is strictly increasing in u. In fact, the left-hand side
of (28) is independent of u. The right-hand side of (28) is strictly increasing in u, as its
derivative with respect to u is greater than (1                     )ph (1)         , which we assume to be strictly
positive. Therefore, the u^ that solves (28) is strictly increasing in u. Moreover, next period’s
unemployment u^ is strictly higher if z^ 2 Z2 than if z^ 2 Z0 . To see this, it is su¢ cient to
notice that the left-hand side of (28) is independent of s(y` ; z^), while the right hand side is
strictly increasing in it.

    The next lemma proves that h(u; z^) is Lipschitz continuous in u with …xed Lipschitz
bounds.

Lemma C5: For all u0 , u1 2 [0; 1] with u0 < u1 , h(u; z^) is such that

                          Dh (u1          u0 ) < h(u1 ; z^)      h(u0 ; z^)      Dh (u1        u0 );                    (C24)


where the bounds Dh and Dh are de…ned as

                                            Dh = 0;       Dh = 1           +      u:                                    (C25)

Proof : Let u^1 denote the solution to (28) for u = u1 and let u^0 denote the solution to (28)

for u = u0 , i.e.

                    u^1 = u1      u1 (J(^
                                        u1 ); u1 ) + (1            u1 )[ + (1          )p` (1)s(y` ; z^0 )],
                    u^0 = u0      u0 (J(^
                                        u0 ); u0 ) + (1            u0 )[ + (1          )p` (1)s(y` ; z^0 )]:

Subtracting the second equation from the …rst one, we obtain

                            u^1     u^0     = (u1       u0 )(1       )[1       p` (1)s(y` ; z^0 )]
                                            +u0 [ (J(^
                                                     u0 ); u0 )               (J(^
                                                                                 u1 ); u0 )]
                                                                                                                        (C26)
                                            +u0 [ (J(^
                                                     u1 ); u0 )               (J(^
                                                                                 u1 ); u1 )]
                                            +u0 (J(^
                                                   u1 ); u1 )          u1 (J(^
                                                                             u1 ); u1 ) :

The …rst line on the right-hand side of (C26) is positive. Since (J; u) is increasing in J,
J is increasing in u and, as established in the main text, u^1 > u^0 , the second line on the
right-hand side of (C26) is negative. Since (J; u) is decreasing in u and u1 > u0 , the third
line on the right-hand side of (C26) is positive. The fourth line on the right-hand side of
(C26) is obviously negative. Hence, an upper bound on u^1                              u^0 is given by

   u^1    u^0       (u1   u0 )(1          )[1     p` (1)s(y` ; z^0 )] + u0 [ (J(^
                                                                                u1 ); u0 )             (J(^
                                                                                                          u1 ); u1 )]
                                                                                                                        (C27)
                    (u1   u0 ) [1          +    u ] :


                                                              50
Combining the above inequality with u^1 < u^0 , we obtain

                                Dg (u1          u0 ) < u^1         u^0     Dg (u1        u0 ) ,                       (C28)

where
                                        Dg = 0, Dg = 1                     +       u.



      Next, we prove that h(u; z^) is continuous with respect to V + and J + . Formally, we
consider ! 0 = (V0+ , J0+ ) and ! 1 = (V1+ , J1+ ) with ! 0 , ! 1 in                         . For i = f0; 1g, we denote
as Ji the …rm’s equilibrium gains from trade computed using ! i in (C15), and as hi the
equilibrium law of motion for unemployment computed using Ji in (28). Then, we show
that, if the distance between ! 0 and ! 1 goes to 0, so does the distance between h0 and h1 .
Lemma C6: For any              > 0 and any ! 0 , ! 1 in                  such that jj! 0 - ! 1 jj < , we have

                                        jjh0        h1 jj <   h    ,       h   =    J   J:                            (C29)

Proof : Take an arbitrary u 2 [0; 1] and z^ 2 fZ0 ; Z2 g. Let u^0 denote h0 (u; z^) and u^1 denote
h1 (u; z^). From (28), it follows that

                     u^0 = u     u (J0 (^
                                        u0 ); u) + (1               u)[ + (1            )p` (1)s(y` ; z^)],
                     u^1 = u     u (J1 (^
                                        u1 ); u) + (1               u)[ + (1            )p` (1)s(y` ; z^)].

Without loss in generality suppose that u^0                       u^1 . In this case,

        u^0   u^1 = u f[ (J1 (^
                              u1 ); u)              (J0 (^
                                                         u1 ); u)] + [ (J0 (^
                                                                            u1 ); u)              (J0 (^
                                                                                                       u0 ); u)]g :   (C30)

The term (J0 (^
              u1 ); u)               u0 ); u) on the right-hand side of (C30) is negative as (J; u) is
                                (J0 (^
increasing in J, J0 is increasing in u and u^0                     u^1 . Therefore, we have

                         u^0    u^1      u [ (J1 (^
                                                  u1 ); u)               (J0 (^
                                                                              u1 ); u)] <     J    J   :              (C31)

Since the above inequality holds for any u 2 [0; 1] and any z^0 2 fB; Gg, we conclude that
kh0     h1 k <   h   , where    h   =     J    J.




C.4       Updated value functions
Given J, V and h, we can construct an update, V +0 , for the worker’s gains from trade at
the end of the production stage as

         V +0 (u) = Ez^ f[(1            )(1     p` (1)s(y` ; z^))           (J(h(u; z^)); u)]V (h(u; z^))g            (C32)

                                                              51
Similarly, we can construct an update, J +0 , for the …rm’s gains from trade at the end of the
production stage as

                           J +0 (u) = Ez^ [(1                       )(1        p` (1)s(y` ; z^))J(h(u; z^))]                         (C33)

Since we are looking for a Recursive Equilibrium with perfect coordination in the stage game,
we set s(y` ; z^) = 0 for z^ 2 Z0 and s(y` ; z^) = 1 for z^ 2 Z2 . Also, we set the probability                                           0

that z^ 2 Z0 and the probability                         2   that z^ 2 Z2 so that         0   =1          2    and

                                    2   =                                                                 :                          (C34)
                                                     (ph (1)        ph (0))(1         )V (h(u; Z2 ))

   In the next lemma, we prove that V +0 (u) and J +0 (u) are Lipschitz continuous in u with
…xed Lipschitz bounds.
Lemma C7: For all u0 , u1 2 [0; 1] with u0 < u1 , V +0 and J +0 are such that
                                                                                                  0
                         D0V + (u1              u0 ) < V +0 (u1 )          V +0 (u0 )         DV + (u1         u0 );
                                                                                              0
                                                                                                                                     (C35)
                         D0J+ (u1           u0 ) < J +0 (u1 )              J +0 (u0 )     DJ+ (u1             u0 ).
                                                0
where the bounds D0V + and DV + are de…ned as

                                                                                      2 DV Dh V
                        D0V + = V (                           J DJ Dh )                                                ,
                                                    u                          (ph (1) ph (0))(1                )V 2                 (C36)
                         0
                        DV +    =           V        u   + (1       )DV Dh ,
                                        0
and the bounds D0J+ and DJ+ are de…ned as

                                                                       2cDV Dh J
                                         D0J+ =                                                       ;
                                                                (ph (1) ph (0))(1              )V 2                                  (C37)
                                          0
                                         DJ+             = (1         )DJ Dh

Proof : Take arbitrary u0 ; u1 2 [0; 1] with u1 > u0 . To simplify notation, let u^j;0 denote
h(u0 ; z^) for z^ 2 Zj and let u^j;1 denote h(u1 ; z^) for z^ 2 Zj . Similarly, let                                        j;0   denote the
probability that the realization of the sunspot is z^ 2 Zj for u0 , and let                                                j;1   denote the
probability that the realization of the sunspot is z^ 2 Zj for u1 . Using this notation and
(C32), we can write V +0 (u1 )                      V +0 (u0 ) as
          V +0 (u1 )        V +0 (u0 )
            P
        =       j f(      j;1       j;0 ) [(1                 )(1    p` (1)s(y` ; z^))            (J(^
                                                                                                     uj;1 ; u1 )]V (^
                                                                                                                    uj;1 )
        +     j;0 [(1       )(1         p` (1)s(y` ; z^))              (J(^
                                                                          u2;1 ; u1 )] [V (^
                                                                                           uj;1 )             V (^
                                                                                                                 uj;0 )]             (C38)
        +     j;0 V   (^
                       uj;0 )[ (J(^
                                  u2;0 ; u0 )                    (J(^
                                                                    u2;0 ; u1 )].
        +     j;0 V   (^
                       uj;0 )[ (J(^
                                  u2;0 ; u1 )                    (J(^
                                                                    u2;1 ; u1 )]g.

                                                                          52
The …rst term on the right-hand side of (C38) is negative. In absolute value, this term is
smaller than cDV Dh V (u1                   u0 )=[ (ph (1)               ph (0))(1          )V 2 ]. The second term on the right-
hand side of (C38) is geater than 0 and smaller than                                        j;0 (1      )DV Dh (u1                u0 ). The third
term on the right-hand side of (C38) is positive, greater than                                          j;0 V       u (u1         u0 ) and smaller
than   j;0 V   u (u1    u0 ). The last term on the right-hand side of (C38) is negative. In absolute
value, this term is smaller than                       j;0 V    J D J D h (u1           u0 ). Overall, we have

                                                                                        2cDV Dh V
  V +0 (u1 )    V +0 (u0 )             V(                  J DJ Dh )                                                        (u1      u0 ),   (C39)
                                                 u                               (ph (1) ph (0))(1                )V 2

and
                        V +0 (u1 )          V +0 (u0 )               V      u   + (1       )DV Dh (u1                u0 ).                   (C40)

   Using (C33), we can write J +0 (u1 )                            J +0 (u0 ) as

                          J +0 (u1 )                 J +0 (u0 )
                            P
                        =       j f(             j;1           j;0 ) [(1          )(1    p` (1)s(y` ; z^))]J(^
                                                                                                             uj;1 )                          (C41)
                        +         j;0 [(1            )(1       p` (1)s(y` ; z^))] [J(^
                                                                                     uj;1 )           J(^
                                                                                                        uj;0 )] :

The …rst term on the right-hand side of (C41) is negative. In absolute value, this term is
smaller than DV Dh J(u1                     u0 )=[ (ph (1)                 ph (0))(1        )V 2 ]. The second term on the right-
hand side of (C41) is geater than zero and smaller than                                        j;0 (1        )DJ Dh (u1             u0 ). Overall,
we have
                                                                          2 DV Dh J
                       J +0 (u1 )       J +0 (u0 )                                                          (u1       u0 ),                  (C42)
                                                                   (ph (1) ph (0))(1                 )V 2
and
                                  J +0 (u1 )           J +0 (u0 )            (1         )DJ Dh (u1          u0 ).                            (C43)

Lemma C7 follows directly from the inequalities in (C39)-(C40) and (C42)-(C43).

   The next lemma shows that, under some parametric conditions, there exists a …xed point
for the Lipschitz bounds on the …rm’s and worker’s gains from trade at the end of the
production stage.

Lemma C8: Assume                   u         J (1              +    u)     > 0. Then there exist                     > 0 and             > 0 such
that, if    2 (0;      ) and           2 (0;           ), there are Lipschitz bounds DV + , DV + , DJ+ , DJ+ such
                                   0                                                            0
that: (i)   D0V +   = DV + ,      DV +       = DV + , D0J+ = DJ+ , and DJ+ = DJ+ ; (ii) DV+ > DV+ > 0,
                                             0
D J+ > 0       DJ+ and DV+ >                     (DJ+          DJ+ ).
                              0                                                                                               0
Proof : Set D0V + and DV + in (C36) equal to DV + and DV + , and D0J+ and DJ+ in (C37) equal
to DJ+ and DJ+ . Then solve for DV + , DV + , DJ+ and DJ+ . It is immediate to verify that,


                                                                            53
                                                                                                                                        0
since     u         J (1          +      u)   > 0, DV+ > DV+ > 0, DJ+ > 0                                 DJ+ and DV+ >                     (DJ+          DJ+ )
for      and        small enough.

      In the last lemma, we prove that V +0 and J +0 are continuous with respect to V + and J + .
Speci…cally, consider ! 0 = (V0+ , J0+ ) and ! 1 = (V1+ , J1+ ) with ! 0 , ! 1 2                                                   . For i 2 f0; 1g,
denote as       Vi+0   and        Ji+0   the continuation value functions computed using Vi+ , Ji+ and hi in
(C32) and (C33). If the distance between ! 0 and ! 1 goes to 0, so does the distance between
V0+ and V1+ and between J0+ and J1+ .

Lemma C9: For any                              > 0 and any ! 0 , ! 1 2                             such that jj! 0 - ! 1 jj <                   , we have
jjV0+0    V1+0 jj    <      V+0     and       jjJ0+0       J1+0 jj   <    0
                                                                         J+     , where

                             2 V
          V+0   =                                                    +1            V   + DV        h      +V     J     J   + DJ     h       ,
                   (ph (1) ph (0))(1                        )V 2
                                                                                                                                                          (C44)
                      2 J V + DV                       h
           0
          J+    =                                                 +       J   + DJ         h   .
                  (ph (1) ph (0))(1                        )V 2

Proof : Take an arbitrary u 2 [0; 1]. To simplify notation, let u^j;0 denote h0 (u; z^) for z^ 2 Zj ,

and let u^j;1 denote h1 (u; z^) for z^ 2 Zj . Similarly, let                                        j;0   denote the probability that the
realization of the sunspot is z^ 2 Zj de…ned by using V0 and h0 in (C34), and let                                                               j;1   denote
the probability that the realization of the sunspot is z^ 2 Zj de…ned by using V1 and h1 in
(C34). Using this notation and (C32), we can write V0+0 (u)                                                  V1+0 (u) as

            V0+0 (u) V1+0 (u)
              P
          =       j f( j;0  j;1 ) [(1                           )(1      p` (1)s(y` ; z^))                (J0 (^
                                                                                                               uj;0 ; u)]V0 (^
                                                                                                                             uj;0 )
                                                                                                                                                          (C45)
          +         j;1 [(1         )(1        p` (1)s(y` ; z^))              (J0 (^
                                                                                   uj;0 ; u)] [V0 (^
                                                                                                   uj;0 )            V1 (^
                                                                                                                         uj;1 )]
          +          j;1 V1 (^
                             uj;1 )[      (J1 (^
                                               uj;1 ; u)             (J0 (^
                                                                          uj;0 ; u)]g.

From (C45), it follows that

          V0+0 (u)          V1+ (u)
                            2cV
                                                            V   + DV      h            +       V   + DV      h       +V     J      J   + DJ           h     ,
         (ph (1)           ph (0))(1            )V 2
                                                                                                                                                          (C46)
where the …rst term on the right-hand side of (C46) is an upper bound on the absolute value
on the …rst line on the right-hand side of (C45), the second term on the right-hand side of
(C46) is an upper bound on the absolute value on the second line on the right-hand side of
(C45), and the last term on the right-hand side of (C46) is an upper bound on the absolute
value on the last line on the right-hand side of (C45).


                                                                              54
    Using (C33) we can write J0+0 (u)                J1+0 (u) as

                            J0+0 (u) J1+0 (u)
                              P
                          =       j f( j;0   j;1 ) (1              )(1    p` (1)s(y` ; z^))J0 (^
                                                                                               uj;0 )                     (C47)
                          +     j;1 (1        )(1   p` (1)s(y` ; z^)) [J0 (^
                                                                           uj;0 )       J1 (^
                                                                                            uj;1 )] :

From (C47), it follows that

                          J0+0 (u)       J1+0 (u)
                                       2 J                                                                                (C48)
                                                                  V    + DV   h     +       J   + DJ      h    ,
                          (ph (1)     ph (0))(1       )V 2

where the …rst term on the right-hand side of (C48) is an upper bound on the absolute value
on the …rst line on the right-hand side of (C47), and the second term on the right-hand side
of (C48) is an upper bound on the absolute value on the second line on the right-hand side
of (C47). Since the inequalities (C46) and (C48) hold for any u 2 [0; 1], we conclude that
 V0+0     V1+0 <      V+      and J0+0          J1+0 <       J+    .


C.5       Existence
In the previous subsections, we have taken a pair of continuation gains from trade V + and
J + and, using the conditions for a perfect coordination equilibrium, we have constructed an
updated pair of continuation gains from trade V +0 and J +0 . We denote as F the operator
that takes !(u; i) = (1             i)V + (u) + iJ + (u) and returns ! 0 (u; i) = (1                    i)V +0 (u) + iJ +0 (u).

    The operator F has three key properties. First, the operator F maps functions that
belong to the set             into functions that also belong to the set                        . In fact, for any ! =
   +    +             0         +0       +0
(V ; J ) 2          , ! = (V         ; J ) is bounded and continuous and, as established in Lemma
C8, it is such that: (i) for all u0 , u1 2 [0; 1] with u0 < u1 , the di¤erence V +0 (u1 )                              V +0 (u0 )
is greater than DV+ (u1              u0 ) and smaller than DV+ (u1                  u0 ); (ii) for all u0 , u1 2 [0; 1]
with u0 < u1 , the di¤erence J +0 (u1 )                 J +0 (u0 ) is greater than DJ+ (u1                    u0 ) and smaller
than DJ+ (u1         u0 ). Second, the operator F is continuous, as established in Lemma C9.
Third, the family of functions F( ) is equicontinuous. To see that this is the case, let
jj:jjE denote the standard norm on the Euclidean space [0; 1]                                f0; 1g. For any           > 0, let
   = minf(maxfDV + ; DJ+ ; jDJ+ jg) 1 ; 1g. Then, for all (u0 ; i0 ), (u1 ; i1 ) 2 [0; 1]                           f0; 1g such
that jj(u0 ; i0 )    (u1 ; i1 )jjE <       , we have

                              j(F!)(u0 ; i0 )       (F!)(u1 ; i1 )j < , for all ! 2 .                                       (29)


                                                              55
Since F :     ! , F is continuous and F( ) is equicontinuous, the operator F satis…es the
conditions of Schauder’s …xed point theorem. Therefore there exists a ! = (V + ; J + ) 2 F
such that F! = ! .

    Now, we compute the equilibrium wage function w using V + and J + . We compute
the equilibrium gains from trade accruing to the worker, V , and to the …rm, J , using w ,
V + and J + . We compute the equilibrium law of motion for unemployment h using J .
Finally, we construct the equilibrium employment contract x (u) as the e¤ort e = 1, the
wage function w and the …ring probabilities s (yh ; z^) = 0, s (y` ; z^) = 0 for z^ 2 Z0 and
s (yh ; z^) = 1 for z^ 2 Z2 . Since the wage function w is strictly decreasing in u and h (u; Z2 )
is strictly greater than h (u; Z0 ), these objects constitute a Recursive Equilibrium in which
there is perfect coordination at the stage game.



D      Additional Figures




                                  Figure D1: Model Labor Market
              50

              40

              30

              20

              10

               0

              -10

              -20

                                          u       UE       EU




                                               56
                                               Figure D2: US Labor Market
60
50
40
30
20
10
 0
-10
-20
-30
-40
-50
                                1992   1995      1998       2001        2004       2007       2010   2013

                                                        u          UE              EU




                                             Figure D3: Recession Probability
                         0.45
                                                                                                            USA
                          0.4
                                                                                                            POOL
                         0.35
 probability recession




                                                                                                            AUS
                          0.3
                                                                                                            CAN
                         0.25
                                                                                                            FR
                          0.2                                                                               IT
                         0.15                                                                               JAP
                          0.1                                                                               UK
                         0.05
                           0
                                 4       5          6          7               8          9
                                                    unemployment




                                                               57
