NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

OPTIMAL LIABILITY WHEN THE
INJURER'S INFORMATION ABOUT
THE VICTIM'S LOSS IS IMPERFECT

A. Mitchell Polinsky

Working Paper No. 2174

NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
March 1987

Any opinions expressed are those of the author and not those of the
National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER Working Paper #2174
March 1987

Optimal Liability When the Injurer's Information
About the Victim's Loss is Imperfect

ABSTRACT

A central result in the economic theory of liability is
that, if an injurer's liability equals the victim's loss,
then either the rule of strict liability or the rule of
negligence can induce the injurer to behave properly.
However, for this result to hold, the injurer must know
the victim's loss before the injurer decides whether to
engage in the harmful activity and,
fortiori, before any
harm has occurred. This paper reevaluates the rules of
strict liability and negligence when the injurer's
information is imperfect. Two questions are addressed:
Under each rule, should the level of liability imposed on
the injurer still equal the victim's loss? Are the rules
of strict liability and negligence still equally
desirable? With respect to the first question, it is
demonstrated that the optimal level of liability generally
is
equal to the victim's loss. With respect to the
second question, it is shown that if the injurer's
liability equals the victim's loss, then the two rules are
equivalent, but if liability is set optimally under each
rule, then strict liability generally induces the injurer
to behave in a more appropriate way.

A. Mitchell Polinsky
Stanford Law School
Stanford University

Stanford, CA 94305

1. Introduction
A central result in the economic

theory of liability is that, if an

injurer's liability equals the victim's loss, then either the rule of strict
liability or the rule of negligence can induce the

injurer to behave properly. [1]

To see why, suppose that injurers differ in ternis of their gains from
engaging in some harmful activity, and that they all know what the victim's
loss will be if they do

engage in the activity. Under the rule of strict

liability, an injurer would have to compensate the victim for the loss, so
that only those injurers whose gains exceed the victim's loss will
engage in

the activity. Under the rule of negligence, an injurer would have to
compensate the victim only if the injurer is
gain is less than the victim's loss.

exceed the victim's loss will
induce injurers to behave in a

Note that the preceding

negligent- -that is, only if his

Again, only those injurers whose gains

engage in the activity. Thus, either remedy can
socially appropriate way. [2J

argument requires a strong assumption about the

injurers' information: each injurer must know the victim's loss before he
decides whether to engage in the harmful activity and,

fortiori, before any

harm has occurred. While it is reasonable to assume that injurers have
some
information about what the harm would be, it is not realistic to assume that
this information is always accurate.

For example, even if a schedule of the

losses that would be caused by various

types of driving accidents were

regularly published in newspapers or disseminated in other ways, it is clearly
implausible to assume that drivers would remember
This paper reevaluates the rules of strict

every detail.

liability and negligence when

the injurers' information about the victim's loss is imperfect. Two questions

are addressed: Under each rule, should the level

1

liability jjnposed

injurer still eciual

negligence

victim's

rules

loss?

strict liability

still eaually desirable? [3]

With respect to the first question, it will be demonstrated that the

optimal level of liability generally is i equal to the victim's loss.
Whether the optimal level of liability is above or below the loss depends on
the social desirability of the activity--that is, on whether the average gain
of injurers is less than or greater than the victim's loss.
To see why this is so, suppose that the court makes the injurer liable
exactly for the victim's loss, which will be referred to as compensatory

damages. [4] Consider the effects of this policy under the rule of strict
liability. If an injurer's estimate of the loss is less than the true loss,
that injurer might be underdeterred- -that is, he might engage in the activity

even though his gain is less than the victim's loss. But if an injurer's
estimate of the loss is above the true loss, that injurer might be
overdeterred- -he might not engage in the activity even though his gain exceeds

the victim's loss. Thus, using compensatory damages leads to two possible
errors.

Suppose, instead of using compensatory damages, the court adjusts

compensatory damages upward by some amount. Assuming that injurers
consequently raise their estimates of their liability, this adjustment

decreases the number of injurers who will be underdeterred but increases the

number who will be overdeterred. If the gains of most injurers are below the

victim's loss--that is, if the activity is socially desirable--then the
imposition of additional damages results in a net social benefit. Conversely,
if the activity is socially desirable, then it is optimal to impose less than
compensatory damages on injurers since the benefit from reducing
2

overdeterrence is more important than the detriment from increasing

underdeterrence
An analogous argument for

adjusting compensatory damages can be made

under the negligence rule. The main difference results from the fact
that,
under this rule, the injurer
expects to be liable only if his gain is less
than his estimate of the victim's loss. For reasons that will be
explained
below, this difference implies that

upward adjustments to compensatory damages

will not affect injurer behavior, while
same effects as under strict liability.

downward adjustments will have the
Consequently, if the activity is

socially desirable, it is optimal under the negligence rule to impose less
than compensatory damages on injurers.
The second question- -

regarding

the relative desirability of strict

liability and negligencewjl be answered in two contexts, depending on
whether the court uses

compensatory damages or optimally adjusts compensatory

damages.

If compensatory damages are used, then the two rules are equivalent. The
reasoning behind this result is essentially the same as in the opening
paragraph- -both rules will lead an injurer to

engage in the activity if and

only if his gain exceeds his estimate of the victim's loss.
However, if the court optimally adjusts
rule, then strict liability

generally is preferred to negligence. The

explanation of this result follows from the
the negligence rule, upward

compensatory damages under each

earlier observation that, under

adjustments to compensatory damages have no

effect, while downward adjustments have the same effects as under strict

liability. Thus, if it is optimal to

adjust compensatory damages downward

under strict liability, negligence can do as well. But if it is optimal to

3

adjust damages upward, strict liability is superior to negligence. Stated
somewhat differently, if the activity is socially desirable, then strict
liability and negligence, with damages less than compensatory damages, are
equally good; but if the activity is socially undesirable, then strict
liability should be used and damages should exceed compensatory damages.

The paper is organized as follows. Section 2 analyzes strict liability
in a general model. Section 3 illustrates the results of section 2 in an

example. Section 4 compares strict liability and negligence. Section 5
contains some concluding remarks.

2. Strict Liability ft the Ceneral Case
There are many potential injurers, each of whom obtains some gain from

engaging in the harmful activity. In addition, there is a fixed loss that
will result if an injurer engages in the activity. [5]

Under strict

liability, an injurer will engage in the activity if his gain exceeds his
estimate of the sum of the victim's loss and the adjustment to compensatory

damages. It is assumed that the injurer has a point estimate of the victim's
loss, but knows the adjustment to compensatory damages exactly. [6]
Social welfare is taken to be the sum of the gains to injurers
(conditional on their engaging in the activity) less the losses to victims.

The court's problem is to choose an adjustment to compensatory damages that
maximizes social welfare (as well as- -see section 4 below- -to choose whether

to use strict liability or negligence). In solving

this problem, the court is

assumed to know the victim's loss, the distribution of the injurers' gains,
and the distribution of the injurers' estimates of the victim's loss.
The following notation will be used in the general case:

4

g

gain of an injurer

f(g)

density of gains across injurers (0

1

loss of victim

1'

estimate of victim's loss

h(1')

density of loss estimates across injurers
(0 < 11 1' 12) [7]

d

g1

g

g2)

adjustment to compensatory damages (optimal adjustment is d*)

W(d)

social welfare

The population will be normalized so that the total number of potential
injurers is unity.

Consider the behavior of an injurer whose gain is g and whose loss

estimate is 1'. That injurer will engage in the activity if and only if g
exceeds l'-i-d, or, equivalently, if 1' < g-d. [8] Therefore, the fraction of

injurers with gain g who will engage in the activity is H(g-d), where H(.) is

the cumulative distribution of h(.). Note that, since li is the lowest value
of 1', no injurers with gains less than l1+d will engage in the activity;
similarly, all injurers with gains greater than 12+d will engage in the
activity.

Social welfare can now be expressed as: [9]

(1)

12±d

W(d) —
1

J H(g-d)f(g)(g-l)dg

+

£2

J f(g)(g-l)dg.
l2+d

The first term represents the gains less the losses of injurers whose gains
are between l1+d and 12÷d, only some of whom will engage in the activity

(those with sufficiently low loss estimates). The second term represents the
gains less the losses of injurers whose gains exceed 12+d, all of whom will
engage in the activity.

Alternatively, social welfare can be written as the first-best level of
5

social welfare less the sum of the social losses due to underdeterrence and
overdeterrence: [10]
£2

J f(g)(g-l)dg

W(d) =

1

(2)
1
-

(

-

12±d

_/ [l-H(g-d)]f(g)(g-l)dg

+

J H(g-d)f(g)(g-1)dg

).

1

l14-d

The first term represents the level of social welfare that would result if
injurers were to engage in the activity if and only if their gains exceed the

victim's loss. The second term (the first term in braces) represents the
social loss due to some injurers actually engaging in the activity when their

gains are less than the victim's loss. And the third term represents the
social loss due to some injurers not engaging in the activity when their gains
exceed the victim's loss.

It is apparent from (2) that a policy of awardingcompensatory damages (d

— 0) will not lead to the first-best level of social welfare since both of the
terms in braces will be positive. In other words, some injurers will be
underdeterred and others overdeterred. It is not clear, however, whether it
is desirable to raise or lower the level of liability, since raising liability
will reduce underdeterrence but increase overdeterrence, and lowering
liability will have the opposite effects.

Assuming that W(.) is a strictly concave function of d, and that d* is an
interior optimum, the sign of the optimal adjustment to compensatory damages
is determined by the sign of W'(d) evaluated at d =

0.

From (2), this

condition can be expressed as:

>

(3) d* — 0 as -

1

J h(g)f(g)(g-l)dg
11
6

>
—
<

12

J h(g)f(g)(g-1)dg.
1

The first integral in (3) is the marginal reduction in the social loss due to
underdeterrence as d is raised, starting at d —
0; the second integral is the
corresponding increase in the social loss due to

overdeterrence. Therefore,

whether compensatory damages should be adjusted upwards or downwards (or not
at all) depends on the relative importance

of underdeterrence and

overdeterrence
Since there is no reason to believe that

the two integrals in (3) are

equal, it is generally not optimal under strict liability to use compensatory

damages without adjustment. However, unless some additional assumptions about
the form of h(.) and/or f(.) are made, not much can be said about when the
adjustment should be positive or negative.
Several alternative assumptions

are sufficient to determine the sign of

d* from (3). Suppose, for example, that the distribution of the
injurers'
loss estimates, h(.), is uniform.
Then, without assuming anything about the
distribution of gains across injurers,

f(.), condition (3) can be expressed

as:

>
d* =

<
0

<

(4)

—

where g —

as g — 1,
>

.12

[

.12

J gf(g)dg ] / [ J f(g)dg 1.
ii

In other words, if the injurers'

activity is socially undesirable--their

average gain is less than the victim's loss--then

compensatory damages should

be adjusted upward, while if the activity is socially desirable,
compensatory

damages should be adjusted downward. (To be precise, it is the average gain
of injurers conditional on their gains being within the range of the loss
estimates--between ii and l2--that Is relevant.)

7

Another interesting special case is when the distribution of the
injurers' loss estimates, h(.), is symmetrical around the true loss. Then, if
the distribution of the injurers' gains, f(.), falls monotonically, the
activity is socially undesirable, and (3) implies that d* > 0.

If,

alternatively, f(.) were to rise monotonically, the activity would become
socially desirable and (3) would imply that d* < 0.
Note that the analysis of strict liability in this section did not assume
anything about whether there is a systematic bias in the injurers' estimates
of the victim's loss--that is, whether the mean of 1' equals 1. Thus, even if
the mean of 1' equals 1, compensatory damages generally are not optimal under

strict liability. This point will be illustrated by the example in the next
section.

3. Strict Liability in the Double-Discrete Example
The simplest version of the general model consists of having the
injurers' gains and their estimates of the victim's loss each take on two

values. This will be referred to as the double-discrete example.

Let:

gj > 0)

gl,g2

possible gains of injurers (g2 >

q

fraction of injurers whose gains are

l-e,l+e

possible estimates of victim's loss (equally likely)

Since the average loss estimate equals the true loss, none of the results that
follow are due to a systematic bias among injurers in estimating the victim's
loss.

In order to have both some underdeterrence and some overdeterrence when
compensatory damages are used in the double-discrete example, it is assumed
that:

8

(5)

l-e<g<l<g2<l+e
First consider strict liability with

compensatory damages. Given (5),

injurers whose gains are g1 will engage in the activity if their estimate of
the victim's loss is l-e, but not if it is l+e. Therefore, half the injurers

with gains of g1 will engage in the activity. Similarly, half of the injurers
with gains of g2 will engage in the activity- -also those whose estimate of the

victim's loss is 1-e. Thus, social welfare under strict liability with
compensatory damages (d —
(6)

W(0) —

0)

is:

.5q(g1-l) + .5(l-q)(g2-l).

It will be useful to

compare this level of social welfare to the level of

social welfare that would occur in the first-best outcome. In the first-best
outcome, injurers would engage in the activity if and only if their gains
exceed the victim's loss- -that is, if their gains are g2, but not if they are

g1 (see (5)). Relative to this outcome, using the rule of

strict liability

with compensatory damages causes two types of errors. The error of
underdeterrence occurs when injurers with gains of g1 think the victim's loss

is l-e. Compared to the first-best outcome, this error lowers social welfare
by -.5q(g1-].). And the error of overdeterrence occurs when injurers with

gains of g2 think the victim's loss is l+e. This error lowers social welfare
by .S(l-q)(g2-l).
If compensatory damages are adjusted, then the appropriate expression for

social welfare depends on whether the adjustment, d, is positive or negative.

There are two relevant ranges to consider. [11]
In the first range, d is positive and high enough to eliminate the
problem of underdeterrence that occurs with

compensatory damages, but not so

high as to worsen the problem of overdeterrence.

9

Let d+ refer to any d in

this range:

0 < g1-(l-e)

(7)

Now, injurers whose gains are

d < g2-(l-e).

will not engage in the activity even if their

estimate of the victim's loss is l-e, since (l-e)+d

g•

The behavior of

injurers whose gains are g2 is unaffected; they will still engage in the

activity if their estimate is l-e, and they will still not engage if their

estimate is l+e. Therefore, social welfare will be:

W(d+) —

(8)

.5(l-q)(g-l).

Similarly, in the second range, d is negative and low enough to eliminate
the problem of overdeterrence that occurs with compensatory damages, but not
so low as to worsen the problem of underdeterrence.

Let d- refer to any d in

this range:
(9)

g1-(l+e)

d < g2-(l+e) < 0.

Now, injurers whose gains are g will engage in the activity regardless of

their loss estimate. And injurers whose gains are g still will engage in the
activity only if their estimate is l-e. Then social welfare will be:
(10)

W(d-) —

.5q(g1-l) +

(l-q)(g-l).

Since g < 1 and g > 1, it is immediately clear from comparing (6), (8),
and (10) that both W(d+) and W(d-) exceed W(0). In other words, under the
rule of strict liability, it is never optimal in this example to use
compensatory damages.

Whether compensatory damages should be adjusted upward or downward in the
double-discrete example can be expressed as follows:

(11)

>
W(d+) — W(d-)
<

>
as -.5q(g1-l) —
<

.5(l-q)(g-l).

This result, which is the analogue to (3) in the general case, has the

10

following interpretation: An appropriate upward adjustment of compensatory
damages can eliminate the error of underdeterrence, while an appropriate
downward adjustment can eliminate the error of overdeterrence. [12] Which
adjustment is most desirable depends on which error Is more important to

correct. It was shown previously that, relative to the first-best outcome,
the welfare loss from underdeterrence is

-.5q(g1-l), and the welfare loss from

overdeterrence is .5(l-q)(g2-].). Thus, (11) states that compensatory damages
should be adjusted upward if the welfare loss from underdeterrence exceeds the

welfare loss from overdeterrence, and downward if the reverse is true.
It will be useful to provide another formulation

of (11), which can be

rewritten as:

(12)

This

>
W(d÷) — W(d-)
<

as g —
>

1,

where g — qg1 + (1-q)g2.

result corresponds to (4) in the general case and has the same

interpretation: If the injurers' activity is socially undesirable (average
gain less than victim's loss), then compensatory damages should be adjusted
upward, while if the activity is socially desirable,

compensatory damages

should be adjusted downward. [13]

4. Strict Liability Versus Negligence
Under the negligence rule, an injurer will be found liable only if his
gain is less than the victim's loss (In contrast to the
under which he would be liable regardless of his

strict liability rule,

gain). Thus, for the court

to be able to apply the negligence rule, it is necessary to assume that the
court can determine an injurer's gain after the injurer has engaged in the

harmful activity. But it is still assumed that at the time the court chooses

11

the adjustment to compensatory damages, it only knows the distribution of
gains across injurers. [14]

If compensatory damages are used under both rules, it is easy see that

strict liability and negligence are equivalent. Consider the behavior of an
injurer whose gain is g and whose loss estimate is 1'. If g is greater than
1', that injurer will believe that he will not be found negligent under the
negligence rule; therefore, he will engage in the harmful activity. The same

behavior would result under strict liability. If g is less than 1', the
injurer will expect to be liable under the negligence rule and to have to pay

1'; consequently, he will not engage in the activity. Again, the same

behavior would result under strict liability. Thus, if damages are
compensatory, both rules will lead an injurer to engage in the activity if and
only if his gain exceeds his estimate of the victim's loss.
However, if damages are set optimally, then the strict liability rule
generally is preferred to the negligence rule.

To understand why, it is

necessary to examine two cases- -when the adjustment to compensatory damages is

positive and negative.

First suppose that d is positive, and again consider an injurer whose
gain is g and whose estimate of the loss is 1'. It is easy to see that, under
the negligence rule, the injurer will behave just as if compensatory damages

were used. If g is greater than 1', the injurer will believe that he will not
be found negligent; therefore, he will engage in the harmful activity even

though d is positive. And if g is less than 1', the injurer will expect to be
liable under the negligence rule and to have to pay l'+d; consequently, he
will not engage in the activity regardless of whether d is zero or positive.
Thus, if d is positive, injurers will behave under the negligence rule as if
12

compensatory damages were used.

Now suppose that d is negative. It will be shown that an injurer's
behavior will be the same under

negligence and strict liability. If g exceeds

1', the injurer will engage in the harmful activity under the negligence rule
since he will believe that he will not be found negligent. The same behavior
would result under strict liability when d is negative. If g is less than 1',
the injurer will expect to be liable under the negligence rule and to have to
pay l'+d; therefore, he will engage in the activity if and only if g >
Again, the same behavior would result under strict

l'+d.

liability. Thus, if d is

negative, the two rules are equivalent.

It is now easy to see why strict

liability generally is superior to

negligence when damages are set optimally. Suppose it is optimal under strict

liability to adjust compensatory damages upward. Then strict liability
clearly dominates negligence since every possible adjustment to compensatory
damages under the negligence rule is equivalent to the strict liability rule

with either no adjustment or a
that it is optimal under strict

negative adjustment. Suppose, alternatively,
liability to adjust compensatory damages

downward. Then strict liability and negligence are equally desirable (with
the same downward adjustment under the negligence rule). In general,
therefore, strict liability is preferable to negligence.
It will be useful to relate this discussion to activities characterized
as socially desirable or socially undesirable (in the

sense previously used).

If the activity is socially desirable, then strict liability and negligence,

with damages less than compensatory damages, are equally good; but if the
activity is socially undesirable, then strict liability should be used and
damages should exceed compensatory damages.

13

5. concluding Remarks
This section discusses several points related to the interpretation of
the results and some extensions of the model.

(a) The results comparing strict liability to negligence may not carry
over with a more realistic characterization of the negligence rule. Suppose,
for example, that injurers are uncertain about what the standard of care is
under the negligence rule, or that the courts make mistakes in observing the

injurer's care. Then each injurer will anticipate being found liable with
some probability and, presumably, this probability would fall as the injurer's

care increases. In this framework, the analysis of the negligence rule could
differ substantially from that presented here. Consider, for example, the

effects of adjusting compensatory damages upward. In the model analyzed in
this paper, such an adjustment had no effect. But in a model in which, under
the negligence rule, injurers would be liable with some probability, there

clearly would be some effects. Moreover, these effects could be quite
beneficial precisely because the probability of liability declines with

injurer care. For example, given any upward adjustment, injurers who take low
care (and who might otherwise be underdeterred) will anticipate a greater
increase in expected liability than injurers who take high care (and who might
otherwise be overdeterred). [15]

(b) The result that it is generally optimal to adjust compensatory
damages also could be affected in a significant way if the court, as well as
the injurer, were assumed to have imperfect information about the victim's

loss. For example, consider the rule of strict liability and suppose the
court's imperfect information takes the same form as the injurers' imperfect

14

information. In this framework, it can be shown that

compensatory damages

without adjustment are optimal. [16] Thus, a crucial assumption in the
analysis in the paper is that the court has better information about the loss

than the injurer. This assumption obviously is more realistic in some
situations than others. For example, a court may deal with some types of
harms- - such

as automobile accidents- -repeatedly, whereas each

injurer may only

be involved with such harms infrequently, if ever.

(c) Notwithstanding the preceding two comments, the theory developed in
this paper is broadly consistent with certain doctrines in American law. For
example, one doctrine holds that activities classified

as "ultrahazardous" or

"abnormally dangerous" should be subject to the rule of strict

rather than the rule of negligence. The

liability

analysis here is consistent with this

principle since it was seen that strict liability is

superior to negligence

when the activity is socially undesirable. [17]

(d) The results of this paper can be applied, with some modification, to
the use of taxes, fines, or standards to deal with externalities. The
analysis of taxes and fines would be similar to the analysis of strict

liability. If the party subject to the tax or the fine has imperfect
information about its level, then that party may cause too much harm or too
little harm as a result of the incorrect estimate of the tax or the fine.
Depending on the relative importance of the two types of errors, it generally

will be desirable to set the tax or the fine higher or lower than would be

optimal if the party's information were perfect. The analysis of standards
would be similar to the analysis of negligence since, if the standard is not
complied with, the party subject to the standard often is punished by a

financial penalty. It may be optimal to adjust the penalty (and possibly the
15

standard) if the party subject to the standard has imperfect information about
the penalty (or the standard).

(e) Allowing for the injurer's information about the victim's loss to be
imperfect has some important general implications for the theory of

externalities. In the more commonly analyzed case in which injurers'
information is assumed to be perfect, it is well known that if an injurer is

made to pay for the victim's harm, then the socially desired behavior of the

injurer will result. A corollary to this proposition is that the injurer's
payment should not depend on whether he is engaging in a socially desirable or

socially undesirable activity. For the reasons shown here, neither of these
conclusions continues to hold if the injurer's information is imperfect.

16

Notes

[*] Stanford University and National Bureau of Economic Research. Work
on this paper was supported by the Center for Economic Policy Research at

Stanford. During its preparation, I had the benefit of comments from Lucian
Bebchuk, Robert Cooter, Richard Craswell, Edward Golding, Alvin Klevorick,
Lewis Kornhauser, Jeffrey Perloff, Ivan P'ng, Michael Riordan, William
Rogerson, Daniel Rubinfeld, Steven Shavell, and Ewart Thomas.

[1] See, for example, Brown (1973). He also considers the victim's
behavior, which is an issue that will not be dealt with here.

[2] This conclusion may not be correct if injurers are risk averse, or
if their "activity level" (e.g., amount of driving) as well as their "care"

(e.g., speed) affects expected accident losses. These issues will not be
considered here.

[3] Although these questions have not been addressed before in a model
which emphasizes the imperfect information of the injurer, there are some

closely related studies. Most of these studies focus on whether, under the
rule of negligence, an injurer will meet the standard of care when the injurer
has imperfect information about the negligence standard or when the court has

imperfect information about the injurer's care. See, for example, Diamond
(1974), Golding (1982), Grady (1983), and Craswell and Calfee (1986). Some
attention also has been given to the optimal level of liability and the choice
between strict liability and negligence when there is imperfect information.
See, for example, Calabresi and Hirschoff (1972), Cooter (1982), and Landes

and Posner (1983). Much of this literature recently has been synthesized and
extended in Shavell (1987, esp. Chs. 4.C & 6.C).

[4] Although reference will be made throughout the paper to "the court,"

17

this is meant in a generic sense to refer to whatever institution is
responsible for choosing the level of liability (including a legislature or an
administrative agency).

[5] In other words, there is no uncertainty about the likelihood or the

magnitude of the loss. It will become clear that the results will generalize
to a model in which both the probability and the magnitude of the loss may be
uncertain.

[6] More realistically, one could assume that the injurer also has
imperfect information about the adjustment to compensatory damages. This
generalization would not affect the results of the paper (provided, as seems
reasonable, that the average estimate of the adjustment is positively related
to the actual adjustment).

[7] It is assumed for convenience that the density of loss estimates
across injurers is independent of the density of gains across injurers.

[8] There is no loss of generality in assuming that the injurer will not
engage in the activity when his gain equals the sum of the loss estimate and
the damage adjustment.

[9] The following expression assumes that g < 11 and that g2 > 12. If
these conditions do not hold, it will be obvious how the expression for social
welfare is affected.

[10] It is straightforward to show from (1) that W'(d) < 0 if d > 1-li

and W'(d) > 0 if d < 1-12. Therefore, lpd* < 1 < 12+d*, making the following
decomposition of (1) well defined for the optimal value of d.

[11] It will become clear from the analysis below that d in one of these

ranges dominates d outside of these ranges. Therefore, values of d outside of
these ranges will not be considered.

18

[12] Given the assumptions of the double-discrete example, it is
possible either to eliminate underdeterrence without worsening overdeterrence,

or to eliminate overdeterrence without worsening underdeterrence. Of course,
this will not be true in general.

[13] Richard Craswell has pointed out to me that the results in this
section do not depend on the distribution of the injurers' estimates of the

victim's loss. This observation does not, however, apply generally.
[14] The characterization of the negligence rule in this section is

overly simplistic in several respects. For example, in practice the
negligence rule imposes liability on an injurer with some probability that
depends on the injurer's care; see comment (a) in section 5 below.

[15] In an earlier version of this paper, each injurer's information
about the victim's loss was characterized as a probability distribution rather

than as a point estimate. In that version, strict liability and negligence
were not equivalent when compensatory damages were used (either rule could
dominate), and negligence was superior to strict liability when damages were
set optimally (essentially for the reason suggested in this comment).

[16] This result is implicit in Shavell (1987, Ch. 6.C).

[17] To be more precise, it is strict liability with compensatory
damages optimally adjusted upward that is superior to negligence with optimal

damages when the activity is socially undesirable. Unfortunately, there does
not appear to be any evidence that indicates whether liability for
ultrahazardous or abnormally dangerous activities generally exceeds

compensatory damages. I am indebted to Richard Craswell for raising this
point.

19

References
Brown, John Prather, "Toward an Economic Theory of Liability," Journal
Legal Studies, Vol. 2, No. 2 (June 1973), PP. 323-349.

Calabresi, Guido, and Jon T. Hirschoff, "Toward a Test for Strict Liability in

Torts," Yale j Journal, Vol. 81, No. 6 (May 1972), pp. 1055-1085.
Cooter, Robert D., "Economic Analysis of Punitive Damages," Southern

California L Review, Vol. 56, No. 1 (November 1982), pp. 79-101.
Craswell, Richard, and John E. Calfee, "Deterrence and Uncertain Legal
Standards," Journal of Law. Economics, and Organization, Vol. 2, No. 2
(Fall 1986), pp. 279-303.

Diamond, Peter A., "Single Activity Accidents," Journal .f

Legal

Studies, Vol.

3, No. 1 (January 1974), pp. 107-164.

Golding, Edward L., "Economic Efficiency of Liability Rules for Joint Torts
with Uncertainty," Working Paper No. 67, Bureau of Economics, Federal
Trade Commission, October 1982.

Grady, Mark F., "A New Positive Economic Theory of Negligence," Yale

j

Journal, Vol. 92, No. 5 (April 1983), pp. 799-829.

Landes, William M., and Richard A. Posner, "An Economic Theory of Intentional

Torts," International Review f

Economics, Vol. 1, No. 2

(December 1981), Pp. 127-154.

Shavell, Steven, Economic Analysis

Accident j (Cambridge: Harvard

University Press, forthcoming 1987).

20

