                                 NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




          SHORT-RUN EFFECTS OF PARENTAL JOB LOSS ON CHILD HEALTH

                                           Jessamyn Schaller
                                             Mariana Zerpa

                                         Working Paper 21745
                                 http://www.nber.org/papers/w21745


                       NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                                1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                  Cambridge, MA 02138
                                     November 2015




The authors would like to thank Elizabeth Ananat, Price Fishback, Jason Lindo, Mindy Marks, Gary
Solon, Ann Huff Stevens, and Tiemen Woutersen, as well as seminar participants at the Annual Meetings
of the Population Association of America for their helpful comments. Funding for this project was
made possible in part by grant number 1H79AE000100-1 to the UC Davis Center for Poverty Research
from the U.S. Department of Health and Human Services, Office of the Assistant Secretary for Planning
and Analysis (ASPE), which was awarded by the Substance Abuse and Mental Health Services Administration
(SAMHSA). Part of the research in this paper was conducted at the CFACT Data Center, and the support
of the Agency for Healthcare Research and Quality (AHRQ) is acknowledged. The views expressed
are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the official policies of the AHRQ or the Department
of Health and Human Services. The views expressed herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily
reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.

© 2015 by Jessamyn Schaller and Mariana Zerpa. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to
exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including
© notice, is given to the source.
Short-run Effects of Parental Job Loss on Child Health
Jessamyn Schaller and Mariana Zerpa
NBER Working Paper No. 21745
November 2015
JEL No. I1,I12,I13,J0,J6

                                              ABSTRACT

Recent research suggests that parental job loss has negative effects on children's outcomes, including
their academic achievement and long-run educational and labor market outcomes. In this paper we
turn our attention to the effects of parental job loss on children's health. We combine health data from
16 waves of the Medical Expenditure Panel Survey, which allows us to use a fixed effects specification
and still have a large sample of parental job displacements. We find that paternal job loss is detrimental
to the physical and mental health of children in low-socioeconomic status (SES) families, increasing
their incidence of injuries and mental disorders. We separately find that maternal job loss leads to
reductions in the incidence of infectious illness among children in high-SES families, possibly resulting
from substitution of maternal care for market-based childcare services. Increases in public health insurance
coverage compensate for a large share of the loss in private coverage that follows parental displacement,
and we find no significant changes in routine or diagnostic medical care.


Jessamyn Schaller
Department of Economics
University of Arizona
McClelland Hall 401PP
Tucson, AZ 85721
and NBER
jschaller@email.arizona.edu

Mariana Zerpa
Department of Economics
University of Arizona
McClelland Hall, Suite 401
1130 E Helen St., Tucson, AZ 85721
marianazerpa@email.arizona.edu
1       Introduction

        During the Great Recession, millions of American workers lost jobs as firms restructured,
relocated, downsized, and closed in response to changing demand conditions. From January
2007 through December 2009—a period encompassing the official beginning and end of the
recession—nearly one in six US workers experienced job displacement (Farber, 2011). Not
only was the rate of job loss significantly higher during this period than during previous
postwar recessions, the rate of reemployment was lower and the average duration of unem-
ployment was longer. The severity of the recent economic downturn has generated renewed
interest among researchers in the consequences of job displacement for workers and their
families.
        Though a substantial literature documents the effects of displacement on outcomes such
as earnings, employment, health, and fertility for displaced workers, less is known about the
consequences of displacement for another group of potential victims—the children of dis-
placed workers. Given that job displacement causes changes in family income, parental time
use, and the physical and mental wellbeing of parents, it is likely to alter family dynamics
and affect parental investments in children. Recent studies of the effects of job displacement
on children’s academic outcomes suggest that this is the case, finding that parental job loss is
associated with increased likelihood of grade repetition and worse performance on standard-
ized tests (Ananat et al., 2011; Stevens and Schaller, 2009). Parental job loss has also been
found to have long-run effects on children in low-income families, reducing their educational
attainment and earnings in adulthood (Oreopolous et al., 2008; Page et al., 2009). However,
the mechanisms by which parental job loss translates into worse outcomes for children in the
short and long run are not well understood.
        In this paper, we turn our attention to the effects of parental job loss on children’s
physical and mental health. While previous work has shown that job loss is associated with
increased mortality and worse physical and mental health among adults,1 only a few papers
    1
        See, for example, Browning and Heinesen, 2012; Schaller and Stevens, 2015; Sullivan and von Wachter,


                                                       2
have examined the effects of parental job loss on children’s health and none have looked
at the effects of parental job loss on a broad set of health outcomes.2 Child health is an
important outcome because it is both an indicator of current welfare and a predictor of future
outcomes including adult health, educational attainment, and earnings, and thus a potential
mechanism for the intergenerational transmission of economic shocks (Currie, 2009).
   As parental job loss is likely to affect a number of important inputs to child health, the
predicted effects are unclear a priori. On one hand, a negative income shock may lead to
reductions in medical care utilization and other health investments. On the other hand, an
unanticipated period of unemployment may allow parents to take their children to the doctor
more often or cause them to substitute parental care for market-based childcare, which may
lead to changes in the quality of care and reduce exposure to contagious illness. Along
these lines, the medical literature documents a correlation between daycare attendance and
infectious illness (see, for example, Beijers et al., 2011; Bradley, 2003; Hardy and Fowler,
1993) and previous research in economics has produced evidence of deleterious effects of
maternal employment on child health (Gennetian et al., 2010; Ruhm, 2000; Morrill, 2011).
Other mechanisms are also possible. For example, a number of studies have found negative
effects of job displacement on outcomes related to adult mental health (for example, Brand
et al., 2008; Browning and Heinesen, 2012; Schaller and Stevens, 2015), which might have
direct or indirect effects on children’s health. Additionally, changes in insurance status or
the source of insurance coverage may alter the cost and availability of medical care.
   In this study, we exploit unique data from the Medical Expenditure Panel Survey (MEPS)
that allow us to examine the reduced-form effects of parental job displacement on several
different measures of child health and mental health and to investigate potential mechanisms
behind these effects. The MEPS is a large-scale representative survey that collects detailed
2009
    2
      To our knowledge there are only three existing papers on the topic: Liu and Zhao (2014) study the
effects of mass layoffs on child height and weight in China, Mork et al. (2013) look at the correlation
between parental unemployment and children’s hospital stays in Sweden, and Lindo (2011) studies the
effects of parental job loss on health at birth using US data.



                                                  3
information on health outcomes, health insurance coverage, and health care utilization for
families over a two-year period. To study the causal effects of parental job loss on children’s
health, we use a large sample of children with displaced parents by combining data from
16 waves of the MEPS covering the period from 1996 through 2012. To limit the effects of
endogenous selection and omitted variables bias, we focus on job losses that are plausibly
exogenous, including only layoffs, job endings, and business closures, and include child fixed
effects in our main specification so that our estimates are identified by changes in health
status after displacement for a given child rather than comparisons between the children of
displaced workers and children of continually employed workers.
   Our results show that both paternal and maternal job loss result in reductions in parent
ratings of children’s health and mental health. We find that a father’s job loss also increases
children’s incidence of anxiety and depression and we see increases in the incidence of injuries
following paternal job loss in low-SES families. By contrast, maternal job loss in high-SES
families reduces children’s incidence of infectious illness. Though the point estimates change
across specifications, these patterns are robust to limiting the definition of job loss to include
only firm closures and are generally stronger when we limit the sample to the children of
workers who are more securely attached to the labor market at baseline.
   Turning to the effects of parental job loss on child health insurance coverage and health
care utilization, we find a small but statistically significant reduction in private insurance
coverage in the period prior to paternal job loss, which is not surprising in light of previous
work showing that male earnings begin to fall prior to displacement (e.g. Jacobson, Lalonde,
and Sullivan, 1993). After job loss occurs, increases in public insurance coverage largely
counteract the loss of private insurance coverage so that the estimated overall effect on chil-
dren’s insurance coverage after displacement is much smaller than corresponding estimates
for adults (see Schaller and Stevens, 2015). We find no significant effects on children’s use
of routine or diagnostic medical care. We do see evidence, however, of increases in mental
health visits after paternal job loss and reductions in prescription drug use after maternal


                                                4
job loss.
    Taken as a whole, our results suggest that, particularly in low-SES families, children’s
health is vulnerable to the stress associated with paternal job loss. This finding can poten-
tially help to explain the long-term effects of paternal displacement on education and labor
market outcomes of children in low-SES families found by Oreopoulos, Page, and Stevens
(2008). Among children in more-advantaged families, the negative effects of paternal job
loss are weak or nonexistent, and our results suggest that the substitution of parental care
for market-based childcare following maternal job loss in families that can afford to do so
may actually be beneficial for child health in the short-run.


2   Theoretical background

    In the standard model of child health production in economics (Grossman, 2000; Currie,
2009), parents are assumed to maximize an inter-temporal utility function whose arguments
in each period are the stock of child health, the consumption of other commodities, and
leisure. The health stock in any given period is a function of the health stock of the previous
period, its depreciation rate, and the health investments made in the previous period. The
health production function depends on both exogenous productivity shifters and permanent
individual productivity shifters. Finally, the investment inputs in this production function
include material inputs (including health care) and parental time inputs.
    Within this framework, there are a few ways in which parental job loss can affect a child’s
health stock. First, the reduction in income associated with job loss can affect consumption
and health investments, such as nutritious food, preventive health care, and the practice of
physical exercise. Second, the loss of a job can cause the loss of employer-provided health
insurance for the worker and his/her dependents. This will affect both the price and the
quality of available health care and may lead to reduced use of health care, especially related
to preventive care, treatment of chronic conditions, and purchase of prescription drugs. For
children, however, the effects of job loss on health insurance coverage may be mediated


                                               5
by the availability of the other parent’s employer-provided health insurance, as well as the
availability and take-up of public health insurance programs such as Medicaid and the State
Children’s Health Insurance Program (SCHIP).
   Job loss may also change the availability of parental time and its allocation towards child
health production, especially in the short run. A parent who recently lost a job may spend
more time caring for the child, increasing non-market time inputs to health production,
which may also increase the amount of health care received by the child (doctor visits,
for example). Additionally, increased availability of parental time, combined with a reduced
income, may cause children to spend less time in daycare, preschool, or after-school activities,
which may reduce their exposure to illness or change their likelihood of incurring injuries.
A final avenue by which parental job loss might lead to changes in child health is increased
parental stress caused by job loss and the associated income shock. Parental stress might
affect child health directly by causing children to experience more stress themselves or it
might affect the quality of care that children receive.
   The many potential mechanisms discussed above make it unclear whether we should
expect job loss to lead to improvement or deterioration in child health on average. We can,
however, make predictions about how these effects might vary depending on parent, child,
and family characteristics. For one thing, the effects of job loss are likely to depend on the
gender of the displaced parent. Research in psychology and sociology suggests that the stress
effects of job loss are typically greater when fathers experience involuntary displacement.
This is partly because male job loss often results in a larger shock to family income, but
has also been attributed to a cultural emphasis on the role of the father as breadwinner.
Meanwhile, maternal job loss may be more likely to result in increased time spent with
children, as women are more likely to take on home-production and caregiving roles during
periods of joblessness (Kalil and Ziol-Guest, 2008).
   Another dimension along which the effects of parental displacement may be heterogeneous
is child age. Though this type of heterogeneity is difficult to characterize a priori, one point is


                                                6
worth noting: with outcomes such as infectious illness, for which changes in time use are an
important mechanism, it is possible that the effects will be more pronounced among children
who are not yet school-aged. At the same time, any differences across age groups will be
muted if young children are exposed to infectious illness through parents or older siblings
(or vice versa), or if older children are also changing their time use (for example, reducing
participation in after-school care or extra-curricular activities) in response to job loss.
        Other important sources of potential heterogeneity in the effects of fathers’ and mothers’
job losses include the number of earners in the family, parental educational attainment,
family earnings, and the contribution of the displaced worker’s earnings to family income
prior to job loss. Single-earner families, and those with less education or lower income may
experience more stress upon job loss and are likely to have fewer resources with which to
moderate shocks to earnings and insurance coverage. Meanwhile, the displacement of a
secondary earner in a family with high socioeconomic status may be less disruptive, both
financially and emotionally.


3       Related Literature

        The literature on job displacement has only recently started to look at the consequences
on children. Previous papers discuss the effects of parental job displacement on children’s
future earnings, finding different results for different countries and samples.3 Some papers
have looked at how parental job displacement affects educational outcomes of children, find-
ing that it increases the likelihood of grade repetition (Stevens and Schaller, 2011; Kalil
and Ziol-Guest, 2008), worsens school performance (Ananat et al., 2011; Rege et al., 2011),
and reduces the likelihood of enrolling in post-secondary education (Coelli, 2011). Notably,
papers that separately examine male and female displacements typically find negative effects
    3
     Oreopoulos et al. (2008) show that fathers’ job displacement has a large negative effect on children’s
young adult earnings, using data for Canada. Page et al. (2009) only find significant effects for children that
initially come from low income households in the U.S., but their sample is small. Bratberg et al. (2008) use
administrative data from Norway, a country with a much lower intergenerational correlation of earnings, and
find that job displacement reduces future earnings of the worker but not of their children.



                                                      7
following fathers’ job losses only (Kalil and Ziol-Guest, 2008; Rege et al. 2011). Meanwhile,
those that stratify by income find that the negative effects of parental job displacement are
stronger among low-income families (Oreopoulos et al. 2008; Page et al, 2009).
   So far, the only paper that has looked at the effects of parental job loss on child health in
the US is Lindo (2011). Using data from the Panel Survey of Income Dynamics (PSID), Lindo
compares the birth-weight of siblings born before and after a job loss. The results indicate
that job displacement of the husband reduces the birth-weight of subsequent children by
4.5%, with larger treatment effects below the median of the birthweight distribution. Other
papers have looked at child health effects of job displacements in other countries. Liu and
Zhao (2014) look at job displacement in the context of mass layoffs from publicly owned
firms in China following the reforms initiated in the 1990s. They find that the father’s job
loss has a large negative impact on height and weight of children, whereas they don’t find
evidence of an effect of mother’s job loss. Mork et al. (2013) look at the effect of parental
unemployment on child health outcomes using administrative data from Sweden. They find
that children with unemployed parents are 1 percent more likely to be hospitalized in the
same year as the job loss, and 5 percent more likely in the long run. However, due to data
limitations they are not able to separately identify the effects of plausibly exogenous job
displacement from all causes of job loss.
   The evidence on the effects of job displacement on adult health is more abundant. Our
paper is closest in methods to Schaller and Stevens (2015). Using data from the MEPS, they
look at the effect of involuntary job loss on a worker’s health outcomes in the short-run. They
find that job loss has substantial negative effects on mental health and that it increases the
likelihood of activity limitations and fair or poor self-reported physical health. However, they
find no effects on the likelihood of reporting a number of specific chronic health conditions,
including arthritis, diabetes, high cholesterol, and hypertension, and they find reductions in
the incidence of infectious illness among adults after job loss. Other papers that look at job
displacement and adult health have found significant effects on adult mortality, suicide risk,


                                               8
cardiovascular health, risky behaviors such as alcohol abuse and smoking, traffic accidents
and mental illness (Sullivan and Von Wachter, 2009; Deb et al., 2011; Classen and Dunn,
2012; Browning and Heinesen, 2012; Black et al., 2012).
    A second strand of literature related to this paper is that on the stability of health
insurance coverage and the effects of unemployment on access to health care. The loss
of insurance coverage following displacement could potentially lead directly to changes in
health status if it causes individuals to reduce their utilization of medical care. Among
adults, Gruber and Madrian (1997) find that job separations (including both layoffs and
quits) have a large impact on the probability of having any insurance. Schaller and Stevens
(2015) also find significant effects of involuntary job loss on insurance coverage in their study
of adults in the MEPS: a 10 percentage point reduction in insurance coverage following job
loss among the full adult sample, and a 26 percentage point reduction in coverage among
workers that were insured through their employer prior to displacement. They also find
negative effects on health care utilization among workers who were insured through their
employer prior to displacement.
    For children, the effects of job loss on health insurance coverage are likely to be smaller
than those for adults. While a majority of both adults and children are insured through an
employer-provided policy,4 there have been large expansions in the eligibility of children for
public health insurance. Publicly provided child health insurance has the potential to insulate
children from the consequences of job instability. Cawley and Simon (2005) and Cawley et
al. (2013) study the effects of state unemployment rates on health insurance coverage for
both adults and children, and find that an increase in the unemployment rate significantly
decreases the probability of being insured for men, but not for women and children, who
they argue are relatively insulated from these fluctuations due to public insurance policies.
To our knowledge, the only paper that looks at the effects of parental job loss on child
health insurance coverage is that of Fairbrother et al. (2010), which finds large increases in
   4
     In our sample, 62% of children whose parents were employed in the first round of the panel had employer-
provided health insurance.


                                                     9
children’s likelihood of becoming uninsured in the three months after parental displacement.
However, the authors categorize any job separation as a job loss, and they do not control
for unobserved characteristics that may be correlated with both a job separation and loss of
insurance.
       Finally, as job displacement constitutes an arguably exogenous shock to both employ-
ment and income, studying its effects on child health can provide insight into the nature of
the causal effects of parental employment and family income on child health. With regard
to employment status, existing research has documented negative effects of maternal em-
ployment on child health outcomes (see, for example, Gennetian et al., 2010; Ruhm, 2000;
Morrill, 2011), though none have used job displacement as a source of identifying variation.
With regard to income, though there is well documented evidence of a positive cross-sectional
correlation between family income and child health (Currie, 2009 provides a review of these
studies), it has proven difficult to identify causal effects. It could be that unobserved char-
acteristics of the parents or the environment in which the child is raised are correlated with
both family income and child health. So far, the few papers that do try to establish the
causal effect of income on child health only look at health at birth.5
       In our paper we are able to build significantly on the existing literature by using a dataset
that allows us to (i) identify plausibly exogenous sources of job separation, (ii) link parents
to their children and follow them over several survey waves, (iii) obtain information on health
insurance coverage, health care utilization, and health outcomes from the same source, and
(iv) explore heterogeneity in the treatment effects of parental job displacement on child
health along several dimensions, including family structure, family income, and parental
education.
   5
    Conley and Bennett (2000, 2001) use mother fixed effects and find that income at time of birth does
not have a significant effect on birth-weight in general, but they do find effects for children whose mothers
had low birth-weight themselves. A caveat of these papers is that the data they use from the PSID has a
relatively small sample. Hoynes et al. (2013) exploit variations caused by tax reforms in the generosity of
the federal Earned Income Tax Credit (EITC) as a source of exogenous variations in family income. They
find that an increase in the EITC income increases the mean birth-weight and reduces the incidence of low
birth-weight. They also find that it increases the use of prenatal care and reduces smoking by pregnant
women.


                                                     10
4   Data

    We use data from the Medical Expenditure Panel Survey (MEPS), maintained by the
Agency for Healthcare Research and Quality (AHRQ). Since 1996, each year the MEPS
selects a new nationally representative subsample of households participating in the previous
year’s National Health Interview Survey (NHIS) conducted by the National Center for Health
Statistics. In each new panel the respondents are interviewed in five rounds spanning two
full calendar years. Round length varies across rounds and across households - in our sample,
reference periods are between three and five months, with an average duration of 4.2 months.
This survey provides information on health care use, expenditures, sources of payment,
and health insurance coverage, as well as reported health status, demographic and socio-
economic characteristics, employment, access to care, and satisfaction with health care.
The information provided by the household respondents is complemented with information
collected from a sample of medical providers, which is primarily used by the MEPS as
an imputation source to supplement or replace household reported information on visits,
diagnosis, and expenditures. Our sample includes 16 waves of the MEPS, covering the
period 1996-2012. We limit our sample to children who were 1 to 16 years old and had at
least one parent employed at the time of the first interview (round) of the survey.6
    The MEPS is ideally suited for this analysis for several reasons. First, it provides rich
information on child health that includes parent-reported health and mental health status,
specific health conditions, and mental disorders. This provides a broad picture of health
while also allowing us to isolate changes in specific conditions that are especially common
and/or costly among children.7 Second, it allows us to examine potential mechanisms,
    6
      We do not count self-employed parents as employed when defining our sample. We trimmed 6.4% of
the children in the sample because they did not have data for all five rounds of the survey. Another 4.4%
of children were dropped from the sample because they had missing data on parental education, mother’s
marital status, or health outcomes, and 9% of children did not have either parent employed in the first round
of the survey.
    7
      Our choice of specific health conditions to include in our analysis is motivated in part by a statistical
brief from the AHRQ (Soni, 2008) that ranks children’s conditions in terms of total medical expenditures.
According to this brief, the five most expensive conditions for children aged 0-17 in 2006 in terms of to-
tal expenditures were mental disorders, asthma, trauma-related disorders, acute bronchitis, and infectious


                                                      11
such as changes in insurance coverage and health care utilization, using the same dataset.
Finally, by combining many short panels it provides a relatively large sample of children
with displaced parents, which is unusual in studies of displacement that rely on survey data.
This enhances our statistical power and allows us to explore heterogeneity in the effects of
parental displacement on child health.
    Our indicators for involuntary job displacement are constructed from a section of the
MEPS survey in which respondents are asked to choose the main reason why they changed
jobs since the last interview from a list of possible responses. In most of our analysis, we define
involuntary displacement as displacement for one of three reasons: “job ended,” “business
dissolved or sold,” or “laid off.”8 Although the three causes for job loss considered are clearly
involuntary, it is possible that layoffs and jobs that end are correlated with unobservable
individual or family shocks that are also related to child health. Though other possible
responses to the survey such as “quit to take care of home or family,” “illness or injury,”
and “quit to take some time off,” are likely to capture many job changes that are potentially
endogenous, one limitation of the MEPS data is that we are not able to identify workers
who were fired for cause. To address this concern, we also create an alternative definition
of job displacement that only includes firm closures—an approach that is common in the
literature on job displacement. We note, however that limiting the definition of involuntary
displacements in this way comes at a cost, resulting in a substantial decrease in the number of
displacements that we observe. We also interpret differences across specifications carefully in
light of possible heterogeneous treatment effects, as the baseline characteristics of individuals
displaced in business closure events are different from those of the full sample of displaced
workers.
    We begin by restricting our samples so that for the estimates of the effects of fathers’
diseases.
   8
     When asked why they changed jobs since the last interview, respondents are given the following options:
job ended, business dissolved or sold, retired, illness or injury, laid off, quit to have a baby, quit to go to
school, quit to take care of home or family, quit because wanted time off, quit to take another job, unpaid
leave, or other.



                                                      12
displacements, the at-risk sample includes all children whose father is employed in the first
round of the survey, and for the estimates of the effects of mothers’ displacements, the at-
risk sample includes all children whose mother is employed in the first round of the survey.
Defining the samples this way ensures that the sample used to help identify the control
variables in our analysis is as similar as possible to the treatment group. We note, however,
that there are differences in baseline characteristics between children in the father-employed
sample and children in the mother-employed sample that make direct comparison of the
effects of paternal and maternal job displacement more difficult. In addition to the models
estimated on these broader samples, we estimate models in which we restrict our father-
employed and mother-employed samples to children whose relevant parent had at least one
year of job tenure prior to displacement. These samples represent groups of children whose
parents were more securely attached to the labor market, for whom job loss is likely to
be a more severe, unexpected, and plausibly exogenous shock. Based on precedent in the
literature on job displacement, we use this as our preferred estimation sample when we
conduct robustness checks and heterogeneity analysis.
   The outcome variables that we examine can be divided into the following categories:

 (i) Health outcomes: These include the following: Reported health: Respondents are asked
     to rate the health and mental health status of each child in the family according to the
     following categories: excellent, very good, good, fair, and poor. We create indicators
     for whether a child’s health and mental health were reported to be fair or poor and
     indicators for whether a child’s health and mental health were reported to be excellent;
     Health conditions: Medical conditions are reported by respondents when there is an
     event related to this condition, such as a doctor visit, hospital stay, disability day, or
     prescription drug purchase. Conditions are reported verbatim by the interviewer and
     then coded to ICD-9-CM codes. We use these codes to identify the following specific
     conditions: infectious illnesses, bronchitis, asthma, injuries (trauma), attention deficit
     disorder (ADD), and stress-related mental disorders (anxiety, depression);

                                             13
 (ii) Health insurance status: We look at whether the child is covered by any insurance,
        private insurance, or public insurance (including Medicaid, SCHIP, Tricare, and other
        public hospital/physician coverage).

(iii) Health care and prescription drug utilization and expenditures: These include indicators
        for any doctor visit, checkups, diagnostic, emergency room (ER) visits, and mental
        health visits, as well as overall prescription drug use and the use of antibiotics and
        mental health drugs.

      Throughout the paper, we include all children ages 1 and up in the regressions with
outcomes related to physical health. In case diagnosis of mental disorders in childhood is
correlated with a child’s exposure to teachers or other non-parental care providers, we limit
the sample to school-aged children (ages 6 and up) for all mental-health-related outcomes,
including mental health ratings, conditions, visits and prescriptions drugs.
      Before proceeding, we emphasize that, as in most of the existing literature, our measures
of child health are reported by household survey respondents (usually the mother). As such,
it is possible that changes in these measures may result from changes in respondent awareness
or perception of a child’s health status, or even the respondent’s own mental state, rather
than changes in the child’s actual health. Moreover, because a medical condition is identified
in the data when a health event related to the condition occurs, changes in the incidence of
health conditions may be related to changes in the consumption of health care. We interpret
our findings with these caveats in mind. We also explore the potential for changes in the
frequency of medical care to influence reporting directly by looking for changes in the use of
routine care after displacement.
      Table 1 presents round 1 summary statistics by parental displacement status.9 A number
of statistically significant differences between the columns highlight the importance of our
empirical approach, which includes individual fixed effects and linear time trends that are
allowed to vary depending on baseline health status. Specifically, the children of displaced
  9
      Additional summary statistics for a number of subgroups can be found in Appendix Table A1.

                                                   14
workers are less likely to be white and their parents are less likely to have a college education,
less likely to have had at least one year of job tenure in round 1, and more likely to have
individual earnings below the sample median. The children of displaced workers also are more
likely to come from single-earner families and families with income below 200 percent of the
poverty line, and have lower levels of private health insurance coverage and higher levels
of public insurance coverage. For the most part, the differences between never-displaced
and displaced samples are less pronounced when the displaced-parent samples are limited
to include only the children of parents who had at least one year of job tenure prior to
displacement or only the children of workers displaced in a firm closure.
   Looking at health outcomes, Table 1 shows that the children of displaced workers are
less likely to have their physical and mental health reported as “excellent” and the children
of displaced mothers are more likely to have physical and mental health reported as “fair
or poor.” The children of displaced fathers are less likely to be diagnosed with specific
mental disorders including ADD, anxiety, and depression, which could be driven by lower
levels of health insurance coverage. There are also a few differences in the incidence of
physical health conditions, for example, a lower incidence of injuries among the children
of displaced mothers and a lower incidence of infections among the children of displaced
fathers. The summary statistics in Table 1 also reveal important differences between the
father-employed and mother-employed samples. Specifically, black children and children in
families with income below 200 percent of the poverty line make up a larger share of the
mother-employed sample. Employed mothers are also less likely to have job tenure than
their male counterparts.




                                               15
5        Empirical Approach

         We estimate a series of fixed-effects models, each with a different health-related dependent
variable. Our main regression equation is as follows:


                                    Yit = αi + βDit + γXit + δt + εit                               (1)

where Yit is the outcome variable for child i in round t, αi is a child-specific fixed effect,
Dit is an indicator for post-parental displacement periods, Xit is a vector of time-varying
control variables, and δt is a set of round dummies. Child fixed effects are included to
account for permanent characteristics of children and families that may be related both with
child health and the likelihood of parental displacement. The time-varying controls include
dummies for child age and the calendar year in which the interview took place, month of
interview dummies to control for seasonality in both health outcomes and the likelihood of
parental displacement, and separate linear time trends for each of the five baseline health
categories. We also control for the length of the round in days, which varies across individuals
even within the same panel and round due to variation in interview dates across households.
Observations are weighted by MEPS individual sample weights.10 To adjust for correlations
across children within families and correlation within families over time the standard errors
are clustered at the household level.
         Within this empirical framework, causal identification of the effects of parental job loss
relies on the assumption that the job loss is exogenous with respect to family and child
outcomes. In other words, there must be no unobservable time-varying factors that are cor-
related both with the probability of worker displacement and with child health outcomes. It
must also be the case that changes in child health do not directly cause changes in the likeli-
    10
    Following Solon et al. (2014), we have also conducted our analysis without using sample weights.
Though there are some differences between the results from the unweighted analysis and our main results,
the discrepancies between the two sets of results are consistent with the known oversampling of minority
groups in the MEPS and the heterogeneity in treatment effects that we observe between groups. Unweighted
results are available from the authors upon request.



                                                    16
hood of parental displacement. While we cannot entirely rule out either of these possibilities,
we address concerns about endogeneity in several ways. Most importantly, we choose our
definition of job displacement carefully and test robustness to an alternative definition of the
variable. Limiting our sample to workers with more stable employment history also helps
to address potential endogeneity. Finally, we check for a potential red flag by estimating
models in which we include an indicator for the survey round prior to displacement to see if
the health effects of parental displacement on child health seem to occur prior to the event.


6     Main Results

6.1     Parental Job Loss and Child Health

      We begin, in Table 2, by estimating the effects of fathers’ and mothers’ job losses on child
health and mental health. As described in Section 4, we estimate the effects of each parent’s
job loss with (1) the full samples and all involuntary displacements, (2) samples limited to
the children of workers with at least one year of job tenure prior to displacement, and (3) a
restricted definition of displacement that includes only firm closures.
      The results in Table 2 show modest decreases (about 6-10 percent) in the likelihood
that a child’s health or mental health is reported to be “excellent” following the job loss
of either parent. Focusing on specific health conditions, however, the estimated effects of
fathers’ and mothers’ job losses on child health differ. Paternal job loss is associated with
substantial (100 to 150 percent) increases in the likelihood of depression and anxiety in both
the tenured-father sample and the firm closures specification, while maternal job loss has
no significant effect on mental illness. Meanwhile, a mother’s job loss is associated with 7-8
percent decreases in the incidence of infectious illness (including viral and bacterial infections
such as flu, colds, intestinal infection, and otitis) while a father’s job loss is not associated
with changes in infectious illness. Other results in Table 2 are mostly insignificant, with point
estimates that vary across specifications. Two exceptions are a weakly significant (at 10%
significance level) reduction in trauma in the male firm-closure specification, and a weakly

                                                 17
significant reduction in asthma in the full-sample female displacement specification.
      The differences between the effects of fathers’ and mothers’ job losses in Table 2 are
interesting in light of the existing literature and potential mechanisms at work. As discussed
in Section 2, previous social science research suggests that the stress effects of paternal dis-
placement are likely to be larger than those from maternal job loss. Our finding that children
are more likely to be diagnosed and treated with mental disorders commonly associated with
stress following paternal displacement is consistent with this story. Research also tells us
that mothers are more likely to spend time as caregivers during periods of unemployment
and may remain unemployed longer than fathers, particularly in two-earner families. Thus,
the finding that the incidence of infectious illness is decreased among children after maternal
displacement can either be explained by reductions in mothers’ own exposure to infectious
illness in the workplace or by changes in children’s exposure from reductions in the use of
out-of-home childcare. Considering the long-run implications of these findings, the short-
run changes in stress following paternal job loss might have broader impacts on children’s
health and academic achievement that could translate into the long-run effects on educa-
tional attainment and labor market outcomes that have been found in other studies. At the
same time, it is difficult to know whether short-run reductions in infectious illness are a net
positive or negative for children’s health (we discuss this issue in more detail below).


6.2     Parental Job Loss, Health Insurance Coverage, and Health Care Utilization

      To investigate the mechanisms behind the health effects observed in Table 2, we next
explore the effects of parental job loss on health insurance coverage and healthcare utilization
in Table 3. If parents forego treatment for the conditions in question as a result of a lack
of insurance coverage or a change in the source of coverage, these results have potentially
important implications for the interpretation of our main results. While we believe that
the acute nature of many of the health conditions that we consider makes it is unlikely that
parents would not seek treatment for these conditions even in the absence of health insurance,



                                              18
we acknowledge the possibility that the observed reduction in the incidence of events related
to infectious diseases following maternal displacement may reflect reductions in the likelihood
of diagnosis and treatment. Reduced diagnosis may also be masking increased incidence of
other health conditions as well. If we find significant decreases in health insurance coverage
and routine healthcare use following displacement, then we have reason to be concerned
about this issue.
       The effects of parental job loss on children’s health insurance status are shown in the top
panel of Table 3. The results show that both paternal and maternal job losses lead to reduc-
tions in private insurance coverage and increases in public insurance coverage. Comparing
the coefficients on maternal and paternal job loss across columns, we can see that children
are also more likely to lose private coverage and gain public coverage following the loss of a
job with tenure, and that the effects of firm closure on insurance coverage are smaller than
the effects of other types of displacement. Focusing on the tenured samples, we see that while
the effects of parental job loss on private insurance coverage are fairly substantial (with de-
creases of around 15 percent in both the tenured father and tenured mother samples), these
effects are largely counteracted by increases in the likelihood of public coverage (26 percent
in the father-tenured sample and 19 percent in the mother-tenured sample). As a result,
even in the sample of tenured workers, the likelihood of having insurance coverage from any
source is reduced by only 5-6 percent following displacement. These effects are substantially
smaller than the effects found by Schaller and Stevens (2015), who use the MEPS to study
the effects of job displacement on adult health outcomes, insurance, and utilization.11 Thus,
our results suggest that families are making use of the public safety net following involuntary
displacement.
       In the bottom panel of Table 3 we explore whether parental job loss results in changes
in children’s medical care utilization. We acknowledge that changes in utilization may be
  11
    Schaller and Stevens (2015) find that job displacement results in a 14.4 percent reduction in the likelihood
of having any insurance for adults in the MEPS sample. Part of this difference can be explained by differences
in the availability of public insurance coverage to adults; only 8 percent of displaced adults in their sample
had public coverage in round 1.


                                                      19
driven simultaneously by changes in family income, changes in insurance status and source
of coverage, and changes in health status, and interpret our findings with caution. Perhaps
not surprisingly, given the relatively small changes in insurance coverage that we observe, we
find no significant effects of parental displacement on the likelihood of receiving a checkup
or well-child visit during the survey round. Thus, it appears that family income shocks and
changes in insurance coverage do not substantially affect the use of routine medical care in
the short run. This finding is reassuring, as it suggests that our health effects are unlikely
to be driven by changes in the likelihood of diagnosis.12 We also find no significant effects
of parental displacement on diagnostic or emergency visits.
       There are two significant results that do appear in Table 3, each of which is potentially
consistent with the health results from the previous table. First, we find an increase in the
likelihood of a mental health visit following paternal displacement, which corresponds with
the increase in mental disorders after paternal displacement seen in Table 2. We also see a
significant reduction in prescription drug use following maternal displacement, which could
be related to the reductions in infectious illness seen in Table 2. However, the effects on
antibiotic use, while negative, are not statistically significant.


6.3      Timing of the Effects

       Next, we estimate models in which we include three separate displacement indicators: one
for the period prior to displacement, one for the period in which displacement occurs, and one
  12
     To further alleviate the concern that sick children might be less likely to visit the doctor and thus less
likely to be diagnosed with a particular medical condition following parental displacement, we additionally
investigated the raw and regression-adjusted correlations between parent-reported general health ratings,
which are not mechanically related to specific to medical events, and the likelihood of checkup or diagnostic
visits. We wanted to see if these correlations are different for children whose parents were recently displaced
than for other children. The idea behind this exercise is that parents’ ratings of their child’s overall health
status should reflect not only conditions for which the child visited a doctor, but also conditions that the
family chose to treat at home or opted not to treat. If the relationship between reported general health and
doctor visits is weaker following displacement, we might worry that some conditions are not being officially
“diagnosed” in our data. We find that the correlations seen immediately following parental displacement are
very similar to those for the rest of our sample. Though they do not necessarily reflect causal relationships,
the fact that these correlations don’t change following parental displacement suggests that the likelihood of
getting treated for a particular health condition also does not change dramatically.




                                                      20
for the periods after displacement. There are two reasons to do this. The first reason is that
previous research has shown that the earnings losses associated with job displacement may
begin as early as two years before the displacement occurs (Jacobson et al. 1993). Though the
reasons for the pre-displacement decline in earnings are unknown, this pattern could mean
that child health may be affected by changes in income, parental time use, and stress before
displacement. This could affect the magnitude of our estimated coefficients if our pre-period
is contaminated with treatment effects. For example, if the pre-period treatment effects on
a health outcome are negative, then we will be underestimating the total treatment effect in
our main specification. It is also possible that individuals anticipating displacement might
choose to attend the doctor or fill prescriptions in the period before they lose their health
insurance, which would bias the magnitude of the health care utilization effects upward.
The second reason for estimating these models is to use the pre-displacement indicators as
a placebo test to reduce concerns about the endogeneity of parental displacement. However,
this relies on the assumption that there are no treatment effects in the pre-period. If we were
to find significant deterioration in child health in the period prior to parental displacement,
it would be difficult to sort out the reasons for this—we may be able to attribute it to early
treatment effects, as described above, but we would also be concerned that the health shock
is related to the reason for the subsequent job displacement.
       Estimates showing the timing of the health effects of fathers’ and mothers’ job losses are
presented in Table 4. In this and all remaining tables, we restrict the sample to workers
with at least one year of job tenure at the start of the survey.13 Consistent with the pre-
displacement earnings losses seen in the literature, we do see a small marginally significant
decline in private insurance coverage in the period prior to paternal displacement. However,
we do not see any significant health effects in the period prior to displacement. This suggests
that any decreases in income, increases in stress levels and changes in time use associated
  13
    Many studies of displaced workers restrict their samples to workers with three or more years of job tenure
prior to displacement. We estimated models in which we restricted our analysis to the children of workers
with three years of tenure in round 1. The estimates were very similar, though less precise.



                                                     21
with job loss do not measurably affect children’s health before job loss occurs. This also
mitigates concerns about reverse causality and omitted variables bias.


7     Heterogeneity

      As discussed in Section 2, it is possible that the effects of parental job displacement
seen in the full sample are masking heterogeneity in the treatment effects along a number
of dimensions. In this section, we explore heterogeneity in the treatment effects of parental
displacement by family type, child age, and family socioeconomic status. We also explore
whether the effects of parental displacement are proxying for changes in local economic
conditions and whether they are affected by the macroeconomic environment in which they
occur.


7.1     Family Type

      First, in Table 5, we consider family structure and the number of earners in the family,
comparing the effects of paternal displacement in dual-earner and single-earner families and
comparing the effects of maternal displacement in two-parent versus single-mother families.
A priori, it is difficult to predict how the effects will differ by family type. Single earner
families may have fewer resources with which to respond to an earnings shock, and displace-
ment is more likely to cause a child to lose private health insurance coverage when only one
parent is employed. On the other hand, Kalil and Ziol-Guest (2008) provide evidence that
the negative effects of paternal displacement on children’s academic outcomes are more pro-
nounced in two-earner households and suggest that this is because fathers are distressed at
losing their “breadwinner” status. Meanwhile, mothers in two-parent families may be more
likely to remain out of the labor force longer following displacement than single mothers, so
it may be more likely to observe reductions in infectious illness and other effects related to
changes in childcare arrangements for these mothers.
      The results by family type show a slightly larger increase in mental disorders after pa-


                                               22
ternal displacement in dual-earner families, but the difference is not statistically significant.
Turning to the effects of maternal displacement, all of the estimated effects, including both
the declines in parent-reported health and mental health and the reduction in infectious ill-
ness, are larger and more precisely estimated in two-parent families. In general, while we do
not have enough data to rule out similar effects across family types, it appears as though the
effects of both paternal and maternal job loss in Table 2 are at least as large in two-earner
families as they are in single-earner families, and possibly larger.


7.2     Socioeconomic Status (SES)

      One of the striking findings from studies of the long-run effects of parental job displace-
ment is that the effects tend to be concentrated among relatively disadvantaged households.
Oreopoulos et al. (2008) and Page et al. (2009) find that the strongest effects of parental
job loss on children’s labor market and educational outcomes in adulthood are found at the
bottom of the income distribution. In Table 6 we explore whether the effects of parental job
loss differ depending on whether the earnings of the displaced parent were above or below
the sample median in round 1, whether family earnings were below 200 percent of the federal
poverty line, and whether either of the child’s parents have attended college.
      As in previous studies, we find striking patterns when we stratify by socioeconomic status
(SES). Specifically, we find that the negative effects of paternal displacement on child mental
health are concentrated among low-SES families. We additionally find statistically significant
negative effects of paternal job loss on a child’s physical health rating and significant increases
in the incidence of injuries following paternal job loss among children in low-SES families
that are not apparent in the full sample. Looking at the effects of maternal displacement,
the coefficients are mostly similar for low- and high-SES children, with one major exception:
we see that the reductions in infectious illness are substantially larger among children in
high-earnings families and children with more-educated parents. This is consistent with
our predictions, since these are the families in which mothers are more likely to have the



                                                23
luxury of choosing to substitute home care for market-based childcare during a period of
unemployment.
      As a side note, while fathers’ job losses are associated with increases in injuries among
the children of in low-SES families, they are associated with decreases in injuries in more-
advantaged families. It is difficult to know what to make of this result—it could be driven
by differential changes in maltreatment rates (for example, if child maltreatment were ex-
acerbated by financial stress in low-income families and exacerbated by workplace stress in
high-income families) but also could be related to different patterns of time use and partici-
pation in sports and other extracurricular activities between low- and high-SES children.


7.3     Child Age

      Next, in Table 7, we estimate the effects of parental job loss on child health by the age
of the child. Recall from Section 2 that we might expect to see the largest reductions in
infectious illness among young children if mothers are substituting home care for market-
based childcare after job loss, but otherwise it is difficult to predict how the effects should
vary by age. To check for heterogeneity by age, we separate our data into three age groups:
age 1-5 (pre-school aged), age 6-12 (primary and middle school), and age 13-18 (teens).
Though the coefficients do vary across columns for most outcomes, we don’t have enough
power to identify significant differences across age groups in the estimated health effects
of parental displacement. For what it is worth, we do not see evidence that the effects of
maternal job loss on infectious illness are concentrated among young children, as we might
have expected if changes in daycare attendance were the only mechanism, and we do not see
significant differences in the effects of paternal job loss on mental illness by age.


7.4     Economic Conditions

      A final factor not yet considered is the state of the local economy at the time of dis-
placement. A large literature has shown that macroeconomic conditions are associated with



                                               24
health, mental health, time use, and other outcomes for adults. As displacements are more
likely to occur when macroeconomic conditions are bad, it is possible that our displacement
indicator is picking up the effects of experiencing an economic downturn, rather than the
direct effects of involuntary job loss. Another way in which macroeconomic conditions might
play a role in our analysis is as a source of heterogeneity in our estimated coefficients. In
particular, it is possible that the effects of job displacement on child health might vary de-
pending on the state of the local economy at the time that the displacement occurs. However,
the direction of the changes in unclear. It is possible that job displacement might carry less
stigma during an economic downturn, as displacement is widespread when the economy is
suffering, but displacement may also result in more financial strain and a longer period of
unemployment during an economic downturn.14
       To explore the link between parental job loss and local economic conditions, we use re-
stricted information on the geographic location of the MEPS respondents, obtained with
special permission from the AHRQ. First, we estimate our health regressions with an addi-
tional control for the state monthly unemployment rate. The results, presented in columns
1 and 6 of Table 8, show that the effects of parental displacement are unchanged when
local economic conditions are included in the regressions. Next, we examine whether the
treatment effects of parental job displacement are different during an economic downturn
by interacting the displacement variables with an indicator for whether the state unemploy-
ment rate is high (above 5) or low at the time of the displacement. Perhaps surprisingly, the
results again show no role for local economic conditions in mediating the effects of parental
job displacement on child health; while the coefficients are sometimes different across the
two columns, the differences between them are never statistically significant.
       As an alternate way of exploring whether the state of the economy matters for the effects
of parental displacement on child health, we split our sample into two parts, separating
  14
    It is also important to keep in mind that selection into job displacement is also likely to be different
during an economic downturn, so any differences in the estimated coefficients may be the result of a change
in the composition of the treated group.



                                                    25
panels that end prior to 2008 (the start of the Great Recession) from panels that end in
2008 or later. This approach is somewhat crude, given that there may be changes in health
behaviors, sample composition, survey methodology, or other unobservable factors over the
time period that contribute to differences in the estimated effects. However, it gives us some
idea of whether the health effects of parental displacement are substantially different in the
later years of our data, when the national economy was in the midst of a severe downturn
and slow recovery. These results, also shown in Table 8, show that our main results—the
effects of paternal job loss on mental health conditions and the effects of maternal job loss
on infectious illness—are not different in the two time periods. However, a few differences
between the time periods do emerge. In particular, paternal job loss results in increases in
the likelihood of reporting a child’s health and mental health to be fair or poor in the period
before 2008, but does not have the same effect after 2008. We also see that paternal job loss
results in a reduction in infectious illness in general and bronchitis and upper respiratory
infections in particular during the later time period. This could be because men were more
likely to remain out of work for a long period following displacement during the downturn,
and thus children were less likely to be exposed to infectious illness through their fathers.15


8        Discussion and Conclusion

         This study examines the short-run effects of parental job loss on children’s health. Our
results suggest differing patterns in the effects of paternal and maternal job loss on child
health in the short-run. In particular, while both male and female job losses are associated
with declines in parents’ ratings of child health and mental health, paternal job loss is
uniquely associated with increases in depression and anxiety and visits to mental health
professionals among children, while maternal job loss reduces the incidence of infectious
illness and the use of prescription drugs. We find that these patterns are robust to replacing
our definition of involuntary job displacement with one that includes only firm closures,
    15
     Schaller and Stevens (2015) find that both men and women experience reductions in infectious illness
following job displacement.

                                                   26
though sometimes the estimates based on the alternative definition are less precise, and
we do not see any statistically significant changes in child health in the period prior to
displacement. Exploring heterogeneity in our estimated effects, we find that the negative
effects of paternal job loss are larger for children in low-SES families, while the reductions in
infections after maternal job loss are concentrated among children in high-SES two-parent
families. We are not able to discern significant differences in the estimated effects of parental
displacement by child age or the state of the economy at the time of displacement. Our paper
is the first to document the negative mental health effects of paternal job loss on children,
and can potential provide insight as to why parental job loss has been found to have negative
effects on children’s academic achievement and long-run outcomes. At the same time, the
finding that maternal job loss reduces children’s incidence of infectious illness in the short-
run suggests that changes in maternal time use are more important for child health than
changes in income and health insurance status when mothers lose their jobs.
   In addition to documenting the differing effects of paternal and maternal job loss on child
health and mental health, another important finding from this study is that public health
insurance programs such as Medicaid and the SCHIP are providing an effective safety net
for children. It does not appear that the reductions in the observed incidence of specific
health conditions that we observe are due to reduced diagnosis resulting from changes in
insurance coverage, as we find only limited effects of job loss on children’s health insurance
coverage and no effects on the utilization of routine and diagnositc medical care. When we
look at health insurance coverage by source, we find a substantial increase in the probability
of having public insurance coverage following displacement, which largely counteracts the
decrease in private coverage. As a result, our estimated effects of job displacement on the
likelihood of children having coverage from any source are substantially smaller than the
corresponding estimates for adults using the MEPS data (Schaller and Stevens, 2015). As
the share of the population eligible for Medicaid is expanded in some states through the
Affordable Care Act, this safety net may become larger still.


                                               27
   One limitation of our study is that we cannot extend our observation period beyond
the scope of the MEPS panel, which is only two years in length. As a substantial fraction
of displaced workers are likely to regain employment soon after displacement, it is likely
that the reductions in contagious illness that we observe will disappear over time. It is also
possible that the effects of job displacement related to income loss and stress will become
larger over time. Job displacement is associated with permanent decreases in earnings and
increased likelihood of future displacement (Jacobson et al., 1993, Stevens 1997) so an initial
displacement may be only the beginning of a tumultuous period for a family. Increased
stress in the period immediately following displacement may also take time to translate into
worse physical health. We also acknowledge that it is difficult to foresee whether temporary
reductions in contagious illness in childhood translate into any changes in longer-term health,
human capital, or labor market outcomes. According to the “cohort morbidity phenotype”
theory of Finch and Crimmins (2004), the inflammatory processes that result from early life
exposure to infectious illness persist from early age into adulthood and may ultimately be
related to old-age mortality. On the other hand, a substantial literature in medicine and
public health is dedicated to exploring the hypothesis that daycare attendance and early
exposure to infectious disease in fact protect against the development of asthma, allergy,
and other diseases later in life (see, e.g. Ball et al. (2000), Nafstad et al. (2005)).
   Though we acknowledge that we cannot draw any conclusions about the long-term welfare
effects of parental job displacement from our findings due to these limitations, we emphasize
that the results from this study highlight the importance of considering not only changes in
income, but also of changes in mental health, parental time use, and childcare arrangements,
when studying the effects of job displacement on individuals and families.




                                               28
                                   Table 1: Summary Statistics

                         Father Not         Father Displaced        Mother Not          Mother Displaced
                            Displaced     All    Tenured Closure        Displaced       All  Tenured    Closure
Health
 Health Fair/Poor             0.023      0.028     0.023     0.031        0.026       0.038* 0.032       0.030
 Health Excellent             0.572      0.519* 0.524*       0.484*       0.568       0.526* 0.555       0.508*
 Infectious Illness           0.399      0.371* 0.372        0.392        0.388       0.396   0.400      0.369
 Bronchitis                   0.204      0.196     0.197     0.223        0.202       0.195   0.193      0.178
 Asthma                       0.113      0.114     0.105     0.131        0.117       0.119   0.114      0.124
 Trauma                       0.054      0.054     0.058     0.077        0.059       0.048* 0.048       0.040
Mental Health+
 Mental Hlth F/Poor           0.020      0.023     0.019     0.025        0.024       0.035* 0.030       0.020
 Mental Hlth Exc.             0.612      0.561* 0.553*       0.547        0.599       0.550* 0.571       0.560
 Attention Deficit Dis.       0.041      0.032* 0.024*       0.029        0.044       0.037   0.037      0.045
 Depression/Anxiety           0.018      0.012* 0.008*       0.004*       0.021       0.032   0.035      0.015
Health Insurance
 Any Insurance                0.915      0.841* 0.900*       0.908        0.902       0.840* 0.871*      0.844*
 Private Ins                  0.775      0.591* 0.705*       0.734        0.731       0.513* 0.649*      0.597*
 Public Insurance             0.162      0.273* 0.218*       0.197        0.191       0.350* 0.244*      0.263*
Health Care Utilization
 Doctor Visit                 0.434      0.416     0.423     0.445        0.425       0.425   0.429      0.402
 Checkup                      0.151      0.151     0.153     0.155        0.141       0.148   0.149      0.115
 Diagnostic                   0.291      0.268* 0.273        0.311        0.282       0.272   0.269      0.282
 Emergency Visit              0.027      0.033     0.032     0.038        0.031       0.034   0.026      0.019
 Any Prescription             0.337      0.307* 0.313        0.362        0.332       0.337   0.329      0.357
 Antibiotic Rx                0.167      0.148* 0.158        0.193        0.155       0.154   0.143      0.150
 Mental Visit+                0.015      0.009* 0.010        0.011        0.016       0.019   0.026      0.016
 Mental Rx+                   0.039      0.028* 0.021*       0.022        0.040       0.032   0.033      0.030
Demographic and Socioeconomic
 Male                         0.514      0.502     0.506     0.531        0.510       0.507   0.497      0.516
 Age                          8.267      8.014* 8.332        8.056        8.819       8.507* 8.937       9.074
 Black Non-Hispanic           0.081      0.106* 0.105*       0.070        0.157       0.216* 0.186*      0.193*
 Hispanic                     0.175      0.268* 0.249*       0.218*       0.153       0.223* 0.209*      0.183
 Parents HS or Less           0.330      0.445* 0.393*       0.361        0.356       0.509* 0.435*      0.491*
 Below 200% FPL               0.261      0.406* 0.322*       0.317        0.383       0.577* 0.472*      0.513*
 Dad 1 Yr Tenure              0.816      0.592* 1.000        0.783
 Single Earner                0.359      0.402* 0.400*       0.421*
 Dad Low Earnings             0.282      0.444* 0.364*       0.332
 Mom 1 Yr Tenure                                                          0.733       0.512* 1.000       0.639*
 Single Mom                                                               0.249       0.380* 0.311*      0.291
 Mom Low Earnings                                                         0.356       0.529* 0.410*      0.467*
Observations                  29711      3644      1990       743         29089       3514    1631        611
Note: This table reports means estimated with data from the first round of each MEPS panel using sampling
weights. The reported number of observations is unweighted. The sample includes children who were 1-16
years old and whose father (columns 1-4) or mother (columns 5-8) was employed in round 1. The samples in
column 1 and 5 include children whose father or mother did not suffer a job loss during the survey period.
The sample in column 2 (6) includes children whose father (mother) lost his (her) job due to a layoff, job
ending, or business closure after the first round of the survey. The sample in column 3 (7) includes children
whose father (mother) had at least 1 year tenure in the job in round 1, and suffered a job loss after round 1 as
previously defined. The sample in coumn 4 (8) includes children whose father (mother) was employed in round
1, and lost his (her) job loss due to a business closure.
* The difference in means between the children of displaced workers and the corresponding sample of children
whose parents were never displaced is statistically significant at the 5 percent level.
+ Mental health sample is age 6+.
                                                   29
              Table 2: Effects of Parental Job Loss on Child Health


HEALTH (AGES 1+)
                                Father Displaced                 Mother Displaced
                             All    Tenured    Closure      All      Tenured     Closure
Health Fair/Poor            0.003    0.005       0.003     0.003      -0.001       0.009*
                          (0.003)   (0.004)    (0.006) (0.002)       (0.003)     (0.005)
Health Excellent           -0.015    -0.012     -0.051*** -0.013      -0.031**    -0.015
                          (0.010)   (0.014)    (0.017) (0.010)       (0.014)     (0.023)
Infectious Illness          0.002    -0.002     0.023     -0.028**    -0.031**    -0.014
                          (0.011)   (0.015)    (0.020) (0.011)       (0.016)     (0.026)
Bronchitis                 -0.006    -0.012     -0.002     0.001       0.008      0.017
                          (0.009)   (0.012)    (0.016) (0.009)       (0.012)     (0.019)
Asthma                      0.002    0.005       0.015    -0.010*     -0.003      -0.010
                          (0.006)   (0.008)    (0.011) (0.006)       (0.009)     (0.014)
Trauma                     -0.002    -0.009     -0.017* -0.002        -0.004      0.011
                          (0.005)   (0.007)    (0.010) (0.005)       (0.008)     (0.011)
Individuals                33001     24633      33001     32242       21343       32242
Displacements               3593      1969        732      3470        1618         597

MENTAL HEALTH (AGES 6+)
                      Father Displaced                           Mother Displaced
                               All    Tenured Closure         All    Tenured      Closure
Mental Hlth Fair/Poor        0.003      0.005      0.001    0.001      0.002       0.008
                            (0.004) (0.005)      (0.006) (0.004) (0.005)          (0.011)
Mental Hlth Exc.             -0.008    -0.001     -0.044** -0.006     -0.038**     -0.058**
                            (0.012) (0.016)      (0.021) (0.013) (0.017)          (0.026)
Attention Deficit Dis.       -0.002    -0.001     -0.000    0.002     0.006         0.007
                            (0.003) (0.004)      (0.005) (0.003) (0.005)          (0.008)
Depression/Anxiety           0.002      0.008** 0.006* -0.004         -0.006       0.003
                            (0.003) (0.004)      (0.004) (0.004) (0.007)          (0.005)
Individuals                  21926     16785      21926     23009     15859        23009
Displacements                 2358      1328        496      2410      1201          451
Note: The table reports results from linear probability models. Samples in columns
labeled Father Displaced (Mother Displaced ) include children whose father (mother)
was employed in the first round. Columns 1 and 4 (All ) present estimates of the effects
of job losses due to layoff, job ending or business closures. Columns 2 and 5 (Tenured )
restrict the sample to children whose father or mother had at least 1 year of tenure in
the main job in round 1. Columns 3 and 6 (Closure) present estimates of the effects of
job losses due to business closures only. All regressions include individual fixed effects,
dummies for age, calendar year of interview, month, and survey round, a control for the
length of the round in days, and linear time trends specific to the health status
reported in the first round. Standard errors (in parentheses) are clustered at the
household level (* p < .10, ** p < .05, and *** p < .01). Estimates are weighted using
MEPS sampling weights.




                                              30
Table 3: Effects of Parental Job Loss on Insurance Coverage and Health Care Utilization


        HEALTH INSURANCE COVERAGE
                          Father Displaced                          Mother Displaced
                               All    Tenured Closure        All    Tenured        Closure
        Any Insurance        -0.042*** -0.055*** -0.029** -0.032*** -0.046***       -0.001
                            (0.010) (0.013)      (0.012) (0.010) (0.014)           (0.019)
        Private Ins.         -0.094*** -0.109*** -0.050*** -0.071*** -0.100***      -0.042**
                            (0.011) (0.014)      (0.013) (0.010) (0.016)           (0.022)
        Public Ins.           0.050*** 0.057*** 0.015       0.034*** 0.047***       0.034**
                            (0.008) (0.011)      (0.010) (0.008) (0.011)           (0.017)

        HEALTH CARE UTILIZATION
                          Father Displaced                          Mother Displaced
                                  All    Tenured Closure          All    Tenured      Closure
        Doctor Visit            0.001     -0.004       -0.010   -0.016    -0.013        -0.010
                               (0.011) (0.014)        (0.019) (0.011) (0.015)          (0.024)
        Checkup                 -0.012    -0.010       -0.011   -0.014    0.005         -0.030
                               (0.009) (0.012)        (0.016) (0.009) (0.013)          (0.020)
        Diagnostic              0.004     -0.001        0.002   -0.004    -0.007        0.005
                               (0.009) (0.013)        (0.017) (0.010) (0.014)          (0.023)
        ER Visit                -0.007    -0.010       -0.010   -0.004    -0.001         0.011
                               (0.005) (0.006)        (0.008) (0.004) (0.006)          (0.008)
        Mental Hlth Visit+ 0.006*         0.008*       0.002    -0.004    -0.008         0.001
                               (0.003) (0.005)        (0.004) (0.005) (0.008)          (0.007)
        Any Rx                   0.004    -0.010       -0.021   -0.025** -0.015         -0.028
                               (0.010) (0.013)        (0.016) (0.010) (0.014)          (0.022)
        Antibiotic Rx           -0.000    -0.007       -0.010   -0.010    -0.009        -0.013
                               (0.008) (0.011)        (0.014) (0.008) (0.011)          (0.017)
        Mental Hlth Rx+          0.003    0.006        0.007     0.006     0.009        -0.002
                               (0.004) (0.004)        (0.006) (0.004) (0.007)          (0.008)
        Individuals             21926     16785        21926    23009     15859         23009
        Displacements            2358      1328          496     2410      1201           451
        Note: The table reports results from linear probability models. All samples include
        children who were age 1-16 in the first round, unless otherwise indicated. Samples in
        columns labeled Father Displaced (Mother Displaced ) include children whose father
        (mother) was employed in the first round. Columns 1 and 4 (All ) present estimates
        of the effects of job losses due to layoff, job ending or business closures. Columns 2
        and 5 (Tenured ) restrict the sample to children whose father or mother had at least
        1 year of tenure in the main job in round 1. Columns 3 and 6 (Closure) present
        estimates of the effects of job losses due to business closures only. All regressions
        include individual fixed effects, dummies for age, calendar year of interview, month,
        and survey round, a control for the length of the round in days, and linear time
        trends specific to the health status reported in the first round. Standard errors (in
        parentheses) are clustered at the household level (* p < .10, ** p < .05, and ***
        p < .01). Estimates are weighted using MEPS sampling weights.
        + Mental health sample is age 6+.




                                                 31
                              Table 4: Effects of Parental Job Loss on Child Health Outcomes (Timing)


     FATHER’S DISPLACEMENT
                                   Insurance                           Doctor Visits                          Prescriptions
                       Any Ins    Private   Public      Checkup          Diagnostic     Psych+    Any Rx       Antibiotic Mental Rx+
     Before Displ.      -0.003     -0.019*   0.015        0.004            -0.032*      0.003      0.008          0.005      0.004
                       (0.011)    (0.012)   (0.011)      (0.017)          (0.018)      (0.005)    (0.018)       (0.016)     (0.006)
     Round of Displ.    -0.071*** -0.122*** 0.057***       0.006           -0.018       0.009**    -0.009        -0.008      0.003
                       (0.017)    (0.017)   (0.015)      (0.018)          (0.017)      (0.004)    (0.018)       (0.016)     (0.004)
     After Displ.       -0.044*** -0.118*** 0.072***      -0.019           -0.019       0.010      -0.002        -0.001      0.008
                       (0.016)    (0.018)   (0.016)      (0.017)          (0.019)      (0.006)    (0.019)       (0.017)     (0.005)
     Individuals        24633      24633     24633        24633            24633        24633      24633         24633       24633
     Displacements       1969       1969      1969         1969             1969         1969       1969          1969        1969
                                              Physical Health                                                       Mental Health+
                       Fair/Poor   Excellent   Infectious   Bronchitis     Asthma      Injury     Fair/Poor    Excellent         ADD       Depr/Anx
     Before Displ.       0.005       0.016       -0.020       0.008         -0.005      0.004       0.005        0.027          -0.002       0.003
                        (0.007)     (0.018)     (0.020)      (0.017)       (0.010)     (0.011)     (0.004)      (0.019)        (0.003)      (0.005)
     Round of Displ.     0.007        0.005      -0.015       -0.009        -0.003      -0.001      0.007        0.018          -0.003       0.010**




32
                        (0.007)     (0.019)     (0.022)      (0.017)       (0.011)     (0.010)     (0.005)      (0.019)        (0.003)      (0.005)
     After Displ.        0.009       -0.011      -0.011       -0.006         0.005      -0.011      0.011**      0.033          -0.003       0.007
                        (0.008)     (0.019)     (0.022)      (0.018)       (0.012)     (0.010)     (0.005)      (0.021)        (0.004)      (0.004)
     Individuals         24633       24633       24633        24633         24633       24633       24633        24633          24633        24633
     Displacements        1969        1969        1969         1969          1969        1969        1969         1969           1969         1969

     MOTHER’S DISPLACEMENT
                         Insurance                                     Doctor Visits                          Prescriptions
                       Any Ins     Private    Public        Checkup      Diagnostic     Psych+    Any Rx       Antibiotic     Mental Rx+
     Before Displ.       -0.003     0.003      -0.003         0.000        -0.004       0.001      -0.006        -0.000         -0.000
                        (0.016)    (0.014)    (0.011)        (0.019)      (0.020)      (0.004)    (0.019)       (0.016)        (0.006)
     Round of Displ.     -0.050*** -0.090*** 0.035***          0.021       -0.020       -0.002     -0.029        -0.022          0.009
                        (0.018)    (0.019)    (0.013)        (0.018)      (0.019)      (0.007)    (0.020)       (0.017)        (0.007)
     After Displ.        -0.045**   -0.105*** 0.055***        -0.008        0.002       -0.012*    -0.009         0.003          0.002
                        (0.019)    (0.020)    (0.016)        (0.018)      (0.020)      (0.007)    (0.019)       (0.016)        (0.007)
     Individuals         21343      21343      21343          21343        21343        21343      21343         21343          21343
     Displacements        1618       1618       1618           1618         1618         1618       1618          1618           1618
     Continued on next page.
     Table 4 (Continued)


     MOTHER’S DISPLACEMENT
                                                   Physical Health                                                Mental Health+
                         Fair/Poor Excellent Infectious Bronchitis           Asthma       Injury Fair/Poor Excellent           ADD        Depr/Anx
     Before Displ.         -0.000       0.007       0.009        -0.003       0.014       -0.008     -0.006       -0.010       0.007         0.005
                          (0.005)     (0.022)      (0.020)      (0.017)      (0.010)     (0.011)    (0.004)      (0.022)      (0.004)       (0.005)
     Round of Displ.        0.001      -0.022       -0.027        0.006       0.012       -0.003     -0.001       -0.032       0.014**       -0.001
                          (0.005)     (0.021)      (0.022)      (0.018)      (0.012)     (0.011)    (0.006)      (0.023)      (0.006)       (0.007)
     After Displ.          -0.004      -0.032       -0.027        0.006       -0.001      -0.012     -0.003       -0.047**     0.010*        -0.004
                          (0.004)     (0.021)      (0.021)      (0.017)      (0.013)     (0.012)    (0.005)      (0.023)      (0.006)       (0.006)
     Individuals           21343       21343        21343        21343        21343       21343      21343        21343        21343         21343
     Displacements          1618        1618         1618         1618         1618        1618       1618         1618         1618          1618
     Note: The table reports results from linear probability models. All samples include include children who were age 1-16 in the first
     round, unless otherwise indicated. Samples in columns labeled Father Displaced (Mother Displaced ) include children whose father
     (mother) was employed in the first round with at least 1 year tenure. Job displacements include job losses due to layoff, job ending and
     business closure. Before Displ. is a dummy indicating the round before a job loss occurs. Round of Displ. is a dummy indicating the




33
     round in which a job loss occurs. After Displ. is a dummy indicating all rounds after a job loss occurred. All regressions include
     individual fixed effects, dummies for age, calendar year of interview, month, and survey round, a control for the length of the round in
     days, and linear time trends specific to the health status reported in the first round. Standard errors (in parentheses) are clustered at
     the household level (* p < .10, ** p < .05, and *** p < .01). Estimates are weighted using MEPS sampling weights.
     + Mental health sample is age 6+.
Table 5: Effects of Parental Job Loss on Child Health and Mental Health, by Family Type


  HEALTH (AGES 1+)
                                           Father Displaced                     Mother Displaced
                              Two Parent    Dual Earner    Single Earner    Two Parent     Single Mom
  Health Fair/Poor               0.005         -0.000           0.012*        0.002           -0.008
                               (0.005)        (0.005)         (0.007)        (0.004)         (0.007)
  Health Excellent              -0.016         -0.016          -0.008         -0.038**        -0.011
                               (0.014)        (0.018)         (0.021)        (0.018)         (0.024)
  Infectious Illness            -0.001         -0.006          -0.004         -0.043**        -0.007
                               (0.015)        (0.019)         (0.025)        (0.020)         (0.025)
  Bronchitis                    -0.013         -0.024           0.002         -0.002           0.031
                               (0.012)        (0.016)         (0.018)        (0.015)         (0.020)
  Asthma                         0.007          0.005           0.004         -0.007           0.007
                               (0.008)        (0.010)         (0.012)        (0.011)         (0.017)
  Trauma                        -0.010         -0.011          -0.005         -0.004          -0.000
                               (0.007)        (0.009)         (0.011)        (0.010)         (0.012)
  Individuals                   24001          14578           10054          15232            6110
  Displacements                  1903           1075             894           991              627

  MENTAL HEALTH (AGES 6+)
                                           Father Displaced                     Mother Displaced
                                Two Parent Dual Earner Single Earner Two Parent Single Mom
  Mental Health Fair/Poor           0.004          0.006         0.002            0.005          -0.006
                                  (0.005)        (0.006)        (0.008)          (0.006)        (0.011)
  Mental Health Exc.               -0.005         -0.021         0.030            -0.047**       -0.017
                                  (0.017)        (0.021)        (0.025)          (0.022)        (0.026)
  Attention Deficit Dis.           -0.002         -0.002         0.002            0.004           0.012
                                  (0.004)        (0.005)        (0.006)          (0.005)        (0.010)
  Depression/Anxiety               0.008*          0.009*        0.007            -0.006         -0.007
                                  (0.004)        (0.005)        (0.006)          (0.008)        (0.013)
  Individuals                      16248          10424          6360             11123           4735
  Displacements                     1271            756           572              723             478
  Note: The table reports results from linear probability models. Samples in columns labeled
  Father Displaced (Mother Displaced ) include children whose father (mother) was employed in the
  first round with at least 1 year tenure, and present estimates of the effects of father’s (mother’s)
  job loss due to layoff, job ending or business closure. Two Parent indicates that the sample is
  restricted to children with both parents present in the household in round 1. The sample Dual
  Earner includes children with both parents employed in round 1. Single Earner includes children
  with the father but not the mother employed in round 1. Single Mom includes children with no
  father present in the household in round 1. All regressions include individual fixed effects,
  dummies for age, calendar year of interview, month, and survey round, a control for the length of
  the round in days, and linear time trends specific to the health status reported in the first round.
  Standard errors (in parentheses) are clustered at the household level (* p < .10, ** p < .05, and
  *** p < .01). Estimates are weighted using MEPS sampling weights.




                                                   34
Table 6: Effects of Parental Job Loss by Pre-Displacement Earnings and Parental Education


 HEALTH (AGES 1+)
                                Father Displaced                              Mother Displaced
                   Family Earnings       Highest Education        Family Earnings      Highest Education
                     Low        High    High School     College     Low       High    High School   College
 Health F/Poor      0.019**    -0.002       0.011**       0.001    -0.005     0.001      -0.007       0.002
                   (0.009)    (0.005)     (0.005)       (0.006) (0.005)     (0.004)     (0.005)     (0.004)
 Health Exc.         0.001     -0.016      -0.004        -0.015    -0.014    -0.037*     -0.022      -0.031
                   (0.019)    (0.018)     (0.019)       (0.019) (0.020)     (0.021)     (0.021)     (0.019)
 Infectious         0.023      -0.017       0.027        -0.019    -0.012    -0.052**    -0.007      -0.052**
                   (0.026)    (0.018)     (0.019)       (0.021) (0.019)     (0.024)     (0.020)     (0.023)
 Bronchitis         0.006      -0.022       0.005        -0.022     0.003    0.008        0.018      -0.001
                   (0.019)    (0.015)     (0.015)       (0.017) (0.015)     (0.019)     (0.016)     (0.018)
 Asthma             -0.010      0.011      -0.007         0.012    -0.003    0.000        0.007      -0.008
                   (0.012)    (0.010)     (0.010)       (0.011) (0.010)     (0.014)     (0.012)     (0.013)
 Trauma             0.017*     -0.020**     0.025***     -0.030*** -0.003    -0.004      0.003       -0.010
                   (0.009)    (0.009)     (0.010)       (0.009) (0.009)     (0.012)     (0.010)     (0.012)
 Individuals         8565      16067       10642         14013      9366     11976        8990       12381
 Displacements        906       1063        1038           931       942       676         854         764

 MENTAL HEALTH (AGES 6+)
                      Father Displaced                                        Mother Displaced
                   Family Earnings       Highest Education        Family Earnings      Highest Education
                       Low     High     High School College       Low       High     High School College
 Mental F/Poor         0.006  0.005         0.008       0.003    -0.005    0.009         -0.000       0.004
                     (0.010) (0.005)       (0.008)    (0.005) (0.009) (0.005)           (0.007)     (0.008)
 Mental Exc.           0.041  -0.019        0.017      -0.013    -0.035    -0.034        -0.035      -0.031
                     (0.027) (0.020)       (0.024)    (0.022) (0.023) (0.026)           (0.026)     (0.023)
 ADD                  -0.005  0.001         -0.001     -0.001     0.006     0.008         0.010       0.004
                     (0.005) (0.005)       (0.005)    (0.005) (0.006) (0.007)           (0.008)     (0.006)
 Depress/Anx           0.011  0.006         0.012**     0.005    -0.004    -0.009        0.000       -0.011
                     (0.008) (0.004)       (0.006)    (0.005) (0.009) (0.010)           (0.007)     (0.010)
 Individuals           5500   11284          7369       9431      7061      8797          6850        9030
 Displacements          579    749           721         607       716       485           648         553
 Note: The table reports results from linear probability models. Samples in columns labeled Father
 Displaced (Mother Displaced ) include children whose father (mother) was employed in the first
 round with at least 1 year tenure, and present estimates of the effects of father’s (mother’s) job loss
 due to layoff, job ending or business closure. Family Earnings–Low (High) indicates that the sample
 is restricted to children whose family had total earnings below (above) 200% of the federal poverty
 line in round 1. Highest Education–High School and Highest Education–College samples include
 children whose parents’ highest educational attainment is High School and College, respectively. All
 regressions include individual fixed effects, dummies for age, calendar year of interview, month, and
 survey round, a control for the length of the round in days, and linear time trends specific to the
 health status reported in the first round. Standard errors (in parentheses) are clustered at the
 household level (* p < .10, ** p < .05, and *** p < .01). Estimates are weighted using MEPS
 sampling weights.




                                                       35
Table 7: Effects of Parental Job Loss on Child Health and Mental Health, by Age


    HEALTH (AGES 1+)
                              Father Displaced                   Mother Displaced
                      Age 1-5    Age 6-12    Age 13-16    Age 1-5   Age 6-12 Age 13-16
    Health F/Poor       0.013       0.003      -0.002      -0.009     -0.001     0.005
                      (0.011)     (0.004)     (0.006)     (0.005)    (0.004)   (0.008)
    Health Exc.        -0.016      -0.000      -0.023      -0.020     -0.044**  -0.025
                      (0.022)     (0.019)     (0.022)     (0.026)    (0.021)   (0.021)
    Infectious         -0.028       0.027      -0.026      -0.040     -0.029    -0.025
                      (0.029)     (0.022)     (0.024)     (0.030)    (0.021)   (0.026)
    Bronchitis         -0.023       0.007      -0.035*      0.025      0.008    -0.011
                      (0.021)     (0.018)     (0.021)     (0.024)    (0.017)   (0.020)
    Asthma              0.019       0.003      -0.010      0.018      -0.009    -0.011
                      (0.015)     (0.011)     (0.011)     (0.022)    (0.012)   (0.013)
    Trauma             -0.009      -0.017*      0.006      -0.014     -0.010    0.016
                      (0.012)     (0.010)     (0.015)     (0.011)    (0.013)   (0.015)
    Individuals         7847       10996        5788        5483       9776      6082
    Displacements        641         881         447         417        734       467

    MENTAL HEALTH (AGES 6+)
                         Father Displaced                             Mother Displaced
                                  Age 6-12 Age 13-16                   Age 6-12 Age 13-16
    Mental F/Poor                    0.008        0.001                   0.006      -0.004
                                   (0.005)      (0.008)                 (0.006)     (0.010)
    Mental Exc.                      0.002       -0.003                  -0.046**    -0.027
                                   (0.020)      (0.026)                 (0.021)     (0.025)
    ADD                             -0.005       0.007                   0.009        0.003
                                   (0.004)      (0.007)                 (0.007)     (0.006)
    Depress/Anx                      0.007        0.010                  0.002       -0.019
                                   (0.004)      (0.008)                 (0.006)     (0.014)
    Individuals                     10996         5788                    9776        6082
    Displacements                     881          447                     540         321
    Note: The table reports results from linear probability models. Samples in columns
    labeled Father Displaced (Mother Displaced ) include children whose father (mother)
    was employed in the first round with at least 1 year tenure, and present estimates of
    the effects of father’s (mother’s) job loss due to layoff, job ending or business
    closure. The sample in each column is restricted to children whose age in round 1
    was in the age group indicated in the column head. All regressions include
    individual fixed effects, dummies for age, calendar year of interview, month, and
    survey round, a control for the length of the round in days, and linear time trends
    specific to the health status reported in the first round. Standard errors (in
    parentheses) are clustered at the household level (* p < .10, ** p < .05, and ***
    p < .01). Estimates are weighted using MEPS sampling weights.




                                              36
                                      Table 8: Parental Job Loss and Local Economic Conditions


     HEALTH (AGES 1+)
                                          Father Displaced                                               Mother Displaced
                      Controlling   State Unemployment               Year            Controlling   State Unemployment           Year
                     For Unemp.       Low       High         Pre-2008 Post-2008      For Unemp.      Low       High     Pre-2008    Post-2008
     Health F/Poor       0.005        0.010     0.002           0.009*   -0.004         -0.001      -0.007     0.002      -0.003       0.001
                       (0.004)      (0.008)   (0.005)         (0.005)   (0.009)        (0.003)     (0.005)   (0.004)     (0.003)     (0.007)
     Health Exc.        -0.012        0.003    -0.021          -0.008    -0.024         -0.031**    -0.043    -0.025      -0.022      -0.048*
                       (0.014)      (0.024)   (0.017)         (0.016)   (0.025)        (0.015)     (0.026)   (0.017)     (0.018)     (0.025)
     Infectious         -0.002        0.014    -0.011           0.017    -0.042*        -0.032**    -0.039    -0.028      -0.032*     -0.033
                       (0.015)      (0.027)   (0.018)         (0.019)   (0.024)        (0.016)     (0.026)   (0.020)     (0.019)     (0.029)
     Bronchitis         -0.012       -0.009    -0.013          -0.003    -0.031*         0.008      -0.004     0.014       0.008       0.005
                       (0.012)      (0.021)   (0.015)         (0.016)   (0.018)        (0.012)     (0.022)   (0.014)     (0.015)     (0.022)
     Asthma             0.004         0.013    -0.000           0.004    0.005          -0.003      0.002     -0.005       0.004      -0.016
                       (0.008)      (0.013)   (0.010)         (0.010)   (0.014)        (0.009)     (0.017)   (0.011)     (0.011)     (0.015)
     Trauma             -0.009       -0.011    -0.007          -0.017**  0.009          -0.004      -0.003    -0.004      -0.006      -0.001
                       (0.007)      (0.011)   (0.009)         (0.008)   (0.012)        (0.008)     (0.016)   (0.008)     (0.010)     (0.011)




37
     Individuals        24633        24633     24633           17554      7078          21343       21343     21343       14683        6659
     Displacements       1969          618      1351            1278       691           1618        472       1146        1040         578

     MENTAL HEALTH (AGES 6+)
                                          Father Displaced                                               Mother Displaced
                      Controlling   State Unemployment               Year            Controlling   State Unemployment           Year
                     For Unemp.       Low       High         Pre-2008    Post-2008   For Unemp.      Low       High     Pre-2008    Post-2008
     Mental F/Poor        0.005       0.006     0.005           0.011*     -0.006        0.002       0.004     0.001      0.005       -0.003
                        (0.005)     (0.009)   (0.005)         (0.006)     (0.006)      (0.005)     (0.007)   (0.007)     (0.006)     (0.011)
     Mental Exc.         -0.000      -0.020     0.010          -0.009      0.015        -0.037**    -0.025    -0.043*     -0.017      -0.074**
                        (0.016)     (0.029)   (0.019)         (0.020)     (0.027)      (0.017)     (0.026)   (0.022)     (0.020)     (0.033)
     ADD                 -0.001      0.007     -0.005          -0.003      0.003         0.006      0.013      0.003      0.004        0.009
                        (0.004)     (0.007)   (0.004)         (0.003)     (0.009)      (0.005)     (0.009)   (0.005)     (0.005)     (0.009)
     Depress./Anx.        0.008**    0.006      0.009          0.007       0.010        -0.006      -0.001    -0.009      -0.003      -0.012
                        (0.004)     (0.005)   (0.006)         (0.004)     (0.008)      (0.007)     (0.008)   (0.009)     (0.008)     (0.012)
     Individuals         16785       16785     16785           12037        4747        15859       15859     15859       10967        4891
     Continued on next page.
     Table 8 (Continued)


     MENTAL HEALTH (AGES 6+)
                                            Father Displaced                                              Mother Displaced
                       Controlling   State Unemployment              Year            Controlling   State Unemployment               Year
                        For Unemp.        Low         High       Pre-2008 Post-2008 For Unemp.          Low       High       Pre-2008 Post-2008
     Displacements          1328          422         906           881        447          1201        349        852         584          277
     Notes: The table reports results from linear probability models. Samples in columns labeled Father Displaced (Mother Displaced ) include
     children whose father (mother) was employed in the first round with at least 1 year tenure, and present estimates of the effects of father’s
     (mother’s) job loss due to layoff, job ending or business closure. Year–Pre-2008 and Year–Post-2008 indicate samples that include MEPS
     panels that end before 2008 and panels that end in 2008 and after, respectively. Columns labeled State Unemployment present the two
     interaction coefficients of a regression that interacts the father or mother’s displacement with two dummies indicating whether the
     unemployment rate was above (High) or below (Low ) 5% when the displacement occurred. All regressions include individual fixed effects,
     dummies for age, calendar year of interview, month, and survey round, a control for the length of the round in days, a linear time trends
     specific to the health status reported in the first round, and the state unemployment rate at the time of interview. Standard errors (in




38
     parentheses) are clustered at the household level (* p < .10, ** p < .05, and *** p < .01). Estimates are weighted using MEPS sampling
     weights.
9   References



Ananat, E.O., A. Gassman-Pines, D.V. Francis, and C.M. Gibson-Davis (2011). “Children
   Left Behind: The Effects of Statewide Job Loss on Student Achievement,” NBER Work-
   ing Paper No. 17104.
Ball, T. M., J.A. Castro-Rodriguez, K.A. Griffith, C.J. Holberg, F.D. Martinz, and A.L.
    Wright (2000). “Siblings, Day-Care Attendance, and the Risk of Asthma and Wheezing
    during Childhood,” The New England Journal of Medicine, 343:538-543.
Banthin, J. S., and T.M. Selden (2003). “The ABCs of children’s health care: how the
   Medicaid expansions affected access, burdens, and coverage between 1987 and 1996.”
   INQUIRY: The Journal of Health Care Organization, Provision, and Financing, 40(2):
   133-145.
Beijers, R. J. Jansen, M.Riksen-Walraven, and C. de Weerth (2011). “Nonparental Care
    and Infant Health: Do the Number of Hours and Number of Concurrent Arrangements
    Matter?” Early Human Development, 87(1): 9-15.
Black, S.E., P.J. Devereux and K.G. Salvanes (2012). “Losing Heart? The Effect of Job
    Displacement on Health,” NBER Working Paper 18660.
Bradley, R.H. (2003). “Child Care and Common Communicable Illnesses in Children Aged
   37 to 54 Months,” Archives of Pediatrics and Adolescent Medicine, 157(2): 196-200.
Brand, J.E., B.R. Levy, and W.T. Gallo (2008). “Effects of Layoffs and Plant Closings on
   Subsequent Depression Among Older Workers.” Research on Aging, 30(6): 701-721.
Bratberg, E., O.A. Nilsen and K. Vaage (2008). “Job Losses and Child Outcomes,” Labour
    Economics, 15(2008): 591-603.
Browning, M. and E. Heinesen (2012). “Effect of job loss due to plant closure on mortality
   and hospitalization,” Journal of Health Economics, 31(2012): 599-616.
Cawley, J. and K.I. Simon (2005). “Health Insurance Coverage and the Macroeconomy,”
   Journal of Health Economics, 24(2005): 299-315.
Cawley, J., A.S. Moriya, and K. Simon (2013). “The impact of the macroeconomy on health
   insurance coverage: evidence from the great recession,” Health Economics, forthcoming.
Classen T.J. and R.A. Dunn (2012). “The Effect of Job Loss and Unemployment Duration on
    Suicide Risk in the United States: a New Look Using Mass-Layoffs and Unemployment
    Duration,” Health Economics, 21: 338-350.
Coelli, M.B. (2011). “Parental Job Loss and the Education Enrollment of Youth,” Labour
    Economics, 18(2011): 25-35.
Conley, D., and N.G. Bennett (2000). “Is biology destiny? Birth weight and life chances.”
   American Sociological Review, 458-467.


                                           39
Conley, D., and N.G. Bennett (2001). “Birth weight and income: interactions across gener-
   ations.” Journal of Health and Social Behavior, 450-465.
Currie, J. (2009). “Healthy, Wealthy, and Wise: Socioeconomic Status, Poor Health in
   Childhood, and Human Capital Development,” Journal of Economic Literature, 47(1):
   87-122.
Deb, P., W.T. Gallo, P. Ayyagari, J.M. Fletcher, J.L. Sindelar (2011). “The Effect of Job
   Loss on Overweight and Drinking,” Journal of Health Economics, 30(2011): 317-327.
Fairbrother, G.L., A.C. Carle, A. Cassedy and P.W. Newacheck (2010). “The Impact Of
    Parental Job Loss On Children’s Health Insurance Coverage,” Health Affairs, 29(7):
    1343-1349.
Farber, H. S. (2011). “Job Loss in the Great Recession: Historical Perspective from the
    Displaced Worker Survey, 1984-2010.” NBER Working Paper 17040.
Finch, C.E., and E.M. Crimmons (2004). “Inflammatory Exposure and Historical Changes
    in Human Life-Spans,” Science: 305(5691): 1736-1739.
Gassman-Pines, A., E.O. Ananat, and C.M. Gibson-Davis (2014). “Effects of Statewide
   Job Losses on Adolescent and Suicide-Related Behaviors,” American Journal of Public
   Health 104(10): 1964-1970.
Gennetian, L.A., H.D. Hill, A.S. London, and L.M. Lopoo (2010). “Maternal Employment
   and the Health of Low-Income Young Children.” Journal of Health Economics, 29: 353-
   363.
Grossman, M. (2000). “The Human Capital Model,” in Handbook of Health Economics, A.J.
   Culyer and J.P Newhouse (eds.), Volume 1, Chapter 7, Elsevier Science B. V.
Gruber, J. and B.C. Madrian (1997). “Employment Separation and Health Insurance Cov-
   erage,” Journal of Public Economics, 66(3): 349–382.
Hardy, A.M. and M.G. Fowler (1993). “Child Care Arrangements and Repeated Ear Infec-
   tions in Young Children,” American Journal of Public Health, 83(9): 1321-1325.
Hoynes, H. W., D. L. Miller, and D. Simon (2012). “Income, the earned income tax credit,
   and infant health.” NBER Working Paper No. 18206, National Bureau of Economic
   Research.
Jacobson, L.S., R.J. Lalonde, and D.G. Sullivan (1993). “Earnings Losses of Displaced
    Workers,” American Economic Review, 83(4): 685-709.
Kalil, A. and K.M. Ziol-Guest (2008). “Parental employment circumstances and children’s
    academic progress,” Social Science Research, 37: 500–515.
Lindo, J.M. (2011). “Parental Job Loss and Infant Health,” Journal of Health Economics,
    30(2011): 869– 879.
Liu H. and Z. Zhao (2014). “Parental Job Loss and Children’s Health: Ten Years after
    the Massive Layoff of the SOEs’ Workers in China.” China Economic Review, 31(2014):


                                           40
    303-319.
Luca, D.L. (2014). “The Long-Term Effects of Post-Neonatal Childhood Health: Evidence
   from Mandatory School Vaccination Laws,” Mimeo.
Mörk, E., A. Sjögren and H. Svaleryd (2013). “Parental Unemployment and Child Health”,
    Mimeo.
Morrill, M.S. (2011). “The Effects of Maternal Employment on the Health of School-Age
   Children.” Journal of Health Economics, 30: 240-257.
Nafstad, P., B. Brunekreef, A. Skrondal, and W. Nystad (2005). “Early Respiratory Infec-
    tions, Asthma, and Allergy: 10-Year Follow-up of the Oslo Birth Cohort, Pediatrics,
    116(2): e255-e262.
Oreopoulos, P., M. Page and A.H. Stevens (2008). “The Intergenerational Effects of Worker
   Displacement,” Journal of Labor Economics, 26(3): 455-483.
Page, M., A.H. Stevens and J.Lindo (2009). “Parental Income Shocks and Outcomes of
   Disadvantaged Youth in the United States,” in The Problems of Disadvantaged Youth:
   An Economic Perspective, J. Gruber (ed.), Conference held April 13-14, 2007, published
   in October 2009, University of Chicago Press.
Rege, M., K. Telle and M. Votruba (2011). “Parental Job Loss and Children’s School
   Performance,” Review of Economic Studies, 78(2011): 1462–1489.
Ruhm, C.J. (2000). “Parental Leave and Child Health,” Journal of Health Economics, 19(6):
   931-960.
Schaller, J. and A.H. Stevens (2015). “Short-run Effects of Job Loss on Health Conditions,
    Health Insurance, and Health Care Utilization.” Journal of Health Economics, advance
    online publication, doi:10.1016/j.jhealeco.2015.07.003, available online 26 July 2015.
Solon, G., S.J. Haider, and J. Wooldridge (2013). “What are we Weighting For?” NBER
    Working Paper 18859.
Soni, A. (2009). “The Five Most Costly Children’s Conditions, 2006: Estimates for the U.S.
    Civilian Noninstitutionalized Children, Ages 0-17,” Agency for Healthcare Research and
    Quality, Statistical Brief #242.
Stevens, A.H. and J. Schaller (2011). “Short-run effects of parental job loss on children’s
    academic achievement,” Economics of Education Review, 30(2011): 289–299.
Sullivan, D. and T. von Wachter (2009). “Job Displacement and Mortality: an Analysis
     Using Administrative Data,” Quarterly Journal of Economics, 124(3): 1265-1306.




                                            41
         Table A1: Summary Statistics by Groups, Children of Displaced Fathers

                          Family Type               Family Earnings       Education                 Age
                  2-Parent 2-Earner 1-Earner Low                High       HS    College    1-5     6-12    13-16
Health
 Health F/P         0.023      0.016       0.033      0.042     0.014     0.026   0.021    0.028 0.020      0.023
 Health Exc.        0.530      0.550       0.487      0.399     0.584    0.444    0.576    0.546 0.510      0.521
 Infectious         0.371      0.384       0.355      0.312     0.401     0.302   0.418    0.419 0.380      0.295
 Bronchitis         0.198      0.206       0.183      0.168     0.210     0.156   0.223    0.216 0.200      0.163
 Asthma             0.107      0.114       0.091      0.099     0.107    0.094    0.112    0.115 0.110      0.082
 Trauma             0.060      0.060       0.056      0.035     0.069     0.037   0.072    0.039 0.061      0.079
Mental Health+
 Mental F/P         0.020      0.015       0.025      0.018     0.020     0.022   0.017            0.015    0.027
 Mental Exc.        0.562      0.551       0.558      0.427     0.607     0.484   0.602            0.563    0.536
 ADD                0.025      0.025       0.023      0.019     0.027     0.018   0.029            0.022    0.028
 Depress/Anx        0.008      0.008       0.008      0.010     0.007    0.004    0.011            0.004    0.015
Health Insurance
 Any                0.903      0.915       0.878      0.794     0.950     0.839   0.940    0.912 0.902      0.879
 Private            0.707      0.810       0.546      0.330     0.883    0.504    0.835    0.666 0.715      0.740
 Public             0.221      0.127       0.356      0.495     0.087     0.342   0.139    0.278 0.206      0.159
Health Care Utilization
 Doctor Visit       0.426      0.433       0.409      0.417     0.426     0.379   0.452    0.580 0.382      0.284
 Checkup            0.154      0.136       0.178      0.177     0.141     0.149   0.155    0.251 0.108      0.099
 Diagnostic         0.276      0.300       0.233      0.222     0.297     0.221   0.307    0.387 0.254      0.152
 ER                 0.034      0.034       0.030      0.023     0.037     0.019   0.041    0.043 0.027      0.026
 Prescription       0.314      0.331       0.286      0.281     0.328     0.269   0.342    0.380 0.287      0.269
 Antibiotic         0.157      0.168       0.142      0.111     0.180     0.125   0.178    0.221 0.142      0.098
 Mental+            0.010      0.011       0.007      0.014     0.008    0.010    0.010            0.011    0.008
 Mental Rx+         0.021      0.020       0.021      0.019     0.021     0.015   0.025            0.017    0.027
Demographic and Socioeconomic
 Black              0.103      0.129       0.069      0.096     0.109     0.112   0.100    0.124 0.095      0.097
 Hispanic           0.254      0.183       0.348      0.501     0.129     0.435   0.129    0.298 0.224      0.228
  HS or Less        0.380      0.320       0.503      0.692     0.251     1.000   0.000    0.353 0.411      0.413
 < 200% FPL         0.309      0.170       0.550      1.000     0.000     0.566   0.163    0.373 0.325      0.246
Observations        1903        1075        894        906      1063      1038     931      641     881      447
Note: This table reports means estimated with data from the first round of each MEPS panel using sampling
weights. The reported number of observations is unweighted. The sample includes children who were 1-16
years old, and whose mother was employed in round 1 with at least 1 year of tenure and lost her job due to a
layoff, job ending, or business closure after the first round of the survey. 2-Parent indicates that the sample is
restricted to children with both parents present in the household in round 1. 2-Earner includes children with
both parents employed in round 1. 1-Earner includes children with the father but not the mother employed in
round 1. Family Earnings–Low (High) indicates that the sample is restricted to children whose family had
total earnings below (above) 200% of the federal poverty line in round 1. Education–HS and
Education–College samples include children whose parents’ highest educational attainment is High School and
College, respectively. The samples in each column under Age are restricted to children whose age in round 1
was in the age group indicated in the column head.
+ Mental health sample is age 6+.




                                                    42
      Table A2: Summary Statistics by Groups, Children of Displaced Mothers

                   Family Type        Family Earnings          Education                  Age
                 2-Parent    Single    Low      High      High Sch     College    1-5     6-12    13-16
Health
 Health F/P        0.024     0.050 0.046        0.020         0.044      0.024    0.026 0.038 0.029
 Health Exc.       0.578     0.504 0.524        0.582         0.490      0.604    0.603 0.510 0.576
 Infectious        0.414     0.368 0.365        0.431         0.341      0.446    0.451 0.408 0.338
 Bronchitis        0.201     0.174 0.176        0.207         0.160      0.218    0.217 0.192 0.170
 Asthma            0.112     0.119 0.113        0.115         0.121      0.109    0.133 0.127 0.078
 Trauma            0.045     0.056 0.047        0.050         0.030      0.063    0.027 0.043 0.077
Mental Health+
 Mental F/P        0.017     0.057 0.052        0.009         0.034      0.026            0.027 0.034
 Mental Exc.       0.604     0.500 0.532        0.608         0.533      0.602            0.573 0.569
 ADD               0.029     0.056 0.046        0.030         0.025      0.047            0.043 0.029
 Depress/Anx       0.029     0.048 0.038        0.032         0.024      0.043            0.017 0.061
Health Insurance
 Any               0.895     0.818 0.785        0.948         0.823      0.908    0.924 0.860 0.837
 Private           0.766     0.391 0.386        0.885         0.493      0.770    0.640 0.635 0.680
 Public            0.156     0.440 0.431        0.078         0.341      0.170    0.299 0.249 0.183
Health Care Utilization
 Doctor Visit      0.435     0.414 0.400        0.455         0.362      0.480    0.561 0.441 0.283
 Checkup           0.158     0.129 0.119        0.176         0.107      0.181    0.268 0.123 0.074
 Diagnostic        0.282     0.238 0.238        0.296         0.238      0.293    0.365 0.280 0.158
 ER                0.017     0.044 0.039        0.014         0.021      0.029    0.026 0.030 0.019
 Prescription      0.344     0.295 0.280        0.373         0.287      0.361    0.417 0.317 0.261
 Antibiotic        0.164     0.099 0.107        0.176         0.115      0.165    0.248 0.124 0.073
 Mental+           0.019     0.040 0.027        0.024         0.017      0.033            0.026 0.024
 Mental Rx+        0.033     0.034 0.024        0.042         0.018      0.046            0.034 0.032
Demographic and Socioeconomic
 Black             0.114     0.346 0.274        0.108         0.224      0.157    0.174 0.202 0.176
 Hispanic          0.183     0.267 0.286        0.141         0.313      0.129    0.211 0.220 0.192
  HS or Less       0.367     0.585 0.607        0.281         1.000      0.000    0.402 0.449 0.446
 < 200% FPL        0.283     0.890 1.000        0.000         0.659      0.328    0.437 0.480 0.494
Observations        991       627       942       676          854        764      417     734      467
Note: This table reports means estimated with data from the first round of each MEPS panel
using sampling weights. The reported number of observations is unweighted. The sample
includes children who were 1-16 years old, and whose father was employed in round 1 with at
least 1 year of tenure and lost his job due to a layoff, job ending, or business closure after the first
round of the survey. 2-Parent indicates that the sample is restricted to children with both
parents present in the household in round 1. Single includes children with no father present in
the household in round 1. Family Earnings–Low (High) indicates that the sample is restricted to
children whose family had total earnings below (above) 200% of the federal poverty line in round
1. Education–High Sch and Education–College samples include children whose parents’ highest
educational attainment is High School and College, respectively. The samples in each column
under Age are restricted to children whose age in round 1 was in the age group indicated in the
column head.
+ Mental health sample is age 6+.




                                                  43
Table A3: Effects of Parental Job Loss on Insurance Coverage and Health Care Utilization,
by Pre-Displacement Earnings and Parental Education


     HEALTH INSURANCE COVERAGE
                       Father Displaced                                   Mother Displaced
                      Family Earnings         Education        Family Earnings          Education
                        Low       High       HS     College     Low       High       HS      College
     Any Ins.          -0.039* -0.065*** -0.074*** -0.045*** -0.047** -0.049** -0.094*** -0.011
                      (0.022) (0.015) (0.022) (0.015) (0.019) (0.020) (0.024)                (0.015)
     Private           -0.093*** -0.118*** -0.141*** -0.089*** -0.127*** -0.078*** -0.151*** -0.060***
                      (0.022) (0.018) (0.022) (0.019) (0.020) (0.024) (0.028)                (0.016)
     Public            0.057** 0.055*** 0.063*** 0.051*** 0.068*** 0.027* 0.046** 0.044***
                      (0.023) (0.013) (0.019) (0.014) (0.017) (0.014) (0.020)                (0.012)

     HEALTH CARE UTILIZATION
                        Father Displaced                                  Mother Displaced
                      Family Earnings         Education        Family Earnings          Education
                         Low      High        HS     College     Low      High        HS       College
     Any Visit           0.018   -0.015     -0.005    -0.004   -0.014    -0.012      0.012      -0.029
                       (0.022) (0.018) (0.023) (0.018) (0.019) (0.023) (0.020)                 (0.022)
     Checkup            -0.027    0.000     -0.018    -0.003    0.017    -0.005      0.026      -0.009
                       (0.018) (0.015) (0.015) (0.017) (0.018) (0.017) (0.018)                 (0.018)
     Diagnostic         0.040** -0.023       0.004    -0.004   -0.012    -0.003     -0.001      -0.011
                       (0.018) (0.017) (0.018) (0.017) (0.016) (0.022) (0.018)                 (0.020)
     ER                 0.010    -0.019** 0.020*** -0.029*** -0.009       0.007     -0.002       0.000
                       (0.009) (0.008) (0.008) (0.009) (0.009) (0.008) (0.009)                 (0.008)
     Psych.+             0.002    0.011* 0.001         0.012    0.005    -0.021** 0.003         -0.017
                       (0.004) (0.006) (0.003) (0.007) (0.013) (0.009) (0.007)                 (0.013)
     Any Rx              0.013   -0.022     -0.020    -0.003   -0.008    -0.021      0.013      -0.037*
                       (0.017) (0.018) (0.020) (0.017) (0.018) (0.021) (0.018)                 (0.020)
     Antibiotic         0.021    -0.024* -0.008       -0.007    0.003    -0.021      0.003      -0.020
                       (0.014) (0.014) (0.013) (0.015) (0.012) (0.018) (0.014)                 (0.016)
     Mental Rx+         0.005     0.006      0.007     0.006    0.014* 0.006         0.022** -0.000
                       (0.007) (0.005) (0.006) (0.006) (0.008) (0.011) (0.010)                 (0.010)
     Individuals         5500    11284       7369      9431     7061      8797       6850        9030
     Displacements        579      749        721       607      716       485        648         553
     Note: The table reports results from linear probability models. Samples in columns labeled
     Father Displaced (Mother Displaced ) include children whose father (mother) was employed in
     the first round with at least 1 year tenure, and present estimates of the effects of father’s
     (mother’s) job loss due to layoff, job ending or business closure. Family Earnings–Low (High)
     indicates that the sample is restricted to children whose family had total earnings below
     (above) 200% of the federal poverty line in round 1. Education–High School and
     Education–College samples include children whose parents’ highest educational attainment is
     High School and College, respectively. All regressions include individual fixed effects,
     dummies for age, calendar year of interview, month, and survey round, a control for the
     length of the round in days, and linear time trends specific to the health status reported in
     the first round. Standard errors (in parentheses) are clustered at the household level (*
     p < .10, ** p < .05, and *** p < .01). Estimates are weighted using MEPS sampling weights.
     + Mental health sample is age 6+.


                                                    44
Table A4: Effects of Parental Job Loss on Insurance Coverage and Health Care Utilization,
by Family Type


     HEALTH INSURANCE COVERAGE
                         Father Displaced                                  Mother Displaced
                      Two Parent Dual Earner       Single Earner    Two Parent      Single Mother
     Any Ins.           -0.053***   -0.040**           -0.079***      -0.044**          -0.051**
                       (0.012)     (0.016)            (0.021)        (0.017)           (0.022)
     Private            -0.105***   -0.101***          -0.123***      -0.082***         -0.141***
                       (0.015)     (0.019)            (0.022)        (0.021)           (0.021)
     Public             0.055***     0.065***           0.045**        0.028**          0.089***
                       (0.012)     (0.015)            (0.018)        (0.013)           (0.020)

     HEALTH CARE UTILIZATION
                          Father Displaced                                 Mother Displaced
                       Two Parent Dual Earner Single Earner Two Parent                 Single Mother
     Any Visit             -0.001         -0.001         -0.011           0.001             -0.042*
                          (0.015)        (0.018)        (0.023)         (0.020)            (0.021)
     Checkup               -0.008         0.001          -0.024           0.015             -0.013
                          (0.012)        (0.014)        (0.021)         (0.016)            (0.021)
     Diagnostic            0.002          -0.017          0.022          -0.001             -0.018
                          (0.013)        (0.017)        (0.019)         (0.018)            (0.021)
     ER                    -0.011*        -0.012         -0.008           0.004             -0.011
                          (0.007)        (0.009)        (0.009)         (0.007)            (0.011)
     Psych.+                0.008          0.013*        -0.001          -0.011             -0.002
                          (0.005)        (0.007)        (0.005)         (0.010)            (0.013)
     Any Rx                -0.008         -0.014         -0.007          -0.018             -0.011
                          (0.014)        (0.017)        (0.021)         (0.017)            (0.024)
     Antibiotic            -0.005         -0.007         -0.010          -0.020             0.013
                          (0.011)        (0.013)        (0.017)         (0.014)            (0.016)
     Mental Rx+             0.005         0.006           0.005           0.004              0.019
                          (0.004)        (0.005)        (0.007)         (0.009)            (0.012)
     Individuals           16248          10424           6360           11123               4735
     Displacements          1271            756            572             723                478
     Note: The table reports results from linear probability models. Samples in columns labeled
     Father Displaced (Mother Displaced ) include children whose father (mother) was employed in
     the first round with at least 1 year tenure, and present estimates of the effects of father’s
     (mother’s) job loss due to layoff, job ending or business closure. Two Parent indicates that
     the sample is restricted to children with both parents present in the household in round 1.
     Dual Earner includes children with both parents employed in round 1. Single Earner includes
     children with the father but not the mother employed in round 1. Single Mom includes
     children with no father present in the household in round 1. All regressions include individual
     fixed effects, dummies for age, calendar year of interview, month, and survey round, a control
     for the length of the round in days, and linear time trends specific to the health status
     reported in the first round. Standard errors (in parentheses) are clustered at the household
     level (* p < .10, ** p < .05, and *** p < .01). Estimates are weighted using MEPS sampling
     weights.
     + Mental health sample is age 6+.




                                                   45
