NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

ECONOMICS OF MEANS-TESTED TRANSFER PROGRAMS:
INTRODUCTION
Robert Moffitt
Working Paper 21751
http://www.nber.org/papers/w21751

NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
November 2015

This volume and an accompanying volume contain revised versions of papers presented at a conference
at the offices of the National Bureau of Economic Research on December 4-5, 2014. The Editor would
like to thank NBER President James Poterba for inspiration for this project and would to thank two
anonymous reviewers for the University of Chicago Press for their comments improving the papers
in the volumes. The chapters were also significantly improved by the comments and suggestions of
the discussants at the conference, David Autor, David Blau, Dan Black, Richard Blundell, Amy Finkelstein,
Lawrence Katz, and Jeffrey Liebman. Eugene Steuerle gave an insightful evening address at the conference
as well. Thanks also go to Carl Beck and Denis Healy for logistical and local arrangements for the
conference and to Helena Fitz-Patrick for shepherding the papers through the review and publication
process. Finally, the Editor would like to thank the authors of the chapters for their long hours of hard
work on their chapters. Any success of these volumes is to be entirely credited to them. Financial support
was graciously provided by the Smith-Richardson Foundation for the project. The Editor also wishes
to acknowledge support from the Russell Sage Foundation for work related to the project and to state
that he has no other material or financial relationships relating to this research. The views expressed
herein are those of the author and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic
Research.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peerreviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.
© 2015 by Robert Moffitt. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs,
may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to
the source.

Economics of Means-Tested Transfer Programs: Introduction
Robert Moffitt
NBER Working Paper No. 21751
November 2015
JEL No. I3
ABSTRACT
This volume collects a series of essays by prominent economists on each of the major means-tested,
or welfare, programs in the United States: the Medicaid, Earned Income Tax Credit, Supplemental
Nutrition Assistance, Temporary Assistance for Needy Families, Supplemental Security Income, Subsidized
Housing, Training, and Early Education programs. Each essay covers the institutional history of a
program, the policy issues surrounding it, its rules and regulations, its history of expenditure and caseloads,
and, most importantly, a summary of the research that economists have conducted on the program
and the findings from that research. The volume is an update of a popular first volume in 2003 which
became a reference Handbook on the shelf of all economists and policy-makers who work on, or who
are interested in, transfer programs in the United States. The new volume focuses primarily on the
changes in programs which have occurred since 2003 and the results of new research since that date.
The volume will be a timely contribution to on-going policy discussions in Washington and elsewhere,
bringing the available evidence to bear on the many issues surrounding those programs.

Robert Moffitt
Department of Economics
Johns Hopkins University
3400 North Charles Street
Baltimore, MD 21218
and IZA
and also NBER
moffitt@jhu.edu

Issues concerning means-tested transfer programs in the U.S. continue to interest both
researchers and policy-makers. Many of the programs have evolved significantly over the last
decade and a half. While some programs that had previously declined, such as the Temporary
Assistance to Needy Families (TANF) program, have remained at low levels of expenditure and
caseloads, many other programs have grown. Those include the Medicaid program, the
Supplemental Nutrition Assistance Program (SNAP), the Earned Income Tax Credit (EITC), and
subsidized housing programs. On net, more programs have grown than have declined, leading to
continued increases in per capita spending on means-tested programs as a whole. Further, the
Great Recession saw major increases in caseloads and spending, partly the result of automatic
growth occasioned by declines in income and consequent increases in the numbers of eligibles,
but partly the result of programmatic reforms enacted by Congress and signed by the President.
At this writing, most, but not all, of those programmatic expansions have phased out and the
overall unemployment rate has returned to pre-recession levels, but whether caseloads and
expenditures in the programs will decline to pre-recession levels remains to be seen.
Economic research on means-tested programs has mostly focused on the determinants of
participation in those programs, the causes of trends in overall caseload and expenditure growth,
the effects of program participation on work incentives and other behaviors, and their potential
beneficial effects on the well-being of recipients as measured by reductions in poverty rates,
increases in consumption, and positive effects on non-monetary outcomes such as health and
education, and other outcomes. The long-term trend increase in expenditures and caseloads as
well as the Great Recession expansions have led to further study of the effects of the programs

on these outcomes.
The chapters in the volume are revised versions of papers presented at a conference
sponsored by the Smith-Richardson Foundation and convened by the National Bureau of
Economic Research (NBER) in Cambridge, Massachusetts on December 4-5, 2014. Each
chapter surveys the history, policy issues, rules, caseloads, and research on one of the major
programs in the U.S. safety net. In addition, two chapters cover, respectively, employment and
training programs and early childhood education programs, which are more human-capital
oriented than are traditional means-tested transfer programs. The chapters represent updated
versions of similar papers on each program published in a prior volume (Moffitt, 2003). The
goal of these chapters, like those in the earlier volume, is to provide in a single source both the
institutional details of each program or set of programs of a given type, and a summary of
research findings. The institutional details surrounding each program are intended to provide
research economists with an introduction to the nature of each program, while the summary of
research findings provides policy analysts as well as non-specialist researchers a convenient
source of learning the results of the latest studies. The technical level is kept at the level of an
advanced graduate student in economics and is therefore intended to enable students conducting
dissertation work as well as older researchers to follow the methods used and how they should be
interpreted. The chapters also present the current policy issues under discussion for each
program, another useful source of information for researchers.
This introduction has two remaining sections. The first provides an overview of current
caseloads and spending in the major programs, a presentation of recent trends in those levels, and
a discussion of marginal tax rates from safety net programs as a whole. The second section
furnishes a short summary of each of the chapters in the volumes.

4

Means-Tested Transfer Programs in 2007
Table 1 lists the major means-tested transfer programs in 2007, the last year before the
Great Recession, when the caseloads and expenditures had not yet been affected by that major
economic event. 1 All the programs in the table are discussed in detail in the chapters in this
volume. The Medicaid program, which provides free medical care to low-income adults and
children, to the elderly and disabled, and for long-term care, was by far the largest program in
both expenditures and caseloads, with $328 billion in expenditures and 56 million recipients.
The second largest program by expenditure was the Earned Income Tax Credit (EITC), which
provides a tax credit to families and individuals with relatively low levels of earnings, costing
$48 billion in FY 2007. While not always thought of as a welfare program, the EITC meets the
means-tested transfer definition by its restriction to those with earned income below specified
levels. The Supplemental Security Income (SSI) program, which provides cash benefits to lowincome aged, blind, and disabled individuals, spent $41 billion in the same year, while almost as
much, $39 billion, was spent on subsidized housing programs, which provide housing vouchers
to low-income families, subsidized rent in public housing projects, and support for construction
of low-income housiong. The Supplemental Nutrition Assistance Program (SNAP), formerly
called Food Stamps, which provides an allotment of funds for food expenditure for low income
families and individuals, cost $30 billion in FY 2007 and hence ranked as the fifth largest

1

Means-tested programs are defined here as programs for which core eligibility requires
sufficiently low income and/or assets. Many major transfer programs like Social Security,
Unemployment Insurance, and even Social Security Disability Insurance are excluded. Although
often current benefits among beneficiaries in those programs are based on current earnings,
income, or hours of work, core eligibility is based on having sufficient work or earnings over
some historical period. Social Insurance programs like these are not aimed at alleviating poverty
per se but rather at providing insurance for workers against certain types of reductions in future
5

program in terms of expenditure. The Temporary Assistance to Needy Families (TANF)
program, which provides cash assistance for general consumption to low income families
(mostly single mothers and children) is the most well known program to many economists, given
the amount of research that was conducted on it under its earlier name, the Aid to Families with
Dependent Children (AFDC) program. However, because of contractionary reforms enacted in
the 1990s, the program was only the seventh largest in the US by 2007, with only $11 billion in
expenditure–only a quarter of what was spent on the EITC, for example. The table also shows
figures for School Food programs (subsidized breakfasts and lunches for children from lowincome families), the Head Start program (providing early education and child care for children
of low-income families), and the WIC program (providing nutritional assistance to mothers,
infants, and children at nutritional risk). While almost $11 billion was spent on School Food
programs, only $6.8 billion and $5.4 billion were spent on Head Start and WIC, respectively.
The programs differ in whether they provide a high level of benefits to a relatively small
number of families, or a low level of benefits to a relatively large number of families, as shown
in the last two columns of Table 1. In the former category is SSI, for example, which intends to
provide cash for all consumption needs of eligible families. In the latter category are SNAP and
School Food programs, which provide only a modest benefit for food consumption only but
which provide it to large numbers of adults and children. Medicaid, subsidized housing, and
Head Start are quite expensive per recipient because the consumption goods they subsidize have
relatively high prices, but the TANF program provides more modest benefits even though they
are intended for all consumption needs. EITC benefits are also modest despite the large scale of
the program.

income.
6

While the mix of different programs in the U.S. shown in Table 1 may seem to be a rather
crazy-quilt assortment of programs with different structures and recipient groups, rather than
following from some single rational design for assistance for the poor of all types, it does reflect
what are commonly regarded as voter preferences in the country. For example, most programs
are in-kind in nature, providing subsidies for specific consumption goods like medical care, food
consumption and nutritional assistance, housing, and early childhood education. When cash is
provided, it is generally not provided universally to all low-income families, but only to those
with specific characteristics, like workers (the EITC) or the aged and disabled (SSI). The only
quasi-general cash program in the country is the TANF program, but it has shrunk dramatically,
providing only a modest level of benefits and only to a restricted set of families, again
presumably reflecting disfavor for giving a general cash transfer in return for low income per se.
For example, no cash program exists for poor, nonelderly and nondisabled childless nonworkers,
whether single individuals or married, and only in-kind benefits are provided to other
nonworkers.

Trends in Expenditure
Figures 1 and 2 shows trends in real per capita expenditure on means-tested programs
from 1970 to 2012, both for multiple programs taken together (Figure 1) and for several of the
individual major programs taken separately (Figure 2). Figure 1 shows both a series for the top
84 means-tested programs through 2004 (after which the series was discontinued) and a series
for the 10 largest programs through the end year of 2012. Both figures show that there has been
no decline in per capita spending but, instead, spending has monotonically grown, albeit at
different rates in different time periods.

7

Five distinct periods are discernible. The first phase began in the 1960s (although not
shown in the figure) and ran through the mid-1970s. In this classic period of expansion of the
welfare state in the U.S., the AFDC program expanded and grew, the Food Stamp program was
extended to the nation as a whole, the SSI program was created, and housing aid was expanded.
The second phase ran from the mid-1970s to the late1980s, when expenditures flattened out, with
no growth. The flattening out was a result of growth in the Food Stamp and housing programs
offset by declines in spending on AFDC and SSI. The third phase, running from the late 1980s
to the mid-1990s, saw another large increase in spending, exceeding that in the early 1970s in
some cases. The growth resulted from major expansions in the EITC and in the SSI and
subsidized housing programs. The fourth phase ran from the mid-1990s to 2007, with some
expansion in overall spending but relatively little on the top 10 programs. Spending on AFDC
declined as it was changed to the TANF program, spending leveled off in the SSI program,
housing programs, and the EITC, but a new Child Tax Credit (CTC) was introduced, pushing up
spending. The Great Recession constitutes the fifth phase, where per capita spending on the 10
largest programs grew by 15 percent from 2007 to 2011, arising from increases in expenditure
particularly in the recently-renamed SNAP program, the EITC, and SSI. The causes of the
trends in expenditure for the different programs over the different periods are discussed in detail
in the individual chapters in the volumes.
Both Figures 1 and 2 exclude Medicaid expenditure growth. Per capita real spending in
that program grew by 216 percent in the twenty-year period from 1970 to 1990 but continued to
grow by 166 percent from 1990 to 2010. This makes the growth in aggregate spending
considerably larger than implied by Figure 1. The figures also exclude expenditure on humancapital programs like employment and training programs and like child care and other early

8

education programs. As discussed in the chapter on employment and training programs,
Department of Labor funding for such programs, while very high in the 1970s from the provision
of public service employment and other programs, today is quite small, even less than is spent on
the TANF program, the smallest in Figure 2. There is no reliable calculation of total
expenditures on all child care and early childhood education programs, either currently or
historically, but the chapter on these programs in this volume reports total expenditure across
Head Start, Early Head Start, the Child Care Development Fund, and IDEA grants that is slightly
above that of TANF in 2013-2014. Clearly, expenditures on human-capital related programs are
dwarfed by those on conventional means-tested programs.
Most, but not all, of the trends in expenditure have been driven by trends in the recipient
caseload rather than in expenditures per recipient. The run-ups in EITC expenditure and in
spending on SNAP, for example, are primarily caseload-driven. However, increases in
subsidized housing expenditure have been partially driven by the cost of housing, for subsidized
housing is not an entitlement program and available slots are limited, with consequent long
waiting lists (see chapter by Collinson et al.). Moreover, while the Medicaid caseload has
expanded because of expansions of eligibility, increases in medical care prices have been at least
as important in driving up the cost of the program. The decline in AFDC/TANF spending has
also been primarily a result of dramatic reductions in the number of recipients, although benefits
per recipient have also fallen.
These trends further illustrate the characteristics of U.S. safety-net programs noted
previously. Much of the expansion has occurred in in-kind programs, particularly Medicaid,
food programs, and housing. Those programs providing cash assistance which have expanded
are those targeted on specific groups (workers, the elderly and disabled). Cash assistance in the

9

one program which provided assistance for general consumption needs to nonworking families,
even if only mainly to single mother families, declined dramatically.
Ben-Shalom et al. (2012, Tables 2, 7) have shown that this evolution of expansion and
contraction of different programs has resulted in a change in the distribution of expenditure by
demographic group and by level of private income. This should be expected given the
differences in demographic groups served shown in Table 1, for the programs which have
expanded and those which have contracted have served different types of families. They find
that, from 1984 to 2004, monthly transfers going to single mother households declined by 19
percent and those going to nonemployed families declined by 21 percent, while transfers going
to employed families, the elderly, and the disabled grew by 61 percent, 12 percent, and 15
percent, respectively, over the same period. 2 Single mother families with private income less
than 50 percent of the poverty line saw a larger, 37, percent decline in transfer receipt, while
single mother families as well as two-parent families with private income between 100 and 150
percent of the poverty line saw transfer increases of 93 percent.

Cumulative Marginal Tax Rates
A traditional focus of much economic research on means-tested programs concerns the
magnitude of marginal tax rates (MTRs) in those programs, which measure the rate at which
benefits are reduced as earnings increase and are a gauge of work disincentives. The chapters in
these volumes report the individual MTRs in each program but not what is called the
“cumulative” MTR that arises when a family participates in more than one program. This
section reports what is known on that issue.

2

Their figures include social transfers as well as means-tested benefits, but exclude
10

For individual programs, the chapter in this volume on the Medicaid program, which
does not have copays for recipients, shows that it has a zero percent MTR until the point of
income eligibility is reached, after which all benefits are lost. This creates a cliff in the benefit
schedule and a notch in the budget constraint where the MTR exceeds 100 percent. The SNAP
program has a nominal 30 percent MTR but is effectively 24 percent because of an earnings
exclusion provision, while subsidized housing programs have an MTR of approximately 30
percent. The SSI program has a 50 percent MTR after an income exclusion is exceeded. But the
EITC provides a subsidy in its lower range, which generates an MTR that can be as high as -45
percent, but when the subsidy is eventually phased out, the MTR has a maximum of 21 percent.
Most programs allow payroll and income taxes to be deducted from income prior to application
of the MTR, thereby reducing the impact of the two MTRs together.
Relatively few studies have been conducted which report cumulative MTRs. This is a
difficult task because it depends on which programs a family participates in and it can vary
markedly from state to state if the program has state-specific parameters. No comprehensive
calculations have been made for all combinations of programs in which a family might
participate in and for all states. However, Table 2 reports an illustration calculation of
cumulative MTRs facing low income families in 2012 who participate only in SNAP yet also
face federal and state income and payroll taxes, which means that the EITC and the CTC are
implicitly included as well. Since these are some of the largest programs in the safety net, they
provide some sense of cumulative MTRs. MTRs for each family vary depending on their level
of earnings, whether all family members work, their level of taxable unearned income, the

Medicaid and Medicare.
11

presence and ages of any children, marital and filing status, and other characteristics. Table 2
reports the distribution of MTRs across all families in each earnings range, given that those
MTRs vary by family. For the poorest families with earnings less than 50 percent of the poverty
line, the median MTR is only 13 percent. Indeed, many families face negative MTRs because of
the EITC and because they have larger numbers of children. The 90th percentile MTR for this
low income group is 35 percent, which arises mainly from families without children who are on
SNAP. However, as the table shows, MTRs rise with earnings, going to medians of 24 percent
for those between 50 and 100 percent of the poverty line and up to 32 percent just above that
line. While the 10th percentile MTRs remain modest, those taxpayers who are at the 90th
percentile of taxpaying units face up to 61 percent MTRs. The higher MTRs for these relatively
high earnings families is a direct consequence of the EITC and CTC, which must be phased out.
When that occurs, MTRs can be high when added to other positive taxes and to SNAP MTRs.
But the low MTRs at low earnings and the higher MTRs at higher levels of earnings go together,
and one cannot have one without the other. 3
The major omission from these MTRs is the Medicaid program which is the most
common program received, along with SNAP, for families receiving benefits from two or more
programs. Medicaid income thresholds vary by state and type of recipient family but, prior to
the Affordable Care Act, thresholds were typically around 50 percent of the poverty or a little
lower or higher. This implies that the MTRs shown in Table 2 are probably about right for
families in the lowest earnings strata but MTRs at higher earnings levels, particularly between 50
and 100 percent of the poverty line, are considerably higher than shown. This reinforces the

3

The CBO study had some reports of how these rates differ by presence of children and
marital status, showing that families with children typically face higher MTRs than those without
children, and that the dispersion of MTRS is greatest for single mother families, who face both
12

conclusion reached in the previous paragraph that the current means-tested transfer system
imposes quite low MTRs for most of the poorest families in the U.S. but considerably higher
ones for the minority of families (16 percent of those below 250 percent of the poverty line) who
receive benefits from multiple transfer programs.
While no time series of cumulative MTRs is available, there is little question that they
have fallen significantly over time for at least two reasons. One is that most of the high
cumulative MTRs calculated prior to the 1990s were a result of a 100 percent MTR in the AFDC
program, and the AFDC program was the largest means-tested transfer program in the country
after Medicaid at that time (see Figure 2). Further, AFDC recipients were categorically eligible
for Food Stamps and Medicaid and were often enrolled in subsidized housing programs,
increasing the cumulative MTR for millions of recipient families. After the program was
reformed in the mid-1990s, most states reduced their MTRs far below 100 percent, as the chapter
on that program in this volume describes. Further, the dramatic decline in the AFDC program
and its successor, TANF, means that multiple program receipt of that program with others
constitutes only a small fraction of those receiving benefits today. Indeed, in 2010, 62 percent of
families with income less than 250 percent of the poverty line received no benefits at all and
another 22 percent received benefits from only one program (U.S. Congressional Budget Office,
2012, Box 1). The remaining 16 percent received benefits from two or more, but virtually all of
those families receive two benefits only, the vast majority receiving SNAP and Medicaid. 4
The second development has been the expansion of the EITC which, at least in lower
earnings ranges, provides a sizable subsidy which offsets most of the MTRs for families with

higher 90th-percentile MTRs as well as lower 10th-percentile MTRs.
4
Edelstein et al. (2014) report rates of multiple benefit receipt in the mid-2000s and also
report that the most common form of multiple receipt is of SNAP and Medicaid.
13

children, leading to low cumulative MTRs for a large fraction of the low income population.
The introduction of a second tax credit, the Child Tax Credit, in 1998, further reduces the MTR
for low-income families by providing a non-refundable credit that could only be applied against
existing tax liability, thereby providing a larger credit to those with higher levels of income for
those with low incomes.

Summaries of the Chapters
Each chapter in the two volumes fleshes out the details of the program in detail and
provide a summary of the research on the determinants of participation and caseload growth as
well as on the effects of program participation and programmatic reforms on behavioral
outcomes.
Buchmueller, Ham, and Shore-Sheppard review the Medicaid program. They note, as did
the chapter in the 2003 volume, that the program is really composed of four separate programs,
covering low-income children and parents, the low-income disabled, those in nursing homes, and
seniors in need of insurance coverage complementary to Medicare. They review the history of
the program, which was begun in 1965 and which was, for almost 30 years, primarily provided
to single parent families receiving AFDC cash assistance and the elderly and disabled receiving
SSI, but was extended to low income children and pregnant women not receiving cash assistance
starting in the 1980s. They also review in detail the many other incremental reforms of
significant program features in the late 1980s and early 1990s, followed by a review of the
effects of the 1996 welfare reform on the program. They then provide a status report on the
current evolution of the program under the provisions of the Affordable Care Act. They also

14

review the history and evolution of the CHIP program.
The Medicaid program has been the subject of a great deal of additional research since
the 2003 volume and more is in progress at this writing. Buchmueller, Ham, and ShoreSheppard provide a thorough review of both the older and newer research. Their review of the
more recent literature on the effects of Medicaid eligibility expansions on takeup of the program
by adults and children as well as crowdout of private insurance shows somewhat smaller
estimates than did the earlier literature. The authors also review the effect of Medicaid on the
purchase of private long-term care insurance, an issue of significant interest in the literature.
Their discussion of the research on the effects of eligibility expansions on access to care and
health of children shows that the literature provides strong support for positive effects on both,
although the magnitudes are not always certain and the impacts seem larger on children in lower
income families. Impacts on adult access to care also appear positive, but effects on health itself
are less conclusive. The authors also review the literature on the effects of Medicaid
expansions, payment policies, reimbursement rates, and related policies on provider behavior and
provision of care, finding a significant range of effects and estimated magnitudes. Their
discussion of the recent literature on the effects of Medicaid on labor supply shows a very wide
range of estimates, ranging from zero in some studies to significant negative effects in others.
Impacts of Medicaid on household financial hardship appear positive, however. Finally, they
review the literature on the effect of the Medicaid program and of various reforms and individual
policies on family structure, finding that the effects are not very robust across studies.
Austin Nichols and Jesse Rothstein discuss the Earned Income Tax Credit (EITC)
program, which provides a subsidy to families with positive earnings. The subsidy increases with
earnings at low earnings levels but then is phased out as earnings rise, and eventually phases out

15

completely for families with annual earnings of roughly $45,000 or higher (for those with two or
more children). They review the familiar history of the program, which was enacted by Congress
in 1975 but was made much more generous in later years. Unlike other means-tested transfer
programs, the EITC is administered by the IRS and the take-up rate is very high. The authors
also discuss the Child Tax Credit, which is somewhat similar in structure but covers a rather
different (higher) income range. Updating the 2003 volume’s discussion of the EITC, Nichols
and Rothstein demonstrate the continued growth of program expenditures and recipients, discuss
the expansion of the program during the Great Recession, and provide new evidence on the
distribution of taxpayers over different regions of the EITC schedule and on the accuracy of
EITC imputations in survey data.
In their review of the effects of the research on the effects of the EITC, the authors
confirm prior findings of positive labor supply effects for single mothers, small negative effects
for married women, and essentially no labor supply effects for men, but also discuss newer
studies on those effects which provide more nuanced findings. They review new evidence on the
importance of information and saliency in the take-up decision, the reasons that families seem to
prefer lump sum refunds rather than collecting the credit in smaller increments over the year, the
large impact of the program on reducing poverty rates, as well as notable positive effects of the
EITC on adult and child health outcomes, child test scores and educational attainment. They
also describe the incidence of the EITC in the labor market, including some findings which
suggest that employers capture some of the program benefits through lower equilibrium wages.
Finally, they discuss proposals for reform, including more generous support for childless workers
and extensions to disabled workers, and they evaluate comparisons, common in policy
discussions, between the EITC and the minimum wage.

16

Hoynes and Schanzenbach review U.S. food and nutrition programs, which include not
only the well-known Supplemental Nutrition Assistance Program (SNAP, formerly known as
Food Stamps) but also the School Breakfast Program and the National School Lunch Program
(each of which supports subsidized schools meals for children from low-income families), and
the Special Supplemental Nutrition Program for Women, Infants, and Children (WIC), which
provides vouchers for particular nutritional foods as well as counseling, health screening, and
referrals for low income infants, young children, and pregnant and postpartum women. SNAP is
the broadest and, indeed, the only means-tested transfer program in the country which provides
essentially open-ended and unrestricted benefits to individuals and families of all types, basing
eligibility only on need and not on family structure, disability, or other characteristic. The most
important changes in the program since the 2003 volume include reforms in the states in the
2000s intended to increase access to benefits, and a temporary increase in benefits during the
Great Recession. As for recent reforms in the other programs in recent years, nutritional
standards in both the School Breakfast Program and the National School Lunch Program have
been modified, payment formulas have been altered to encourage high-poverty schools to adopt
universally free meals for all students, and access to the School Breakfast Program has been
expanded. The content of the food bundle provided to WIC recipients has been changed to reflect
current dietary guidelines and promote consumption of fruits and vegetables. None of these
reforms altered the basic structure of the programs, however.
In their literature review, the authors begin by presenting a stylized model for examining
the economic impacts of the programs, in particular highlighting the range across the programs
in their degree of “in-kind” versus cash structure. They then review the large volume of research
on the programs and their effects on program participation, consumption, labor supply, health

17

and nutrition, focusing on recent research that has used strong research designs. They find the
research to show that the recent changes in SNAP caseloads, for example, are primarily driven
by the macroeconomy, although SNAP and welfare policies have also played a role. Hoynes and
Schanzenbach also review recent research on the effect of the program on food consumption and
spending, finding them to be increased by the program but that the effect is essentially equivalent
to the effect of cash for inframarginal households. The effects of SNAP on reducing food
insecurity are, however, more mixed, and overall with less statistically significant findings.
Much recent literature has focused on health effects, finding generally positive impacts on child
health but more mixed results for obesity among adult participants. Recent research on the
effects of the program on labor supply (based on data from the program rollout in the 1970s prior
to welfare reform and the expansion in the EITC) show no significant effects overall but
significant negative effects for single mother households. Leveraging recent expansions in the
School Breakfast Programs, there has been a significant volume of recent research showing sharp
increases in program participation, but more limited impacts on breakfast consumption and
dietary quality, and decidedly mixed impacts on student test scores. Research on the National
School Lunch Program on food security and body weight is quite mixed, but in the absence of
experiments or programmatic changes it has been challenging to credibly identify impacts.
Hoynes and Schanzenbach also review the recent literature on the WIC program. The research
provides consistent evidence that WIC leads to improvements in birth outcomes, but there is
much less evidence about how the program affects child nutrition and health. More recently,
several studies explore the supply side incentives generated by the program.
Ziliak reviews the Temporary Assistance for Needy Families (TANF) program, which
was called the Aid to Families with Dependent Children (AFDC) program prior to 1996. He

18

includes a new summary of the history of the program and of the major reforms in 1996 which
introduced work requirements and time limits, reduced marginal tax rates on earnings, and
enacted other features, and he shows the dramatic decline in the caseload which followed. He
reviews the later 2005 DRA law, which changed the work requirements in the program, and he
discusses the temporary additional spending allocated by Congress during the Great Recession.
He shows that the “child-only” caseload has strongly increased, for an increasing proportion of
cases have no adults supported by the grant, and that there has been an increase in the fraction of
funds spent on in-kind activities such as child care, transportation, and work supports rather than
simple cash assistance.
In his review of research on the program, he concentrates on new research conducted
since the 2003 volume but also summarizes some of the research begun just after 1996 for which
it is now possible to draw firmer conclusions. He finds that the literature on the causes of the
caseload decline after 1996, for example, now shows somewhat greater relative effects of
welfare reform policies than the macroeconomy on caseloads, but that the effect of the latter has
generally declined, perhaps because of the rise of child-only families. Ziliak finds research on
this issue in the Great Recession to show that the caseload became, with that recession,
increasingly less responsive to the economy. His review of the effects of specific policies shows
that time limits were an important contributor to caseload decline but that the research has had
difficulty fully separating the relative importance of the many components of the 1996 reforms.
The large body of research on labor supply, he finds, shows that welfare reform had a positive
effect on employment and hours worked of single mothers, as did a number of specific welfareto-work experiments that were conducted. However, while the literature also shows positive
effects on earnings, the declines in welfare benefits arising from leaving welfare often cancel out

19

the earnings increases, leaving income relatively unchanged (although the literature also shows
considerable heterogeneity, with some families experiencing income increases and others,
decreases). Especially in more recent years, in addition, a significant number of single-mother
families appear to have been made worse off and to have higher deep poverty rates. Ziliak’s
review of research on the effects of TANF on other outcomes shows mixed results on savings
and consumption, some negative effects of the 1996 reform on health insurance coverage
because of loss of Medicaid, no consistent evidence of the effect of reform on family structure
and fertility, and mixed results of the effect of the reform on children, with some but not all
studies showing positive effects on young children and negative effects on adolescents.
Duggan, Kearney, and Rennane review the Supplemental Security Income (SSI)
program, a federal program created in 1974 which provides cash and usually Medicaid benefits
to low income individuals who are eligible for reasons of older age or disability. SSI covers
three distinct populations: blind and disabled children, disabled non-elderly adults, and
individuals over 65, regardless of disability status,who meet the financial criteria. Many states
have supplemental SSI programs which provide additional benefits to those in federal law. The
authors discuss the important literature on the determination of medical disability for adults and
children and of continuing disability reviews, finding shifting definitions over time which appear
to be partly responsible for rising caseloads, particularly for disabled children (the latter
particularly affected by expansions in medical eligibility criteria following the 1990 Zebley
Supreme Court decision). They show that since the beginning of the program, the fraction of
elderly adults on SSI has declined by more than half while the fraction of disabled non-elderly
adults and children on SSI has risen substantially, doubling for children and younger adults. In
terms of qualifying diagnoses, the authors find that in 2013, 68 percent of the child SSI caseload,

20

and 57 percent of the adult caseload, had mental disorders, the rest having physical disorders.
In their review of research on SSI, the authors find that the program increases family
income and reduces poverty rates and food insecurity but that the research provides mixed
evidence of the effect of the child SSI program on parental labor supply and earnings. The
authors also review recent research indicating that child SSI recipients who lose eligibility as an
adult have subsequent very low earnings and high rates of poverty, and they review what is
known for the reason for the disproportionate presence of boys in the child SSI caseload. They
also review the small literature on the effect of interactions between TANF, CHIP, special
education, and other programs on child SSI participation, finding that spillovers between
programs likely result from financial incentives for beneficiaries and for state governments. The
authors also review the sizable literature on the effects of demonstration programs over the last
20 years intended to increase work among SSI recipients, which often show little or no effect,
leading to a very mixed set of results. Finally, the authors discuss many questions still to be
answered in research on SSI, including the need for additional research on the long-term
outcomes of child SSI recipients. In conclusion, the authors find the volume of research on the
SSI program to be smaller than it should be given the importance of the program and the many
important policy issues surrounding it.
Collinson, Ellen, and Ludwig discuss the many low-income housing programs in the
U.S., composed of public housing, privately-owned subsidized housing, and tenant-based
vouchers. The authors trace the history of initial but then declining support for public housing,
the changing character of government subsidies for the construction of private housing for those
with low and moderate incomes (especially the 1986 Low Income Housing Tax Credit, or
LIHTC), and the evolution of the 1974 housing voucher program, which is the largest housing

21

subsidy program for low-income households. They also provide an extensive discussion of the
justification for housing programs. Their review of caseloads in the programs reveals falling
numbers of households in public housing and other developments subsidized by the U.S.
Department of Housing and Urban Development, but rising numbers of those living in LIHTC
developments and receiving housing vouchers. The authors also discuss the very small fraction
of low income families in the U.S. who actually receive subsidized housing assistance and the
existence of long waiting lists created by limits on the number of units and vouchers made
available. They add a discussion of the tradeoffs in providing less assistance to more households
compared to the current situation as well as a discussion of targeting and priorities given the
supply constraints.
The authors review existing research on housing programs, first reviewing research
showing that housing subsidies do, in fact, increase housing consumption and reduce
overcrowding. They also find that the research literature shows that public housing and housing
vouchers have favorable effects on housing affordability, reducing the fraction of income
families spend on housing, although there is little research evidence to date on the effects of the
LIHTC. Their review of the evidence on the effects of housing programs on residential mobility
suggests that the programs reduce it, although the number of studies is quite small. The
considerably larger body of evidence on whether housing programs lead to residential locations
in neighborhoods with better characteristics shows only very small effects of that kind. In their
review of the effects of housing programs on other outcomes, the authors find evidence that
vouchers reduce labor supply. They find little evidence that public housing and vouchers, as
typically administered, do much in terms of improving neighborhood quality for families or
providing measurable benefits for children. When housing vouchers improve neighborhood

22

conditions for families, however, as in the MTO experiment, children appear to benefit
substantially into adulthood.
Barnow and Smith review the wide variety of employment and training programs in the
U.S., ranging from programs for skill development (vocational development) to job development
(public employment) to employability development (personal attitudes and attributes needed for
employment) to work experience programs (providing work experience per se). Some other
programs, such as the labor exchange, are intended to match workers and jobs better or to
provide counseling and assessment or information about the labor market. The authors review
the long history of programs, starting in the Great Depression, but concentrate their discussion on
the Workforce Investment Act (WIA) program enacted in 1998. WIA remains the primary
federal employment and training program and it was reauthorized with some changes in July,
2014 as the Workforce Innovation and Opportunity Act (WIOA). WIA introduced many new
features to the nation’s training programs, greatly extending the presence of One-Stop centers
where individuals could learn about and participate in a large range of program options at one
time, providing new Individual Training Accounts which were essentially vouchers for
individuals to use at different training providers, mandating a fixed sequence of activities
(starting with core services, then intensive ones, then training; this mandated sequence was
deemphasized over time and eliminated in the 2014 reauthorization), and improving the
performance management system. Studies of the implementation of WIA have shown that the
One-Stop systems have been successfully established and that the Individual Training Accounts
have been very popular, but that the new performance management system had many difficult
challenges and that training programs were not sufficiently engaging the local business
community.

23

In their review of research on employment and training programs, Barnow and Smith first
review the many different methodologies used to evaluate program effects as well as providing a
discussion of data and measurement issues. Their review of research findings, concentrated on
studies since the 2003 volume, indicates many estimates of positive earnings effects from the
WIA program (generally interpreted as treatment effects on the treated), although often differing
by gender, by whether the trainees were dislocated workers rather than other types of adults in
need, and by whether the effects were long-lasting rather than fading out. Their review of
research on the Job Corps shows that it, alone among programs providing training to youth, has
positive and substantial effects on their labor market outcomes, although the benefits fade after
about five years as the control groups catch up. It also easily passes a benefit-cost criterion from
the point of view of the participants. Barnow and Smith also review the evidence on the effects
of the Trade Adjustment Assistance program, which provides employment and training services
to those displaced by international trade, finding the program to not have statistically or
substantively significant impacts on long-run labor market outcomes of the participants. The
authors also review the smaller literatures on evaluation of performance measures, determinants
of participation in employment and training programs, and the matching of participants to
services.
Elango, García, Heckman, and Hojman review early childhood education (ECE)
programs. The authors identify four different federal funding streams for childcare: the funding
for Head Start and Early Head Start, the Child Care Development Fund, and the Individuals with
Disabilities Education Act grants. They consider a wide variety of ECE programs, including (i)
means-tested demonstration programs; (ii) Head Start, the largest means-tested ECE program in
the U.S.; (iii) non-means-tested programs that have universal coverage in a local population; and

24

(iv) different types of childcare. They consider four iconic demonstration programs implemented
from 1962 to 1988: the Perry Preschool Project, the Carolina Abecedarian Project, the Early
Training Project, and the Infant Health and Development Program. They argue that these
programs have objectives and components that resemble modern high-quality ECE program,
making the conclusions drawn from them relevant. The authors also devote considerable
discussion to Head Start, noting that its criterion for eligibility (poverty in terms of income) is
less stringent than the criteria used for most demonstration programs (usually based on an index
of disadvantage). They also review universal programs, including statewide and citywide
programs in the U.S. and two comprehensive evaluations of universal programs in Norway and
Canada. The authors stress the difference between high-quality (center-based) and low-quality
(informal, family-based) childcare.
Elango and coauthors conduct an extensive review of research findings on these
programs. They frame their discussion using the modern theory of skill formation and set up a
framework illustrating the alternative choices that parents face for their children. They first
focus on the four iconic demonstration programs, all of which were experimentally evaluated and
have long-term follow-ups available. They also present their own reanalysis of the primary data
sources used in those evaluations. Their review of studies of the effectiveness of Head Start
considers both experimental evaluations with short-term data and quasi-experimental evaluations
with long-term data. They find that, with few exceptions, ECE programs strongly boost IQ in
the short-run but the control group largely catches up at school entry. They argue that this catchup in IQ does not imply that these programs are not effective, as demonstration programs have
strong impacts on substantive later-life outcomes by boosting non-cognitive skills. The available
cost-benefit analyses of the programs are also strongly favorable. The authors stress that these

25

positive results are obtained from populations of disadvantaged children. Then they conduct a
detailed review of the most rigorous evaluations of the Head Start program (especially those
addressing substitution bias, i.e., the availability of good substitutes for members of control
groups). They report that, contrary to some claims, Head Start has significant positive effects on
many short-term and long-term child outcomes. In a review of the evaluations of universal ECE
programs, the authors find that these programs have heterogeneous impacts across children in
different socioeconomic statuses, with effects ranging from strongly positive for very
disadvantaged children to low or even negative for non-disadvantaged children. They conclude
by presenting evidence in the U.S. indicating that impacts are inextricably tied to program
quality and to the quality of alternative home environments.

26

References
Ben-Shalom, Y.; R. Moffitt; and J.K. Scholz. 2012. “An Assessment of the Effect of AntiPoverty Programs in the United States.” In Oxford Handbook of the Economics of Poverty, ed.
P. Jefferson. Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Edelstein, S.; M. Pergamit; and C. Ratcliffe. 2014. “Characteristics of Families Receiving
Multiple Public Benefits.” Washington: Urban Institute.
Haveman, R.; R. Blank; R. Moffitt; T. Smeeding; and G. Wallace. 2015. “The War on Poverty:
Measurement, Trends, and Policy.” Journal of Policy Analysis and Management 34 (Summer):
593-638.
Moffitt, R., Ed. 2003. Means-Tested Transfer Programs in the United States. Chicago and
London: University of Chicago Press.
Spar, K. (2006). Cash and noncash benefits for persons with limited income: Eligibility rules,
recipient and expenditure data, FY2002–FY2004. Washington, DC: Congressional Research
Service.
U.S. Congressional Budget Office. 2012. Effective Marginal Tax Rates for Low- and ModerateIncome Workers. Washington: U.S. Congress.

27

Table 1: Annual Expenditures and Caseloads in Social Insurance and Means-tested Programs, FY 2007

Medicaid

Type of Transfer

Demographic Groups Covered

In-Kind

Families with dependent children, disabled, elderly

Expenditures
(millions)

Caseloads
(thousands)

Monthly Expenditures
per Recipient
(constant 2007
dollars)

328,875

56,821
24,584

165

482

EITC

Cash

Individuals with positive earnings

48,540

SSI

Cash

Aged, blind, and disabled individuals

41,205

7,360

467

Housing Aid

In-Kind

All individuals and families

39,436

5,087

646

SNAP

In-Kind

All individuals and families

30,373

26,316

96

4,138

234

TANF

Cash

Mostly single mother families

11,624

School Food Programs

In-Kind

Children in school

10,916

40,720

22

Head Start

In-Kind

All children

6,889

908

632

WIC

In-Kind

Mother, infants, and children at nutritional risk

5,409

8,285

54

Source: Ben-Shalom et al. (2012, Table 1).

Table 2
Marginal Tax Rates Faced by U.S. Families with Income
Below 200 Percent of the Poverty Line
Participating in the SNAP Program
under 2012 Law (percent)

Earnings Relative
to the Poverty Line

Median

10th
Percentile

90th
Percentile

0 to 49 percent

13

-8

35

50 to 99 percent

24

13

53

100 to 149 percent

32

22

61

150 to 199 percent

31

22

51

Source: U.S. Congressional Budget Office (2012, Figure 5). The simulation estimates the MTR
for each filing unit in 2012, for those families with earnings in the specified earnings-to-povertyline range, evaluated at the point at which their family earnings are observed. The MTRs are
based on federal and state income taxes, federal payroll taxes, and the SNAP benefit formula.
Only nonelderly, nondisabled families with positive family earnings are included.

Figure 1: Real Expenditure Per Capita in Means-Tested Programs ,
1970-2012 (Real 2009 Dollars)
3000

2500

2000

1500

1000

10 Largest Programs
500

0
1970
1971
1972
1973
1974
1975
1976
1977
1978
1979
1980
1981
1982
1983
1984
1985
1986
1987
1988
1989
1990
1991
1992
1993
1994
1995
1996
1997
1998
1999
2000
2001
2002
2003
2004
2005
2006
2007
2008
2009
2010
2011
2012

Expenditure per Capita

Top 84 Programs

Year

Notes: Top 84 programs from Spar (2006) and 10 Largest Programs from authors' calculations from individual program
statistics. Expenditures are sum of federal, state, and local expendtirues. The top 84 program figures for before 1975 are
extrapolated bewteen 1968 and 1975. Top 10 programs exclude Medicaid.

Figure 2: Expenditure per Capita, Non-Medicaid Means Tested
Programs, 1970-2012 (real 2009 dollars)
350

300

Expenditure per Capita

250

AFDC/TANF

200

150

SSI
TANF

CTC

100

SNAP

Housing Aid

50

EITC

CHIP

0
1970

1975

1980

Source: Haveman et al. (2015).

1985

1990
Year

1995

2000

2005

2010

