                                NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




  OPTIMAL INCOME TAXATION WITH UNEMPLOYMENT AND WAGE RESPONSES:
                  A SUFFICIENT STATISTICS APPROACH

                                             Kory Kroft
                                           Kavan J. Kucko
                                          Etienne Lehmann
                                        Johannes F. Schmieder

                                        Working Paper 21757
                                http://www.nber.org/papers/w21757


                      NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                               1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                 Cambridge, MA 02138
                                    November 2015




We would like to thank Felix Bierbrauer, Pierre Cahuc, David Card, Raj Chetty, Sebastian Findeisen,
Peter Funk, Robert Gary-Bobo, Emmanuel Hansen, Laurence Jacquet, Hilary Hoynes, Henrik Kleven,
Claus Thustrup Kreiner, Patrick Kline, Kevin Lang, Thomas Le Barbanchon, Isabelle Mejean, Jean-Baptiste
Michau, Austin Nichols, Matthew Notowidigdo, Claudia Olivetti, Daniele Paserman, Jukka Pirttilä,
Julien Prat, Jesse Rothstein, Dominik Sacks, Emmanuel Saez, Stefanie Stantcheva, Aleh Tsyvinski,
Owen Zidar as well as seminar participants at Boston University, McGill University, University of
Connecticut, University of Toronto, CRED-University Paris II, CREST, TEPP Aussois winter school,
University of Cologne, Queens University, THEMA Cergy-Pontoise, SOLE Meeting 2013, the NTA
Meeting 2014, Berkeley, Hamilton, Wilfried Laurier, CEPR, SED 2015 Warsaw, NBER Summer
Institute, University of Chile, Cergy Pontoise and TEPP annual conference for many helpful comments
on this project. All errors are our own. The views expressed herein are those of the authors and do
not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.

© 2015 by Kory Kroft, Kavan J. Kucko, Etienne Lehmann, and Johannes F. Schmieder. All rights
reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission
provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
Optimal Income Taxation with Unemployment and Wage Responses: A Sufficient Statistics
Approach
Kory Kroft, Kavan J. Kucko, Etienne Lehmann, and Johannes F. Schmieder
NBER Working Paper No. 21757
November 2015
JEL No. H21,H22,H23,J2,J21,J23

                                              ABSTRACT

This paper reassesses whether the optimal income tax program features an Earned Income Tax Credit
(EITC) or a Negative Income Tax (NIT) at the bottom of the income distribution, in the presence of
unemployment and wage responses to taxation. The paper makes two key contributions. First, it derives
a sufficient statistics optimal tax formula in a general model that incorporates unemployment and endogenous
wages. This formula nests a broad variety of structures of the labor market, such as competitive models
with fixed or flexible wages and models with matching frictions. Our results show that the sufficient
statistics to be estimated are: the macro employment response with respect to taxation and the micro
and macro participation responses with respect to taxation. We show that an EITC-like policy is optimal
provided that the welfare weight on the working poor is larger than the ratio of the micro participation
elasticity to the macro participation elasticity. The second contribution is to estimate the sufficient
statistics that are inputs to the optimal tax formula using a standard quasi-experimental research design.
We estimate these reduced-form parameters using policy variation in tax liabilities stemming from
the U.S. tax and transfer system for over 20 years. Using our empirical estimates, we implement our
sufficient statistics formula and show that the optimal tax at the bottom more closely resembles an
NIT relative to the case where unemployment and wage responses are not taken into account.


Kory Kroft                                           Etienne Lehmann
Department of Economics                              CRED - University Pantheon-Assas Paris II
University of Toronto                                12 place du Panthéon
150 St. George Street                                75231 Paris Cedex 05, France
Toronto, ON M5S 3G7                                  etienne.lehmann@gmail.com
Canada
and NBER                                             Johannes F. Schmieder
kory.kroft@utoronto.ca                               Department of Economics
                                                     Boston University
Kavan J. Kucko                                       270 Bay State Road
Department of Economics                              Boston, MA 02215
Boston University                                    and IZA
270 Bay State Road                                   and also NBER
Boston MA 02215                                      johannes@bu.edu
kavan.kucko@gmail.com


Supplementary materials available at http://www.nber.org/papers/w21757:
  - data appendix
I   Introduction

    Recent decades have witnessed a large shift in the U.S. tax and transfer system away from
welfare towards in-work benefits. In particular, for single mothers, work incentives increased
dramatically: welfare benefits were cut and time limits introduced, the Earned Income Tax Credit
(EITC) was expanded and changes in Medicaid, job training programs and child care provision
encouraged work. The shift away from programs featuring a Negative Income Tax (NIT) structure
(lump-sum transfers to the non-employed with positive employment taxes) towards EITC-like
programs (negative employment taxes at the bottom) is prevalent in other countries including
Canada, France, South Korea and the U.K.
    The literature evaluating these policy reforms largely views them as successful. For single
mothers, the reforms sharply reduced welfare caseloads and increased labor force participation
and income (Eissa and Liebman, 1996, Meyer and Rosenbaum, 2001, Eissa and Hoynes, 2006, Gel-
ber and Mitchell, 2012, Hoynes and Patel, 2015) and consumption levels (Meyer and Sullivan,
2004, 2008). Within an optimal income taxation framework, the various tax policy changes sub-
stantially improved welfare (Eissa, Kleven, and Kreiner, 2008). This is consistent with (Saez, 2002)
who shows that the optimal income tax features an EITC-like structure at the bottom of the income
distribution when labor supply responses are primarily concentrated along the extensive margin
relative to the intensive margin and the welfare weight on the working poor is greater than one.
    Two important assumptions in (Eissa, Kleven, and Kreiner, 2008) and (Saez, 2002) are that all
job-seekers find work and wages are fixed with respect to the tax system. The first assumption
may be appropriate during the 1990s when the U.S. unemployment rate was falling and was very
low, by historical standards, but may be less realistic in more recent periods where unemployment
rates exceeded 10 percent. Furthermore, even in a full employment economy, the assumption of
fixed wages may be implausible (Rothstein, 2010). It is also worth noting that these assumptions
rule out any labor market spillover effects of government policies. Since anyone can find a job
at all times, there is no mechanism by which a boost to the labor force could “crowd out” job
finding. Thus, these assumptions are at odds with the growing body of evidence that suggest,
especially during times when unemployment is high, government policies may induce substantial
spillover effects, particularly at the bottom end of the income distribution. It is desirable to have
a theoretical framework that can account for the presence of these spillovers.
    The goal of this paper is to relax the fixed wage and full employment assumptions and re-
assess whether the optimal income tax features an EITC-like structure at the bottom, as in (Saez,
2002). The paper makes two key contributions, one theoretical and one empirical. Theoretically,
we derive a sufficient statistics optimal tax formula in a general model that incorporates unem-
ployment and wage responses to taxation. In the model, individuals can be out of work by choice

                                                 1
(“non-participants”) or by failing in their search to find a job (“unemployed” ). This contrasts with
(Saez, 2002) where all active individuals are effectively working. This addresses (Mirrlees, 1999)
who writes that ”a desire is to have a model in which unemployment can arise and persist for
reasons other than a preference for leisure”. Rather than specifying the full structure of the labor
market, we pursue a sufficient statistics approach (Chetty, 2009) by allowing wages and the ”con-
ditional employment probability” - the fraction of participating individuals that are effectively
working (i.e. one minus the unemployment rate) - to depend in a reduced-form way on taxes.
Our theoretical results show that, for each labor market, the sufficient statistics to be estimated
are: i) the microeconomic participation response with respect to taxation, ii) the macroeconomic
participation response with respect to taxation and iii) the macroeconomic employment response
with respect to taxation.1 Unlike micro responses, macro responses allow wages and conditional
employment probabilities in each labor market to respond to a change in taxes. When we consider
a restricted version of the model with no cross effects, we show that an EITC-like policy is optimal
provided that the welfare weight on the working poor is larger than the ratio of the micro partici-
pation elasticity to the macro participation elasticity.2 When the micro and macro effects are equal,
this collapses to the condition in (Saez, 2002). Thus, if the macro effect is less than the micro effect,
as our empirical evidence suggests, the optimal policy is pushed more towards an NIT, relative to
the benchmark case.
    The intuition for why our optimal tax formula depends on macro employment responses and
macro and micro participation responses is the following. In the absence of unemployment and
wage responses, behavioral responses to taxation only matter through their effects on the govern-
ment’s budget because they have no first-order effect on an individual’s objective by the envelope
theorem (Saez, 2001, 2002). However, the latter argument does not apply to wage and unem-
ployment responses because these responses are not directly chosen by individuals but rather are
mediated at the market level.3 Since the social welfare function is assumed to depend only on
expected utilities, market spillovers due to wage and unemployment responses matter only inso-
far as macro responses of expected utility to taxes differ from micro responses. Moreover, since
participation decisions depend only on expected utilities as well, these market spillovers are en-
tirely captured by the ratio of macro over micro participation responses. This is related to results
in Kroft (2008) and Landais, Michaillat, and Saez (2015) who show that to evaluate optimal unem-
ployment insurance (UI), it is important to estimate the ratio of the micro and macro take-up and

   1 For  ease of exposition, we hereafter refer to microeconomic as ”micro” and macroeconomic as ”macro”.
   2 The  no cross effects restriction implies that tax liabilities in one market do not affect participation and employment
levels in a different occupation.
    3 For example, higher taxes in one occupation may change equilibrium wages, and therefore labor demand of firms

and the conditional employment probabilities that workers face. Such responses may also appear in occupations other
than the one where the tax has changed. Moreover, the tax change may reduce the number of job seekers, thereby
triggering search externalities.


                                                             2
duration elasticities in the presence of spillover effects, respectively.
    The optimal tax formulas structure our empirical strategy which estimates the sufficient statis-
tics that are inputs to the optimal tax formula using a standard quasi-experimental research de-
sign. Following most of the literature on labor supply responses to taxation, we focus on single
women. The primary advantage is that this group is most likely to be at the margin of participat-
ing in the labor market and is thereby most affected by tax and transfer policies at the bottom of
the income distribution, in particular the EITC.4 We adopt a ”cell-based” approach and define la-
bor markets on the basis of education (high school dropouts, high school graduates, some college
but no degree, and college graduates), state and year. This largely mirrors the definition of labor
markets in (Rothstein, 2010). To identify the micro participation response, we rely on expansions
to the federal EITC which differentially affected single women with and without children. For the
macro participation and employment responses, we rely on variation in state EITC levels, as well
as variation in welfare benefits within states over time. To isolate purely exogenous variation in
tax liabilities coming from policy reforms, we implement a simulated instruments approach sim-
ilar in spirit to Currie and Gruber (1996) and Gruber and Saez (2002). Our instrumental variables
(IV) estimates show that the micro participation elasticity, for the full sample of single women, is
0.63. This generally lines up with the range of estimates reported in the literature (Eissa, Kleven,
and Kreiner, 2008). Our estimate of the macro participation and employment elasticity is 0.51.
Finally, we estimate how these behavioral responses vary over the business cycle, proxied by the
local unemployment rate, and we find that the responses are lower in magnitude when the unem-
ployment rate is relatively high. We also find more suggestive evidence that the ratio of the micro
to macro participation responses increases during times of high unemployment.
    As an illustration, we use our empirical estimates to implement our sufficient statistics formula
and calibrate the optimal income tax. We demonstrate three key results. First, relative to the opti-
mal tax schedule in Saez (2002), we find that since the macro participation response is less than the
micro response, this moves the optimal schedule more towards an NIT-like tax schedule with a
relatively larger lump sum payment to the non-employed combined with higher employment tax
rates. Second, we show that calibrating our tax formula with smaller (employment and participa-
tion) macro responses has a much larger effect on the shape of the optimal tax profile (leading to
a larger lump sum transfer and employment taxes), relative to calibrating the Saez (2002) formula
with a smaller employment elasticity. This shows that it is misleading to simply calibrate existing
tax formulas with macro employment elasticities, as standard intuition might suggest. Third, we

   4 Our sample omits married women and men. Rothstein (2010) points out that the wages of similarly skilled single

and married women substantially diverged in the 1990s. For this reason, it seems reasonable to assume they operate in
distinct labor markets. For men on the other hand, to the extent that they are substitutable for single women, we will be
understating the size of each labor market and overstating the changes in market-level average tax rates. These effects
will tend to work in opposite directions.


                                                           3
use our empirical estimates of behavioral responses over the business cycle to show that during
recessions, the optimal income tax at the bottom shifts more towards an NIT-like structure.5
    The primary advantage of our sufficient statistics approach is its generality with respect to the
underlying mechanisms. In particular, competitive models with fixed and flexible wages (Dia-
mond (1980), Saez (2002, 2004), Choné and Laroque (2005), Choné and Laroque (2011), Rothstein
(2010) and Lee and Saez (2012)) and models with matching frictions (Hungerbühler, Lehmann,
Parmentier, and Van der Linden (2006) and Landais, Michaillat, and Saez (2015)) are special cases
of our sufficient statistics formula. Also, our formulas are exact and do not rely on any approx-
imations. The disadvantage of our approach however is that analytical results about the precise
shape of the optimal tax schedule are harder to obtain.
    Our paper builds on and contributes to the literature on labor supply responses to taxation in
three ways. First, many studies in the tax literature do not clarify whether labor supply responses
correspond to micro or macro elasticities. An important exception is (Rothstein, 2010) who con-
siders labor demand responses to the EITC in the U.S. Like Rothstein (2010), our empirical work
emphasizes this important distinction. Additionally, we estimate micro and macro effects, which
is necessary to implement our optimal tax formula, and we use a single methodology and the same
sample.6 This avoids the concern that differences in micro and macro estimates are confounded by
differences in methodologies and/or different samples. Second, our results clarify the importance
of distinguishing between the effects of taxes on labor force participation and employment. Some
studies use the labor force participation rate as the dependent variable (Gelber and Mitchell, 2012)
while others use the employment rate (Meyer and Rosenbaum, 2001). Our optimal tax formula
indicates that it is important to estimate both participation and employment elasticities. Third, this
study adds to the large literature evaluating the impact of the EITC expansions in the 1980s and
1990s by expanding the analysis horizon until the most recent years.7
    A number of recent papers have highlighted the distinction between micro and macro behav-

    5 Interestingly, while governments have in general shifted away from NIT programs, in practice, transfers to the

bottom get increased during recessions. For example, the U.S. significantly increased transfers to the non-employed
through the Supplemental Nutrition Assistance Program (SNAP) during the Great Recession as part of the American
Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009. This suggests that the shape of optimal income transfers at the bottom might
depend on the strength of the labor market. Unfortunately, there is very little research on this question to help guide
policymakers since current models by design do not allow for this possibility.
    6 A recent study by Jäntti, Pirttilä, and Selin (2015) estimates micro and macro labor supply elasticities using cross-

country data from the Luxembourg Income Study (LIS) along with a single estimator. We estimate the micro elasticity
using micro data and control for market fixed effects. For the macro elasticity, we pool the data to the market level and
control separately for year and state fixed effects. One can show that this approach is essentially equivalent to one that
estimates both the micro and macro equation in a single regression.
    7 One of the earliest papers in this tradition, Eissa and Liebman (1996) evaluate the expansion of the EITC in the

Tax Reform Act of 1986 and find positive and significant participation effects, but no effect on hours of work. Meyer
and Rosenbaum (2001) exploit variation in the EITC up until 1996, controlling for changes to welfare (AFDC and food
stamps), Medicaid, child care subsidies, and job training during this time period. Gelber and Mitchell (2012) exploit the
same reform along with a large reform to the EITC in 1993 to examine the impact of taxes on the labor force participation
of single women and their allocation of time to market work versus home production.


                                                             4
ioral responses. The first paper to show that both are important for optimal policy is Landais,
Michaillat, and Saez (2015), who consider a model of unemployment insurance (UI) with labor
market spillovers and demonstrate that the optimal benefit level is a function of the gap between
micro and macro unemployment duration elasticities. While our model is related in that it deals
with spillover effects, the difference is that we consider multiple income groups of the labor mar-
ket and focus on the optimal non-linear income tax; particularly, optimal transfers at the bottom
of the income distribution. Landais, Michaillat, and Saez (2015) on the other hand have a single
labor market and focus on the optimal UI benefit level and how this should vary over the busi-
ness cycle. Nevertheless, the distinction that the micro elasticity refers to responses that hold the
job-finding rate (conditional on search intensity) and wages constant, while the macro elasticity
allows the job-finding rate to adjust to UI benefits, is very similar to the distinction we introduce in
our model. Partly inspired by Landais, Michaillat, and Saez (2015), some recent papers have tried
to empirically estimate macro and micro effects of UI benefits (Lalive, Landais, and Zweimüller,
2013, e.g.) and job search assistance programs (Crépon, Duflo, Gurgand, Rathelot, and Zamora,
2013, e.g.) on unemployment durations.8
    The distinction between micro and macro responses also plays an important role in the recent
literature estimating extensive and intensive labor supply responses (See Chetty, Guren, Manoli,
and Weber (2011) and Chetty, Guren, Manoli, and Weber (2012) for an overview). The terms
micro and macro responses in these papers correspond to conceptually the same responses that
are identified using different sources of variation in taxes. For macro, the source of variation is
cross-country or business cycle whereas for micro, the source of variation is quasi-experimental.
Differences between the two have been attributed to adjustment costs (Chetty, Friedman, Olsen,
and Pistaferri, 2011) and optimization frictions (Chetty, 2012), an issue we abstract from in this pa-
per. Instead, we consider responses that do (macro) or do not (micro) allow for certain equilibrium
adjustment mechanisms.
    This paper also relates to recent research on whether the generosity of UI benefits should de-
pend on the state of the labor market. Unemployment benefits create a similar problem as tradi-
tional welfare benefits in that they provide transfers that are conditional on not working (or at least
are at their maximum) and thus provide incentives not to work, while at the same time providing
important insurance against hardship. Just as in the optimal taxation literature, the efficiency loss

   8 Crépon, Duflo, Gurgand, Rathelot, and Zamora (2013) evaluate an experiment of job placement assistance and

find evidence of negative spillover effects (i.e., crowd-out onto untreated individuals). They find evidence that these
spillover effects are larger when the labor market is slack and interpret this evidence as consistent with a model of job
rationing (Landais, Michaillat, and Saez, 2015). Lalive, Landais, and Zweimüller (2013) show that the unemployment
spells of individuals ineligible for UI were affected by a large expansion of Austria’s UI benefits. Hagedorn, Karahan,
Manovskii, and Mitman (2013) estimate large macro effects of unemployment insurance policies during the Great Re-
cession. This is inconsistent with evidence that the micro effects of UI are small (Rothstein, 2011, Farber and Valletta,
2013). The authors stress the role of labor demand, although Marinescu (2014) does not find robust evidence of UI on
vacancy creation.


                                                           5
from providing UI is inversely related to the labor supply elasticities. Baily (1978), Chetty (2006),
Schmieder, Von Wachter, and Bender (2012), Kroft and Notowidigdo (2014) and Landais, Michail-
lat, and Saez (2015), derive welfare formulas where the marginal effect of increasing the generosity
of unemployment benefits depends on the elasticity of unemployment durations with respect to
the benefit generosity. These papers provide empirical evidence that the labor supply elasticities
determining the optimal benefit durations (Schmieder, Von Wachter, and Bender, 2012) and levels
(Kroft and Notowidigdo 2014 and Landais, Michaillat, and Saez 2015) decline during periods of
high unemployment and that the generosity of the UI system should therefore increase during
these times. There are also papers that directly examine how labor supply responses to taxation
vary with local labor market conditions. Closer to our setting, Herbst (2008) shows that the labor
supply responses to a broad set of social policy reforms in the U.S. during the 1990s, such as EITC
expansions, time limits, work requirements and Medicaid, are cyclical. Mogstad and Pronzato
(2012) shows that labor supply responses to a “welfare to work” reform in Norway are attenuated
when the local unemployment rate is relatively high.
     Finally, our work broadly relates to research which permit labor demand variables to deter-
mine employment outcomes and welfare participation for males and females. Blundell, Ham, and
Meghir (1987) shows that demand characteristics, such as unemployment rates, are important
determinants of work for married females. Using the PSID, Ham and Reilly (2002) also find evi-
dence that unemployment rates are significant predictors of work for males. While these papers
focus on how demand-side factors affect the level of employment, our research explores whether
such factors influence the change in employment in response to taxes and transfers. The role of
demand side factors in affecting welfare use has been noted by others (see Hoynes 2000), yet their
normative implications have not been fully investigated so far.
     The rest of the paper proceeds as follows. Section II develops our theoretical model. Section III
contains details on Institutional background and describes our data and empirical results. Section
IV considers the policy implications of our theoretical and empirical findings. The last section
concludes.



II    The theoretical model

     In this section, we derive an optimal tax formula in a general model that is consistent with a
rich set of labor market responses to taxation. Following Chetty (2009), we use this benchmark
model to identify the sufficient statistics that are necessary to compute the optimal income tax.
We do so first in the no-cross effect case where employment and participation responses are only
on the extensive margin. This allows us to show the intuition of the main result before we go
to the general formula that holds with arbitrary responses to taxes across labor markets. Our

                                                   6
approach contrasts with papers that have incorporated unemployment into models of optimal
taxation in a more structural way such as competitive models without unemployment (Mirrlees,
1971, Diamond, 1980, Saez, 2002), models with wage rigidity and job rationing (Lee and Saez,
2012) and matching models and Nash bargaining (Pissarides, 1985).9 Below, we illustrate how
these various structural models map into our sufficient statistic formula.

II.1   Setup
Labor markets

    We generalize the model in the appendix of Saez (2002) by introducing unemployment and
wage responses to taxation. The size of the population is normalized to 1. There are I + 1 “occupa-
tions” or income levels, indexed by i ∈ {0, 1, ..., I }. Occupation 0 corresponds to non-employment.
All other occupations correspond to a specific labor market where the gross wage is wi , the net
wage (or consumption) is ci and the tax liability is Ti = wi − ci . The assumption of a finite number
of occupations is made for tractability. It is not restrictive as the case of a continuous wage distri-
bution can be approximated by increasing the number I of occupations to infinity. The timing of
our static model is:

   1. The government chooses the tax policy.

   2. Each individual m chooses the occupation i ∈ {0, ..., I } to participate in. Individual hetero-
       geneity only enters the model through the cost of search, as we indicate below.

   3. For each labor market i ∈ {1, ..., I }, only a fraction pi ∈ (0, 1] of participants are employed,
       receive gross wage wi , pay tax Ti and consume the after-tax wage ci = wi − Ti . The remaining
       fraction 1 − pi of participants are unemployed.

    Unlike Saez (2002), we make a distinction among the non-employed individuals between the un-
employed who search for a job in a specific labor market and fail to find one and the non-participants
who choose not to search for a job.10 For each labor market i ∈ {1, ..., I }, k i denotes the number
of participants, pi ∈ (0, 1] denotes the fraction of them who find a job and are working, hereafter
the conditional employment probability, and hi = k i pi denotes the number of employed workers.
The number of unemployed individuals in labor market i is k i − hi = k i (1 − pi ) and the unem-
ployment rate is 1 − pi . The number of non-participants is k0 . The number of non-employed is
h0 = k0 + ∑iI=1 k i (1 − pi ).
   9 See Boadway and Tremblay (2013) for an excellent review of optimal income taxation in models with unemploy-

ment.
  10 We simply assume job search intensity is either zero for non-participants or one for participants. Introducing a

continuous job search intensity decisions as Landais, Michaillat, and Saez (2015) would add notational complexity
while not substantially modifying the results.


                                                         7
    All the non-employed, whether non-participants or unemployed, receive the same welfare
benefit denoted b.11 Therefore, the policy choice of the government is represented by the vector
t = ( T1 , ..., TI , b)0 . The government faces the following budget constraint:

                              I                                      I
                            ∑ Ti hi = b h0 + E            ⇔         ∑ (Ti + b) hi = b + E                              (1)
                            i =1                                   i =1

where E ≥ 0 is an exogenous amount of public expenditures. One more employed worker in
occupation i increases the government’s revenues by the amount Ti of tax liability she pays, plus
the amount of welfare benefit b she no longer receives, the sum of two defining the employment
tax.12 The budget constraint states that the sum of employment tax liabilities Ti + b collected on
all employed workers in all occupations finances the public good plus a lump-sum rebate b over
all individuals.
    Rather than specify the micro-foundations of the labor market, we use reduced-forms to de-
scribe the general equilibrium or macro responses of wages and conditional employment probabil-
ities to tax policy t.13 In labor market i, the gross wage is given by wi = Wi (t), the net wage is given
                 def
by ci = Ci (t) ≡ Wi (t) − Ti and the conditional employment probability is given by pi = Pi (t).
At this general stage, we are agnostic about the micro-foundations that lie behind these macro
response functions and we only assume that these functions are differentiable, that P (·) takes
values in (0, 1] and that 0 < b < W1 (t) < ... < W I (t) for all tax policies t. The latter assumption
ensures that occupations indexed with a higher i correspond to labor markets with higher skills.
The functions Wi (·), Ci (·) and Pi (·) encapsulate all the effects of taxes, including those occurring
through labor demand and wage setting responses.
    Profits do not explicitly appear in the model. There are several justifications for this assump-
tion. First, one can assume profits away. Competitive models with constant returns to scale or
models with matching frictions on the labor market and free entry as Mortensen and Pissarides
(1999) are models without profits. Alternatively, we can assume that occupation I actually corre-
sponds to firm-owners for which w I includes profits. The incidence of tax reforms on profits are
then included as changes in w I .14
  11 This  is because the informational structure of our static model prevents benefits from being history-dependent.
Moreover, as the government only observes income, it cannot distinguish non-participants from unemployed individ-
uals. This latter assumption seems more realistic than the polar opposite one where the government can perfectly
monitor job search. In this case, and if there is only one occupation, the government can provide full insurance to the
unemployed.
   12 The literature uses instead the terminology participation tax, which we find confusing whenever unemployment

is introduced. The employment tax Ti + b captures the change in tax revenue for each additional employed worker. An
additional participant being only employed with probability pi , the change in tax revenue for each additional participant
is only ( Ti + b) pi , which should correspond to the participation tax.
   13 We implicitly assume that an equilibrium exists and is unique. This equilibrium varies smoothly with the policy t

in a way described by the W (·), the C (·) and the P (·) functions.
   14 In such a case, we need to assume full employment in occupation I. We also need to assume that for some indi-

viduals like capital owners or CEOs, only occupation I is available, while for others, only occupations {0, ..., I − 1} are


                                                            8
Labor supply decisions

    The structure of labor supply is as follows. We let u(·) be the cardinal representation of
the utility individuals derive from consumption. This function is assumed to be increasing and
weakly concave. Individual m faces an additional utility cost di for working in occupation i
and a utility cost χi (m) for searching a job in labor market i.15 Individual m thus enjoys a util-
ity level equal to u(ci ) − di − χi (m) if she finds a job in labor market i, equal to u(b) − χi (m)
if she is unemployed in labor market i, and u(b) if she chooses not to search for a job. Let
       def
Ui (t) ≡ Pi (t) (u (Ci (t)) − di ) + (1 − Pi (t)) u(b) denote the gross expected utility of searching
for a job in occupation i, absent any participation cost, as a function of the tax policy t, and let Ui
denote its realization at a particular point of the tax system.16 Let U0 = u(b) be the utility expected
out of the labor force.
    Individual m expects utility Ui − χi (m) by searching for a job in labor market i. She chooses to
search in labor market i if and only if Ui − χi (m) > Uj − χ j (m) for all j ∈ {0, ..., I } \ {i }. The set
                                                                                                              def
of individuals choosing to participate in labor market i is therefore Mi (U1 , ..., U I , u(b)) ≡ {m|i =
arg max j∈{0,...,I } Uj − χ j (m)}. Assuming that participation costs (χ1 , ..., χ I ) are distributed in the
population in a sufficiently smooth way and denoting µ(.) the distribution of individuals, the
number k i of participants in labor market i is a continuously differentiable function of expected
                                                                                def
utility in each occupation through: k i = K̂i (U1 , ..., U I , u(b)) ≡ µ( Mi (U1 , ..., U I , u(b))). Participa-
tion decisions are determined through:

                                                   def
                                     k i ≡ Ki (t) ≡ K̂ (U1 (t), ..., U I (t), u(b))                                    (2)

    Finally, employment is given by:

                                                            def
                                             h i = H i ( t ) ≡ K i ( t ) Pi ( t )                                      (3)


Micro vs. Macro Responses

    A crucial distinction is the difference between macro and micro participation responses to
taxes. We define the micro participation response to a tax change in the hypothetical case where
tax changes do not affect gross wages w1 , ..., w I or conditional employment probabilities p1 , ..., p I .

available. As will be clear, our model allows for such restrictions on labor supply decisions.
   Moreover, the budget constraint (1) is equivalent to a resources constraint. To see this, one simply needs to add
∑iI=1 ci hi on both sides of (1) to obtain ∑iI=1 wi hi = b h0 + ∑iI=1 ci hi + E. The left-hand side, by adding labor income
and profits, corresponds to total income in the economy, while the right-hand side corresponds to total expenditures in
the economy. We rule out cases where profits are positive and distributed to all individuals.
   15 We denote χ ( m ) = 0. We furthermore assume that χ ( m ) = + ∞ if individual m does not have the required skill
                   0                                           i
to work in occupation i.
   16 U is identical across all participants because the conditional employment probability p and the wage w are iden-
       i                                                                                           i              i
tical across participants in labor market i and in particular do not vary with (χ1 (m), ..., χ I (m)).


                                                              9
This is, for instance, the case for tax reforms frequently considered in the micro-econometric lit-
erature that affect only a small subset of the population, so that the general equilibrium effects of
the reform on wages and conditional employment probabilities can be safely ignored. The micro
response of expected utility is thus − pi u0 (ci ). Moreover, from Equation (2), as taxes affect partic-
ipation decisions only through expected utility levels in each occupation, the micro participation
response is given by:
                                             Micro
                                      ∂ Ki           def                   ∂K̂i
                                                     ≡ − p j u0 (c j )                                                (4)
                                      ∂Tj                                  ∂Uj


   Conversely macro responses encapsulates wage and conditional employment probability re-
sponses. The macro response of expected utility is therefore:


                                         ∂Pi u(ci ) − di − u(b)
                                                                
                           ∂Ui     ∂Ci
                               =       +                           pi u 0 ( ci )                                      (5)
                           ∂Tj     ∂Tj   ∂Tj       pi u 0 ( ci )


The term within brackets on the right-hand side of (5) in particular describes how the wage and
conditional employment probability responses induce a gap between macro and micro expected
utility responses. Using (2) and (5), the macro participation response is given by:

                     I             I 
              ∂ Ki      ∂U` ∂K̂i             ∂P` u(c` ) − d` − u(b)               ∂K̂i
                                                                    
                                       ∂C`
                   =∑            =∑        +                0 (c )
                                                                      p` u0 (c` )                                     (6)
              ∂Tj   `=1
                        ∂Tj ∂U `  `=1
                                       ∂Tj    ∂Tj     p ` u     `                 ∂U `



   The micro and macro participation responses differ for two main reasons. First, utility levels
in the occupation that experiences the tax change can be affected by change in the wage and in
the conditional employment probability in that occupation, as we will discuss below. For micro
                                                           ∂C j
responses, gross wages are held constant, thus             ∂Tj     = −1 and taxes are passed through one for
                                                                                            ∂P j
one to the worker, while employment probabilities are also fixed and thus                   ∂Tj    = 0. For macro re-
                                                                                                            ∂C j
sponses on the other hand, tax adjustments may affect gross wages in a variety of ways                      ∂Tj    6 = −1
                                                                  ∂P j
while employment probabilities may also change                    ∂Tj    6= 0, e.g. due to changes in labor supply
in that occupation or due to changes in vacancy creation by employers, as we will discuss below.
Second, utility levels can also be affected by change in the tax liability in other occupations, ex-
plaining the summation over all occupations in (6). This could be for example because increasing
taxes in occupation j may lead firms to adjust their composition of labor inputs and may change
labor demand for other occupations. Moreover, it may be because the workers who are less likely
to search for jobs in occupation j may look for jobs in other occupations which will thus change
equilibrium outcomes in those occupations.

                                                       10
Social objective

     We assume that the government maximizes a weighted utilitarian welfare objective that de-
pends only on individuals’ expected utilities:
                                                          Z                                         
                        Ω(U1 , ..., U I , u(b)) =               γ(m) max Ui − χi (m)                      dµ(m)     (7)
                                                                        i


where the weights γ(m) may vary across individuals. In the particular case where the utility
function u(·) is linear, it is the variation of weights with the characteristics of individuals through
the heterogeneity in γ(·) that generates the social desire for redistribution, while if individual
utility is concave the desire for redistribution comes (also) from individual risk aversion.17


The optimal policy

     The government chooses the tax policy t = ( T1 , ..., TI , b)0 to maximize (7) subject to the budget
constraint (1). Let λ > 0 denote the Lagrange multiplier associated with the latter constraint.
Following Saez (2001, 2002), we define the marginal social welfare weight of workers in occupation
i ∈ {1, ..., I } as:
                                                   pi u 0 ( ci )
                                                                            R
                                   1 ∂Ω u0 (ci )
                                 def                                            m ∈ Mi
                                                                                         γ(m) dµ(m)
                              gi ≡               =                                                                  (8)
                                   k i ∂Ui λ                                      λ hi
The social weight gi represents the social value in monetary terms of transferring an additional
dollar to an individual working in occupation i. It captures the micro effect on the social objective
of a unit decrease in tax liability, expressed in monetary terms. Absent wages and conditional em-
ployment probabilities responses, the government is indifferent between giving one more dollar
to an individual employed in labor market i and gi more dollars of public funds. Using Equations
(5) and (8), we get the following lemma (See Appendix A.1).

Lemma 1. The first-order condition with respect to the tax liability Tj in labor market j is:

                                       I                    I 
                                         ∂ Hi                         ∂Pi u(ci ) − di − u(b)
                                                                                              
                                                                ∂Ci
              0=      hj           +∑         ( Ti + b) + ∑         +                           gi h i              (9)
                     |{z}           i =1
                                         ∂Tj              i =1
                                                                ∂Tj   ∂Tj       pi u 0 ( ci )
                 Mechanical effect  |        {z       } |                   {z                      }
                                           Behavioral effects                            Social Welfare effects


     A unit increase in tax liability triggers the following effects:


   1. Mechanical effect: Absent any behavioral response, a unit increase in Tj increases the gov-
          ernment’s resources by the number h j of employed individuals in occupation j.
  17 It
     is straightforward - and does not change our results below - to generalize this social welfare function to the case
where the social planners maximizes an arbitrary concave function of individual expected utilities integrated over the
population.


                                                                   11
  2. Behavioral effects: A unit increase in Tj induces a change ∂Hi /∂Tj in the level of employ-
        ment in occupation i. For each additional worker in occupation i, the government increases
        its resources by the employment tax Ti + b that is equal to the additional tax received Ti plus
        the benefit b that is no longer paid.

  3. Social welfare effects: A unit increase in Tj affects the expected utility in occupation i by
                                                    ∂Ω
        ∂Ui /∂Tj . Multiplying by the rate          ∂Ui /λ   at which each unit change in expected utility affects
        the social objective in monetary terms and using Equations (5) and (8), we get that the social
                                                          h                           i
                                                                  ∂Pi u(ci )−di −u(b)
        welfare effect of tax Tj in occupation i is: gi hi ∂C i
                                                            ∂Tj + ∂Tj        0
                                                                         p u (c )
                                                                                        . Note that because
                                                                                         i      i

        the social welfare function depends on expected utility Ui , the labor supply responses only
        modifies the decisions of individuals that are initially indifferent between two occupations,
        and thus only have second-order effects on the social welfare objective, by the envelope
        theorem (Saez, 2001, 2002). Conversely, wage and unemployment responses are general
        equilibrium (macro) responses induced by the market instead of being directly triggered by
        individual choices. This is the reason why these “market spillovers” show up in the social
        welfare effect through the term within brackets, unlike the participation responses. Because
        the social objective as well as participation decision depend on the tax policy only through
                                                                                 ∂Ci                u(ci )−di −u(b)
        expected utility levels in each occupation, the same terms               ∂Tj   + ∂P
                                                                                         ∂Tj
                                                                                            i
                                                                                                       pi u 0 ( ci )
                                                                                                                       describe how
        macro social welfare effects differ from micro ones and how macro participation responses
        differ from micro ones.


Optimal benefit level

      Finally, for the sake of completeness, the first-order condition with respect to the welfare ben-
efit b is (see Appendix A.1):

                               I                             I
                                           ∂ Hi                              1 ∂Pi u(ci ) − di − u(b)
                                                                                                     
                                                                       ∂Ci
               0 = −h0 + ∑ ( Ti + b)            + g0 h 0 + ∑ g i h i       +                                                    (10)
                              i =1
                                            ∂b             i =1
                                                                       ∂b    pi ∂b        u 0 ( ci )

where the social marginal welfare weight on the non-employed is:
                                            "Z                                                         #
                                  u0 (b)
                                   def                   γ (m)           I
                                                                              gi
                             g0 ≡                              dµ(m) + ∑ 0          k (1 − p i )                                (11)
                                   h0            m∈ M0     λ           i =1
                                                                            u ( ci ) i

In particular, if we furthermore assume there is no income effects so that ∑iI=1                         ∂Wi
                                                                                                         ∂Ti   =   ∂Wi    I
                                                                                                                    ∂b , ∑i =1 ∂Ti
                                                                                                                               ∂Pi
                                                                                                                                     =
                  ∂H         ∂ Hi
            ∑iI=1 ∂Tii
∂Pi
 ∂b   and                =    ∂b , we get that the weighted sum of social welfare weights is 1 (See Appendix
A.1):
                                                                I
                                                    g0 h 0 + ∑ g i h i = 1
                                                              i =1


                                                               12
II.2     The sufficient statistics optimal tax formula

      To numerically implement the optimal tax formula in equation (9), one must know the gap
in utilities between employment and non-employment, the responses of net wages to taxation
∂Ci                                                                                                             ∂Pi
∂Tj   and the responses of the conditional employment probabilities to taxation                                 ∂Tj    that appear in
the social welfare effects. We now show that there is a simpler representation for the optimal tax
                                                                                                             Micro
                                                  ∂ Ki                                                ∂ Ki
formula (9) in terms of the macro                 ∂Tj    and micro participation responses            ∂Tj            . The advantage
of this representation is that we may apply conventional econometric techniques to estimate these
terms.


The no-cross-effect case

      To simplify the exposition and develop intuition, we begin with the “no-cross-effect” case
where we assume for simplicity that ∂Wi /∂Tj = ∂Ci /∂Tj = ∂Pi /∂Tj = ∂K̂i /∂Uj = 0 for i 6= j and
i 6= 0. The last equality implies that labor supply responses are concentrated along the extensive
margin. Moreover, we get from (5) that ∂Ui /∂Tj = 0, which together with (2) and (3) imply that:
∂Ki /∂Tj = ∂Hi /∂Tj = 0 for i 6= j, i.e. that the wage, the conditional employment probability,
the employment level and the participation level in one occupation only depend on the welfare
benefit b and on the tax liability in the same occupation, and not on tax liabilities in the other
occupations. The no-cross-effect environment includes the model of Landais, Michaillat, and Saez
(2015) where the wage depends on the level of tax liability but not on the marginal tax rate.
      In the no-cross effect case, Equations (4) and (6) imply that we may express the macro partici-
pation response in terms of the micro participation response in the following way:

                                                                                               Micro
                                      ∂K j             ∂P j u(c j ) − d j − u(b) ∂K j
                                                                                
                                                ∂C j
                                           =−        +
                                      ∂Tj       ∂Tj    ∂Tj         p j u0 (c j )   ∂Tj
The formula (9) for the optimal tax liability in occupation j then simplifies to:

                                                                             ∂K j
                                                          ∂H j               ∂Tj
                                            0 = hj +           ( Tj + b) −             gh
                                                                                  Micro j j
                                                                                                                                       (12)
                                                          ∂Tj              ∂K j
                                                                           ∂Tj

To better relate this expression to the optimal tax literature, we define the micro participation elas-
                 def       c j −b ∂K j Micro
ticity as π m
            j ≡ −             kj  ∂Tj        .   This elasticity measures the percentage of employed workers in
i who leave the labor force when the tax liability is increased by 1 percent, holding wages and
the conditional employment probabilities fixed. Next, we define the macro employment elastic-
           def         c j −b ∂H j                                                                                      c j −b ∂P j
ity as η j ≡ −            h j ∂Tj .   From (3), the macro employment response η j verifies η j =                           p j ∂Tj    + πj.
                                                                                        c j −b ∂P j
In particular, it encapsulates conditional employment responses                            p j ∂Tj    in addition to the macro

                                                                   13
participation responses π j . Moreover, wage and unemployment responses modify the macro par-
ticipation responses π j from the micro ones π m
                                               j , as discussed above.

Proposition 1. The optimal tax formula in the no-cross-effects case is:
                                                                    πj
                                                               1−      gj
                                             Tj + b                 πm
                                                                     j
                                                    =                                                       (13)
                                             cj − b                 ηj

      The no-cross effect environment is the simplest one to understand how the introduction of
unemployment and wage responses modifies the optimal tax formula compared to the pure ex-
tensive case without unemployment case considered by Diamond (1980), Saez (2002) and Choné
                                           Tj +b        1− g j
and Laroque (2005, 2011) where it is:      c j −b   =    πm    .
                                                          j
      There are two key differences between Equation (13) and Equation (4) in Saez (2002). First,
the denominator in (13) corresponds to the macro employment elasticity, whereas Saez (2002)
does not distinguish between a micro employment elasticity and macro employment elasticity
that includes all the general equilibrium effects of taxation. Second, equation (13) modifies the
social marginal welfare weight by the ratio of the macro to micro participation elasticity. The
response of expected utility may be different at the macro and micro levels. This is because the
macro responses encapsulate not only the direct effect of a tax change on consumption, but also the
                                                    ∂Wi
indirect effects of a tax change on the wage        ∂Ti   6= 0 and on the conditional employment probability
∂Pi
∂Ti   6= 0. The ratio between the micro and macro expected utility responses corresponds exactly
to the ratio of the macro to the micro participation elasticities. So the welfare effect may be larger
or lower than the social welfare weight gi . To understand why, consider a decrease in tax liability
Tj . This triggers a positive direct impact on social welfare − g j h j , which is the only one at the
micro level. Moreover, this decrease in tax liability typically induces a decreases in the gross wage
        ∂W j
when    ∂Tj    > 0, so the responses of wage attenuates the direct impact on social welfare. Finally, the
                                                                                   ∂P j
decrease in tax liability also typically triggers a rise in job creation, i.e.     ∂Tj    < 0, so the response
of the conditional employment probability reinforces the direct impact on social welfare. The
macro response of participation to taxation is therefore larger (smaller) than the micro one if the
impact of the conditional employment responses dominates (is dominated by) the impact of the
wage responses. In particular, if the effect of the tax on the conditional employment probability
happens only though a labor demand response, the macro participation response is higher than
micro one if the labor demand elasticity is high enough. We therefore get:
                                                                                                     π1m
Corollary 1. In the no-cross-effect case, the optimal employment tax is negative whenever g1 >       π1 .

      According to (13), a negative employment tax (EITC) becomes optimal whenever the social
welfare weight is higher than the ratio of micro over macro participation elasticity, instead of one
without unemployment and wage responses, a condition that can be easily tested.

                                                            14
The case with cross effects

      We now turn back to the general formula with cross effects, where matrix notation turns out
to be convenient. For f = K, K̂, H, U , P, W and x = T, U, we denote                                            df
                                                                                                                dx   the square matrix
                                                                      ∂ fi
of rank I whose term in row j and column i is                         ∂x j   for i, j ∈ {1, ..., I }.18 Symmetrically, the matrix
                                                        Micro
of micro responses are denoted                     df
                                                   dx           . Moreover, h = (h1 , ..., h I )0 denotes the vector of em-
ployment levels, g h = ( g1 h1 , ..., g I h I )0 denotes the vector of welfare weights times employment
levels and · denotes the matrix product. Appendix A.2 then shows that market spillover terms
∂Ci       ∂Pi u(ci )−di −u(b)
∂Tj   +   ∂Tj    pi u 0 ( ci )
                                 that appear in the social welfare effects in the optimal tax formula (9) still
correspond to the ratio of macro over micro participation responses. The only difference is that
in the presence of cross effects, this ratio should be understood in matrix terms. We thus get the
following generalization of the optimal tax (12) in the presence of cross effects:
                                 Micro
                            dK
Proposition 2. If           dT           is invertible, the optimal tax system for occupations i = {1, ..., I } solves the
following system of equations in matrix form:
                                                                                               ! −1
                                                                                       Micro
                                          dH             dK                      dK
                                   0 = h+    · (T + b) −    ·                                         · (g h)                     (14)
                                          dT             dT                      dT

      Equation (14) is expressed in terms of sufficient statistics. It implies that the ratio (in matrix
terms) of macro to micro participation responses are the sufficient statistics to estimate, instead of
                                                                               ∂Ci
the market spillover terms that depend on net wage                             ∂Tj   and conditional employment probability
                ∂Pi
responses       ∂Tj .   Intuitively, because the social welfare function is assumed to depend only on ex-
pected utilities, the market spillovers that appear in the social welfare effects in (9) coincide with
                ∂Ci       ∂Pi u(ci )−di −u(b)
the terms       ∂Tj   +   ∂Tj     pi u 0 ( ci )
                                                  that describe how the macro responses of expected utility differ
from the micro ones (see (5)). Moreover, because participation decisions depend only on expected
utility as well, these market spillovers are entirely captured by the matrix ratio of macro over mi-
cro participation responses. Importantly, the gap between micro and macro responses does not
matter for the behavioral effects, but only for the social welfare effects. This is because the matrix
dH
dT    of macro employment responses already encapsulates the unemployment and wage responses
in addition to the micro participation responses.


II.3      The links between the optimal tax formula and micro-foundations of the labor
          market

      The key result of our paper is that the optimal tax schedule can be implemented using the
macro employment responses as well as the ratio of the macro over micro participation responses.
  18 In particular, these matrices do not include partial derivatives with respect to b, nor do they include partial deriva-
tives for occupation 0.


                                                                      15
While the advantage of our approach is that it does not rely on any assumptions about the struc-
ture of the labor market, the downside is that it does not provide any guidance for how to interpret
differences between macro and micro participation responses. In this section, we discuss how dif-
ferent micro-foundations yield different predictions for the relative magnitude of micro and macro
participation (and to a lesser degree employment) responses. This serves to build intuition for the
macro-micro gap and thereby what economic forces push the optimal tax at the bottom towards
an EITC or NIT, while at the same time highlighting how our framework encompasses standard
models of the labor market. Since providing an exhaustive exposition of possible models would go
beyond the scope of the paper, we instead focus on two main paradigms: search-matching models
and job-rationing models. These two classes of models provide a determination for the level of
employment and for the unemployment rate as a function of the wage and possibly labor supply.
It is worth noting that the different micro-foundations for the gross wage, such as a minimum
wage, an efficiency wage or a bargained wage can be included in either of these two frameworks.
We start with the search-matching paradigm before presenting the job-rationing paradigm. We
then briefly discuss the competitive model and finally models with a wage moderating effect of
tax progressivity.

Search and matching models with constant returns to scale (CRS)

   In its simplest version, the search-matching framework (Diamond, 1982, Pissarides, 1985, Mortensen
and Pissarides, 1999, Pissarides, 2000) assumes a linear (constant returns to scale) production func-
tion and a matching function which gives the number of jobs created as a function of the number
of vacancies and the number of job seekers. Firms employ more workers the lower the gross wage
(which makes it more rewarding for firms to hire a worker) and the more numerous job-seekers
there are (which decrease the search congestions from firms’ viewpoint thereby easing their re-
cruitment). In the model, the conditional employment probability pi is a decreasing function Li (·)
of the gross wage and is independent of the number of job-seekers.19 Therefore, a policy reform
that increases labor supply, without affecting the gross wage, leads to a rise in employment in the
same proportion as the rise in labor supply, but does not affect the employment probability.
   If we consider a version of the matching model where wages are fixed, than the conditional
employment probabilities are fixed, so the macro participation responses are equal to the micro
ones. If we instead consider a version of the matching model where wage setting is based on wage
bargaining, taxes may affect the outside option for workers as well as the match surplus and thus
equilibrium wages and in turn conditional employment probabilities. To build intuition, consider
the case with risk neutral workers (hence u(c) ≡ c) and proportional bargaining. In such a setting,
workers receive an exogenous share β i ∈ (0, 1) of the total match surplus yi − Ti − di − b, so the
 19 We   derive in AppendixA.3 this standard result, as well as the proof of Proposition 3 below.


                                                           16
wage is given by:20
                                      wi = Wi ( Ti , b) ≡ β i yi + (1 − β i )( Ti + di + b)                                     (15)

    Combining the labor demand relation pi = Li (wi ) with the wage equation (15) and the
assumption that labor supply responses are concentrated along the extensive margin provides
a complete search-matching micro-foundation for the no-cross effect economy. The following
proposition shows that the macro-micro participation gap is directly linked to the bargaining
weights and the elasticity of the matching function with respect to the number of job-seekers
µi ∈ (0, 1):

Proposition 3. In the search-matching economy with proportional bargaining (15), the micro and macro
participation responses are equal either when the workers have full bargaining power so there is no wage
responses, or when the Hosios (1990) condition β i = µi for a decentralized economy without tax and
transfer to be socially efficient is verified. If β i < µi the macro response is lower then micro one. If
µi < β i < 1 the macro response is larger then micro one.

    An increase in tax liability has three effects on expected utility, thereby on participation deci-
sions. First, absent wage and conditional employment response, a rise in Ti has a direct negative
impact at the micro level (holding wi and pi constant) as it reduces the net wage and thus in-
centives to work and to participate. Second, at the macro level, gross wages increases (through
bargaining) attenuating the direct labor supply effect. Finally, the gross wage increase triggers a
reduction in labor demand that amplifies the direct effect at the macro level. If the workers get
all of the surplus (i.e. if β i = 1), wages do not respond to taxation ( ∂W
                                                                         ∂Ti = 0), the conditional
                                                                            i


employment probabilities are not affected so the micro and macro responses to participation are
identical. On the other hand, if β i < 1, the conditional employment probability effect dominates
(is dominated by) the wage effect whenever the labor demand elasticity is (not) sufficiently elas-
tic, which happens when the matching elasticity µi is higher (lower) than the bargaining share β i .
Propositions 1 and 3 imply that the optimal employment tax rate on the working poor is more
likely to be negative in the no-cross effect DMP case than in the pure extensive case if the work-
ers’ bargaining power is inefficiently high, i.e, is higher than the bargaining power prescribed by
the Hosios (1990) condition.21 Therefore, in the DMP model the macro micro participation gap
can be higher or lower than one, attenuating or reinforcing the arguments in favor of a negative
participation tax at the bottom.22
 20 A similar expression for wage bargaining appears in Jacquet, Lehmann, and Van der Linden (2014) and in Landais,

Michaillat, and Saez (2015).
                                                                            βj
                                                          Tj +b        1− µ g j
  21 As π j   =
                  βj
                       from (24), Equation (13) becomes            =         j
                                                                                  which corresponds to (19b) in Jacquet, Lehmann, and
        πm
         j        µj                                      c j −b          ηj
Van der Linden (2014).
  22 By extending this model with intensive labor supply decision, the present model can include the central mechanism

of Golosov, Maziero, and Menzio (2013) where firms have different productivity and individuals direct their search.


                                                                       17
Job-rationing models

    An older tradition in economics has proposed job rationing to explain unemployment. In
contrast to the matching framework, the job-rationing framework assumes search frictions away
and considers that each type of labor exhibits decreasing marginal productivity. In each labor
market, employment is determined by the equality between the marginal product and the wage.
Unemployment occurs whenever the wage is set above its market-clearing level. This theory of
unemployment that Keynes (1936) attributed to Pigou was formalized in the disequilibrium the-
ory (Barro and Grossman, 1971) and further developed in models that allowed for wages being set
endogenously above the market clearing level (McDonald and Solow, 1981, Shapiro and Stiglitz,
1984, Akerlof and Yellen, 1990).23
    To develop some intuition about the macro-micro participation gap in job-rationing models,
we now consider a model with a single type of labor that exhibits a decreasing marginal pro-
ductivity and a fixed gross wage w. This can occur for instance as a result of a minimum wage
regulation. The fixed wage determines the level of employment h, independently of the number
of participants.24 We assume that individuals who participate face a heterogeneous participation
cost χ that is sunk upon participation. The k participants face the same probability p = h/k to be
employed, whatever the participation cost χ they incur if they participate. In such a framework,
a tax cut in T triggers a rise in participation at the micro level. However, provided that this tax
cut occurs for a fixed wage, employment does not change, so the macro employment response is
nil. Therefore, as the number of participants increases, the probability to be employed is reduced,
which attenuates the participation responses at the macro level, as compared to the micro one.
As a result, the optimal employment tax on the working poor is more likely to be positive in this
job-rationing model without cross effect than in the pure extensive case.
    There are different job-rationing models in the literature. For instance, in Lee and Saez (2012),
there are different types of labor that are perfect substitutes, the minimum wage policy is explicitly
an additional policy instrument and efficient rationing is assumed, so that the probability to be
employed varies across participants as a function of their private cost upon working. Wages can
also be made endogenous through union bargaining (McDonald and Solow, 1981) or through
efficiency wages (Shapiro and Stiglitz, 1984, Akerlof and Yellen, 1990). Job rationing can also
be analyzed within a search-matching framework if decreasing returns to scale is assumed for
  23 The Keynesian and New Keynesian theories of unemployment in addition assume nominal rigidities to give a

transitional role to aggregate demand management policies. See also Michaillat and Saez (2015) for an extension of the
new Keynesian model in which disequilibrium due to price rigidity are smoothed by matching functions on both the
labor and the product market.
  24 Note that with a fixed wage, it is no longer equivalent whether the firm or the worker pays the tax. If the firm pays

the tax, then a tax cut reduces the cost of labor and increases labor demand. In this case, the government controls not
only the total tax liability in an occupation, but also the cost of labor and thereby the employment level. Lee and Saez
(2012) provides conditions where the government finds optimal to set the cost of labor above the market-clearing level,
thereby generating unemployment in a job-rationing model.


                                                           18
the production function, as in Michaillat (2012). As in a job-rationing model without matching,
the macro employment effect would be dampened compared to the micro one and conditional
employment probabilities would fall in response to a tax decrease. This in turn generates a gap in
the micro and macro participation response that captures the spillover effect on the labor market.
While decreasing returns to scale may not be realistic in the long run, it may be plausible at least
in the short-run during recessions with aggregate demand shortfalls. Landais, Michaillat, and
Saez (2015) discuss this possibility as a possible reason that the effect of unemployment insurance
benefits on employment may be larger when the labor market is tight than when it is slack and
thus the moral hazard associated with UI may be less severe during a crisis. For the same reason
it may be that reductions in tax levels may have a larger effect on employment in recessions than
in booms and the optimal policy during recessions may look more like an NIT.25




Competitive models


    Like job-rationing models, competitive models assume search frictions away. However, these
models assume that in each labor market, the gross wage adjusts to clear the labor market so there
is no unemployment. If, in addition, the technology exhibit constant returns to scale and perfect
substitution across the different types of labor, labor demand is perfectly elastic and our model
reduces immediately to Saez (2002).26 In such a model, there is no difference between macro and
micro responses, so the optimal tax formula depends only on the macro (or micro) employment
effect of taxes. On the other hand, consider a competitive model with a constant returns to scale
technology and flexible wages: there would be no unemployment, but wages may adjust to taxes
due to imperfect substitution across the different types of labor. In this case the micro and macro
employment responses may be different due to the wage adjustments in each labor market, but
the participation gap would still capture these spillover effects. Saez (2004) showed that in such a
model, the optimal tax formula can be expressed using only the micro employment response and
takes the same form as Saez (2002). In the on-line Appendix, we show that this result remains valid
if unemployment rates are positive but exogenous. So, the optimal employment tax is negative
when the social marginal welfare weight exceeds one. However, even in this case, our optimal tax
formula (14) remains valid.


  25 Though note that we have a static framework which may not be well suited to determine time-varying optimal

taxes over the business cycle.
  26 Assuming fixed w and p , equation (9) collapses to the optimal tax formula (11) in the Appendix of Saez (2002). This
                      i      i
formula can be further specialized by assuming that labor supply responses are concentrated along the intensive margin
(Mirrlees (1971) and Saez (2002, Equation (6))), along the extensive margin (Diamond (1980), Saez (2002, Equation (4))
and Choné and Laroque (2005, 2011)) or both (Saez (2002, Equation (8)))


                                                           19
Wage moderating effects of tax progressivity

       Another strand in the literature has stressed the possibility that increases in tax progressivity
may actually increase employment. For example in the monopoly union model, unions set the
wage to maximize the expected utility of its members, which is increasing in the net wage and in
the level of employment. Since the level of employment is decreasing in the gross wage, unions
do not want to push the wage too high. If tax rates increase (become more progressive) the wedge
between net and gross wages increases and therefore a one unit increase in the net wage will have
to be traded off against a larger loss in employment. Thus unions may actually accept a lower
gross wage in response to an increase in tax progressivity and tax increases may increase employ-
ment.27 The main consequence of introducing the wage moderating effect of tax progressivity into
                                       dW                                  dP dU         dK         dH
the model is to make the matrix        dT   and therefore the matrices     dT , dT   ,   dT   and   dT   non-diagonal.
The wage moderating effect of tax progressivity is therefore an argument against the no-cross ef-
fect restriction, which is different than the presence of labor supply responses along the intensive
margin.28


III       Estimating Sufficient Statistics

       To illustrate the practical relevance of our optimal tax formula, we estimate the sufficient statis-
tics necessary to implement our optimal tax formula, namely the macro employment response to
taxes, and the micro and macro participation responses. We follow the large empirical literature
on the effects of the EITC and welfare reform in the U.S. and focus on single women throughout
the last three decades. As a consequence of the gradual expansion of the EITC and the 1990’s wel-
fare reform, this group experienced substantial changes in participation and marginal tax rates
differentially by number of children, within and across states. These policy reforms provide suffi-
cient variation to identify both micro and macro participation responses and macro employment
   27 This result has been obtained in a Monopoly unions model with job rationing by Hersoug (1984), in a union bar-

gaining model by Lockwood and Manning (1993) or in the competitive directed search model (or wage posting) of
Moen (1997) by Lehmann, Parmentier, and Van der Linden (2011). A very similar result can also hold in the efficiency
wage model of Pisauro (1991) or within the matching framework with Nash bargaining (Pissarides, 1985, 1998), or with
the bargaining model of top income earners of Piketty, Saez, and Stantcheva (2014). Evidence for this wage moderating
effect of tax progressivity can be found in Malcomson and Sartor (1987), Holmlund and Kolm (1995), Hansen, Peder-
sen, and Sløk (2000) and Brunello and Sonedda (2007), while Manning (1993) and Lehmann, Lucifora, Moriconi, and
Van der Linden (2015) provide some empirical support for the unemployment reducing effect of tax progressivity.
   28 In the context of our framework reduced to the case with two occupations I = 2, these models imply that the

wage functions Wi not only verify ∂W                ∂W1
                                      ∂T2 > 0 and ∂T1 > 0, as in the proportional bargaining case, but also that the
                                         2

marginal tax rate, as approximated by T2 − T1 , has a wage moderating and unemployment reducing effect. This implies
       ∂T1 > 0 > ∂T2 . Within a matching model, using pi = Li ( wi ), we obtain ∂T2 < 0 and ∂T1 < 0, but also
                     ∂W1                                                                            ∂P1
that ∂W   2                                                                          ∂P2

∂P2
 ∂T1  < 0 < ∂P ∂T2 . Hence, making the tax schedule more progressive by increasing T2 and decreasing T1 increases
                  1

employment in both occupations, which the government finds beneficial whenever employment taxes remain positive.
Hence, compared to the proportional bargaining case, the case with a wage moderating/unemployment reducing effect
of tax progressivity leads to a more progressive optimal tax schedule as formally shown by Hungerbühler, Lehmann,
Parmentier, and Van der Linden (2006), Lehmann, Parmentier, and Van der Linden (2011).


                                                         20
responses.

III.1      Data
Current Population Survey (CPS)

    Our analysis is based on data from the monthly outgoing rotation group (ORG) and the March
annual data of the Current Population Survey (CPS). The March annual data spans the time period
1984-2011, while the ORG data (from IPUMS) spans 1994-2010. As our analysis sample, we select
all single women age 18 to 55 who are not in the military or enrolled full time in school or college.
Since there was insufficient tax variation for higher income individuals we furthermore restrict our
sample to women with education less than a bachelors degree. Our theory distinguishes between
individuals who choose to participate in the labor force (and are employed or unemployed) and
those individuals who are actually employed. We measure these labor market states using the
standard International Labor Office (ILO) criteria. A person is classified as being in the labor force
if she is either employed or unemployed (i.e., actively looking for a job during the reference week
and was available for work) and employed if she has been working during the reference week (or
been temporarily absent from a job).          29

    Panel A of Table 1 shows descriptive statistics for the demographic characteristics of single
women in the March CPS for the full sample (Column 1) and broken down by educational attain-
ment groups (Columns 2-4), pooling all years from 1984 to 2011.30 The age range is pretty similar
across the three education groups - less than high school, high school, and some college - but there
are large differences in the distribution of number of children, with lower educated single women
being much more likely to be mothers. This is likely due to our sample restriction to single women
since higher educated mothers are more likely to be married. Additionally, low educated women
are more likely to be black or Hispanic than high educated ones. Panel B displays labor market
variables by educational attainment. Lower educated women are much less likely to be in the
labor force than higher educated ones and also experience higher unemployment rates.

Tax and Transfer Calculator

    In order to estimate the employment and participation effects of taxes and transfers it is nec-
essary to compute the budget sets that individuals face. For this purpose, we build a calculator
that computes taxes and transfers at (nominal) income levels for single women, depending on the
number of children, state and year.31 We assume that a woman is filing as the head of the house-
hold and claims her children as dependents. To compute taxes (covering federal and state income
  29 Forcomplete details on sample construction and variable definitions, please see the online appendix.
  30 We do not include the CPS ORG in this table since it spans different years,
                                                                              but when we compare sample means for
the March CPS and ORG for the same period they are extremely close.
  31 We describe in details below how we impute income that serves as an input to the calculator.



                                                           21
taxes, including tax credits, as well as FICA liability), we rely on the NBER TAXSIM software. We
assign taxes based on state of residence, as reported in the CPS, as well as number of children,
year, and income.32 To compute transfers, in particular Aid to Families with Dependent Children
(AFDC), Temporary Assistance for Needy Families (TANF) and Supplemental Nutrition Assis-
tance Program (SNAP), we construct a benefit calculator based on rules published in the Welfare
Rules Database, managed by the Urban Institute. This allows us to compute the benefits an indi-
vidual is eligible for, as a function of number of children, state of residence, year and income. The
shift from AFDC to TANF introduced a number of additional work and eligibility requirements
for welfare recipients. For example, federal rules require a minimum number of TANF recipi-
ents to be employed and the lifetime duration of receiving TANF benefits is limited to a total of 5
years.33 Rather than incorporate all of these policies explicitly into our empirical framework, we
multiply benefits by recipiency rates constructed from the Survey of Income and Program Partici-
pation (SIPP). The new eligibility requirements are reflected in lower observed recipiency rates in
our sample post-welfare reform.
    We use our tax and transfer calculator to compute the incentive to work. Since we focus solely
on the extensive margin in our analysis, we capture work incentives using just two measures, the
transfer an individual receives when she has zero income and the tax and transfer level at the
earnings level an individual obtains when working. A key difficulty is that earnings, and hence
tax liabilities, are unobserved for non-employed individuals. Moreover, earnings for employed
workers may be endogenous to the tax system. We proceed using two approaches. First, we
impute an individual’s tax liability following the approach taken in Eissa and Hoynes (2004) and
Gelber and Mitchell (2012). We begin by running separate regressions for each education group
(e) and year (t) of log annual earnings for individual m on state fixed effects (δe,s,t ) and control
variables (Xm,e,s,t ):   34




                                    log(wm,e,s,t ) = δe,s,t + Xm,e,s,t πe,t + em,e,s,t                                 (16)

    The control variables include state fixed effects, a quadratic function of age, dummy variables
for black and hispanic, and a categorical variable describing geographic location (i.e., urban versus
  32 For an individual who resides and works in different states, the following rules apply. Generally an individual is
required to pay income tax to his or her state of residence first. Then they must file as a non-resident in the state where
they work, but get to take the amount of tax paid to the state of residence as a tax credit, and only pay the difference. If
the amount of tax paid to the state of residence is greater than the tax bill for the work state, the individual doesn’t pay
anything to the work state, but still has to file. We don’t take this into account in computing tax liabilities.
  33 In general, a state must have 50 percent of its single parent households and 90 percent of its dual parent house-

holds engaged in work-related activities (these include not only work but searching for work or training courses) for
a minimum number of hours per week (30 hours per week or 20 hours if there is a young child). The 50 percent and
90 percent are calculated from a pool of ”work-eligible individuals” which does not include single parents of children
under the age of 1. States can obtain credits against the 50 and 90 percent rates for overall caseload reduction.
  34 For this exercise, we use earnings from the March CPS. To deal with misreporting we also drop observations where

the implied hourly wage is less than one dollar or greater than one hundred dollars.


                                                            22
rural). For each individual in our sample (both the non-employed and employed), we construct
predicted earnings using the regression coefficients estimated from our model. This is for the
purpose of obtaining a consistent specification.35 We then use predicted earnings to impute an
individual’s tax liability using TAXSIM and the benefit calculator described above.
    In the Online Appendix, we present OLS regressions of participation and employment using
this imputed tax liability. One problem with this approach is that the demographic distribution
itself, and therefore the imputed tax liabilities, might be endogenous to tax policy. For instance,
more generous transfers to single mothers with kids, but not to women without children, may
boost fertility and impact earnings. To address this concern, we also rely on a simulated instru-
ment approach based on Currie and Gruber (1996).36 This approach isolates policy variation in
tax liabilities since it uses a fixed income and demographic distribution during the sample period.
    There are several steps that we take to implement this procedure. To construct the simulated
micro tax liabilities, we first compute real earnings in 2010 dollars for each employed individual
in the sample. Second, using earnings for the full sample of employed individuals across all years
1984-2011, we construct the percentiles of the empirical earnings distribution. Third, we compute
for each education group, the percentage of workers that fall into each centile across all states and
years. Fourth, for each year, we compute the nominal earnings level in each centile, conditional
on real earnings in that year being within the bounds of the centile from step 2. Fifth, for each
year, we take the nominal earnings level in each centile and we compute tax liabilities separately
by number of children for each state, using the tax and transfer calculator. In the last step, for
each education group, year, state and number of children, we compute the weighted-mean of the
tax liabilities across centiles using the (time- and state-invariant) education distribution from step
3 as weights. This leaves us with instruments that are cell means, where the cells are defined by
education group, year, state, and number of children, with variation driven solely by exogenous
changes in the tax code, and not by endogenous changes in the earnings and/or demographics
distribution. Finally, for the simulated macro tax liability, we aggregate micro tax liabilities across
family types using weights for number of children that vary by education group, but are time-
and state-invariant. All tax liabilities are adjusted for inflation using the consumer price index for
all urban consumers with 2010 as the base year. The simulated cell average (micro and macro)
tax liabilities are then matched back to the CPS data and used as instruments for imputed tax
liabilities, among individuals in a given cell, in a two-stage least squares regression.

  35 As an alternative, we tried performing a Heckman selection correction to control for self-selection using the number

of children and the presence of young children in the selection equation. However, we found that the pattern of results
were not very well behaved. In particular, predicted earnings for high school dropouts seemed too high and earnings
for higher education levels seemed unrealistically low relative to the raw differences earnings across education groups.
This is likely due to the lack of a convincing instrument for working.
  36 Gruber and Saez (2002) use this approach to estimate taxable income elasticities; however, we are not aware of any

papers that use this approach to estimate extensive margin labor supply responses.


                                                          23
    Panel C of Table 1 shows the mean imputed real earnings for each education group averaged
over the years and the corresponding tax and transfer levels depending on the number of chil-
dren in the household. All numbers are reported in real 2010 U.S. dollars (USD). For high school
dropouts, taxes (transfers) are strongly decreasing (increasing) in the number of children. The wel-
fare benefit for households with no children is driven entirely by SNAP since these households
are ineligible for AFDC/TANF. For bachelor degree holders, the range is very small and close to
0 since most are ineligible for these mean-tested benefits. Importantly, the reported welfare bene-
fits do not incorporate recipiency rates which are much less than 100 percent during our sample
period. The last four rows report recipiency rates, as estimated in the SIPP. Each individual in the
CPS is assigned a recipiency rate that we calculate from the SIPP based on education, income and
year. The table reports the average of the assigned recipiency rates separately for AFDC/TANF
and food stamps, and also pre- and post-1996. We see that for high school dropouts, recipiency
rates are roughly 50 percent for AFDC/TANF but fall to 20 percent post-1996. For food stamps,
recipiency rates are much more comparable pre- and post-1996 and equal to roughly 40 percent.37
These recipiency rates decrease with education which reflects diminishing eligibility as earnings
increase.


III.2      Empirical Method
Specification of Labor Markets

    In the theoretical model, individuals sort themselves into I + 1 distinct occupations. For our
empirical analysis, a key difficulty is ranking individuals, including the non-employed, according
to their potential income if they work. For this purpose, we approximate the labor market an
individual may participate in by her educational attainment (high school dropout, high school
graduate, some college), state and year. We assume that individuals are perfect substitutes within
labor markets and use (e, s, t) to denote these cells. This labor market definition is consistent with
Rothstein (2010).


Estimating Micro and Macro Participation Responses and Macro Employment Responses

    Equation (14) shows that the optimal tax schedule can be expressed in terms of macro employ-
ment responses and the ratio of macro to micro participation responses in matrix terms. Ideally
                                                                                       ∂ Ki
one would attempt to estimate the matrix of macro participation responses              ∂Tj ,   the matrix of mi-
                                       Micro
                                ∂ Ki                                                                  ∂ Hi
cro participation responses     ∂Tj            and the matrix of macro employment responses           ∂Tj    for all
labor markets i, j. However, this would lead to a very large number of cross effects to estimate
  37 For AFDC/TANF, we calculate recipiency rates based on sample of mothers since single women with no children
are not eligible for these programs.


                                                        24
that would be difficult to identify, especially the macro responses. Thus, for the purpose of esti-
mation, we focus on the no-cross effects case where the above mentioned matrices are diagonal.
We also assume away income effects by estimating the responses to employment tax liabilities
Ti + b, instead of estimating separately the responses to tax liability Ti and to benefit b.
    In our model Hi and Ki correspond to the number of individuals in income group i, but for
an empirical specification that uses variation across individuals and labor markets, it makes little
                     ∂ Ki        ∂ Hi
sense to assume      ∂Ti    or   ∂Ti    are constant across labor markets. Instead we will estimate the effect
of taxes Ti on employment and participation rates. We denote the employment rate in income
group i, which in our empirical setting will correspond to an education group i, as Ĥi and the
participation rate as K̂i . These are the fraction of individuals with education level i who are em-
ployed or participating in the labor force, respectively. Estimating the marginal effects of taxes on
employment and participation rates furthermore has the important advantage that the estimates
are easier to interpret and to compare to the prior literature. For example, these estimates are
straightforward to convert to employment and participation elasticities.
    To obtain an econometric specification for the responses to taxation that is motivated by the
theoretical model (without cross effects), we make two assumptions. First, we assume that the con-
ditional employment probability and wage in a market can be written as functions of the average
tax liability in that market only.38 Second, we assume that tax liabilities vary across individuals
within a labor market according to the number n of children in the household.39 The function
describing participation decisions for individual m in labor market (e, s, t) can thus be written as:

                             K̂m,e,s,t,n (t) = K̃m,e,s,t,n ( pe,s,t ( Te,s,t ), we,s,t ( Te,s,t ), Te,s,t,n )       (17)

    To estimate the micro participation response, we take a linear approximation to Equation (17),
add labor market and education-by-number of children fixed effects, control variables and an error
term, to get the following econometric specification40 :

                             k̂ m,e,s,t,n = δe,s,t + δe,n + Te,s,t,n β + Xm,e,s,t,n λ + νm,e,s,t,n                  (18)

                                                            Micro
                                             ∂K̂m,e,s,t,n
This equation implies that β =                ∂Te,s,t,n             captures the micro participation effect. Implicit in
this specification is a pooling assumption, whereby the partial derivative of taxes on participation
does not vary across labor markets. We adopt this assumption for simplicity and because it is
difficult to generate exogenous variation in tax liabilities that differentially affects income groups.
  38 The restrictions on the econometric specification correspond to the no cross effect theoretical assumption that is

assumed in Proposition 1 and Corollary 1.
  39 Moffit (1998) argues that the literature features very heterogeneous marriage and fertility responses to taxes and

transfers across studies, with a large number of studies finding no effect. As a result, he concludes that much more
research remains to be done.
  40 In the regressions, we interact all control variables with education group.



                                                                     25
    Next, to estimate macro participation responses, we aggregate the data to state-year-education
averages, add education-by-year and education-by state fixed effects, and region specific linear
time trends, and demographic controls to get41 :


                                         k̂ e,s,t = δe,s + δe,t + Te,s,t γ + Xe,s,t λ + νe,s,t                                       (19)

    The macro effect is defined as the change in individual participation probabilities if the tax
liabilities for all individuals in a labor market increase by one dollar. Therefore the macro effect
                           dK̂e,s,t
can be obtained as:        dTe,s,t    = γ.42
    The market-level employment rate in market (e, s, t) is given by Ĥe,s,t ( Te,s,t ) = pe,s,t ( Te,s,t ) ×
                                                                                      ∂Ĥe,s,t                K̂e,s,t
K̂e,s,t ( Te,s,t ). Thus, the macro employment response is given by                   ∂Te,s,t    = pe,s,t × ∂∂T e,s,t
                                                                                                                      + K̂e,s,t × ∂p e,s,t
                                                                                                                                  ∂Te,s,t .
We will rely on a linear approximation for the market-level employment rate similar to Equation
(19) and we will estimate the macro employment response in a way that is analogous to how we
estimate the macro participation response.

Identification

    To identify the parameter β, we require that the micro tax liability Te,s,t,n is exogenous, condi-
tional on labor market and education-by-number of children fixed effects and observables. Simi-
larly, our identifying assumption for γ is that the macro tax liability Te,s,t is exogenous, conditional
on education-by-state and education-by-year fixed effects and observables. Thus, two indepen-
dent sources of exogenous variation in tax liabilities are needed. For the micro response β, we
require variation in tax liabilities across individuals within the same labor market. For the macro
response γ, we require variation in average tax liabilities between labor markets.
    As described above, our strategy is to generate such variation using a simulated instrument
approach. The policy variation in the micro tax liability is illustrated in Figure 1a). This figure plots
the average value of the micro simulated tax liability, by year and number of children, relative to
the value in 1984, for high school dropouts. One can see that there is substantial variation in
taxes over time and this variation is very different across the number of children. Much of this
is driven in large part by the EITC. In particular, the TRA86 reform can be clearly seen in 1986-
1987, but is quite small relative to the expansions in the 1990s, which also introduced differential
EITC levels for parents with one or two children. Finally in 2009, the EITC was expanded for
  41 In   the regressions, we interact all controls with education group
  42 Note that without income effects, ∂K̂i∂K̂i
                                                =
                                       ∂Ti  ∂b .In this case, only the difference in taxes and transfers between working
                                                                 K̂i    K̂i
and not working matters Ti − Ti (0) = Ti + b, and therefore ∂∂T
                                                                   i
                                                                     = ∂∂b  = ∂(T∂K̂+i b) . For our main specification, we will
                                                                                  i

assume no income effects and therefore estimate directly ∂(T∂K̂+i b) thereby using both variation in Ti and b to estimate
                                                               i
                                                                                    K̂i    K̂i
the parameter of interest with maximum power. We tested whether the condition ∂∂T       = ∂∂b  holds and found that the
                                                                                      i
difference was very small and statistically insignificant. We therefore only report results under the no income effect
assumption.


                                                                  26
parents with 3 children, as can be seen in the figure, and income taxes were cut for all family
types. The identification strategy is similar to the one used by Eissa and Liebman (1996), Meyer
and Rosenbaum (2001) and Gelber and Mitchell (2012).
      The policy variation for the macro tax liability comes mainly from changes in state income
taxes; in particular, the state-level EITCs and welfare benefits, which vary across states and over
time. The large expansions of the federal EITC, that much of the literature has relied on, are not
useful, since the change affected all states simultaneously and thus would be collinear with time
trends. We illustrate this variation by plotting the macro simulated tax liability for high school
dropouts for the largest 12 states in Figure 1b).
      A potential concern with our identification strategy is that single women might move in re-
sponse to a tax reform or to receive higher welfare benefits. However several papers (e.g. Meyer,
2000, Kennan and Walker, 2010) suggest that this response is at best modest, particularly for the
sample of low income women that are the focus of this study. Thus, while migration responses
might be important in other contexts, we do not believe that our estimates will be confounded by
it.


III.3    Empirical Results

      For all of our empirical results, we report Instrumental Variables (IV) estimates from a Two-
Stage Least Squares (2SLS) regression. Reported standard errors in all regressions are clustered on
the state level. The notes of the tables contain exact details about the regression specification. All
of the OLS results can be found in the Online Appendix. Note that in interpreting these results
that the tax liabilities are in units of $1000.
      The top panel of Table 2 shows the IV estimates for the micro participation (Column 1) and
employment (Column 2) responses to taxes and transfers based on equation (18) above. The re-
sults indicate a clear negative and statistically significant participation effect of taxes, consistent
with the prior literature. We find that a $1000 increase in taxes leads to a 3.4 percentage point
reduction in the participation probability which translates to an elasticity of -0.63.43 We also see
fairly similar micro responses for employment.44
      Our elasticity estimates are somewhat large but they are within the range of elasticities that is
  43 Following the theory, we take the marginal effect and multiply it by the ratio of the income gain from employment

over the participation rate. For example, if we take the marginal effect of -0.034 and multiply it by the ratio $14.26/0.77,
we get an elasticity of -0.63.
  44 The Online Appendix reports the OLS regression results. We see that the OLS participation responses are attenuated

relative to our IV estimates. For the full sample, the micro participation elasticity is 0.09 and the macro participation
elasticity is -0.8. The micro and macro employment responses are of a similar magnitude. This highlights the impor-
tance of instrumenting for the micro and macro tax liabilities. In general the OLS results are not very informative, for
example there is a strong reverse causality issue where high participation rates will be associated with lower earnings
(due to selection) and higher employment taxes. Isolating variation coming from tax policy changes is crucial in order
to obtain meaningful results.


                                                            27
reported in the literature.45 This is not that surprising since we use similar variation in taxes as
the previous literature; in particular, variation driven by the EITC. One notable difference is that
past studies typically control for state and year fixed effects, but not their interaction. This yields
estimates that confound micro and macro responses (See Rothstein (2010) for a discussion of this).
Nevertheless, most of the tax variation in these papers would also have come from across group
variation within labor markets.
   The macro participation and employment IV estimates are displayed in the second panel of
Table 2. These correspond to empirical estimates from a macro-level (education-state-year cells)
2SLS regression of participation and employment rates on market-level tax liabilities, controlling
for education-by-state and education-by-year fixed effects and percent black, percent Hispanic,
average age, average age-squared, average number of children and their interactions with edu-
cation and region-specific time trends. Since the number of observations is much smaller and
since there is less variation in tax liabilities across labor markets, the coefficients are estimated
less precisely. Nevertheless, there is some suggestive evidence that the macro participation and
employment responses are smaller than the micro ones.
   Our results on micro and macro responses to taxation are generally consistent with the meta
analysis conducted in Chetty, Guren, Manoli, and Weber (2012) who report slightly larger esti-
mates of the extensive steady-state elasticities based on micro evidence than macro evidence. It is
worth noting that the macro-based studies cited in Chetty, Guren, Manoli, and Weber (2012) are
based on cross-country evidence that typically comes from a limited number of OECD countries.
Nevertheless, it is reassuring to note that our results are similar, based on a panel data approach
across all states, over time, in the U.S.
   Table 3 provides a series of robustness tests where we drop the region-specific time trends from
the macro regressions and include alternative controls for pre-trends. The first column reports our
baseline estimates for comparison. We see that the macro responses are very robust to controlling
for division-by-year fixed effects, region-by-year fixed effects and no controls for pre-trends.
   Finally, Table 4 considers behavioral responses over the business cycle. In particular, this al-
lows us to test whether spillovers are larger in recessions, as some recent research has found. We
rely on several proxies for the business cycle: the 6-month change in the unemployment rate, the
state unemployment rate and an indicator for whether the unemployment rate exceeds 9 percent.
Across all specifications, we see that micro and macro participation and employment responses
tend to be lower when the unemployment rate is relatively high. This is consistent with results
in (Schmieder, Von Wachter, and Bender, 2012) and Kroft and Notowidigdo (2014). There is also
some suggestive evidence that the micro-macro participation gap increases in weak labor mar-
kets; for instance, for the 6-month change in unemployment specification, the gap is roughly 0.1
 45 Eissa,   Kleven, and Kreiner (2008) report a range of (-0.35,-1.7) with a central elasticity of -0.7.


                                                               28
in weak labor markets but only 0.01 in strong labor markets. We emphasize however, that lack of
precision limits any strong conclusion about how the gap varies over the cycle.
     Overall, these results suggest that while micro labor supply responses are sizeable and in line
with what the literature has found before, they may not always be good approximations for the
macro employment responses. In particular our evidence broadly suggests that macro responses
tend to be lower than micro responses. Although this is some of the first evidence on the gap
between micro and macro elasticities, it is however worth noting that our macro estimates are
less precisely estimated than our micro ones. Such discrepancy can easily been explained by the
limited policy variations at the state level over time, compared to policy variations across women
with different number of kids over time. Future research should use other source of policy varia-
tions as robustness checks for our macro estimates.


IV      Simulating the Optimal Tax Schedule

     In this section we show how unemployment and wage responses affect the shape of the opti-
mal tax and transfer schedule. For this purpose we simulate the optimal tax schedule using the
sufficient statistics formula for the optimal tax and transfer schedule. In line with the empirical
section, we focus on the no-cross effects model with its restricted set of sufficient statistics. These
simulations are very stylized and should be viewed as an illustration of the comparative statics of
our optimal tax formula, that highlight the importance of taking spillovers into account. The re-
sulting tax schedule should not be viewed as a precise attempt to derive the optimal tax schedule
for any particular population.46
     To simulate the optimal tax schedule, we solve the system of first-order conditions derived in
the theoretical section for the tax levels at different income levels. The system contains N + 2 un-
knowns, the i = 0 . . . N tax levels Ti as well as the lagrange multiplier λ, and N + 2 equations, the
first-order conditions (12) and (10) and the government budget constraint (1). Since we focus on
the no-cross effects model, the first-order conditions for the tax levels simplify to Equation (12).47
We partition the income distribution into discrete bins, corresponding to the zero income level,
the 3 education groups in our empirical analysis, as well as a 4th group: single women with Bach-
elor degrees, which we did not use in our empirical analysis due to the lack of identifying policy

  46 Such an exercise for the U.S. would, for example, have to take into account that policy makers seem to have placed

different welfare weights on different groups of single women, depending on the number of children. Backing out
the implicit welfare weights in the current tax schedule given an optimal tax framework and calibrating how the tax
schedule given these welfare weights would change under alternative models would be very interesting, but beyond
the scope of this paper.
  47 In order to express the FOC for the benefit level in terms of sufficient statistics, we make two assumptions: a)

benefits do not affect wages or job finding probabilities in any labor market and b) the social welfare function is linear
in expected utilities (Benthamite Utilitarian). This can be viewed as an approximation that in practice likely does not
make a big difference for the results.


                                                           29
variation for this group. We take the average number of individuals over all years as the popula-
tion shares of the education groups and assign to each group the average income over our sample
period. In order to solve the system of equations we also have to parameterize gi ( Ti ) and hi ( Ti ).
                                                                                    1
Following Saez (2002) we parameterize gi using the functional form: gi =      λ(wi0 − Ti0 )ν
                                                                                             ,   where ν is the
parameter describing society’s parameter for redistribution. For comparability with Saez (2002)
we set ν = 1, but in the Online Appendix we also report results for ν = 0.5. We use a first order
Taylor approximation to describe hi , which should provide a reasonable approximation as long as
the optimum is close to the current policy:

                                             ∂ Hi
                             hi = h0i +              ( Ti + b) − Ti0 + b0 .
                                                                         
                                                                                                           (20)
                                          ∂( Ti + b)

   We present simulations of the optimal tax schedule based on the formula derived in this paper,
which we refer to as the KKLS formula, and contrast this tax schedule with simulations based on
the optimal tax formula in Saez (2002).
   Figure 2a) shows the optimal tax and transfer schedule for the 4 education groups using the
employment and participation response estimates from our empirical section. The dashed line
with circles shows the optimal tax schedule implied by our no-cross effects welfare formula, which
relies on the micro-macro participation gap to correct for spillovers. The figure also shows the cor-
responding optimal tax schedule implied by the pure extensive margin optimal tax formula in
Saez (2002). The Saez (2002) formula relies only on employment responses but does not specify
whether these are micro or macro responses. For the solid line with stars we implement the Saez
(2002) formula using our micro employment response estimates, while for the red line we use the
macro estimates. Compared to using the Saez (2002) formula with macro employment responses,
our formula implies a substantially higher lump sum transfer to the non-employed and higher
marginal tax rates (a flatter slope). This is because our estimates imply lower macro than mi-
cro participation responses, so that the spillover effects attenuate the welfare gain of a transfer to
the working poor. The Saez (2002) formula calibrated with macro employment responses implies
larger transfers at the bottom than when micro employment responses are used for calibration
and a somewhat flatter slope. This is because we estimate larger micro employment responses
than macro ones. To highlight the differences in the slopes, Figure 2b) shows the implied em-
                           Ti +b
ployment tax rates, i.e.    wi ,   at each income level. Clearly the Saez (2002) formula with micro
employment effects generates the lowest employment tax rate, although still positive and there-
fore not EITC-like. Saez (2002) with macro employment effects, the line with plus signs, generates
larger employment tax rates and finally the KKLS optimal tax formula yields an employment tax
rate that for the lowest income group is more than twice as high (25 percent) than the Saez (2002)
formula with micro responses would suggest.
   In Figure 3a) we show how, holding the macro employment response constant, the macro-

                                                    30
micro participation ratio affects the optimal tax schedule. The line with circles shows the bench-
mark tax schedule from Figure 2 using our optimal tax formula with our main empirical esti-
mates. The line with stars shows the optimal tax schedule using our formula when we double
the macro-micro participation ratio but everything else constant. This captures a situation where
the spillovers from an increase in employment taxes are positive (more labor market participants
make it easier for people to find jobs). This makes the tax profile steeper and the optimal tax is
an EITC-like schedule, as Figure 3b) shows the employment tax rate is indeed negative at the bot-
tom. The line with plus signs on the other hand shows the optimal tax schedule when we cut the
macro-micro participation ratio to 0.5, thus leading to large negative spillovers where the macro
response is smaller than the micro response. This makes the overall tax profile flatter and the
benefits to the non-employed larger, mirroring an NIT situation.

    Other papers have stressed the possibility that macro employment responses could be signif-
icantly lower than micro employment responses, particularly in the context of UI and job search
assistance and this has typically been explained by the possibility of job rationing at least in the
short run, especially during recessions. Our estimates in Table 4 are consistent with this view:
while both macro and micro responses decline in recessions, the decline is much larger for macro
responses, both with respect to employment and participation. The business cycle macro estimates
suggest that spillover effects could be significantly larger during economic downturns. Figure 4
simulates how the optimal tax schedule would vary over the business cycle given our estimates
from Table 4. We present results from the estimates based on the 6 month change in the un-
employment rate here, but using the other measures yields qualitatively very similar results. In
Figure 4a) and 4b) we show the optimal tax schedule for different business cycle states implied
by our (KKLS) optimal tax formula. The transfer at zero income is around 7000 USD during a
strong labor market with a relatively low employment tax of about 18 percent for moving from
zero income to the first income group. During weak labor markets the simulation suggests that
the transfer at zero should increase to 8000 USD per year with a much higher employment tax of
about 40 percent.48 In contrast, panels (c) and (d) of Figure 4 show the tax schedule implied by
the Saez (2002) formula using the macro employment effects estimated over the business cycle.49
While the decline in macro employment responses during weak labor markets also leads to an
increase in transfers at the bottom and a slight increase in employment tax rates, the change is
comparatively modest due to the absence of the spillover channel.




  48 Interestingly the differences between weak and strong labor markets are even more pronounced if the government
has a less strong taste for redistribution, as can be seen results for ν = 0.5 in the Online Appendix.
  49 Using the micro employment effects yields even less variation in the optimal tax schedule over the cycle.



                                                        31
V    Conclusion

    This paper revisits the debate about the desirability of the EITC versus the NIT. We have shown
that whether the optimal employment tax on the working poor is positive or negative depends on
the presence of unemployment and wage responses to taxation. Our sufficient statistics optimal
tax formula, combined with our reduced-form empirical estimates, indicate that the optimal policy
is pushed more towards an NIT than the standard optimal tax model with fixed wages would
suggest, although statistical precision limits strong conclusions about the magnitude of the macro
responses.
    There are several limitations to our analysis that should be addressed in future work. First,
there is clearly a need for better empirical estimates of the macro effects of taxation. Most studies
of macro labor supply responses rely on cross-country variation in taxes, which can be substan-
tial. While this variation is clearly desirable for efficiency reasons, across countries, tastes for
redistribution and other forms of government spending are probably correlated with taxes and
employment and are difficult to fully control for. What is needed is reliable policy variation in
taxes across labor markets, similar to variation in UI benefit payments that is exploited in Lalive,
Landais, and Zweimüller (2013). Second, it would be very interesting to study business cycle ef-
fects of taxation more directly by introducing dynamics into the model. The approach we adopted
in this paper is entirely steady-state. Finally, it would be useful to develop a model that more fully
integrates UI benefits and income taxes, where benefits depend on prior wages, as is currently the
policy in most developed economies.


References
A KERLOF, G. A., AND J. L. Y ELLEN (1990): “The Fair Wage-Effort Hypothesis and Unemploy-
  ment,” The Quarterly Journal of Economics, 105(2), 255–83.

B AILY, M. N. (1978): “Some aspects of optimal unemployment insurance,” Journal of Public Eco-
  nomics, 10(3), 379–402.

B ARRO , R. J., AND H. I. G ROSSMAN (1971): “A General Disequilibrium Model of Income and
  Employment,” American Economic Review, 61(1), 82–93.

B LUNDELL , R., J. C. H AM , AND C. M EGHIR (1987): Unemployment and female labour supply, no. 149.
   Centre for Economic Policy Research.

B OADWAY, R., AND J.-F. T REMBLAY (2013): “Optimal Income Taxation and the Labour Market:
  An Overview,” CESifo Economic Studies, 59(1), 93–148.

B RUNELLO , G., AND D. S ONEDDA (2007): “Progressive taxation and wage setting when unions
   strategically interact,” Oxford Economic Papers, 59(1), 127–140.

C HETTY, R. (2006): “A general formula for the optimal level of social insurance,” Journal of Public
  Economics, 90(10-11), 1879–1901.

                                                 32
       (2009): “Sufficient Statistics for Welfare Analysis: A Bridge Between Structural and
  Reduced-Form Methods,” Annual Review of Economics, 1(1), 451–488.
       (2012): “Bounds on elasticities with optimization frictions: A synthesis of micro and macro
  evidence on labor supply,” Econometrica, 80(3), 969–1018.
C HETTY, R., J. N. F RIEDMAN , T. O LSEN , AND L. P ISTAFERRI (2011): “Adjustment Costs, Firm
  Responses, and Micro vs. Macro Labor Supply Elasticities: Evidence from Danish Tax Records,”
  The Quarterly Journal of Economics, 126(2), 749–804.
C HETTY, R., A. G UREN , D. M ANOLI , AND A. W EBER (2011): “Are micro and macro labor sup-
  ply elasticities consistent? A review of evidence on the intensive and extensive margins,” The
  American Economic Review, 101(3), 471–475.
         (2012): “Does Indivisible Labor Explain the Difference between Micro and Macro Elastic-
  ities? A Meta-Analysis of Extensive Margin Elasticities,” NBER Macroeconomics Annual, 27(1),
  1–56.
C HON É , P., AND G. L AROQUE (2005): “Optimal incentives for labor force participation,” Journal of
  Public Economics, 89(2-3), 395–425.
         (2011): “Optimal taxation in the extensive model,” Journal of Economic Theory, 146(2), 425–
  453.
C R ÉPON , B., E. D UFLO , M. G URGAND , R. R ATHELOT, AND P. Z AMORA (2013): “Do labor market
  policies have displacement effects? Evidence from a clustered randomized experiment,” The
  Quarterly Journal of Economics, 128(2), 531–580.
C URRIE , J., AND J. G RUBER (1996): “Health insurance eligibility and Child Health: lessons from
  recent expansions of the Medicaid program,” Quarterly Journal of Economics, 111(2), 431–466.
D IAMOND , P. (1980): “Income taxation with fixed hours of work,” Journal of Public Economics,
  13(1), 101–110.
        (1982): “Wage Determination and Efficiency in Search Equilibrium,” Review of Economic
  Studies, 49(2), 217–27.
E ISSA , N., AND H. H OYNES (2004): “Taxes and the labor market participation of married couples:
   the earned income tax credit,” Journal of Public Economics, 88(9), 1931–1958.
E ISSA , N., AND H. W. H OYNES (2006): “Behavioral Responses to Taxes: Lessons from the EITC
   and Labor Supply,” Tax Policy and the Economy, 20, pp. 73–110.
E ISSA , N., H. J. K LEVEN , AND C. T. K REINER (2008): “Evaluation of Four Tax reforms in the
   United States: Labor supply and welfare effects for single mothers,” Journal of Public Economics,
   92(3-4), 795–816.
E ISSA , N., AND J. B. L IEBMAN (1996): “Labor Supply Response to the Earned Income Tax Credit,”
   The Quarterly Journal of Economics, 111(2), pp. 605–637.
FARBER , H. S., AND R. G. VALLETTA (2013): “Do extended unemployment benefits lengthen un-
  employment spells? Evidence from recent cycles in the US labor market,” Discussion paper,
  National Bureau of Economic Research.
G ELBER , A., AND J. M ITCHELL (2012): “Taxes and Time Allocation: Evidence from Single Women
  and Men,” Review of Economic Studies, 79, 863–897.
G OLOSOV, M., P. M AZIERO , AND G. M ENZIO (2013): “Taxation and Redistribution of Residual
  Income Inequality,” Journal of Political Economy, 121(6), 1160 – 1204.

                                                 33
G RUBER , J., AND E. S AEZ (2002): “The elasticity of taxable income: evidence and implications,”
  Journal of Public Economics, 84(1), 1–32.

H AGEDORN , M., F. K ARAHAN , I. M ANOVSKII , AND K. M ITMAN (2013): “Unemployment benefits
  and unemployment in the great recession: the role of macro effects,” Discussion paper, National
  Bureau of Economic Research.

H AM , J. C., AND K. T. R EILLY (2002): “Testing intertemporal substitution, implicit contracts, and
  hours restriction models of the labor market using micro data,” The American Economic Review,
  92(4), 905–927.

H ANSEN , C. T., L. H. P EDERSEN , AND T. S LØK (2000): “Ambiguous effects of tax progressivity –
  theory and Danish evidence,” Labour Economics, 7(3), 335–347.

H ERBST, C. M. (2008): “Do social policy reforms have different impacts on employment and wel-
  fare use as economic conditions change?,” Journal of Policy Analysis and Management, 27(4), 867–
  894.

H ERSOUG , T. (1984): “Union Wage Responses to Tax Changes,” Oxford Economic Papers, 36(1),
  37–51.

H OLMLUND , B., AND A. S. K OLM (1995): “Progressive taxation, wage setting and unemployment:
  theory and Swedish evidence,” Swedish Economic Policy Review, 2, 423–460.

H OSIOS , A. J. (1990): “On the Efficiency of Matching and Related Models of Search and Unem-
  ployment,” Review of Economic Studies, 57(2), 279–98.

H OYNES , H. W. (2000): “Local Labor Markets And Welfare Spells: Do Demand Conditions Mat-
  ter?,” The Review of Economics and Statistics, 82(3), 351–368.

H OYNES , H. W., AND A. J. PATEL (2015): “Effective Policy for Reducing Inequality? The Earned
  Income Tax Credit and the Distribution of Income,” NBER Working Papers 21340.

H UNGERB ÜHLER , M., E. L EHMANN , A. PARMENTIER , AND B. VAN DER L INDEN (2006): “Optimal
  Redistributive Taxation in a Search Equilibrium Model,” Review of Economic Studies, 73(3), 743–
  767.

J ACQUET, L., E. L EHMANN , AND B. VAN DER L INDEN (2014): “Optimal income taxation with
   Kalai wage bargaining and endogenous participation,” Social Choice and Welfare, 42(2), 381–402.

J ÄNTTI , M., J. P IRTTIL Ä , AND H. S ELIN (2015): “Estimating labour supply elasticities based on
    cross-country micro data: A bridge between micro and macro estimates?,” Journal of Public Eco-
    nomics, 127(1), 87 – 99.

K ENNAN , J., AND J. R. WALKER (2010): “Wages, welfare benefits and migration,” Journal of Econo-
  metrics, 156(1), 229 – 238, Structural Models of Optimization Behavior in Labor, Aging, and
  Health.

K EYNES , J. M. (1936): The General Theory of Employment, Interest and Money. Macmillan, New York.

K ROFT, K. (2008): “Takeup, Social Multipliers and Optimal Social Insurance,” Journal of Public
  Economics, 92(3-4), 623–668.

K ROFT, K., AND M. N OTOWIDIGDO (2014): “Should unemployment insurance vary with the un-
  employment rate? Theory and evidence,” Discussion paper, National Bureau of Economic Re-
  search.

                                                 34
L ALIVE , R., C. L ANDAIS , AND J. Z WEIM ÜLLER (2013): “Market Externalities of Large Unemploy-
  ment Insurance Extension Programs,” IZA Discussion Papers 7650, forthcoming American Eco-
  nomic Review.

L ANDAIS , C., P. M ICHAILLAT, AND E. S AEZ (2015): “Optimal Unemployment Insurance over the
  Business Cycle,” Working Paper 16526, National Bureau of Economic Research.

L EE , D., AND E. S AEZ (2012): “Optimal minimum wage policy in competitive labor markets,”
   Journal of Public Economics, 96(9 - 10), 739 – 749.

L EHMANN , E., C. L UCIFORA , S. M ORICONI , AND B. VAN DER L INDEN (2015): “Beyond the
   Labour Income Tax Wedge: The Unemployment-Reducing Effect of Tax Progressivity,” Inter-
   national Tax and Public Finance, p. forthcoming.

L EHMANN , E., A. PARMENTIER , AND B. VAN DER L INDEN (2011): “Optimal income taxation with
   endogenous participation and search unemployment,” Journal of Public Economics, 95(11), 1523–
   1537.

L OCKWOOD , B., AND A. M ANNING (1993): “Wage setting and the tax system theory and evidence
  for the United Kingdom,” Journal of Public Economics, 52(1), 1–29.

M ALCOMSON , J. M., AND N. S ARTOR (1987): “Tax push inflation in a unionized labour market,”
  European Economic Review, 31(8), 1581 – 1596.

M ANNING , A. (1993): “Wage Bargaining and the Phillips Curve: The Identification and Specifica-
  tion of Aggregate Wage Equations,” Economic Journal, 103(416), 98–118.

M ARINESCU , I. (2014): “The General Equilibrium Impacts of Unemployment Insurance: Evidence
  from a Large Online Job Board,” .

M C D ONALD , I. M., AND R. M. S OLOW (1981): “Wage Bargaining and Employment,” American
  Economic Review, 71(5), 896–908.

M EYER , B., AND D. S ULLIVAN (2004): “The effects of Welfare and Tax Reforms: The Material
  Well-Being of Single Mothers in the 1980s and 1990s,” Journal of Public Economics, 88, 1387–1420.

        (2008): “Changes in the Consumption Income and well-being of single mothers Headed
  families,” American Economic Review, 98, 2221–2241.

M EYER , B. D. (2000): “Do the poor move to receive higher welfare benefits?,” .

M EYER , B. D., AND D. T. R OSENBAUM (2001): “Welfare, the Earned Income Tax Credit, and the
  Labor Supply of Single Mothers,” The Quarterly Journal of Economics, 116(3), pp. 1063–1114.

M ICHAILLAT, P. (2012): “Do matching frictions explain unemployment? Not in bad times,” The
  American Economic Review, 102(4), 1721–1750.

M ICHAILLAT, P., AND E. S AEZ (2015): “Aggregate Demand, Idle Time, and Unemployment,” The
  Quarterly Journal of Economics, 130(2), 507–569.

M IRRLEES , J. (1999): “Optimal Marginal Tax Rates at Low Income,” mimeo.

M IRRLEES , J. A. (1971): “An Exploration in the Theory of Optimum Income Taxation,” The Review
  of Economic Studies, 38(2), pp. 175–208.

M OEN , E. R. (1997): “Competitive Search Equilibrium,” Journal of Political Economy, 105(2), 385–
  411.

                                                35
M OFFIT, R. A. (1998): “The Effect of Welfare on Marriage and Fertility: What Do We Know and
  What Do We Need to Know?,” in Welfare, the Family, and Reproductive Behavior, ed. by R. Moffitt.
  National Research Concil, National Academy of Sciences Press.
M OGSTAD , M., AND C. P RONZATO (2012): “Are Lone Mothers Responsive to Policy Changes?
  Evidence from a Workfare Reform in a Generous Welfare State,” The Scandinavian Journal of
  Economics, 114(4), 1129–1159.
M ORTENSEN , D. T., AND C. A. P ISSARIDES (1999): “New developments in models of search in the
  labor market,” vol. 3 of Handbook of Labor Economics, chap. 39, pp. 2567–2627. Elsevier.
P IKETTY, T., E. S AEZ , AND S. S TANTCHEVA (2014): “Optimal Taxation of Top Labor Incomes: A
   Tale of Three Elasticities,” American Economic Journal: Economic Policy, 6(1), 230–71.
P ISAURO , G. (1991): “The effect of taxes on labour in efficiency wage models,” Journal of Public
   Economics, 46(3), 329–345.
P ISSARIDES , C. A. (1985): “Taxes, Subsidies and Equilibrium Unemployment,” Review of Economic
   Studies, 52(1), 121–134.
      (1998): “The impact of employment tax cuts on unemployment and wages; The role of
  unemployment benefits and tax structure,” European Economic Review, 42(1), 155–183.
           (2000): Equilibrium Unemployment Theory, 2nd Edition, vol. 1 of MIT Press Books. The MIT
  Press.
P ISSARIDES , C. A., AND B. P ETRONGOLO (2001): “Looking into the Black Box: A Survey of the
   Matching Function,” Journal of Economic Literature, 39(2), 390–431.
R OTHSTEIN , J. (2010): “Is the EITC as Good as an NIT? Conditional Cash Transfers and Tax Inci-
  dence,” American Economic Journal: Economic Policy, 2(1), pp. 177–208.
        (2011): “Unemployment insurance and job search in the Great Recession,” Discussion
  paper, National Bureau of Economic Research.
S AEZ , E. (2001): “Using Elasticities to Derive Optimal Income Tax Rates,” Review of Economic
   Studies, 68, 205–229.
       (2002): “Optimal Income Transfer Programs: Intensive versus Extensive Labor Supply
  Responses,” The Quarterly Journal of Economics, 117(3), pp. 1039–1073.
       (2004): “Direct or Indirect Tax Instruments for Redistribution: short-run versus long-run,”
  Journal of Public Economics, 88, 503–518.
S CHMIEDER , J., T. V ON WACHTER , AND S. B ENDER (2012): “The Effects of Extended Unemploy-
   ment Insurance Over the Business Cycle: Evidence from Regression Discontinuity Estimates
   Over 20 Years,” The Quarterly Journal of Economics, 127(2), 701–752.
S HAPIRO , C., AND J. E. S TIGLITZ (1984): “Equilibrium Unemployment as a Worker Discipline
   Device,” American Economic Review, 74(3), 433–44.



A    Theoretical Appendix
    The Lagrangian associated to the government’s program writes:
                                I
                         def                                 1
                    Λ(t) ≡     ∑ (Ti + b)Hi (t) − b − E + λ Ω (U1 (t), ..., U I (t), u(b))     (21)
                               i =1


                                                      36
A.1       Derivation of Equations (9) and (10)
    Differentiating (21) with respect to Tj and using Equations (5) and (8) gives (9). Differentiating
(21) with respect to b gives:

                              ∂Λ          I      I
                                                          ∂H   u0 (b) ∂Ω    I
                                                                               ∂Ui ∂Ω
                                 = −1 + ∑ hi + ∑ ( Ti + b) i +           +∑
                              ∂b        i =1   i =1
                                                           ∂b    λ    ∂b  i =1
                                                                                ∂b ∂Ui

Differentiating Ui (t) ≡ Pi (t) (u (Ci (t)) − di ) + (1 − Pi (t)) u(b) with respect to b gives:

                                                                                           ∂Pi u(ci ) − di − b
                                                                                                               
                                      ∂Ui                                            ∂Ci
                                          = (1 − p i ) u 0 ( b ) + p i u 0 ( c i )       +
                                       ∂b                                            ∂b     ∂b    pi u 0 ( ci )

Using h0 = 1 − ∑iI=1 hi and Equations (8) and (11) leads to (10). From                                             ∂Ci
                                                                                                                   ∂Ti   =   ∂Wi
                                                                                                                             ∂Ti   − 1 and for j 6= i,
∂Ci       ∂Wi
∂Ti   =   ∂Ti ,   the sum of (9) for all Tj minus Equation (10) leads to:
                                                             !                           !
                              0              I                   I                 I
                                              ∂ Hi      ∂ Hi
              0 = ∑ hi + ∑ ( Ti + b) ∑               −           − g0 h 0 + ∑ g i h i                                                                  (22)
                  i =1    i =1           j =1
                                              ∂Tj        ∂b                      i =1
                                             !                                                     !
                    I          I                     I                                  I
                                  ∂Wi   ∂Wi                  u ( ci ) − di − u ( b )       ∂Pi ∂Pi
                + ∑ gi h i ∑          −         + ∑ gi h i                            ∑ ∂Tj − ∂b
                  i =1       j =1
                                  ∂Tj    ∂b        i =1
                                                                      u 0 ( ci )      j =1


In the absence of income effects, a simultaneous change in all tax liabilities and welfare benefit
∆T1 = ... = ∆Ti = −∆b induces no changes in wages, conditional employment probabilities not
                                                                      ∂ Hi     ∂ Hi
employment levels, so that ∑iI=1 ∂W i   ∂Wi  I    ∂Pi   ∂Pi       I
                                 ∂Ti = ∂b , ∑i =1 ∂Ti = ∂b and ∑i =1 ∂Ti = ∂b . Plugging these
equalities in (22) leads to: g0 h0 + ∑iI=1 gi hi = 1.


A.2       Derivation of Equation (14)
                                                                                                                                   ∂Ci            u(ci )−di −u(b)
   Let A denotes the square matrix of rank I whose term in row j and column i is                                                   ∂Tj   + ∂P
                                                                                                                                           ∂Tj
                                                                                                                                              i
                                                                                                                                                     pi u 0 ( ci )
                                                                                                                                                                   .
The optimal tax formula (9) can be rewritten in matrix notations:

                                                                          dH
                                            0=           h            +      · (T + b) +               A · (g h)                                       (23)
                                                                          |dT {z
                                                        |{z}                                           | {z }
                                                  Mechanical effect                  }
                                                                                                   Social Welfare effects
                                                                          Behavioral effects

                                                                                          Micro
However, Equation (5) implies that:                             dU
                                                                dT    = −A ·        dU
                                                                                    dT            . Moreover, from Ki (t) = K̂i (U (t)), we
                                                        Micro              Micro
              dK         dU           dK̂          dK                dU                dK̂
get that:     dT    =    dT       ·   dU    and    dT           =    dT            ·   dU .   We thus get that:

                                                                                  ! −1                               ! −1
                                                                          Micro                              Micro
                                              dU                dU                         dK          dK
                                         −A =    ·                                       =    ·
                                              dT                dT                         dT          dT

                  dK̂
whenever          dU    is invertible, in which case Equation (23) can be rewritten as (14).

                                                                                  37
A.3      The Matching model
    We consider a matching economy where on each labor market i, the constant returns to scale
matching function gives the employment level hi as a function Mi (νi , k i ) of the number νi of
vacancies posted and the number k i of participating job seekers (Pissarides and Petrongolo, 2001).
Creating a jobs costs κi > 0 and generates output yi > κi when a worker is recruited. Hence, the
different types of labor are perfect substitutes.
                                                                                            def Mi (νi ,k i )
   Each vacancy is matched with probability qi = Qi (θi ) ≡                                        νi           = Mi (1, 1/θi ), which is
                                   def
decreasing in tightness θi ≡ νi /k i . Firms create jobs whenever the expected profit qi (yi − wi ) −
κi is positive. As more vacancies are created, tightness decreases until the free entry condition
qi (yi − wi ) = κi is verified. The conditional employment probability is an increasing function of
                                         def Mi (νi ,k i )
tightness through pi = P(θi ) ≡         = Mi (θi , 1). Therefore, the conditional probability pi is a
                                                ki                  
decreasing function of the gross wage through pi = Pi Qi−1 yi − κi
                                                                   wi    , which determines the labor
demand function pi = Li (wi ).
   Under risk neutrality and proportional bargaining (15), one has for any j 6= i that ∂W    ∂Tj = 0,
                                                                                               i


thereby    ∂Pi
           ∂Tj= 0 from pi = Li (wi ), and finally ∂U
                                                   ∂Tj = 0 from (5). Moreover, we get from pi =
                                                     i


Li (wi ) and (5) that:
                                                wi ∂Pi wi − Ti − di − b
                                                                      
                       ∂Ui           ∂Wi
                           = −1 +           1+                             pi
                       ∂Ti            ∂Ti       pi ∂wi        wi
    As µi ∈ (0, 1) denote the elasticity of the matching function with respect to the number of
                    dp                       dqi               dpi   1−µi dqi
job-seekers, we get pi i = (1 − µi ) dθ               dθi
                                      θi and qi = − µi θi , so pi = − µi qi . Log-differentiating the
                                        i


free-entry condition k i = qi (yi − wi ) leads to
                                                                      dqi
                                                                      qi    =       wi dwi
                                                                                y i − wi wi .   So, we get
                                                                                                                dpi
                                                                                                                 pi   = − 1−µiµi yi −
                                                                                                                                    wi dwi
                                                                                                                                      wi wi , i.e:
wi ∂Pi
pi ∂wi   = − 1−µiµi yi −
                       wi
                         wi and:

                                                 1 − µi wi − Ti − di − b
                                                                       
                             ∂Ui        ∂Wi
                                 = −1 +       1−                            pi
                             ∂Ti        ∂Ti        µi       y i − wi
                                     wi − Ti −di −b           βi            ∂Wi
Equation (15) implying that              y i − wi        =   1− β i   and   ∂Ti   = 1 − β i , we get:

                                                                                                                  Micro
                                                 1 − µi β i
                                                            
                       ∂Ui                                            β i ∂Ui
                           = −1 + (1 − β i ) 1 −                 pi =                                                                       (24)
                       ∂Ti                         µi 1 − β i         µi ∂Ti

when µi > 0 and β i < 1, which ends the proof of Proposition 3.




                                                                       38
                                  Table 1: Variable Means for Single Women
                                                            (1)          (2)             (3)                 (4)
                                                           Full      High School     High School            Some
                                                          Sample      Dropout         Graduate             College
Panel A: Demographics
Age                                                         34.1         33.6            33.9               34.5
No Children Percent                                         65.1         59.6            65.8               67.0
1 Child Percent                                             17.7         16.9            17.8               18.0
2 Children Percent                                          10.8         12.3            10.6               10.3
3+ Children Percent                                          6.3         11.2             5.8                4.7
Mean Years of Education                                     12.0          9.3             12                13.3
Percent Black                                               21.0         24.7            21.5               18.7
Percent Hispanic                                            14.6         30.0            12.2               10.0
Panel B: Labor Force Status
Labor Force Participation Rate (k i )                       76.9         55.2            78.3               85.3
Employment Rate (hi )                                       70.2         45.9            71.4               80.2
Unemployment Rate (1 − pi )                                  9.3         17.1             8.9                6.1
Panel C: Income, Taxes and Transfers (Real 2010 Dollars)
Imputed Pre-tax Wage Earnings                           17463            10021           16925              21503
Net Taxes: No Children                                   3929             1667            3717               5092
Net Taxes: 2 Children                                    -816            -1991           -1286                375
AFDC/TANF and Food Stamps: No Children                    644             1355             638                359
AFDC/TANF and Food Stamps: 2 Children                    3748             7177            3666               1944
Net Tax and Transfers ( Ti ): No Children                3285              312            3079               4733
Net Tax and Transfers ( Ti ): 2 Children                -4564            -9168           -4951              -1569
Net Tax and Transfers (b): Zero Income, No Children     -2070            -2055           -2069              -2077
Net Tax and Transfers (b): Zero Income, 2 Children     -11477           -11546          -11442             -11480
AFDC/TANF Recipiency Rate for Mothers: Pre-1996           29               49               25                 17
AFDC/TANF Recipiency Rate for Mothers: Post-1996          11               21               10                  6
Food Stamp Recipiency Rate: Pre-1996                       21               41              19                 10
Food Stamp Recipiency Rate: Post-1996                      22               41              23                 15
Number of observations                                    773367        138766         334359              300242
Notes: The sample is restricted to single women aged 18-55. All dollar figures are in real 2010 dollars.
Data used in each column are restricted to women with the education level in the column header.
Imputed earnings result from a linear regression of demographics on wages conditional on employment.
Net Taxes is federal, state and fica (sum of employer and employee) tax liabilities net of tax credits, including EITC.
AFDC/TANF and Food Stamps assume 100 percent recipiency among those eligible based on income.
Net Taxes and Transfers is the net of federal, state and fica (sum of employer and employee) tax liabilities and credits,
AFDC or TANF payments and food stamp benefits.




                                                          39
                Table 2: Micro and Macro Responses to Changes in Taxes and Benefits
                                      Instrumental Variable Regressions
                                                                       (1)                        (2)
 LHS Variable                                                Participation Rate: K̂i       Employment Rate: Ĥi
 Micro Response

 Taxes Plus Benefits                                                   -0.034                        -0.033
                                                                     [0.002]***                    [0.002]***
 Num. Obs                                                             773367                        773367
 Mean of Dep. Var.                                                      0.77                          0.70
 Inc Gain from Employment (2010USD)                                   14259.0                       14259.0
 Tax Elasticity                                                        -0.63                         -0.66
 Macro Response

 Avg Taxes Plus Benefits within Labor Market                           -0.030                        -0.027
                                                                      [0.017]*                       [0.018]
 Num. Obs                                                              4284                          4284
 Mean of Dep. Var.                                                      0.74                          0.67
 Inc Gain from Employment (2010USD)                                   12479.3                       12479.3
 Tax Elasticity                                                        -0.51                         -0.51
Notes: (** P<.05, *** P<.01) Standard errors clustered on state level. The sample is restricted to single women aged
18-55. The data include March CPS for 1984-2011 and Outgoing Rotations Groups for 1994-2010. The first column uses
labor force participation as the outcome variable, the second column uses employment status. Taxes Plus Benefit is the
net of federal (including EITC), state and fica (sum of employer and employee) taxes plus the benefits an individual
would be eligible for at no earnings, adjusted for national recipiency rates. The Micro Response regressions use
individual level data and include controls for age, age-squared, race, ethnicity and fixed effects for number of children
and State x Year x Month. The Macro Response regressions use data that are collapsed to the state-year cell, each
cell receives equal weight in the regression. Regressions include controls for percent black, percent hispanic, average
age, age-squared, number of children and fixed effects for state and year and CPS region time trends. Controls in all
regressions are interacted with education group.




                                                           40
          Table 3: Macro Participation and Employment Responses to Changes in Tax Liability
                                                  IV Robustness Checks
                                                                 (1)               (2)            (3)               (4)
                                                               Region          Div X Year      Reg X Year           No
                                                             Time Trend            FE             FE            Pre-Trends
 Macro Participation Response

 Avg Taxes Plus Benefits within Labor Market                     -0.030          -0.035           -0.034           -0.039
                                                                [0.017]*         [0.025]         [0.020]*         [0.017]**
 Num. Obs                                                        4284             4284             4284            4284
 Mean of Dep. Var.                                                0.74             0.74             0.74            0.74
 Income Gain from Employment                                    12479.3          12479.3          12479.3         12479.3
 Tax Elasticity                                                  -0.51            -0.58            -0.56           -0.65
 Macro Employment Response

 Avg Taxes Plus Benefits within Labor Market                     -0.027           -0.031          -0.026           -0.034
                                                                [0.018]          [0.026]          [0.022]         [0.019]*
 Num. Obs                                                        4284             4284             4284            4284
 Mean of Dep. Var.                                                0.67             0.67             0.67            0.67
 Income Gain from Employment                                    12479.3          12479.3          12479.3         12479.3
 Tax Elasticity                                                  -0.51            -0.58            -0.49           -0.64
Notes: (** P<.05, *** P<.01) Standard errors clustered on state level. The sample is restricted to single women aged 18-55.
The data include March CPS for 1984-2011 and Outgoing Rotations Groups for 1994-2010. The full sample is used for all
columns, each column include controls described in the column header. Taxes Plus Benefit is the net of federal (including
EITC), state and fica (sum of employer and employee) taxes plus the benefits an individual would be eligible for at no
earnings, adjusted for national recipiency rates. The data are collapsed to the state-year cell, each cell receives equal weight
in the regression. Regressions include controls for percent black, percent hispanic, average age, age-squared, number of
children and fixed effects for state and year. Controls for all regressions are interacted with education group.




                                                           41
Table 4: Participation and Employment Responses: Heterogeneous Labor Market Conditions
                                      (1)              (2)                     (3)            (4)
                                       Regression Coef.                    Extrapolated Marg. Effects
                                Marginal Effect   Interaction                Weak          Strong
                                of Tax Liability  of Tax Liab.            Labor Market Labor Market
                                                  with Labor
                                                 Market Meas.

 Panel A: Micro Participation
 6-mo change in unemp         -0.034                      0.0011              -0.033              -0.036
                            [0.002]***                  [0.0004]***
 State unemp. rate            -0.035                      0.0012              -0.030              -0.039
                            [0.002]***                  [0.0003]***
 Unemp above 9 pct            -0.035                      0.0053              -0.029              -0.035
                            [0.002]***                  [0.0013]***

 Panel B: Macro Participation
 6-mo change in unemp          -0.029                       0.0043            -0.024              -0.035
                              [0.017]*                     [0.0030]
 State unemp. rate             -0.034                       0.0011            -0.029              -0.039
                              [0.018]*                     [0.0012]
 Unemp above 9 pct             -0.031                       0.0089            -0.022              -0.031
                              [0.017]*                     [0.0052]

 Panel C: Micro Employment
 6-mo change in unemp      -0.033                          0.0007             -0.032              -0.034
                         [0.002]***                       [0.0005]
 State unemp. rate         -0.033                          0.0015             -0.028              -0.039
                         [0.002]***                     [0.0003]***
 Unemp above 9 pct         -0.033                          0.0074             -0.026              -0.033
                         [0.002]***                     [0.0018]***

 Panel D: Macro Employment
 6-mo change in unemp       -0.027                           0.0030           -0.023              -0.030
                           [0.018]                          [0.0031]
 State unemp. rate          -0.035                           0.0018           -0.027              -0.042
                          [0.019]*                          [0.0013]
 Unemp above 9 pct          -0.029                           0.0112           -0.017              -0.029
                          [0.017]*                         [0.0060]*
Notes: (** P<.05, *** P<.01) Standard errors clustered on state level. The Micro Response regressions use
individual level data and include controls for age, age-squared, race, ethnicity and fixed effects for number of
children and State x Year x Month. The Macro Response regressions use data that are collapsed to the state-year
cell observations, each cell receives equal weight in the regression. Regressions include controls for percent
black, percent hispanic, average age, age-squared, number of children and fixed effects for state and year and
CPS Region time trends. Weak and strong labor markets marginal effects assume the market indicator is two
standard deviations above or below the mean for the continuous variables.



                                                      42
                                                                              Figure 1: The Variation in Taxes plus Benefits
                                                                                 Micro Simulated Instrument By Number of Children: Taxes plus Benefits For HS Drop



                                                               1
                  Real Taxes plus Benefits, relative to 1984
                                                               .8
                                                               .6
                                                               .4
                                                               .2
                                                               0




                                                                          1985                   1990         1995                   2000                2005         2010
                                                                                                                            year
                                                                                                              No Children                      1 Child
                                                                                                              2 Children                       3 Children




                                                                                         (a) Micro Variation in Taxes plus Benefits
                                                                       Macro Simulated Instrument By 12 Largest States: Taxes plus Benefits For HS Drop, Removing Year FE
                  Real Taxes plus Benefits, relative to 1984
                                                               1.005
                                                               1
                                                               .995
                                                               .99
                                                               .985




                                                                          1985                 1990           1995                   2000                2005         2010
                                                                                                                       Survey year
                                                                                      California             Florida                        Georgia             Illinois
                                                                                      Michigan               New Jersey                     New York            North Carolina
                                                                                      Ohio                   Pennsylvania                   Texas               Virginia




                                                                                        (b) Macro Variation in Taxes plus Benefits

Notes: The top figure shows the variation in taxes plus benefits for high school dropouts by number of children
normalized such that 1984 equals one. Taxes plus benefits is the net of federal (including EITC), state and fica
(sum of employer and employee) taxes plus the benefits an individual would be eligible for at no earnings,
adjusted for national recipiency rates.
The bottom figure shows residuals from a regression of year fixed effects on the state level average taxes plus
benefits with state means added back to the residual, then normalized such that 1984 equals one. Taxes plus
benefits is the net of federal (including EITC), state and fica (sum of employer and employee) taxes plus the
benefits an individual would be eligible for at no earnings, adjusted for national recipiency rates.




                                                                                                                       43
Figure 2: Optimal Tax and Transfer Schedule Comparing KKLS Formula with Saez (2002)
Formula
                                                         Optimal Tax Schedule: Empirical Estimates − Matrix Formula − No Cross Effects
                                                          4
                                                     x 10
                                                3




                                               2.5




                                                2
                             Post Tax Income




                                               1.5




                                                1




                                               0.5
                                                                                                        KKLS Formula
                                                                                                        Saez 2002 Formula, Macro Emp response
                                                                                                        Saez 2002 Formula, Micro Emp response
                                                                                                        45 degree line
                                                0
                                                     0          0.5         1            1.5        2            2.5          3          3.5
                                                                                         Pre Tax Income                                  x 10
                                                                                                                                                4




                   (a) Comparing KKLS vs. Saez (2002) formula: Post vs. Pre-tax income
                                                                                    Employment Tax Rate

                                               0.7


                                               0.6


                                               0.5


                                               0.4
                    Employment Tax Rate




                                               0.3


                                               0.2


                                               0.1


                                                0


                                          −0.1                                                          KKLS Formula
                                                                                                        Saez 2002 Formula, Macro Emp response
                                                                                                        Saez 2002 Formula, Micro Emp response
                                          −0.2
                                                     1                1.5            2                  2.5             3               3.5
                                                                                         Pre Tax Income                                  x 10
                                                                                                                                                4




                    (b) Comparing KKLS vs. Saez (2002) formula: Employment tax rates

Notes: Simulations of the optimal tax and transfer schedule under alternate assumptions on employment and
participation responses. Distribution of the 4 income groups is calibrated using CPS data and corresponds to
the 4 education groups in the empirical section. The figure uses the participation and employment responses
estimated in the paper. The line with circles uses the optimal welfare formula derived in this paper. The
dashed line with plus signs uses the Saez (2002) formula based on the estimated macro responses in this
paper, while the solid line uses the estimated micro employment responses in this paper.




                                                                                               44
Figure 3: The Effect of Changing the Macro Participation Effect on the Optimal Tax and
Transfer Schedule
                                                         Optimal Tax Schedule: Effect of Changing Macro Participation (Full Sample Est)
                                                          4
                                                     x 10
                                                3




                                               2.5




                                                2
                             Post Tax Income




                                               1.5




                                                1




                                               0.5
                                                                                                    KKLS Formula: Estimates
                                                                                                    KKLS Formula: 0.5 * Macro/Micro Part Ratio
                                                                                                    KKLS Formula: 2 * Macro/Micro Part Ratio
                                                                                                    45 degree line
                                                0
                                                     0          0.5         1            1.5        2           2.5           3           3.5
                                                                                         Pre Tax Income                                    x 10
                                                                                                                                                 4




               (a) KKLS formula with alternative macro vs micro participation rates: Post vs.
               Pre-tax income
                                                                                     Employment Tax Rate

                                               0.7


                                               0.6


                                               0.5


                                               0.4
                    Employment Tax Rate




                                               0.3


                                               0.2


                                               0.1


                                                0


                                          −0.1                                                      KKLS Formula: Estimates
                                                                                                    KKLS Formula: 0.5 * Macro/Micro Part Ratio
                                                                                                    KKLS Formula: 2 * Macro/Micro Part Ratio
                                          −0.2
                                                     1                1.5            2                  2.5             3                3.5
                                                                                         Pre Tax Income                                    x 10
                                                                                                                                                 4




               (b) KKLS formula with alternative macro vs micro participation rates: Employ-
               ment tax rates

Notes: Simulations of the optimal tax and transfer schedule under alternate assumptions on employment and
participation responses. Distribution of the 4 income groups is calibrated using CPS data and corresponds to
the 4 education groups in the empirical section. The top figure shows the post vs. pre-tax income relationship
while the bottom figure shows the employment tax rates. The line with circles shows the optimal tax schedule
given the empirical estimates and the KKLS formula. The solid line shows the optimal schedule if the macro
responses are multiplied by 0.5 and the line with plus signs if they are multiplied by 2.



                                                                                               45
                               Figure 4: Optimal Tax and Transfer Schedule in Weak vs. Strong Labor Markets

                                          Varying Macro Responses (Part + Emp) − KKLS Formula                                                                           Employment Tax Rate
                                4
                           x 10
                      3                                                                                                                             0.7


                                                                                                                                                    0.6
                     2.5
                                                                                                                                                    0.5


                      2                                                                                                                             0.4




                                                                                                                             Employment Tax Rate
   Post Tax Income




                                                                                                                                                    0.3
                     1.5
                                                                                                                                                    0.2


                      1                                                                                                                             0.1


                                                                                                                                                     0
                     0.5
                                                                             KKLS Formula − Benchmark Estimates
                                                                             KKLS Weak Labor Market Estimates                                      −0.1                                       KKLS Formula − Benchmark Estimates
                                                                             KKLS Strong Labor Market Estimates                                                                               KKLS Weak Labor Market Estimates
                                                                             45 degree line                                                                                                   KKLS Strong Labor Market Estimates
                      0                                                                                                                            −0.2
                           0        0.5           1        1.5        2             2.5           3          3.5                                          1      1.5     2              2.5                3               3.5
                                                            Pre Tax Income                                    x 10
                                                                                                                    4                                                        Pre Tax Income                                 x 10
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   4




                      (a) KKLS formula: Post vs. Pre-tax income                                                                                           (b) KKLS formula: Employment tax rates
                                    Varying Macro Responses (Part + Emp) − Saez 2002 Formula                                                                            Employment Tax Rate
                                4
                           x 10
                      3                                                                                                                             0.7


                                                                                                                                                    0.6
                     2.5
                                                                                                                                                    0.5


                      2                                                                                                                             0.4
                                                                                                                             Employment Tax Rate
   Post Tax Income




                                                                                                                                                    0.3
                     1.5
                                                                                                                                                    0.2


                      1                                                                                                                             0.1


                                                                                                                                                     0
                     0.5
                                                                          Saez Formula − Benchmark Estimates
                                                                          Saez 2002 Weak Labor Market Estimates                                    −0.1                                 Saez Formula − Benchmark Estimates
                                                                          Saez 2002 Strong Labor Market Estimates                                                                       Saez 2002 Weak Labor Market Estimates
                                                                          45 degree line                                                                                                Saez 2002 Strong Labor Market Estimates
                      0                                                                                                                            −0.2
                           0        0.5           1        1.5        2             2.5           3          3.5                                          1      1.5     2              2.5                3               3.5
                                                            Pre Tax Income                                    x 10
                                                                                                                    4                                                        Pre Tax Income                                 x 10
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   4




  (c) Saez (2002) formula: Post vs. Pre-tax income                                                                                       (d) Saez (2002) formula: Employment tax rates

Notes: Simulations of the optimal tax and transfer schedule under alternate macro participation responses.
Distribution of the 4 income groups is calibrated using CPS data and corresponds to the 4 education groups
in the empirical section. The top two figures use the KKLS optimal tax formula, the bottom two figures the
Saez (2002) optimal tax formula using Macro employment effects. The line with circles corresponds to the
benchmark simulation using the estimated, participation and employment responses. The solid line shows
the tax schedule using the weak labor market estimates from Table 4 based on the 6 month change in the
unemployment rate. The line with plus signs shows the tax schedule for the corresponding strong labor
market estimates from Table 4.




                                                                                                                        46
