                                NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                       FORWARD GUIDANCE IN THE YIELD CURVE:
                          SHORT RATES VERSUS BOND SUPPLY

                                         Robin Greenwood
                                          Samuel Hanson
                                         Dimitri Vayanos

                                        Working Paper 21750
                                http://www.nber.org/papers/w21750


                      NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                               1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                 Cambridge, MA 02138
                                    December 2015




We thank Simone Manganelli (discussant), Mike Woodford, and participants at the Central Bank of
Chile Annual Conference for helpful comments. Young Min Kim and Tiago Florido provided helpful
research assistance. This research was funded by the Division of Research at Harvard Business School.
The views expressed herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the
National Bureau of Economic Research. Additional and up-to-date author disclosures about outside
activities are provided on the authors' personal websites.

At least one co-author has disclosed a financial relationship of potential relevance for this research.
Further information is available online at http://www.nber.org/papers/w21750.ack

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.

© 2015 by Robin Greenwood, Samuel Hanson, and Dimitri Vayanos. All rights reserved. Short sections
of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full
credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
Forward Guidance in the Yield Curve: Short Rates versus Bond Supply
Robin Greenwood, Samuel Hanson, and Dimitri Vayanos
NBER Working Paper No. 21750
December 2015
JEL No. G12,G18

                                           ABSTRACT

We present a model of the yield curve in which the central bank can provide market participants with
forward guidance on both future short rates and on future Quantitative Easing (QE) operations, which
affect bond supply. Forward guidance on short rates works through the expectations hypothesis, while
forward guidance on QE works through expected future bond risk premia. If a QE operation is expected
to be undone in the near term, then its announcement will have a hump-shaped effect on the yield and
forward-rate curves; otherwise the effect may be increasing with maturity. Humps associated to QE
announcements typically occur at maturities longer than those associated to short-rate announcements,
even when the effects of the former are expected to last over a shorter horizon. We use our model
to re-examine the empirical evidence on QE announcements in the US.


Robin Greenwood                                   Dimitri Vayanos
Harvard Business School                           Department of Finance, OLD 3.41
Baker Library 267                                 London School of Economics
Soldiers Field                                    Houghton Street
Boston, MA 02163                                  London WC2A 2AE
and NBER                                          UNITED KINGDOM
rgreenwood@hbs.edu                                and CEPR
                                                  and also NBER
Samuel Hanson                                     d.vayanos@lse.ac.uk
Harvard Business School
Baker Library 361
Soldiers Field
Boston, MA 02163
and NBER
shanson@hbs.edu
1    Introduction

Since late 2008, when short-term interest rates reached their zero lower bound, central banks have
been conducting monetary policy through two primary instruments: quantitative easing (QE), in
which they buy long-term government bonds and other long-term securities, and so-called “forward
guidance,” in which they guide market expectations about the path of future short rates. Because
QE alters the maturity structure of the government debt that is available to the public, it changes
the amount of duration risk that market participants must bear, thereby impacting bond risk
premia and long-term interest rates. Forward guidance may also impact long rates because it
contains information about the central bank’s willingness to keep short rates low in the future.

    Although the term “forward guidance” is normally used in reference to central-bank policy on
future short rates, QE operations typically involve some forward guidance as well. This is because
announcements that the central bank will purchase long-term securities are made well in advance
of the actual purchases, which are spread out over a period of months or years. For example, on
March 18, 2009, the Federal Open Market Committee (FOMC) announced that to “help improve
conditions in private credit markets,” the Federal Reserve would increase the scale of its previously
announced asset purchase program from $600 billion to $1.75 trillion and that these purchases
would be carried out over the next six to twelve months. At the same time, the FOMC provided
forward guidance on short rates, stating that it “anticipates that economic conditions are likely to
warrant exceptionally low levels of the Federal Funds rate for an extended period.” The impact
of announcements such as these on the yield curve has been substantial. Following the March 18,
2009 announcement, for example, ten-year zero-coupon Treasury yields fell by 51 basis points over
the course of two days.

    How should forward guidance on short rates and forward guidance on QE be reflected in the
yield curve? Policymakers have taken the implicit view that forward guidance on short rates is
easy to interpret. If the expectations hypothesis of the yield curve holds, then the expected future
path of short rates coincides with the curve of instantaneous forward rates. But forward guidance
on QE is inherently more difficult to assess because it depends on how future bond risk premia
change in response to QE and how these changes are incorporated into current bond prices. For
example, suppose that market participants believe the central bank plans to acquire large amounts
of long-term government bonds, but then plans to sell these bonds in five years. How should these
beliefs impact long rates today? What if the market revises its expectations about how long the
central bank will maintain its elevated holdings of long-term bonds?

    To make these questions concrete, consider the so-called “Taper Tantrum” of May-June 2013,
a period in which market participants feared that the Fed might reduce the pace of future bond


                                                 1
purchases. On May 22, 2013, Federal Reserve Chairman Bernanke testified in front of Congress
that the Fed would slow or “taper” its QE program if the economy showed signs of improving.
Within a week, yields of ten-year government bonds had increased by 21 basis points. On June 19,
2013, bond yields increased further following a Federal Reserve press conference, as markets feared
an end to the Fed’s balance-sheet expansion.

   Figure 1 shows the evolution of the zero-coupon Treasury yield curve between May 21 and June
28, 2013 (nine days after the Fed press conference). Panel (a) shows yields and Panel (b) shows
changes in yields between the two dates. The peak increase in yields occurred at a maturity of
seven years, where the yield to maturity increased by a total of 60 basis points (bps). Panel (c) and
Panel (d) show the same information for the forward rate curve. The peak increase in forward rates
occurred at five years to maturity: the one-year yield four-year ahead increased by over 100bps
between the two dates. The change in forward rates was large even as far as ten years into the
future.

   How should we interpret the yield curve changes in Figure 1? Were they mainly driven by
market participants’ revised expectations about the path of future short rates? If so, then under
the expectations hypothesis of the yield curve, expectations were revised the most about short
rates five years into the future, and revisions were significant even over a ten-year horizon. Were
the changes in the yield curve instead driven by expectations about future purchases of long-term
bonds by the Fed? If so, then over what horizon did expectations have to change to generate the
observed yield curve changes?

   In this paper, we build a no-arbitrage model of the yield curve that allows us to characterize
and compare the effects of forward guidance on short rates and forward guidance on QE. Among
other results, we show that forward guidance on QE tends to impact longer maturities than forward
guidance on short rates, even when expectations about bond purchases by the central bank concern
a shorter horizon than expectations about future short rates. Using our model we interpret reactions
of the US yield curve to policy announcements during the QE period.

   Our model builds on Vayanos and Vila (2009) and Greenwood and Vayanos (2014). There is a
continuum of default-free, zero-coupon bonds that are available in positive supply. For simplicity,
we consolidate the central bank and the fiscal authority, so that the only relevant quantity is the
supply of bonds that must be held by the public. The marginal holders of the bonds are risk-averse
arbitrageurs with short investment horizons. These arbitrageurs demand a risk premium for holding
bonds, because of the possibility that unexpected shocks will cause the bonds to underperform
relative to the short rate. Following a long line of research on the portfolio-balance channel (Tobin
(1958), Tobin (1969)), declines in bond supply lower the amount of duration risk that is borne by
arbitrageurs, reducing bond risk premia and raising bond prices.

                                                 2
                                     (a) Yields                                     (b) Change in yields
                  5.0                                                   1.25

                  4.0                                                   1.00
                                                                        0.75
                  3.0
              %




                                                                   %
                                                                        0.50
                  2.0
                                                                        0.25
                  1.0                              5/21/2013            0.00
                                                   6/28/2013
                  0.0                                                  −0.25
                        2   4   6    8   10 12 14 16 18 20                     2    4   6    8   10 12 14 16 18 20


                                    (c) Forwards                                   (d) Change in forwards
                  5.0                                                   1.25

                  4.0                                                   1.00
                                                                        0.75
                  3.0
              %




                                                                   %
                                                                        0.50
                  2.0
                                                                        0.25
                  1.0                              5/21/2013            0.00
                                                   6/28/2013
                  0.0                                                  −0.25
                        2   4   6    8 10 12 14 16 18 20                       2    4   6    8 10 12 14 16 18 20
                                    Maturity (years)                                        Maturity (years)




          Figure 1: Changes in US yields and forwards during the 2013 “Taper
          Tantrum.” Panels (a) and (c) plot zero-coupon Treasury yields and one-year for-
          ward rates prior to and following the Taper Tantrum (May 21 to June 28, 2013).
          Panels (b) and (d) plot cumulative changes during the Taper Tantrum. Yields and
          forward rates are computed using the continuously compounded yield curve fitted by
          Gurkaynak, Sack, and Wright (2007).



   Relative to previous work, our key theoretical innovation is that we allow for news about both
the future path of short rates and the future supply of bonds. Specifically, the short rate in our
model evolves stochastically. However, holding fixed the current level of the short rate, we also
allow for shocks to the expected path of future short rates. Similarly, the supply of bonds evolves
stochastically. But, holding fixed current supply, we also allow for shocks to the expected path
of future supply. Shocks to the expected path of future short rates and future supply can be
interpreted as policy announcements that provide forward guidance on these variables.

   After deriving the equilibrium yield curve, we describe the impact of forward guidance. Forward
guidance on short rates in our model works through the expectations hypothesis. Suppose, for
example, that arbitrageurs’ expectation of the short rate three years from now declines by 100bps.
This is reflected directly in a 100bps decline in the instantaneous forward rate three years from
now. The expectations hypothesis describes the effects of shocks to expected future short rates
because these shocks do not affect the positions that arbitrageurs hold in equilibrium and hence do
not affect bond risk premia.

   Forward guidance on supply works through expected future bond risk premia. Suppose, for


                                                               3
example, that the central bank announces that it will buy ten-year bonds one year from now.
After the purchase occurs, arbitrageurs will be holding a smaller position in ten-year bonds and
be bearing less duration risk. Hence, the premium associated to that risk will decrease and bond
prices will increase. The anticipation of this happening in one year causes an immediate rise in the
prices of all bonds with maturity longer than one year. Note that the price increase is not confined
to the bonds that the central bank announces it will purchase; in fact, other bonds may be more
heavily affected. This is because—as in Vayanos and Vila (2009) and Greenwood and Vayanos
(2014)—supply effects do not operate locally, but globally through changes in the prices of risk.

   Announcements about expected future short rates have a hump-shaped effect on the yield and
forward-rate curves. This is because current short rates are not affected, nor are expected short
rates far in the future. The location of the hump on the forward-rate curve coincides with that in
expected future short rates because of the expectation hypothesis.

   Announcements about future supply can also have a hump-shaped effect on the yield and
forward-rate curves. The intuition can be seen by noting that the impact of a supply shock on
a bond’s yield is the average on the shock’s effect on the bond’s instantaneous expected return
over the bond’s lifetime. When comparing the effect across bonds of different maturities, there are
two opposing forces. On one hand, the supply shock has a larger impact on the current expected
return that arbitrageurs require to hold the longer-term bond. On the other hand, if the shock is
expected to revert quickly, required returns are expected to remain elevated over a larger portion
of the shorter-term bond’s life. The combination of these effects means that a supply shock that
is expected to revert quickly has a hump-shaped effect on the yield curve. Moreover, the more
quickly the shock is expected to revert, the shorter is the maturity where the hump is located.
If the shock is expected to revert slowly, its effect is increasing with maturity (i.e., the hump is
located at infinity).

   A key difference between shocks to future supply and shocks to future short rates is that the
former can impact yields and forward rates at maturities much longer than the time by which the
shocks are expected to die out. And likewise, the humps on the yield and forward-rate curves
associated to supply shocks typically occur at maturities longer than those associated to short-rate
shocks, even when the former are expected to revert more quickly. Consider, for example, the
impact of a supply shock on the one-year forward rate in nine years. We show that it can be
written as the sum of the shock’s impact on the difference between expected returns on ten- and
nine-year bonds over the next year, plus the impact on the difference between expected returns
on nine- and eight-year bonds over the year after, and so on. Even a temporary shock can have
a significantly larger effect on the current expected return on ten-year bonds relative to nine-year,
and hence impact the one-year rate forward rate in nine years.


                                                 4
      After developing the theoretical results, we re-examine the empirical evidence on QE announce-
ments in the US. Existing studies of QE have computed changes in bond yields around major policy
announcements in the US and elsewhere. We add to these studies by computing changes in forward
rates along the entire curve and considering a large set of announcement dates. We show that the
cumulative effect of all expansionary announcements up to 2013 was hump-shaped with a maximum
effect at the ten-year maturity for the yield curve and the seven-year maturity for the forward-rate
curve. Explaining this evidence through changing expectations about short rates would mean that
expectations were revised the most drastically for short rates seven years into the future, while
revisions one to four years out were much more modest. This seems unlikely. On the other hand,
the evidence is more consistent with changing expectations about supply: according to our model,
the maximum revision in supply expectations would have to be only one year into the future.

      Our findings accord nicely with those of Swanson (2015), who decomposes the effect of FOMC
announcements from 2009-2015 into a component that reflects news about the future path of short
rates (forward guidance) and a component that reflects news about future asset purchases (QE).
Consistent with our model, Swanson (2015) finds that both QE-related and forward-guidance-
related announcements have hump-shaped effects on the yield curve. Moreover, the hump for the
former announcements occurs at a longer maturity than for the latter: QE announcements have
their largest impact at around the ten-year maturity, while forward-guidance announcements have
their largest impact at two to five years.

      Our paper builds on a recent literature that seeks to characterize how shocks to supply and
demand affect the yield curve (Vayanos and Vila (2009); Greenwood and Vayanos (2014); Hanson
(2014); Malkhozov, Mueller, Vedolin, and Venter (forthcoming)). It is also related to a number
of event studies that analyze the behavior of the yield curve and prices of other securities around
QE-related events. Modigliani and Sutch (1966), Ross (1966), Wallace (1967), and Swanson (2011)
study the impact of the 1962-1964 Operation Twist program. More recent event studies of QE in the
wake of the Great Recession include Gagnon, Raskin, Remache, and Sack (2011), Krishnamurthy
and Vissing-Jorgensen (2011), D’Amico, English, Lopez-Salido, and Nelson (2012), D’Amico and
King (2013), Mamaysky (2014), and Swanson (2015) for the US, and Joyce, Lasaosa, Stevens, and
Tong (2011) for the UK.1

      The paper proceeds as follows. Section 2 presents the model. Section 3 derives the equilibrium
yield curve. Section 4 describes the impact of announcements on the yield and forward-rate curves.
Section 5 re-examines the empirical evidence on QE in light of our model. Section 6 concludes.
  1
    See also Bernanke, Reinhart, and Sack (2004) for a broader analysis of QE programs, and Joyce, Myles, Scott,
and Vayanos (2012) for a survey of the theoretical and empirical literature on QE.




                                                       5
2        Model

The model is set in continuous time. The yield curve at time t consists of a continuum of default-
                                                                                                                                    (τ )
free zero-coupon bonds with maturities in the interval (0, T ] and face value one. We denote by Pt
                                                                                      (τ )                                (τ )
the price of the bond with maturity τ at time t, and by yt                                   the bond’s yield. The yield yt      is the
                                                                (τ −∆τ,τ )
spot rate for maturity τ . We denote by ft                                     the forward rate between maturities τ − ∆τ and
τ at time t. The spot rate and the forward rate are related to bond prices through

                             (τ )
           (τ )      log Pt
          yt      =−                ,                                                                                              (1)
                         τ
                                                (τ )
                                                        
                                             Pt
                             log             (τ −∆τ )
           (τ −∆τ,τ )                       Pt
          ft            =−                                  ,                                                                      (2)
                                            ∆τ

                                                                    (τ )
respectively. The short rate is the limit of yt                            when τ goes to zero, and we denote it by rt . The
                                                                                        (τ −∆τ,τ )
instantaneous forward rate for maturity τ is the limit of ft                                         when ∆τ goes to zero, and we
                     (τ )                                        (τ )
denote it by ft . We sometimes refer to ft                              simply as the forward rate for maturity τ .

        We treat the short rate rt as exogenous, and assume that it follows the process


          drt = κr (r̄t − rt )dt + σr dBr,t ,                                                                                      (3)


where


          dr̄t = κr̄ (r̄ − r̄t )dt + σr̄ dBr̄,t ,                                                                                  (4)


(κr , σr , r̄, κr̄ , σr̄ ) are positive constants, and (Br,t , Br̄,t ) are Brownian motions that are independent
of each other. The short rate rt reverts to a target r̄t , which is itself mean-reverting. The assumption
that the diffusion coefficients (σr , σr̄ ) are positive is without loss of generality since we can switch
the signs of (Br,t , Br̄,t ). We refer to r̄t as the “target short rate.” To emphasize the distinction with
rt , we sometimes refer to the latter as the “current short rate.” Shocks to r̄t can be interpreted as
policy announcements by the central bank that provide forward guidance on the future path of the
short rate. The process (3) and (4) for the short rate has been used in the term-structure literature
(e.g., Chen (1996), Balduzzi, Das, and Foresi (1998)) and is known as a stochastic-mean process.2
    2
    Although we refer to r̄t as the “target short rate,” this should be interpreted as the central banks intermediate-
term policy target (e.g., at a 1- to 2-year horizon) and not as the current operating target for the short rate (e.g.,
the current target for the federal funds rate set by the FOMC).




                                                                           6
   Bonds are issued by the government and are traded by arbitrageurs and other investors. We
consolidate the central bank and the fiscal authority, so that only the net supply coming out of
the two institutions matters. This means, for example, that a QE policy in which the central bank
expands the size of its balance sheet, issuing interest-bearing reserves (i.e., overnight government
debt) to purchase long-term government bonds, is equivalent to direct reduction in the average
maturity of government debt issued by the fiscal authority. For simplicity, we treat the net supply
coming out of the government as exogenous and price-inelastic. We do the same for the demand of
investors other than arbitrageurs, and model explicitly only the arbitrageurs. Hence, the relevant
supply in our model is that held by arbitrageurs, and reflects the combined effects of central bank
purchases, issuance by the fiscal authority, and demand by other investors in the economy.

   We assume that arbitrageurs choose a bond portfolio to trade off the instantaneous mean and
variance of changes in wealth. Denoting their time-t wealth by Wt and their dollar investment in
                                                     (τ )
the bond with maturity τ by xt , their budget constraint is


                             T             (τ )                  T           
                                  (τ ) dPt
                     Z                                        Z
                                                                       (τ )
      dWt =                      xt       (τ )
                                                dτ   + Wt −           xt dτ       rt dt.               (5)
                         0              Pt                    0



The first term in (5) is the arbitrageurs’ return from investing in bonds, and the second term is
their return from investing their remaining wealth in the short rate. The arbitrageurs’ optimization
problem is

                                 h              a            i
             max                     Et (dWt ) − V art (dWt ) ,                                        (6)
           (τ )
      {xt }τ ∈(0,T ]                            2


where a is a risk-aversion coefficient.

   We model the supply of bonds in a symmetric fashion to the short rate, so to be able to capture
forward guidance on bond supply. Specifically, we assume that the net supply coming out of the
central bank, the fiscal authority, and the other investors is described by a one-factor model: the
dollar value of the bond with maturity τ supplied to arbitrageurs at time t is

       (τ )
      st          = ζ(τ ) + θ(τ )βt ,                                                                  (7)


where ζ(τ ) and θ(τ ) are deterministic functions of τ , and βt is a stochastic supply factor. Intuitively,
it may be useful to think of βt as proportional to the amount of ten-year bond equivalents, meaning
duration-adjusted dollars of long-term debt. See Greenwood, Hanson, Rudolph, and Summers
(2015) for a calculation along these lines for US government debt.

                                                                          7
    The factor βt follows the process


      dβt = κβ (β̄t − βt )dt + σβ dBβ,t ,                                                               (8)


where


      dβ̄t = −κβ̄ β̄t dt + σβ̄ dBβ̄,t ,                                                                 (9)


(κβ , σβ , κβ̄ , σβ̄ ) are positive constants, and (Bβ,t , Bβ̄,t ) are Brownian motions that are independent
of each other and of (Br,t , Br̄,t ). The process (8) and (9) is a stochastic-mean process, analogous
to that followed by the short rate rt . The assumption that the diffusion coefficients (σβ , σβ̄ ) are

positive is without loss of generality since we can switch the signs of (Bβ,t , Bβ̄,t ). We refer to β̄t
as the target supply. To emphasize the distinction with βt , we sometimes refer to the latter as the
current supply. Shocks to β̄t can be interpreted as policy announcements by the central bank that
provide forward guidance on future purchases or sales of bonds, which in our model affect bond
yields.

    Since the supply factor βt has mean zero, the function ζ(τ ) measures the average supply for
maturity τ . The function θ(τ ) measures the sensitivity of that supply to βt . We assume that θ(τ )
has the following properties.

Assumption 1. The function θ(τ ) satisfies:
     RT
 (i) 0 θ(τ )dτ ≥ 0.

 (ii) There exists τ ∗ ∈ [0, T ) such that θ(τ ) < 0 for τ < τ ∗ and θ(τ ) > 0 for τ > τ ∗ .

    Part (i) of Assumption 1 requires that an increase in βt does not decrease the total dollar value
of bonds supplied to arbitrageurs. This is without loss of generality since we can switch the sign
of βt . Part (ii) of Assumption 1 allows for the possibility that the supply for some maturities
decreases when βt increases, even though the total supply does not decrease. The maturities for
which supply can decrease are restricted to be at the short end of the yield curve. As we show in
Section 3 below, Parts (i) and (ii) together ensure that an increase in βt makes the overall portfolio
that arbitrageurs hold in equilibrium more sensitive to movements in the short rate.



3    Equilibrium Yield Curve

Our model has four risk factors: the current short rate rt , the target short rate r̄t , the current
supply βt , and the target supply β̄t . We next examine how shocks to these factors influence the

                                                     8
                       (τ )
bond prices Pt                that are endogenously determined in equilibrium. We solve for equilibrium in two
steps: first solve the arbitrageurs’ optimization problem for equilibrium bond prices of a conjectured
form, and second use market clearing to verify the conjectured form of prices. We conjecture that
equilibrium spot rates are affine functions of the risk factors. Bond prices thus take the form


                  = e−[Ar (τ )rt +Ar̄ (τ )r̄t +Aβ (τ )βt +Aβ̄ (τ )β̄t +C(τ )]
           (τ )
      Pt                                                                                                           (10)


for five functions Ar (τ ), Ar̄ (τ ), Aβ (τ ), Aβ̄ (τ ), and C(τ ) that depend on maturity τ . The functions
Ar (τ ), Ar̄ (τ ), Aβ (τ ), and Aβ̄ (τ ) characterize the sensitivity of bond prices to the current short rate

rt , the target short rate r̄t , the current supply βt , and the target supply β̄t , respectively. Sensitivity
to factor i = r, r̄, β, β̄ is defined as the percentage price drop per unit of factor increase.

   Substituting (10) into (1) and (2), we can write spot rates and instantaneous forward rates as

        (τ )          Ar (τ )rt + Ar̄ (τ )r̄t + Aβ (τ )βt + Aβ̄ (τ )β̄t + C(τ )
      yt          =                                                             ,                                  (11)
                                                  τ
         (τ )
      ft          = A0r (τ )rt + A0r̄ (τ )r̄t + A0β (τ )βt + A0β̄ (τ )β̄t + C 0 (τ ),                              (12)


respectively. Thus, the sensitivity of spot rates to factor i = r, r̄, β, β̄ is characterized by the
             Ai (τ )
function       τ ,       and that of instantaneous forward rates by the function A0i (τ ).

   Applying Ito’s Lemma to (10) and using the dynamics of rt in (3), r̄t in (4), βt in (8), and β̄t
in (9), we find that the instantaneous return of the bond with maturity τ is

             (τ )
        dPt               (τ )
          (τ )
                      = µt dt − Ar (τ )σr dBr,t − Ar̄ (τ )σr̄ dBr̄,t − Aβ (τ )σβ dBβ,t − Aβ̄ (τ )σβ̄ dBβ̄,t ,      (13)
        Pt


where

         (τ )
      µt          ≡A0r (τ )rt + A0r̄ (τ )r̄t + A0β (τ )βt + A0β̄ (τ )β̄t + C 0 (τ )

                      + Ar (τ )κr (rt − r̄t ) + Ar̄ (τ )κr̄ (r̄t − r̄) + Aβ (τ )κβ (βt − β̄t ) + Aβ̄ (τ )κβ̄ β̄t

                       1              1                1              1
                      + Ar (τ )2 σr2 + Ar̄ (τ )2 σr̄2 + Aβ (τ )2 σβ2 + Aβ̄ (τ )2 σβ̄2                              (14)
                       2              2                2              2

denotes the instantaneous expected return. Substituting bond returns (13) into the arbitrageurs’
budget constraint (5), we can solve the arbitrageurs’ optimization problem (6).



                                                                         9
Lemma 1. The arbitrageurs’ first-order condition is

        (τ )
      µt       − rt = Ar (τ )λr,t + Ar̄ (τ )λr̄,t + Aβ (τ )λβ,t + Aβ̄ (τ )λβ̄,t ,                                        (15)


where for i = r, r̄, β, β̄,

                      Z       T
                                   (τ )
      λi,t ≡ aσi2                 xt Ai (τ )dτ.                                                                          (16)
                          0



                                                                                                                  (τ )
    According to (15), a bond’s instantaneous expected return in excess of the short rate, µt −rt , is
a linear function of the bond’s sensitivities Ai (τ ) to the factors i = r, r̄, β, β̄. The coefficients λi,t of
the linear function are the prices of risk associated to the factors: they measure the expected excess
return per unit of sensitivity to each factor. Although we derive (15) from the optimization problem
of arbitrageurs with mean-variance preferences, this equation is a more general consequence of the
absence of arbitrage: the expected excess return per unit of factor sensitivity must be the same for
all bonds (i.e., independent of τ ), otherwise it would be possible to construct arbitrage portfolios.

    Absence of arbitrage imposes essentially no restrictions on the prices of risk, and in particular
on how they vary over time t and how they depend on bond supply. We determine these prices
from market clearing. Equation (16) shows that the price of risk λi,t for factor i = r, r̄, β, β̄ at
                                         R T (τ )
time t depends on the overall sensitivity 0 xt Ai (τ )dτ of arbitrageurs’ portfolio to that factor.
Intuitively, if arbitrageurs are highly exposed to a factor, they require that any asset they hold
yields high expected return per unit of factor sensitivity. The portfolio that arbitrageurs hold in
equilibrium is determined from the market-clearing condition

        (τ )       (τ )
      xt       = st ,                                                                                                    (17)

                                                                           (τ )
which equates the arbitrageurs’ dollar investment xt                              in the bond with maturity τ to the bond’s
                     (τ )                         (τ )        (τ )
dollar supply st . Substituting µt                       and xt      from (7), (14) and (17) into (15), we find an affine
equation in rt , r̄t , βt , and β̄t . Setting linear terms in rt , r̄t , βt , and β̄t to zero yields four ordinary
differential equations (ODEs) in Ar (τ ), Ar̄ (τ ), Aβ (τ ), and Aβ̄ (τ ) respectively. Setting constant
terms to zero yields an additional ODE in C(τ ). We solve the five ODEs in Theorem 1.




                                                                      10
Theorem 1. The functions Ar (τ ), Ar̄ (τ ), Aβ (τ ), and Aβ̄ (τ ) are given by

                1 − e−κr τ
      Ar (τ ) =             ,                                                                                 (18)
                    κr
                   Z τ
                                           0           κr̄ (1 − e−κr τ ) − κr (1 − e−κr̄ τ )
      Ar̄ (τ ) =κr     Ar (τ 0 )e−κr̄ (τ −τ ) dτ 0 =                                         ,                (19)
                    0                                             κr̄ (κr̄ − κr )
                                                                                                                
                         γ2      −γ1 τ         γ1      −γ2 τ                   γ2 − κr −γ1 τ γ1 − κr −γ2 τ   −κr τ
      Aβ (τ ) =Z1               e       −             e       + 1 + Z2                 e       −         e +e
                      γ1 − γ2              γ1 − γ2                             γ1 − γ2           γ1 − γ2
                                                                            
                         γ2 − κr̄ −γ1 τ γ1 − κr̄ −γ2 τ                −κr̄ τ
                + Z3               e       −               e     +e            ,                              (20)
                         γ1 − γ2               γ1 − γ2
                   Z τ
                                             0
      Aβ̄ (τ ) =κβ      Aβ (τ 0 )e−κβ̄ (τ −τ ) dτ 0 ,                                                         (21)
                          0


respectively, where

                                  σr2 Ir  σr̄2 Ir̄
                                               
                        κβ̄ a      κr + κr̄
      Z1 ≡                                               ,                                                   (22)
              κβ̄ κβ −        κβ̄ aσβ2 Iβ − κβ aσβ̄2 Iβ̄

                                                           σr2 Ir        σr̄2 Ir̄
                                                                                   
                                       (κr − κβ̄ )a         κr      +   κr̄ −κr
      Z2 ≡                                                                                              ,    (23)
              κ2r − κr (κβ̄ + κβ − aσβ2 Iβ ) + κβ̄ κβ − κβ̄ aσβ2 Iβ − κβ aσβ̄2 Iβ̄

                                               κr (κβ̄ −κr̄ )   2
                                               κr̄ (κr̄ −κr ) aσr̄ Ir̄
      Z3 ≡                                                                                              ,    (24)
              κ2r̄ − κr̄ (κβ̄ + κβ −         aσβ2 Iβ ) + κβ̄ κβ −          κβ̄ aσβ2 Iβ − κβ aσβ̄2 Iβ̄
              Z    T
      Ir ≡             Ar (τ )θ(τ )dτ,                                                                       (25)
               0
              Z    T
      Ir̄ ≡            Ar̄ (τ )θ(τ )dτ,                                                                      (26)
               0


(γ1 , γ2 ) are the solutions of the quadratic equation


      γ 2 − γ(κβ̄ + κβ − aσβ2 Iβ ) + κβ̄ κβ − κβ̄ aσβ2 Iβ − κβ aσβ̄2 Iβ̄ = 0,                                (27)




                                                                           11
and (Iβ , Iβ̄ ) solve the system of equations

              Z   T
      Iβ =            Aβ (τ )θ(τ )dτ,                                                              (28)
              0
              Z   T
      Iβ̄ =           Aβ̄ (τ )θ(τ )dτ,                                                             (29)
              0


in which the right-hand side is a function of (Iβ , Iβ̄ ) through (20)-(27). A solution to the system
of (28) and (29) exists if a is below a threshold ā > 0. The function C(τ ) is given by (A.16) in
Appendix A.

    As in Greenwood and Vayanos (2014), an equilibrium with affine spot rates may fail to exist,
and when it exists there can be multiplicity. Equilibrium exists if the arbitrageurs’ risk-aversion
coefficient a is below a threshold ā > 0. We focus on that case, and select the equilibrium that
corresponds to the smallest value of Iβ . When a converges to zero, that equilibrium converges to
the unique equilibrium that exists for a = 0.



4     Shocks to the Yield Curve

In this section we examine how shocks to the four risk factors r, r̄, β, β̄ affect the equilibrium yield
curve. We start with a numerical example that illustrates the main results. We next return to the
analysis of the general model, and provide more complete characterizations and intuition.


4.1   Numerical Example

Table 1 summarizes the parameters used in our baseline numerical example. While we attempt
to choose realistic values for the parameters, the example’s main purpose is to illustrate general
properties of the effects of the shocks rather than to provide exact quantitative estimates.




                                                  12
                        Table 1: Parameters for baseline numerical example
                 Parameter                                                          Value
                 κr : Rate at which short rate rt reverts to target short rate r̄t  1.3
                 σr : Volatility of shocks to short rate rt                         1.65%
                 κr̄ : Rate at which target short rate r̄t reverts to long-run mean 0.2
                 σr̄ : Volatility of shocks to target short rate r̄t                2.15%
                 κβ : Rate at which supply factor βt reverts to target supply β̄t   2.5
                 σβ : Volatility of shocks to supply factor βt                      0.18
                 κβ̄ : Rate at which target supply β̄t reverts to long-run mean     0.25
                 σβ̄ : Volatility of shocks to target supply β̄t                    0.18
                 T : Maximum bond maturity                                          20
                 a: Arbitrageur risk aversion                                       1.65


       We choose values for κr , σr , κr̄ , and σr̄ to match four time-series moments of the short rate.
For the purposes of this exercise we identify the short rate with the one-year nominal yield,
and use monthly Gurkaynak, Sack, and Wright (2007) data from June 1961 to September 2015.
                       p
We match the variance ( Var(rt ) = 3.33%), the one-month autocorrelation (Corr(rt , rt−1/12 ) =
0.99), the one-year autocorrelation (Corr(rt , rt−1 ) = 0.86), and the three-year autocorrelation
(Corr(rt , rt−3 ) = 0.59). This yields κr = 1.3, σr = 1.65%, κr̄ = 0.2, and σr̄ = 2.15%. Under
these values, 90% of the total variance of the short rate is driven by persistent shocks to the target
short rate.3 The half-life of the shocks to the target short rate is 3.46 years (=log(2)/κr̄ ) whereas
the half-life of the shocks to the current short rate is only 0.53 years (=log(2)/κr ).

       We choose the values of the remaining parameters to capture aspects of the Fed’s QE program.
We assume that the θ(τ ) function (which characterizes the sensitivity of the dollar supply of the
                                                        RT
bond with maturity τ to the supply factor βt ) satisfies 0 θ(τ )dτ = 0. Under this assumption,
changes in βt do not alter the total value of bonds that arbitrageurs hold in equilibrium, but affect
only the duration of their portfolio. For simplicity, we assume that θ(τ ) depends linearly on τ .
This yields the specification

                                 
                             2τ
         θ(τ ) = θ0       1−          .
                             T


We normalize θ0 to one, which is without loss of generality because only the product θ(τ )βt matters
in the definition of bond supply.

       We choose values for κβ and κβ̄ to match plausible market expectations about the persistence
of the Fed’s balance-sheet operations. We assume that the Fed’s initial announcement of large scale
   3                                               σ2        κ σ2
    The variance of the short rate is Var(rt ) = 2κrr + 2κr̄ (κrr +κ
                                                                  r̄
                                                                     r̄ )
                                                                          . The second term in this expression corresponds to
the part of the variance that is driven by shocks to the target short rate.


                                                             13
asset purchases (LSAP) in 2008 and 2009 led market participants to expect a large reduction in
bond supply over the next twelve months and a gradual increase in supply thereafter. Accordingly,
we choose κβ and κβ̄ so that the change in the expected supply factor Et (βt+τ ) at time t + τ

following a shock to target supply β̄t at time t is maximum after one year (τ = 1) and decays to
50% of the maximum after the next three years (τ = 4). This yields κβ = 2.5 and κβ̄ = 0.25. In
Section 4.5 we examine the sensitivity of our results to a smaller value of κβ̄ , under which the effect

of a β̄t -shock on expected supply is maximum after a period longer than one year.

   We assume that a unit shock to β̄t corresponds to the announcement of a QE program that will
reduce bond supply by $3 trillion of ten-year bond equivalents. This is without loss of generality
because it amounts to a re-normalization of the monetary units in which supply is measured. Figure
2 plots the change in the expected supply factor Et (βt+τ ) at time t + τ following a unit shock to
β̄t at time t. This change, which we denote by ∆β̄ Et (βt+τ ), is a hump-shaped function of τ under

any parameter values. Indeed, the effect of the β̄t -shock on Et (βt+τ ) is small for small τ because
the shock does not affect βt , increases with τ as Et (βt+τ ) catches up with the new value of β̄t , and
decreases again to zero because β̄t mean-reverts. Under our chosen values for κβ and κβ̄ , the hump
occurs after one year, and the function reaches half of its maximum value after the next three years.

   The change ∆r̄ Et (rt+τ ) in the expected short rate Et (rt+τ ) following a unit shock to r̄t is
similarly hump-shaped. Under our chosen values for κr and κr̄ , the hump occurs after 1.7 years.
This is because we assume that supply shocks are less persistent than shocks to the short rate.
The mean-reversion parameter for supply shocks is larger than for short-rate shocks both when
comparing shocks to current supply βt and the current short rate rt (κβ > κr ), and when comparing
shocks to target supply β̄t and the target short rate r̄t (κβ̄ > κr̄ ).
                                                                  p
   We set σβ = σβ̄ = 0.18. Under these values, the volatility      Var(βt ) of the supply factor is 0.25.
We can compare this quantity to the change ∆β̄ Et (βt+τ ) in the expected supply factor following

a unit shock to β̄t . This change is 0.75 after one year (∆β̄ Et (βt+1 ) = 0.75), which is three times

the standard deviation of βt . Thus, a unit shock to β̄t is a rare and large shock to expected future
supply, consistent with it being a QE program undertaken in a crisis.

   Our final parameter is the arbitrageurs’ risk-aversion coefficient a, and we choose its value to
match the price effects of supply shocks. As noted by Greenwood, Hanson, Rudolph, and Summers
(2015), the Fed’s combined QE policies from late 2008 to mid-2014 cumulatively reduced the ten-
year bond equivalents available to investors by roughly $3 trillion. Following the meta-analysis
of studies examining the impact of QE announcements in Wiliams (2014), we assume that an



                                                    14
                                                                        3500




                     Path of expected supply: $B of 10-yr equivalents
                                                                        3000




                                                                        2500




                                                                        2000




                                                                        1500




                                                                        1000




                                                                        500




                                                                          0
                                                                               0   2   4    6       8        10   12   14   16   18   20
                                                                                                τ 0 : Years in future
                  Figure 2: Model-implied path of QE in ten-year bond equivalents



announced purchase of $500 billion ten-year bond equivalents reduces ten-year yields by 25 bps.
This suggests a total price impact for all QE announcements of 1.50%. Therefore, the value of a
must be such that Aβ̄ (10)/10 = 1.50%. This yields a = 1.65.4

    Figure 3 plots the effects of shocks to the four risk factors r, r̄, β, β̄ on the equilibrium yield
curve and forward-rate curve. There are four plots, each describing the effect that a unit shock to
one of the factors has on the yield and forward-rate curves, holding the remaining factors constant.
Recall from (11) and (12) that the effect of a unit shock to factor i = r, r̄, β, β̄ on the yield for
                 Ai (τ )
maturity τ is      τ ,                                                  and on the forward rate for that maturity is A0i (τ ). Plotting these functions
reveals the “footprint” that shocks to factor i leave on the yield and forward-rate curves.
   4
     In principle, one could use the simulated method of moments to estimate the parameters of our model. The
parameters that govern the short rate process (κr , σr , κr̄ , σr̄ ) could be identified as above by matching time-series
moments of short rates. The parameters that govern the bond supply process (κβ , σβ , κβ̄ , σβ̄ ) and arbitrageur risk
aversion (a) could be identified by matching time-series moments of long-term bond yields of various maturities and
the excess returns on long-term bonds. We do not pursue this approach because the supply and demand shocks
that have driven bond risk premia over the past decades may have been of a different nature from the supply shocks
generated by the Fed’s QE policies since 2008.




                                                                                                        15
                                                 (a) Shock to current short rate: rt
         1
                                                                                                          Yields
                                                                                                          Forwards
   %

       0.5


         0
             0           2         4         6         8        10         12           14     16         18         20
                                                 (b) Shock to target short rate: r̄ t
         1
   %




       0.5


         0
             0           2         4         6          8        10         12          14     16         18         20
                                                   (c) Shock to current supply: βt
       0.4
   %




       0.2


         0
             0           2         4         6          8        10        12           14     16         18         20
                                                   (d) Shock to target supply: β̄ t
         4
     %




         2


         0
             0           2         4         6         8       10         12            14     16         18         20
                                                       Maturity in years: τ

                 Figure 3: The effects of a unit shock to each of the four risk factors r, r̄, β, β̄
                 on the equilibrium yield curve and forward-rate curve. Panel (a) plots a shock
                 to the current short rate rt , Panel (b) a shock to the target short rate r̄t , Panel (c) a
                 shock to current supply βt , and Panel (d) a shock to target supply β̄t . For each factor
                 i = r, r̄, β, β̄, the blue solid line represents the effect Aiτ(τ ) on the yield curve and the
                 green dashed line represents the effect A0i (τ ) on the forward-rate curve.



   We make three observations regarding Figure 3. First, an increase in any of the factors raises
all yields and forward rates. Thus, yields and forward rates for any maturity move up in response
to increases in the current and in the target short rate. They also move up in response to increases
in current and in target supply.

   The second observation is that the effect of shocks to factors other than the current short rate
is hump-shaped with maturity. Figure 3 thus suggests that policy announcements by the central
bank that provide forward guidance on the short rate or on balance-sheet operations should have
hump-shaped effects on the yield and forward-rate curves. This is consistent with the evidence on
the Taper Tantrum, presented in the Introduction.




                                                               16
   The third observation suggests a way to differentiate between the two types of forward guidance.
The hump for shocks to target supply β̄t occurs at a much longer maturity than for shocks to the
target short rate r̄t : 11.5 years compared to 3.3 years for the yield curve, and 6.4 years compared to
1.7 years for the forward-rate curve. This result cannot be attributed to supply shocks being more
persistent than shocks to the short rate: in our baseline numerical example they are actually less
persistent. Figure 3 thus suggests that hump-shaped effects of forward guidance are more likely
to concern guidance on supply rather than on the short rate when the hump is located at longer
maturities.

   Figure 3 accords nicely with the empirical findings of Swanson (2015), who decomposes the
effect of FOMC announcements from 2009-2015 into a component that reflects news about the
future path of short rates (forward guidance) and a component that reflects news about future
asset purchases (QE). Swanson (2015) finds that both QE-related and forward-guidance-related
announcements have hump-shaped effects on the yield curve. Moreover, QE announcements (β̄t -
shocks in our model) have their largest impact at around the ten-year maturity, while forward-
guidance announcements (r̄t -shocks) have their largest impact at two to five years.

   In the remainder of this section we show that the these three observations hold more generally,
and we explain the intuition behind them. Section 4.2 analyzes shocks to the current and the
target short rate. Section 4.2 analyzes shocks to current and target supply. Section 4.4 compares
the footprints left by shocks to target supply and shocks to the target short rate. Section 4.5
examines how the effects of the shocks depend on various parameters of the model.


4.2     Shocks to the Current and the Target Short Rate

Shocks to the current and the target short rate do not affect bond risk premia in our model. This
is because premia depend only on the positions that arbitrageurs hold in equilibrium, and these
depend only on the supply factor βt . Since these shocks do not affect risk premia, their effects on
yields and forward rates are only through expected future short rates, and are fully consistent with
the expectations hypothesis. That is, the changes in forward rates caused by these shocks are equal
to the changes in expected future short rates.

Proposition 1. The expectations hypothesis holds for shocks to the current and the target short
rate.

   • Consider a unit shock to the current short rate rt at time t, holding constant the remaining
        risk factors (r̄t , βt , β̄t ). The change A0r (τ ) in the forward rate for maturity τ is equal to the
        change ∆r Et (rt+τ ) in the expected short rate at time t + τ .


                                                      17
   • Consider a unit shock to the target short rate r̄t at time t, holding constant the remaining
      risk factors (rt , βt , β̄t ). The change A0r̄ (τ ) in the forward rate for maturity τ is equal to the
      change ∆r̄ Et (rt+τ ) in the expected short rate at time t + τ .

   Using Proposition 1, we next determine how the effects of shocks to the current and the target
short rate depend on maturity. The effect of shocks to the current short rate rt decreases with
maturity, and is hence strongest for short maturities. Indeed, because rt mean-reverts, the effect
of shocks to rt on the expected future short rate Et (rt+τ ) is largest in the near future, i.e., for
small τ . The same applies to the forward rate because of Proposition 1. On the other hand, the
effect of shocks to the target short rate r̄t is hump-shaped with maturity, and is hence strongest
for intermediate maturities. Indeed, the effect of shocks to r̄t on the expected future short rate
Et (rt+τ ) is small for short maturities because the shocks do not affect rt , increases with maturity as
Et (rt+τ ) catches up with the new value of r̄t , and decreases again to zero because r̄t mean-reverts.
These results hold both for the yield curve and the forward-rate curve, and are consistent with our
baseline numerical example.

Proposition 2. The following results hold for both the yield curve and the forward-rate curve:

   • An increase in the short rate rt moves the curve upwards. The effect is decreasing with
      maturity, is equal to one for τ = 0, and to zero for τ → ∞.

   • An increase in the target short rate rt moves the curve upwards. The effect is hump-shaped
      with maturity, and is equal to zero for τ = 0 and t → ∞.


4.3   Shocks to Current and Target Supply

Shocks to current and target supply affect yields and forward rates only through bond risk premia.
Proposition 3 expresses the effects of the shocks on a bond’s price as an integral of risk premia over
the life of the bond.

Proposition 3. The effects of supply shocks can be expressed as follows:

   • Consider a unit shock to current supply βt at time t, holding constant the remaining risk
      factors (rt , r̄t , β̄t ). The time-t instantaneous expected return of the bond with maturity τ
      changes by


            U RP (τ ) ≡ aσr2 Ar (τ )Ir + aσr̄2 Ar̄ (τ )Ir̄ + aσβ2 Aβ (τ )Iβ + aσβ̄2 Aβ̄ (τ )Iβ̄ .      (30)




                                                          18
      The bond’s price change in percentage terms is

                         Z   τ
            Aβ (τ ) =            U RP (τ − τ 0 )∆β Et (βt+τ 0 )dτ 0 ,                                     (31)
                         0


      where ∆β Et (βt+τ 0 ) is the change in the expected supply factor Et (βt+τ 0 ) at time t + τ 0 .

   • Consider a unit shock to target supply β̄t at time t, holding constant the remaining risk factors
      (rt , r̄t , βt ). The percentage price change of the bond with maturity τ is

                         Z   τ
            Aβ̄ (τ ) =           U RP (τ − τ 0 )∆β̄ Et (βt+τ 0 )dτ 0 ,                                    (32)
                         0


      where ∆β̄ Et (βt+τ 0 ) is the change in the expected supply factor Et (βt+τ 0 ) at time t + τ 0 .


   A unit shock in current supply changes the instantaneous expected return of the bond with
maturity τ by a quantity that we denote U RP (τ ). This acronym stands for “Unit Risk Premium,”
as it is a required compensation for risk resulting from a unit increase in supply. The unit risk
premium for the bond with maturity τ is the product of the arbitrageurs’ risk-aversion coefficient
a times the change in the bond’s instantaneous covariance with the arbitrageurs’ portfolio. The
covariance changes in response to the supply shock because arbitrageurs change their portfolio in
equilibrium. The unit risk premium U RP (τ ) is small for bonds with short maturity τ because
these bonds have small price sensitivity to the risk factors. As maturity increases, price sensitivity
increases and so does U RP (τ ).

   The impact of a shock to current or target supply on a bond’s price derives from its effect on risk
premia over the life of a bond. If, for example, the risk premia increase, then the price decreases.
Equations (31) and (32) make this relationship precise by expressing the effect of a unit supply
shock on the percentage price of a bond with maturity τ as a integral of unit risk premia over the
bond’s life, i.e., from t to t + τ . The risk premium corresponding to time t + τ 0 , when the bond
reaches maturity τ − τ 0 , is proportional to the unit risk premium U RP (τ − τ 0 ). Since U RP (τ − τ 0 )
corresponds to a unit increase in the supply factor at t + τ 0 , we need to multiply it by the actual
increase in the expected supply factor. This is ∆β Et (βt+τ 0 ) in the case of a shock to current supply
and ∆β̄ Et (βt+τ 0 ) in the case of a shock to target supply.

   Using Proposition 3, we next characterize more fully the effects of shocks to current and target
supply: the sign of the effects and how they depend on maturity. As for our analysis on short
rates, the results are the same whether we are looking at the yield curve or the forward-rate curve.
For the formal propositions that we show in the rest of this section, we assume σβ̄ = 0, hence

                                                               19
interpreting shocks to β̄t as unanticipated and one-off. However, these formal results are consistent
with our baseline numerical example as well as other examples that we have explored, all of which
assume σβ̄ > 0.

    As in Greenwood and Vayanos (2014), an increase in current supply βt moves the yield curve
upwards. Moreover, this occurs even though Assumption 1 allows for the possibility that the supply
of short-term bonds can decrease. Yields and supply for a given maturity can move in opposite
directions because—as in Vayanos and Vila (2009) and Greenwood and Vayanos (2014)—supply
effects do not operate locally, but globally through changes in the prices of risk. Equations (16)
and (17) show that the prices of risk, λi,t for i = r, r̄, β, β̄, depend on the supply of debt adjusted
by measures of duration (the price sensitivities to the factors). An increase in the supply factor
raises duration-adjusted supply and hence the prices of risk. Risk premia also increase, and bond
prices decrease from Proposition 3. As with βt , an increase in target supply β̄t in our model moves
the yield curve upwards.

    We next examine how supply effects depend on maturity. Equation (31) implies that the effect
of a unit shock to current supply βt on the yield of a τ -year bond is

                   Rτ
       Aβ (τ )     0    U RP (τ − τ 0 ) × ∆β Et (βt+τ 0 )dτ 0
               =                                              .                                       (33)
         τ                              τ

This is an average of risk premia over the bond’s life. The premium corresponding to time t + τ 0 ,
when the bond reaches maturity τ − τ 0 , is the product of the unit risk premium U RP (τ − τ 0 )
corresponding to that maturity, times the increase ∆β Et (βt+τ 0 ) in the expected supply factor at
time t + τ 0 .

    Supply shocks have small effects on short-maturity bonds because these bonds carry small
risk premia. This can be seen formally from (33): for small maturity τ the unit risk premia
U RP (τ − τ 0 ) are small, and so is the average in (33). As maturity τ increases, the average in
(33) increases because unit risk premia increase. A countervailing effect, however, is that because
shocks to βt mean-revert, unit risk premia corresponding to distant times t + τ 0 are multiplied by
the increasingly smaller quantity ∆β Et (βt+τ 0 ). This pushes the average down. The countervailing
effect is not present in the extreme case where there is no mean-reversion (κβ = 0). In that case,
the effect of shocks to βt is increasing with τ , i.e., is strongest at the long end of the term structure.
In the other extreme case where mean-reversion is high, only the terms for times t + τ 0 close to t
matter in the average. Because unit risk premia increase less than linearly with τ (in particular,
changes to rt or r̄t have a vanishing effect on spot rates for long maturities) dividing by τ makes the



                                                           20
average converge to zero. The overall effect is hump-shaped and hence strongest for intermediate
maturities. The same result holds for shocks to β̄t . The hump-shaped effects are consistent with
our baseline numerical example.

Proposition 4. Suppose that σβ̄ = 0. An increase in current supply βt or target supply β̄t moves
both the term structure of spot rates and that of instantaneous forward rates upwards. The effect
is equal to zero for τ = 0. For large enough values of κβ , the effect is hump-shaped with maturity
and is equal to zero for τ → ∞. Otherwise, the effect is increasing with maturity.

    To illustrate the effects of supply, we plot in Figure 4 the functions inside the integrals (31)
and (32) in the context of our baseline numerical example. Panel (a) confirms that the unit risk
premium U RP (τ ) is equal to zero for τ = 0 and increases with τ . Panels (b)-(d) plot U RP (τ − τ 0 ),
∆β Et (βt+τ 0 ), and ∆β̄ Et (βt+τ 0 ) as a function of τ 0 ∈ [0, τ ] for three different bonds: a two-year bond
(τ = 2) in Panel (b), a ten-year bond (τ = 10) in Panel (c), and a twenty-year bond (τ = 20) in
Panel (d). The function ∆β Et (βt+τ 0 ) is decreasing with τ 0 : because βt mean-reverts, the effect of
shocks to βt on the expected future supply factor Et (βt+τ 0 ) is largest in the near future, i.e., for
small τ 0 . The function ∆β̄ Et (βt+τ 0 ) is hump-shaped, as explained in Section 4.1.

    In the case of the two-year bond, unit risk premia are small, and so are the average values of
U RP (τ − τ 0 ) × ∆β Et (βt+τ 0 ) and U RP (τ − τ 0 ) × ∆β̄ Et (βt+τ 0 ) over the interval [0, 2]. Hence, supply
effects are small. In the case of the ten-year bond, unit risk premia are larger and so are supply
effects. In the case of the twenty-year bond, unit risk premia are even larger, but the average values
of U RP (τ − τ 0 ) × ∆β Et (βt+τ 0 ) and U RP (τ − τ 0 ) × ∆β̄ Et (βt+τ 0 ) over the interval [0, 20] are smaller
because of the declines in ∆β Et (βt+τ 0 ), and ∆β̄ Et (βt+τ 0 ). Hence supply effects are smaller, yielding
the hump shape. Note that the smaller supply effect on the yield of the twenty-year bond masks a
strong time-variation in expected return. The bond’s instantaneous expected return is high (and
higher than for the other bonds) in the short term, but the effect dies out in the longer term,
resulting in a smaller average.


4.4    Forward Guidance on Supply vs. the Short Rate

We next compare the effects of shocks to target supply β̄t and shocks to the target short rate r̄t .
Interpreting these shocks as forward guidance by the central bank, we are effectively examining
whether different types of forward guidance leave a different “footprint” on the yield and forward-
rate curves. For simplicity, we focus on the forward-rate curve for the rest of this section.

    In our baseline numerical example, shocks to target supply β̄t have their maximum effect at a

                                                       21
                                      10                                                                                                                                   10                                                                                                              1
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       URP(2 − τ 0 ) (left scale)
                                       9                                                                                                                                        9                                                                      ∆β E [βt +τ 0 ] (right scale)       0.9
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       ∆β̄ E [βt +τ 0 ] (right scale)
                                       8                                                                                                                                        8                                                                                                          0.8


                                       7                                                                                                                                        7                                                                                                          0.7




                                                                                                                                                      URP(2 − τ 0 ) in %
                        URP(τ) in %



                                       6                                                                                                                                        6                                                                                                          0.6




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 E [βt +τ 0 ]
                                       5                                                                                                                                        5                                                                                                          0.5


                                       4                                                                                                                                        4                                                                                                          0.4


                                       3                                                                                                                                        3                                                                                                          0.3


                                       2                                                                                                                                        2                                                                                                          0.2


                                       1                                                                                                                                        1                                                                                                          0.1


                                       0                                                                                                                                        0                                                                                                          0
                                           0        2       4       6         8        10        12        14        16        18        20                                            0              2       4       6         8       10        12        14        16        18        20
                                                                          Maturity in years: τ                                                                                                                                τ 0 : Years in future
                            10                                                                                                       1                                                       10                                                                                                  1
                                                                                             URP(10 − τ 0 ) (left scale)                                                                                                                                URP(20 − τ 0 ) (left scale)
                              9                                                              ∆β E [βt +τ 0 ] (right scale)           0.9                                                      9                                                         ∆β E [βt +τ 0 ] (right scale)            0.9
                                                                                             ∆β̄ E [βt +τ 0 ] (right scale)                                                                                                                             ∆β̄ E [βt +τ 0 ] (right scale)
                              8                                                                                                      0.8                                                      8                                                                                                  0.8


                              7                                                                                                      0.7                                                      7                                                                                                  0.7
      URP(10 − τ 0 ) in %




                                                                                                                                                                       URP(20 − τ 0 ) in %
                              6                                                                                                      0.6                                                      6                                                                                                  0.6
                                                                                                                                           E [βt +τ 0 ]




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                E [βt +τ 0 ]
                              5                                                                                                      0.5                                                      5                                                                                                  0.5


                              4                                                                                                      0.4                                                      4                                                                                                  0.4


                              3                                                                                                      0.3                                                      3                                                                                                  0.3


                              2                                                                                                      0.2                                                      2                                                                                                  0.2


                              1                                                                                                      0.1                                                      1                                                                                                  0.1


                              0                                                                                                      0                                                        0                                                                                                 0
                                  0             2       4       6         8       10        12        14        16        18        20                                                            0       2       4       6         8        10        12        14        16        18        20
                                                                        τ 0 : Years in future                                                                                                                                   τ 0 : Years in future


                                               Figure 4: Decomposition of the effect of supply shocks. Panel (a) plots
                                               the unit risk premium U RP (τ ). Panels (b)-(d) plot U RP (τ − τ 0 ) (blue solid line),
                                               ∆β Et (βt+τ 0 )dτ 0 (green dashed line), and ∆β̄ Et (βt+τ 0 )dτ 0 (red dotted line) as a func-
                                               tion of τ 0 ∈ [0, τ ] for three different bonds: Panel (b) for a two-year bond (τ = 2),
                                               Panel (c) for a ten-year bond (τ = 10), and Panel (d) for a twenty-year bond (τ = 20).



longer maturity than shocks to the target short rate r̄t . While this is the “typical” outcome in our
model, the result is not completely general: if the shocks to current and target supply mean-revert
very rapidly, the comparison can reverse. Proposition 5 derives sufficient conditions for β̄t -shocks
to have their maximum effect at a longer maturity than r̄t -shocks. The proposition compares the
location of the humps associated to two types of shocks, with the convention if the effect of a shock
is monotonically increasing with maturity then the hump is located at infinity.

Proposition 5. Suppose that σβ̄ = 0. If κr̄ ≥ κβ or κr̄ ≥ κβ̄ , then the hump on the forward rate

curve associated to shocks to β̄t is located at a strictly longer maturity than the hump associated to
shocks to r̄t .

    Shocks to β̄t have their largest impact at longer maturities compared to shocks to r̄t under the
sufficient condition that the latter shocks do not mean-revert more slowly than the former shocks
(κr̄ ≥ κβ̄ ). Alternatively, r̄t -shocks can revert more slowly than β̄t -shocks, but then they must not

                                                                                                                                                   22
mean-revert more slowly than βt -shocks (κr̄ ≥ κβ ). Note that under either sufficient condition, the
hump associated to β̄t -shocks occurs at a strictly longer maturity than that associated to r̄t -shocks,
even though the sufficient conditions are weak inequalities. Our baseline numerical example shows
that the comparison between the two humps remains the same even when κβ and κβ̄ are both
significantly larger than κr̄ . (For very large values, however, the comparison can reverse.) Thus,
the sufficient conditions in Proposition 5 are not tight, and the “typical” result is that shocks to
target supply have their maximum impact at longer maturities than shocks to the target short rate.

    The intuition why shocks to future supply tend to have their largest impact at longer maturities
compared to shocks to the future short rate can be seen from (32). The impact of a β̄t -shock on
the forward rate for maturity τ is

                           τ
                               ∂U RP (τ − τ 0 )
                      Z
      A0β̄ (τ )   =                             ∆β̄ Et (βt+τ 0 )dτ 0 ,                                             (34)
                      0             ∂τ


where (34) follows from (32) by differentiating with respect to τ and noting that U RP (0) = 0. The
impact on the forward rate can be thought of as the impact on the percentage price of the bond
with maturity τ relative to the same effect for the bond with maturity τ − ∆τ . The bond with
maturity τ is impacted more heavily because for any given future time t + τ 0 , the unit risk premium
U RP (τ − τ 0 ) associated to that bond is larger than the corresponding premium U RP (τ − ∆τ − τ 0 )
associated to the bond with maturity τ − ∆τ . The impact on the forward rate hence involves the
             ∂U RP (τ −τ 0 )
derivative       ∂τ          ,      as (34) confirms. This derivative is multiplied by the increase ∆β̄ Et (βt+τ 0 )
in the expected supply factor at time t + τ 0 , and the product is integrated from zero to τ .

    Compare next the shock’s impact on the forward rate for maturity τ and for maturity τ̂ > τ .
                          ∂U RP (τ −τ 0 )
The derivative                ∂τ            that is present in the integral (34) for maturity τ is also present in
the integral for maturity τ̂ . But while in the former integral it corresponds to time t + τ 0 and is
multiplied by ∆β̄ Et (βt+τ 0 ), in the latter integral it corresponds to the more distant time t+ τ̂ −τ +τ 0
and is multiplied by ∆β̄ Et (βt+τ̂ −τ +τ 0 ). If τ̂ ≤ τβ̄ , where t + τβ̄ denotes the location of the hump of
∆β̄ Et (βt+τ 0 ), then ∆β̄ Et (βt+τ̂ −τ +τ 0 ) > ∆β̄ Et (βt+τ 0 ) for all τ 0 ∈ [0, τ ]. Therefore, the impact of a βt -
shock on the forward rate for maturity τ̂ is larger than for maturity τ , which means that the shock’s
maximum impact occurs at a maturity strictly longer than τβ̄ . On the other hand, Proposition
1 implies that the maximum impact of a r̄t -shock occurs exactly at τr̄ , where t + τr̄ denotes the
location of the hump of ∆r̄ Et (rt+τ 0 ). Therefore, if the shocks to r̄t and β̄t are symmetric in their
persistence, then β̄t -shocks have their largest impact at longer maturities compared to r̄t -shocks.

    We can also compare r̄t - and β̄t -shocks by focusing on the long end of the term structure rather

                                                                    23
than on the hump. Proposition 6 derives sufficient conditions for the effect of β̄t -shocks to decay
more slowly with maturity than that of r̄t -shocks. Under these conditions, β̄t -shocks impact the
long end of the term structure more than r̄t -shocks do.

Proposition 6. Suppose that σβ̄ = 0. If min{κr , κr̄ } ≥ κβ̄ , then the effect of shocks to β̄t on
the forward rate curve decays with maturity at a slower rate than the effect of shocks to r̄t . If
min{κr , κr̄ } ≥ κβ , then the same comparison holds and is strict.

   The sufficient conditions in Proposition 6 have a similar flavor to those in Proposition 5. As
with Proposition 5, the conditions are not tight. Our baseline numerical example illustrates this.


4.5   Comparative statics

Figure 5 examines how the effect of supply shocks depends on arbitrageur risk aversion. The figure
plots the effect of shocks to current supply βt and future supply β̄t on the forward-rate curve in
two numerical examples: our baseline one where the risk-aversion coefficient a is set to 1.65, and an
example where a is set to 2.25 (and all other parameters remain the same). When arbitrageurs are
more risk averse, they require a larger risk premium to accommodate supply shocks, and hence the
shocks have a larger impact on yields and forward rates. Furthermore, the hump for both βt - and β̄t -
shocks occurs at longer maturities. For example, the location of the hump that β̄t -shocks generate
on the forward-rate curve increases from 6.4 years in the baseline example where a = 1.65 to 9
years when a = 2.25. The hump occurs at a longer maturity because when arbitrageurs are more
risk averse the unit risk premium U RP (τ ) increases proportionately more for long-term bonds, i.e.,
becomes a more convex function of τ . This is because with more risk-averse arbitrageurs, supply
shocks have larger price effects, and the impact of these shocks on long-term bonds relative to
short-term bonds is larger than that of short-rate shocks. For example, the impact of rt -shocks is
characterized by the increasing function Ar (τ ), while the impact of βt -shocks involves an integral
of that function.

   Figure 6 examines how the effect of supply shocks depends on the shocks’ persistence. The
figure plots the effect of shocks to current and future supply on the forward-rate curve in two
numerical examples: our baseline one where the mean-reversion coefficient κβ̄ of β̄t -shocks is set
to 0.25, and one where κβ̄ is set to 0.2 and hence shocks are more persistent. When κβ̄ = 0.2, the

effect of a β̄t -shock on the expected supply factor Et (βt+τ ) at time t + τ is maximum after 1.1 year
(τ = 1.1) and decays to 50% of the maximum after the next 3.9 years (τ = 5). When shocks are
more persistent, they have a larger impact on the yield and forward-rate curves. Furthermore, the
hump for both βt - and β̄t -shocks occurs at longer maturities. For example, the location of the hump

                                                  24
                                       (a) Shock to current supply: βt
        0.7

        0.6
                                                                Baseline: a = 1.65
                                                                Higher risk aversion: a = 2.25
        0.5

        0.4
    %




        0.3

        0.2

        0.1

         0
              0         2        4       6       8         10      12     14     16      18      20


                                       (b) Shock to target supply: β̄ t
         5

         4

         3
    %




         2

         1

         0
              0         2        4       6       8         10      12     14     16      18      20
                                             Maturity in years: τ
                  Figure 5: Impact of supply shocks on the forward-rate curve under different
                  values of arbitrageur risk aversion a. The blue solid lines correspond to
                  our baseline numerical example where a = 1.65 and the green dashed lines
                  to an example where a = 2.25 and all other parameters remain the same.



that β̄t -shocks generate on the forward-rate curve increases from 6.4 years in the baseline example
where κβ̄ = 0.25 to 7.6 years when κβ̄ = 0.2. While the shift of the hump to longer maturities may

not be surprising in the case of β̄t -shocks, whose persistence increases, it may be more surprising
in the case of βt shocks, whose persistence does not change. The intuition for βt -shocks is that
higher persistence means that supply shocks have larger price effects, and this makes the unit risk
premium U RP (τ ) a more convex function of τ .



5    Reassessing QE and the Taper Tantrum

Table 2 summarizes the reaction of the US Treasury yield and forward-rate curves to major QE
announcements. The table shows the two-day change in zero-coupon Treasury yields and one-year

                                                      25
                                  (a) Shock to current supply: βt
      0.35

       0.3
                                                         Baseline: κβ̄ = 0.25
                                                         More persistent supply: κβ̄ = 0.2
      0.25

       0.2
  %




      0.15

       0.1

      0.05

        0
             0      2       4       6       8            10          12      14          16      18      20


                                   (b) Shock to target supply: β̄ t
        3

       2.5

        2
   %




       1.5

        1

       0.5

        0
             0      2       4       6       8            10          12      14          16      18      20
                                         Maturity in years: τ
             Figure 6: Impact of supply shocks on the forward-rate curve under different
             values of the shocks’ persistence. The blue solid lines correspond to our
             baseline numerical example where the mean-reversion coefficient of shocks
             to future supply is κβ̄ = 0.25 and the green dashed lines to an example
             where κβ̄ = 0.2 and all other parameters remain the same.



forward rates around major policy announcements about the Fed’s QE operations. We use two-
day changes to allow for the possibility that market participants need time to digest news about
LSAP programs. However, we obtain qualitatively similar results if we restrict attention to one-day
changes. We obtain US Treasury yields and forward rates using the fitted nominal Treasury curve
estimated by Gurkaynak, Sack, and Wright (2007). We use GSW’s zero-coupon yields, and compute
                                             (τ −1,τ )        (τ )             (τ −1)
one-year forward rates from those yields: ft             = τ yt      − (τ − 1)yt        . The one-year forward
rates are close to the instantaneous forward rates estimated by GSW. We measure all variables in
percentage points.

   Our set of QE-related announcement dates is drawn from Fawley and Neely (2013), who provide
a comprehensive list of FOMC policy announcements and speeches that contained major news


                                                  26
about QE. We classify these events based on whether the announcement contained significant news
indicating that the Fed would be expanding or contracting its asset purchases. Many of these events
contain a mixture of news about future QE operations as well as the path of the short rate. For
example, the list includes the March 18, 2009 FOMC announcement discussed in the Introduction,
in which the Fed announced that it was expanding the scale of its long-term asset purchase program
from $600 billion to $1.75 trillion and that it intended to hold rates at the zero lower bound for
“an extended period.”

   Table 2 shows the change in yields and forward rates around each announcement date. It also
shows yield and forward-rate changes aggregated across all expansionary and all contractionary
announcements. Figure 7 plots the latter aggregates. As the table and the figure show, both
expansionary and contractionary announcements had hump-shaped effects on both the yield and
the forward-rate curve. In the case of expansionary announcements, the hump in yields occurred
at the ten-year maturity. One-year yields dropped by 33 basis points (bps) on aggregate, two-year
yields by 52bps, three-year yields by 86bps, four-year yields by 121bps, five-year yields by 153bps,
seven-year yields by 195bps, ten-year yields by 211bps, fifteen-year yields by 179bps, and twenty-
year yields by 144bps. The hump in forward rates occurred at the seven-year maturity, with the
one-year forward rate seven years into the future dropping by 301bps. In the case of contractionary
announcements, the hump in yields occurred at the seven-year maturity and that in forward rates
at the five-year maturity.

   What is the most natural interpretation of these changes? According to our model, the hump-
shaped impact on yields and forward rates can be explained either by forward guidance on the path
of future short rates or forward guidance on the path of future bond supply.

   Forward guidance on short rates works through the expectations hypothesis. This means, in
particular, that following expansionary announcements, yields and forward rates dropped because
market participants revised downwards their expectations about future short rates. Moreover,
expectations dropped the most for short rates seven years into the future, with the aggregate
effect over all announcements being 301bps. That market participants revised so drastically their
expectations about the short rate seven years into the future, while expectations one to four years
out were revised much more modestly, seems unlikely.

   Forward guidance on supply works through expected future risk premia. In contrast to forward
guidance on short rates, humps in the yield and forward-rate curves that are consistent with the
data could have been the results of changes in supply expectations concerning the near future.
Indeed, in our baseline numerical example, shocks to target supply have their largest effect at the
11.5-year maturity in the yield curve and the 6.4-year maturity in the forward-rate curve. Yet, these
shocks have their maximum effect on expectations about supply only one year into the future, with


                                                 27
                                       1.50

                                       1.00

                                       0.50
             Change in yield (%)
                                       0.00

                                      −0.50

                                      −1.00

                                      −1.50

                                      −2.00

                                      −2.50

                                      −3.00
                                              2   4   6     8       10      12     14     16         18   20
                                                                Maturity (years)

                                                      QE expansions                QE contractions



                                       1.50

                                       1.00

                                       0.50
             Change in forwards (%)




                                       0.00

                                      −0.50

                                      −1.00

                                      −1.50

                                      −2.00

                                      −2.50

                                      −3.00
                                              2   4   6     8       10      12     14     16         18   20
                                                                Maturity (years)

                                                      QE expansions                QE contractions


          Figure 7: Changes in Yields and Forward Rates Surrounding QE Announce-
          ment Dates.



the effect four years out being only half of the maximum.

   Corroborating evidence on the relative role of supply and short-rate expectations in driving the
effects of QE comes from the work by Adrian, Crump, and Moench (2013). These authors construct
a methodology for decomposing yields and forward rates into an expectations and a term-premium


                                                                 28
component. Drawing on their data for the same announcement dates, Figure 8 plots the changes
in expected future short rates and in the term premia.5 As with the previous figures, we show the
results for both yields and forward rates. ACM’s estimates attribute almost all of the impact of
QE announcements to changes in term premia and almost none to changes in expected future short
rates.



6    Conclusion

In this paper, we build a model to analyze the impact of forward guidance on the yield curve.
Our model recognizes that in recent years forward guidance pertains not only to the future path of
short-term interest rates, but also to the future size of the central bank’s balance sheet.

    We show that forward guidance on short-term interest rates is easy to interpret because it
works through the expectations hypothesis. If, for example, the market expectation of the short
rate three years from now declines by 100bps, this is reflected directly in a 100bps decline in the
instantaneous forward rate three years from now. However, when the central bank provides forward
guidance on supply, the effects are more subtle. In particular, yields and forward rates are impacted
at maturities much longer than the time by which supply shocks are expected to die out. Moreover,
while the effects of either type of forward guidance on the yield and forward-rate curves can be
hump-shaped, the humps associated to supply shocks typically occur at maturities longer than
those associated to short-rate shocks.

    Using our model we re-examine the empirical evidence on QE announcements in the US. We
show that the cumulative effect of all expansionary announcements up to 2013 was hump-shaped
with a maximum effect at the ten-year maturity for the yield curve and the seven-year maturity
for the forward-rate curve. This evidence is hard to square with changing expectations about short
rates as the maximum change would have to concern short rates seven years into the future. On
the other hand, the evidence is more consistent with changing expectations about supply, as the
maximum change would have to be only one year into the future.




  5
    The ACM model does not fit the GSW yields exactly. Thus, the two parts of the ACM curve do not perfectly
sum to the GSW curve.


                                                    29
                             1.50

                             1.00

                             0.50
   Change in yield (%)



                             0.00

                            −0.50

                            −1.00

                            −1.50

                            −2.00

                            −2.50

                            −3.00
                                    1   2     3      4     5         6      7      8      9       10
                                                         Maturity (years)

                                            QE expansions: TP               QE expansions: EH
                                            QE contractions: TP             QE contractions: EH



                             1.50

                             1.00

                             0.50
   Change in forwards (%)




                             0.00

                            −0.50

                            −1.00

                            −1.50

                            −2.00

                            −2.50

                            −3.00
                                    1   2     3      4     5         6      7      8      9       10
                                                         Maturity (years)

                                            QE expansions: TP               QE expansions: EH
                                            QE contractions: TP             QE contractions: EH


Figure 8: Changes in expected future short rates and in the term premia
surrounding QE announcement dates. EH refers to the expectations component
and TP to the term-premium component. The decomposition into EH and TP draws
on data from Adrian, Crump, and Moench (2013).




                                                           30
Appendix

A     Proofs of Theoretical Results

Proof of Lemma 1: Using (13), we can write (5) as
                                     Z       T                                         Z          T                  
                                                   (τ ) (τ )                                              (τ )
      dWt = Wt rt +                               xt (µt          − rt )dτ        dt −                   xt Ar (τ )dτ       σr dBr,t
                                          0                                                      0
                    Z        T                                                  Z     T                                           Z      T                    
                                   (τ )                                                       (τ )                                                 (τ )
               −                  xt Ar̄ (τ )dτ                   σr̄ dBr̄,t −               xt Aβ (τ )dτ              σβ dBβ,t −                 xt Aβ̄ (τ )dτ        σβ̄ dBβ̄,t ,
                          0                                                          0                                                    0



and (6) as

                                  T                                                          T                     2
                                                                      aσ 2
                       Z                                                          Z
                                       (τ ) (τ )                                                  (τ )
          max                         xt (µt                − rt )dτ − r                         xt Ar (τ )dτ
        (τ )
      {xt }τ ∈(0,T ]          0                                        2                 0


                        aσ 2
                                       Z             T
                                                           (τ )
                                                                          2
                                                                                   aσβ2
                                                                                                 Z      T
                                                                                                              (τ )
                                                                                                                            2       aσβ̄2 Z         T
                                                                                                                                                           (τ )
                                                                                                                                                                          2 #
                       − r̄                               xt Ar̄ (τ )dτ        −                             xt Aβ (τ )dτ        −                        xt Aβ̄ (τ )dτ          .
                         2                        0                                  2               0                                2           0

                                                                                                                                                                   (A.1)


Point-wise maximization of (A.1) yields (15).

                                                                       (τ )
Proof of Theorem 1: Substituting xt                                           from (7) and (17) into (16), we find

                     Z        T
      λi,t = aσi2                 [ζ(τ ) + θ(τ )βt ] Ai (τ )dτ.                                                                                                    (A.2)
                          0


                   (τ )
Substituting µt           and λi,t from (14) and (A.2) into (15), we find an affine equation in (rt , r̄t , βt , β̄t ).
Identifying terms in rt yields


      κr Ar (τ ) + A0r (τ ) − 1 = 0,                                                                                                                               (A.3)


identifying terms in r̄t yields


      −κr Ar (τ ) + κr̄ Ar̄ (τ ) + A0r̄ (τ ) = 0,                                                                                                                  (A.4)




                                                                                       31
identifying terms in βt yields
                                                             Z       T
      κβ Aβ (τ ) +      A0β (τ )          =   aσr2 Ar (τ )               Ar (τ )θ(τ )dτ
                                                                 0
                             Z       T                                            Z       T                                           Z       T
      +     aσr̄2 Ar̄ (τ )               Ar̄ (τ )θ(τ )dτ   + aσβ2 Aβ (τ )                         Aβ (τ )θ(τ )dτ   + aσβ̄2 Aβ̄ (τ )               Aβ̄ (τ )θ(τ )dτ,
                                 0                                                    0                                                   0
                                                                                                                                                                (A.5)


identifying terms in β̄t yields


      −κβ Aβ (τ ) + κβ̄ Aβ̄ (τ ) + A0β̄ (τ ) = 0,                                                                                                               (A.6)


and identifying constant terms yields

                                                                               σβ̄                2                2
                                σ2            σ2               σβ
      C (τ ) − κr̄ r̄Ar̄ (τ ) + r Ar (τ )2 + r̄ Ar̄ (τ )2 +
        0
                                                                  Aβ (τ )2 +       A (τ )2
                                 2            2                 2               2 β̄
                      Z T                                  Z T
            2                                   2
      = aσr Ar (τ )         Ar (τ )ζ(τ )dτ + aσr̄ Ar̄ (τ )     Ar̄ (τ )ζ(τ )dτ
                                 0                                                    0
                             Z       T                                                Z       T
      +     aσβ2 Aβ (τ )                 Aβ (τ )ζ(τ )dτ +            aσβ̄2 Aβ̄ (τ )               Aβ̄ (τ )ζ(τ )dτ.                                              (A.7)
                                 0                                                        0


The ordinary differential equations (ODEs) (A.3)-(A.7) must be solved with the initial conditions
Ar (0) = Ar̄ (0) = Aβ (0) = Aβ̄ (0) = C(0) = 0. The solution to (A.3) with the initial condition
Ar (0) = 0 is (18). The solution to (A.4) with the initial condition Ar̄ (0) = 0 is (19). The solution
to (A.6) with the initial condition Aβ̄ (0) = 0 is (21). To solve (A.5), we write it as


      κβ Aβ (τ ) + A0β (τ ) = aσr2 Ir Ar (τ ) + aσr̄2 Ir̄ Ar̄ (τ ) + aσβ2 Iβ Aβ (τ ) + aσβ̄2 Iβ̄ Aβ̄ (τ ),                                                      (A.8)


using (25), (26), (28), and (29). Differentiating with respect to τ , we find


      κβ A0β (τ ) + A00β (τ ) = aσr2 Ir A0r (τ ) + aσr̄2 Ir̄ A0r̄ (τ ) + aσβ2 Iβ A0β (τ ) + aσβ̄2 Iβ̄ A0β̄ (τ ).                                                (A.9)




                                                                                      32
Multiplying (A.8) by κβ̄ , adding to (A.9), and using (18), (19), and (A.6), we find
                                                     
          κβ̄ κβ −   κβ̄ aσβ2 Iβ   −   κβ aσβ̄2 Iβ̄       Aβ (τ ) + (κβ̄ + κβ − aσβ2 Iβ )A0β (τ ) + A00β (τ )

                      κβ̄   κr − κβ̄ −κr τ                                   κβ̄   κr − κβ̄ −κr τ κr (κβ̄ − κr̄ ) −κr̄ τ
                                                                                                                        
      = aσr2 Ir           +         e                      + aσr̄2 Ir̄           +          e    +                 e           . (A.10)
                      κr       κr                                            κr̄   κr̄ − κr        κr̄ (κr̄ − κr )


Equation (A.10) is a second-order linear ODE with constant coefficients. Its solution has the form


      Aβ (τ ) = Γ1 e−γ1 τ + Γ2 e−γ2 τ + Âβ (τ ),                                                                                (A.11)


where (γ1 , γ2 ) are the solutions of the quadratic equation (27), and Âβ (τ ) is one solution to (A.10).

We look for Âβ (τ ) of the form


      Âβ (τ ) = Z1 + Z2 e−κr τ + Z3 e−κr̄ τ .


Substituting into (A.10), we find that (Z1 , Z2 , Z3 ) are given by (22)-(24), respectively. To determine
(Γ1 , Γ2 ) we use the initial conditions. The initial condition Aβ (0) = 0 implies


      Γ1 + Γ2 + Z1 + Z2 + Z3 = 0.                                                                                                (A.12)


The initial condition A0β (0) = 0, which follows from (A.5) and Ar (0) = Aβ (0) = Aβ̄ (0), implies


      γ1 Γ1 + γ2 Γ2 + κr Z2 + κr̄ Z3 = 0.                                                                                        (A.13)


Solving the linear system of (A.12) and (A.13) yields

              γ2 Z1 + (γ2 − κr )Z2 + (γ2 − κr̄ )Z3
      Γ1 =                                         ,                                                                             (A.14)
                            γ1 − γ2

                γ1 Z1 + (γ1 − κr )Z2 + (γ1 − κr̄ )Z3
      Γ2 = −                                         .                                                                           (A.15)
                              γ1 − γ2


Substituting (Γ1 , Γ2 ) from (A.14) and (A.15) into (A.11), we find (20).




                                                                             33
   The solution to (A.7) is
                       Z           τ                               Z       τ                             Z     τ                           Z       τ
                                                   0       0                          0         0                            0    0
      C(τ ) = Zr                       Ar (τ )dτ + Zr̄                         Ar̄ (τ )dτ + Zβ                     Aβ (τ )dτ + Zβ̄                     Aβ̄ (τ 0 )dτ 0
                           0                                           0                                   0                                   0

                σ2
                       Z           τ
                                                   σ2
                                                                       Z       τ                         σβ2
                                                                                                               Z       τ                   σβ̄2 Z            τ
               − r                     Ar (τ ) dτ − r̄
                                                   0 2         0                          0 2
                                                                                   Ar̄ (τ ) dτ −     0                           0 2
                                                                                                                           Aβ (τ ) dτ −0
                                                                                                                                                                 Aβ̄ (τ 0 )2 dτ 0 ,
                 2             0                    2                      0                             2         0                           2         0
                                                                                                                                                                                 (A.16)


where
                       Z   T
        Zr ≡   aσr2                Ar (τ )ζ(τ )dτ,
                       0
                                         Z     T
        Zr ≡ κr̄ r̄ +      aσr̄2                       Ar̄ (τ )ζ(τ )dτ,
                                           0
                       Z       T
      Zβ ≡ aσβ2                        Aβ (τ )ζ(τ )dτ,
                           0
                       Z       T
      Zβ̄ ≡    aσβ̄2                   Aβ̄ (τ )ζ(τ )dτ.
                           0



   For a = 0, the solutions of (27) are (γ1 , γ2 ) = (κβ , κβ̄ ), and the solution to the system of (28)
and (29) is (Iβ , Iβ̄ ) = (0, 0). The existence of a solution to (28) and (29) for a close to zero follows
from the implicit function theorem.

Proof of Proposition 1: Consider first the unit shock to rt . Taking expectations in (3), we find
that the change ∆r Et (rt+τ ) in the expected short rate at time t + τ follows the dynamics


      d[∆r Et (rt+τ )] = −κr ∆r Et (rt+τ )dτ.


With the initial condition ∆r Et (rt ) = 1, these dynamics integrate to


      ∆r Et (rt+τ ) = e−κr τ = A0r (τ ),


where the second step in the first equation follows from (18).

   Consider next the unit shock to r̄t . Taking expectations in (3) and (4), we find that the change
∆r̄ Et (rt+τ ) in the expected short rate and ∆r̄ Et (r̄t+τ ) in the target short rate at time t + τ follow




                                                                                                34
the dynamics

       d[∆r̄ Et (rt+τ )] = κr [∆r̄ Et (r̄t+τ ) − ∆r̄ Et (rt+τ )]dτ,

       d[∆r̄ Et (r̄t+τ )] = −κr̄ ∆r̄ Et (r̄t+τ )dτ.


With the initial condition (∆r̄ Et (rt ), ∆r̄ Et (r̄t )) = (0, 1), these dynamics integrate to

                                    e−κr τ − e−κr̄ τ
       ∆r̄ Et (rt+τ ) = κr                           = A0r̄ (τ ),
                                       κr̄ − κr

       ∆r̄ Et (r̄t+τ ) = e−κr̄ τ ,


where the second step in the first equation follows from (19).

   We next show a useful lemma.
                                                                                                      RT
Lemma A.1. If a function f (τ ) is positive and increasing, then                                      0    f (τ )θ(τ )dτ > 0.

                                                              RT
Proof: We can write the integral                               0   f (τ )θ(τ )dτ as

       Z       T                      Z    τ∗                           Z   T
                   f (τ )θ(τ )dτ =              f (τ )θ(τ )dτ +                 f (τ )θ(τ )dτ
           0                           0                                 τ∗
                                                 Z       τ∗                        Z    T
                                   > f (τ ∗ )                 θ(τ )dτ + f (τ ∗ )            θ(τ )dτ
                                                     0                                 τ∗
                                                 Z       T
                                            ∗
                                   = f (τ )                   θ(τ )dτ ≥ 0,
                                                     0


where the second step follows from Part (ii) of Assumption 1 and because f (τ ) is increasing, and
the last step follows from Part (i) of Assumption 1 and because f (τ ) is positive.

Proof of Proposition 2: The effect of an increase in rt on the term structure of spot rates is
                                          Ar (τ )
described by the function                   τ ,          and the effect on the term structure of instantaneous forward rates
by the function A0r (τ ). We will show that these functions have the following properties:

       Ar (τ )
   •     τ          > 0 and A0r (τ ) > 0 for τ > 0.

                      Ar (τ )
   • limτ →0            τ        = 1 and A0r (0) = 1.

                       Ar (τ )
   • limτ →∞             τ       = 0 and limτ →0 A0r (τ ) = 0.


                                                                                 35
           Ar (τ )
     •       τ         and A0r (τ ) are decreasing in τ .

     Equation (18) implies that the function Ar (τ ) is positive and increasing. Therefore, the functions
Ar (τ )
  τ        and A0r (τ ) are positive, which means that an increase in rt shifts the term structure upwards.
                               Ar (τ )       1−e−κr τ
Moreover, both                   τ       =     κr τ           and A0r (τ ) = e−κr τ are equal to one for τ = 0 and to zero for
                                                                                                                               Ar (τ )
τ → ∞. Finally, A0r (τ ) is decreasing in τ , and the same is true for                                                           τ       because for a general
function g(τ )

                                                              Rτ
            d g(τ )   τ g 0 (τ ) − g(τ )                          0   τ 0 g 00 (τ 0 )dτ 0
                    =                    =                                                .                                                                  (A.17)
           dτ τ                τ2                                          τ2


     The effect of an increase in r̄t on the term structure of spot rates is described by the function
Ar̄ (τ )
  τ        and that on the term structure of instantaneous forward rates by the function A0r̄ (τ ). We will
show that these functions have the following properties:

           Ar̄ (τ )
     •       τ         > 0 and A0r̄ (τ ) > 0 for τ > 0.

                         Ar̄ (τ )
     • limτ →0             τ         = 0 and A0r̄ (0) = 0.

                          Ar̄ (τ )
     • limτ →∞              τ        = 0 and limτ →0 A0r̄ (τ ) = 0.

           Ar̄ (τ )
     •       τ         and A0r̄ (τ ) are hump-shaped in τ .

     Since the function Ar (τ ) is positive, (19) implies that the function Ar̄ (τ ) is also positive. More-
over, Ar̄ (τ ) is increasing because
                                                 Z       τ                                                  
                                                                              −κr̄ (τ −τ 0 )
           A0r̄ (τ )   = κr Ar (τ ) − κr̄                     Ar (τ )e    0
                                                                                                    dτ   0
                                                                                                                                                             (A.18)
                                                      0
                                                  Z          τ                                 
                                                                      −κr̄ (τ −τ 0 )        0
                       ≥ κr Ar (τ ) 1 − κr̄                       e                    dτ
                                                          0


                       = κr Ar (τ )e−κr̄ τ > 0,


where the first step follows by differentiating (19) and the second because Ar (τ ) is increasing. Since
                                                                                            Ar̄ (τ )
Ar̄ (τ ) is positive and increasing, the functions                                            τ              and A0r̄ (τ ) are positive, which means that an
                                                                                                                                                 Ar̄ (τ )
increase in r̄t shifts the term structure upwards. Since Ar (0) = 0, (19) implies that                                                             τ        is equal
to zero for τ = 0, and (A.18) implies the same property for A0r̄ (τ ). Since Ar (τ ) converges to the

                                                                                                36
               1                                                               Ar̄ (τ )
finite limit   κr      for τ → ∞, (19) implies that                              τ         converges to zero for τ → ∞, and (A.18) implies
the same property for A0r̄ (τ ).

                                Ar̄ (τ )
    To show that                  τ        and A0r̄ (τ ) are hump-shaped, it suffices to show this property for A0r̄ (τ ).
                                                                Ar̄ (τ )
Indeed, (A.17) would then imply that                              τ        can either be increasing or increasing and then decreas-
                                                                                        Ar̄ (τ )
ing, and the first pattern is ruled out because                                           τ        is equal to zero for both τ = 0 and τ → ∞.
Differentiating (A.18), we find

                                                                      Z   τ                                             
                                                                                               −κr̄ (τ −τ 0 )
      A00r̄ (τ )   = κr         A0r (τ )    − κr̄ Ar (τ ) +     κ2r̄           Ar (τ )e    0
                                                                                                                dτ   0
                                                                                                                             .        (A.19)
                                                                       0


The term in brackets has the same sign as

                                                                           Z       τ
                                                                                                       0
      Hr̄ (τ ) ≡ A0r (τ ) − κr̄ Ar (τ ) eκr̄ τ + κ2r̄                                  Ar (τ 0 )eκr̄ τ dτ 0 .
                                      
                                                                               0


The function Hr̄ (τ ) is equal to A0r (0) = 1 for τ = 0, and its derivative is


      Hr̄0 (τ ) = A00r (τ )eκr̄ τ < 0.


Therefore, Hr̄ (τ ) is either positive or positive and then negative. This means that A0r̄ (τ ) is either
increasing or increasing and then decreasing. The first pattern is ruled out because A0r̄ (τ ) is equal
to zero for both τ = 0 and τ → ∞.

Proof of Proposition 3: Consider first the unit shock to βt . Using the definition (30) of U RP (τ ),
we can write (A.5) as


      κβ Aβ (τ ) + A0β (τ ) = U RP (τ ).                                                                                              (A.20)


Integrating (A.20) with the initial condition Aβ (τ ) = 0, we find
                       Z    τ
                                                        0
      Aβ (τ ) =                 U RP (τ 0 )e−κβ (τ −τ ) dτ 0                                                                          (A.21)
                        0
                       Z    τ
                                                            0
                   =            U RP (τ − τ 0 )e−κβ τ dτ 0 .                                                                          (A.22)
                        0


Taking expectations in (8), we find that the change ∆β Et (βt+τ ) in the expected future supply factor




                                                                                        37
at time t + τ follows the dynamics


      d[∆β Et (βt+τ )] = −κβ ∆β Et (βt+τ )dτ.


With the initial condition ∆β Et (βt ) = 1, these dynamics integrate to


      ∆β Et (βt+τ ) = e−κβ τ .                                                                                              (A.23)


Using (A.23), we can write (A.22) as (31).

   Consider next the unit shock to β̄t . Taking expectations in (8) and (9), we find that the
changes ∆β̄ Et (βt+τ ) in the expected future supply factor and ∆β̄ Et (β̄t+τ ) in the expected future
target supply follow the dynamics

      d[∆β̄ Et (βt+τ )] = κβ [∆β̄ Et (β̄t+τ ) − ∆β̄ Et (βt+τ )]dτ,

      d[∆β̄ Et (β̄t+τ )] = −κβ̄ ∆β̄ Et (β̄t+τ )dτ.


With the initial condition (∆β̄ Et (βt ), ∆β̄ Et (β̄t )) = (0, 1), these dynamics integrate to

                                    e−κβ τ − e−κβ̄ τ
      ∆β̄ Et (βt+τ ) = κβ                            ,                                                                      (A.24)
                                       κβ̄ − κb

      ∆β̄ Et (β̄t+τ ) = e−κβ̄ τ .


Substituting (A.21) into (21), we find
                                                                                                  !
                       Z       τ    Z       τ0
                                                                          (τ 0 −τ 00 )                            0
      Aβ̄ (τ ) = κβ                              U RP (τ 00 )e−κβ                        dτ 00         e−κβ̄ (τ −τ ) dτ 0
                           0            0

                       Z       τ   Z     τ                                                       
                                                 −κβ (τ 0 −τ 00 ) −κβ̄ (τ −τ 0 )              0
              = κβ                              e               e                    dτ               U RP (τ 00 )dτ 00
                           0            τ 00
                                                                                                  0
                       τ
                                       e−κβ (τ −τ ) − e−κβ̄ (τ −τ ) 0
                  Z                                               0
                                            0
              =            U RP (τ )κβ                             dτ
                   0                            κβ̄ − κβ
                                                                                          0
                       τ
                                                           e−κβ τ − e−κβ̄ τ
                  Z                                                   0

              =            U RP (τ − τ 0 )κβ                                dτ 0 .                                          (A.25)
                   0                                          κβ̄ − κβ


Using (A.24), we can write (A.25) as (32).

Proof of Proposition 4: The effect of an increase in βt on the term structure of spot rates is


                                                                                         38
                                                 Aβ (τ )
described by the function                          τ          and that on the term structure of instantaneous forward rates by
the function A0β (τ ). For σβ̄ = 0, (A.8) becomes


        κβ Aβ (τ ) + A0β (τ ) = aσr2 Ir Ar (τ ) + aσr̄2 Ir̄ Ar̄ (τ ) + aσβ2 Iβ Aβ (τ ),


and integrates to

                                   Z       τ                                                      Z        τ
                                                             −κ̂β (τ −τ 0 )                                                          0
        Aβ (τ ) =        aσr2 Ir                     0
                                               Ar (τ )e                        0
                                                                              dτ +   aσr̄2 Ir̄                 Ar̄ (τ 0 )e−κ̂β (τ −τ ) dτ 0 ,                                   (A.26)
                                       0                                                               0


where


        κ̂β ≡ κβ − aσβ2 Iβ .


                                                                    Aβ (τ )
    We will show that the functions                                   τ        and A0β (τ ) have the following properties:


           Aβ (τ )
    •        τ       > 0 and A0β (τ ) > 0 for τ > 0.

                      Aβ (τ )
    • limτ →0           τ       = 0 and A0β (0) = 0.

                                                 Aβ (τ )
    • For κ̂β > 0, limτ →∞                         τ         = 0 and limτ →0 A0β (τ ) = 0.

                                 Aβ (τ )                                                                                                              Aβ (τ )
    • For κ̂β > 0,                 τ            and A0β (τ ) are hump-shaped in τ . For κ̂β < 0,                                                        τ           and A0β (τ ) are
        increasing in τ .

    Since the functions Ar (τ ) and Ar̄ (τ ) are positive and increasing, Lemma A.1 implies that
(Ir , Ir̄ ) are positive. Hence, (A.26) implies that the function Aβ (τ ) is positive. To show that Aβ (τ )
is increasing, we differentiate (A.26):

                                                  Z     τ                                                                              Z       τ                                            
                                                                        −κ̂β (τ −τ 0 )                                                                               −κ̂β (τ −τ 0 )
A0β (τ )   =   aσr2 Ir       Ar (τ ) − κ̂β                          0
                                                             Ar (τ )e                    dτ   0
                                                                                                      +aσr̄2 Ir̄         Ar̄ (τ ) − κ̂β               Ar̄ (τ )e 0
                                                                                                                                                                                      dτ   0
                                                                                                                                                                                                   .
                                                     0                                                                                        0

                                                                                                                                                                                (A.27)


If κ̂β ≤ 0, then (A.27) and the positivity of (Ar (τ ), Ar̄ (τ )) imply that A0β (τ ) is positive. If κ̂β > 0,
then the same conclusion follows by proceeding as in the proof of the result in Proposition 2 that
                                                                                                                                          Aβ (τ )
Ar̄ (τ ) is increasing. Since Aβ (τ ) is positive and increasing, the functions                                                             τ           and A0β (τ ) are posi-


                                                                                         39
tive, which means that an increase in βt shifts the term structure upwards. Since (Ar (0), Ar̄ (0)) = 0,
                             Aβ (τ )
(A.26) implies that            τ         is equal to zero for τ = 0, and (A.27) implies the same property for A0β (τ ).

Since (Ar (τ ), Ar̄ (τ )) converge to the finite limit ( κ1r , κ1r̄ ) for τ → ∞, (19) implies that when κ̂β > 0,
                                                                                                                                                  Aβ (τ )
Aβ (τ ) converges to a finite limit for τ → ∞. Therefore, when κ̂β > 0,                                                                             τ       converges to zero for
τ → ∞, and (A.18) implies the same property for A0β (τ ).

                                                                Aβ (τ )
    We next study the monotonicity of                             τ        and A0β (τ ). Differentiating (A.27), we find
                                                                        Z       τ                                                   
                                                                                                         −κ̂β (τ −τ 0 )
      A00β (τ )   =aσr2 Ir       A0r (τ )    − κ̂β Ar (τ ) +      κ̂2β               Ar (τ )e    0
                                                                                                                           dτ    0
                                                                             0
                                                                                Z       τ                                                    
                                                                                                                 −κ̂β (τ −τ 0 )
                    + aσr̄2 Ir̄         A0r̄ (τ )   − κ̂β Ar̄ (τ ) +     κ̂2β                Ar̄ (τ )e   0
                                                                                                                                  dτ      0
                                                                                                                                                  .                       (A.28)
                                                                                     0



If κ̂β ≤ 0, then (A.28) and the positivity of (Ar (τ ), Ar̄ (τ )) imply that A00β (τ ) is positive. Therefore,
                                                                          Aβ (τ )
A0β (τ ) is increasing, and (A.17) implies that                             τ                is increasing. If κ̂β > 0, then we will show that
                                                                                                                                                                           Aβ (τ )
A00β (τ ) is positive and then negative, and hence A0β (τ ) is hump-shaped. The hump-shape of                                                                                τ
                                                                         Aβ (τ )
will follow by using (A.17) and noting that                                τ             is equal to zero for both τ = 0 and τ → ∞.

    The right-hand side of (A.28) has the same sign as
                                                                                            Z       τ                                    
                                                                                                                       κ̂β τ 0
                  =aσr2 Ir           A0r (τ )   − κ̂β Ar (τ ) eκ̂β τ + κ̂2β                                        0                  0
                                                            
      Hβ (τ )                                                                                            Ar (τ )e                dτ
                                                                                                 0
                                                                                                    Z       τ                                    
                                                                                                                            κ̂β τ 0
                        aσr̄2 Ir̄         A0r̄ (τ )   − κ̂β Ar̄ (τ ) eκ̂β τ + κ̂2β                                     0                      0
                                                                   
                    +                                                                                            Ar̄ (τ )e            dτ              .
                                                                                                         0




                                                                                     40
The function Hβ (τ ) is equal to aσr2 Ir A0r (0) = aσr2 Ir > 0 for τ = 0. Its derivative is

           Hβ0 (τ ) = aσr2 Ir A00r (τ )eκ̂β τ + aσr̄2 Ir̄ A00r̄ (τ )eκ̂β τ .

                                           σr̄2 Ir̄
                                                                      
                      =  aσr2 Ir        A00r (τ )
                                       + 2 κr Hr̄ (τ )e         −κr̄ τ
                                                                         eκ̂β τ
                                           σr Ir
                                                               Z τ
                                           σr̄2 Ir̄
                                                                                                   
                           2       00                                  00 0 κr̄ τ 0      0     −κr̄ τ
                      = aσr Ir Ar (τ ) + 2 κr 1 +                   Ar (τ )e          dτ e              eκ̂β τ
                                           σr Ir                0
                                                                         Z τ
                                                   σr̄2 Ir̄
                                                                                                          
                           2          −κr τ                                     (κr̄ −κr )τ 0   0     −κr̄ τ
                      = aσr Ir −κr e        + 2 κr 1 − κr                     e               dτ e             eκ̂β τ
                                                   σr Ir                  0
                                  "                                                  !                #
                                            2I              κ   e (κr̄ −κr )τ − 1
                                          σ      r̄          r
                      = aσr2 Ir κr −1 + r̄2             1−                                e(κr −κr̄ )τ e(κ̂β −κr )τ
                                          σr Ir                   κr̄ − κr
                                         "                                                             !#
                                                 σ 2 Ir̄                        κr 1 − e(κr −κr̄ )τ
                      = aσr2 Ir κr           −1 + r̄2          e(κr −κr̄ )τ   −                              e(κ̂β −κr )τ .
                                                 σr Ir                              κr̄ − κr


The term in square brackets is an affine function of e(κr −κr̄ )τ and can hence change sign at most
once. Since A0r (τ ) is decreasing and A0r̄ (τ ) is hump-shaped, Hβ0 (τ ) is negative for large τ . Since it
can change sign at most once, it is either negative or positive and then negative. Therefore, Hβ (τ )
is either decreasing or increasing and then decreasing. Since Hβ (τ ) is positive for τ = 0, it is either
positive or positive and then negative. The first pattern is ruled out because when κ̂β > 0, A0β (τ )
is equal to zero for both τ = 0 and τ → ∞.

     The effect of an increase in β̄t on the term structure of spot rates is described by the function
Aβ̄ (τ )
  τ        and that on the term structure of instantaneous forward rates by the function A0β̄ (τ ). We

will show that these functions have the following properties:

           Aβ̄ (τ )
     •       τ        > 0 and A0β̄ (τ ) > 0 for τ > 0.

                       Aβ̄ (τ )
     • limτ →0           τ        = 0 and A0β̄ (0) = 0.

                                               Aβ̄ (τ )
     • For κ̂β > 0, limτ →∞                      τ        = 0 and limτ →0 A0β̄ (τ ) = 0.

                                   Aβ̄ (τ )                                                                            Aβ̄ (τ )
     • For κ̂β > 0,                  τ        and A0β̄ (τ ) are hump-shaped in τ . For κ̂β < 0,                          τ        and A0β̄ (τ ) are
           increasing in τ .

     The above properties can be derived from those of Aβ (τ ) in the same way that the properties

                                                                               41
     Ar̄ (τ )
of     τ        and A0r̄ (τ ) are derived from those of Ar (τ ) in the proof of Proposition 2. In particular,
because Aβ (τ ) is positive, increasing, equal to zero for τ = 0, and converging to a finite limit for
                                                                   Aβ̄ (τ )
τ → ∞ when κ̂β > 0, we can show that                                 τ        and A0β̄ (τ ) are positive, equal to zero for τ = 0, and

converging to zero for τ → ∞ when κ̂β > 0. The function A00β̄ (τ ) has the same sign as

                                                                         Z        τ
                                                                                                     0
         Hβ̄ (τ ) ≡ A0β (τ ) − κβ̄ Aβ (τ ) eκβ̄ τ + κ2β̄                              Aβ (τ 0 )eκβ̄ τ dτ 0 .
                                         
                                                                              0


The function Hβ̄ (τ ) is equal to A0β (0) = 0 for τ = 0, and its derivative is


         Hβ̄0 (τ ) = A00β (τ )eκβ̄ τ .


                                                                                                                           Aβ̄ (τ )
When κ̂β ≤ 0, A00β (τ ) is positive. Therefore, A00β̄ (τ ) is also positive and the functions                                τ        and

A0β̄ (τ ) are increasing. When κ̂β > 0, A00β (τ ) is positive and then negative. Therefore, Hβ̄ (τ ) is

increasing and then decreasing. Since Hβ̄ (τ ) is equal to zero for τ = 0, it is either positive or
positive and then negative. The first pattern is ruled out when κ̂β > 0 because A0β̄ (τ ) is equal to

zero for both τ = 0 and τ → ∞.

     The final step in the proof is to show that κ̂β is a monotone function of κβ . This will ensure
that κ̂β > 0 corresponds to larger values of κβ than κ̂β ≤ 0 does. Since the function Aβ (τ ) is
positive and increasing, Lemma A.1 implies that Iβ is positive. Since the function


         G(κ̂β ) ≡ κ̂β − κβ + aσβ2 Iβ


is positive for κ̂β ≥ κβ , any solution κ̂β to G(κ̂β ) = 0 satisfies κ̂β < κβ . Moreover, at the largest
solution, which corresponds to our equilibrium selection, the function G(κ̂β ) crosses the x-axis from
below. Since G(κ̂β ) is decreasing in κβ , the largest solution is increasing in κβ .

Proof of Proposition 5: The humps on the instantaneous-forward-rate term structure associated
to shocks to r̄t and β̄t are located at the solutions to
                                Z     τ
                                                        0
          Hr̄ (τ ) = 1 +                  A00r (τ 0 )eκr̄ τ dτ 0 = 0,                                                           (A.29)
                                  0
                      Z     τ
                                                   0
         Hβ̄ (τ ) =             A00β (τ 0 )eκβ̄ τ dτ 0 = 0,                                                                     (A.30)
                        0




                                                                                      42
respectively. We denote these solutions by (τr̄ , τβ̄ ). Since


      A00β (τ ) = Hβ (τ )e−κ̂β τ
                                 Z                                   τ   h                                                                                i            
                           2                                                                            0                                              0
                       = aσr Ir +                                             aσr2 Ir A00r (τ 0 )eκ̂β τ               +   aσr̄2 Ir̄ A00r̄ (τ 0 )eκ̂β τ         dτ   0
                                                                                                                                                                            e−κ̂β τ ,
                                                                  0



we can write (A.30) as
      Z       τ
                                            0
                  A00β (τ 0 )eκβ̄ τ dτ 0 = 0
          0
                          (                                                                                                                                              )
                  Z   τ                                   Z    τ0     h                                                                                      i
                                                                                                            τ 00                                      τ 00                              0   0
       ⇔                      aσr2 Ir +                                   aσr2 Ir A00r (τ 00 )eκ̂β                    + aσr̄2 Ir̄ A00r̄ (τ 00 )eκ̂β              dτ 00        e−κ̂β τ eκβ̄ τ dτ 0 = 0
                  0                                        0

                      τ                                                           τ            τ
                                                                                                                                                    σr̄2 Ir̄ 00 00
                  Z                                                       Z           Z                                                                         
                          (κβ̄ −κ̂β )τ 0                      0                                    (κβ̄ −κ̂β )τ 0          0                                          00
       ⇔                  e                           dτ +                                         e                  dτ            A00r (τ 00 )   + 2 Ar̄ (τ ) eκ̂β τ dτ 00 = 0
                  0                                                           0            τ 00                                                     σr Ir
                                                                                                            0         0
                                  τ
                                                                          σr̄2 Ir̄ 00 0 e(κβ̄ −κ̂β )τ +κ̂β τ − eκβ̄ τ
                          Z                                                            
       ⇔1+                                A00r (τ 0 ) +                           A (τ )                                dτ 0 = 0.                                                                   (A.31)
                              0                                           σr2 Ir r̄           e(κβ̄ −κ̂β )τ − 1


    A sufficient condition for τβ̄ > τr̄ is that

                                            0                         0
      e(κβ̄ −κ̂β )τr̄ +κ̂β τ − eκβ̄ τ                                                      0

                      (κβ̄ −κ̂β )τr̄
                                                                           < eκr̄ τ                for      0 < τ 0 < τr̄ .                                                                         (A.32)
                  e                             −1

This is because
                                          Z         τr̄
                                                                                       0
      Hr̄ (τr̄ ) = 1 +                                    A00r (τ 0 )eκr̄ τ dτ 0 = 0
                                                0

                                                (κβ̄ −κ̂β )τr̄ +κ̂β τ 0                                           0
                                  τr̄
                                         00 0 e                                                        − eκβ̄ τ
                          Z
       ⇒1+                              Ar (τ )  >0   (κ −κ̂β )τr̄
                              0          −1                               e       β̄


                                                                0         0
                            σr̄2 Ir̄ 00 0 e(κβ̄ −κ̂β )τr̄ +κ̂β τ − eκβ̄ τ
           Z τr̄                        
                    00 0
       ⇒1+         Ar (τ ) + 2 Ar̄ (τ )                                     >0
            0               σr Ir               e(κβ̄ −κ̂β )τr̄ − 1

       ⇒ Hβ̄ (τr̄ ) > 0,                                                                                                                                                                            (A.33)


where the second step follows from (A.32) and A00r (τ 0 ) < 0, and the third step follows because
A00r̄ (τ 0 ) > 0 for τ 0 < τr̄ . Since Hβ̄ (τ ) has the same sign of Aβ̄ (τ ), and the latter is positive if and
only if τ < τβ̄ , (A.33) implies that τr̄ < τβ̄ .




                                                                                                                       43
    Equation (A.32) is equivalent to

                                                 0                0
                  e(κβ̄ −κ̂β )τr̄ +(κ̂β −κr̄ )τ − e(κβ̄ −κr̄ )τ
      h(τ 0 ) ≡                 (κβ̄ −κ̂β )τr̄
                                                                      <1        for 0 < τ 0 < τr̄ .
                               e                     −1

The function h(τ 0 ) is equal to one for τ 0 = 0 and to zero for τ 0 = τr̄ . Its derivative is

                                                              0                              0
        0   0
                  (κ̂β − κr̄ )e(κβ̄ −κ̂β )τr̄ +(κ̂β −κr̄ )τ − (κβ̄ − κr̄ )e(κβ̄ −κr̄ )τ
      h (τ ) =
                                                 e(κβ̄ −κ̂β )τr̄ − 1

and has the same sign as

                                                          0
            0
                (κ̂β − κr̄ )e(κβ̄ −κ̂β )(τr̄ −τ ) − (κβ̄ − κr̄ )
      h1 (τ ) ≡                                                  .
                                  κβ̄ − κ̂β


    If κβ ≤ κr̄ , then κ̂β < κr̄ . The function h1 (τ 0 ) is negative, as can be seen by writing it as

                                                          0
            0                e(κβ̄ −κ̂β )(τr̄ −τ ) − 1
      h1 (τ ) = (κ̂β − κr̄ )                           − 1.
                                    κβ̄ − κ̂β


Suppose next that κβ̄ ≤ κr̄ . If κ̂β ≤ κr̄ , then h1 (τ 0 ) is negative because of the previous argument.
If κ̂β > κr̄ , then h1 (τ 0 ) is negative, as can be seen by writing it as

                                                                       0
            0
                κβ̄ − κr̄ − (κ̂β − κr̄ )e(κβ̄ −κ̂β )(τr̄ −τ )
      h1 (τ ) =                                               .
                               κ̂β − κβ̄


Since h1 (τ 0 ) is negative, h(τ 0 ) < 1 for 0 < τ 0 < τr̄ , and hence (A.32) is satisfied.

Proof of Proposition 6: Equation (19) implies that the function A0r̄ (τ ) decays at rate e− min{κr ,κr̄ }τ
for large τ . Equations (20) and (21) imply that the function A0β̄ (τ ) decays at rate e− min{κr ,κr̄ ,γ1 ,γ2 }τ

for large τ . Therefore, the effect of β̄t -shocks on the instantaneous-forward-rate term structure de-
cays with maturity at a slower rate than the effect of r̄t -shocks if


      min{γ1 , γ2 } ≤ min{κr , κr̄ },                                                                   (A.34)


and at a strictly slower rate if (A.34) is strict. For σβ̄ = 0, (27) implies that (γ1 , γ2 ) = (κ̂β , κβ̄ ).
The proposition follows from this observation, (A.34), and κ̂β < κβ .

                                                                           44
References
Adrian, Tobias, Richard Crump, and Emanuel Moench, 2013, Pricing the term structure with linear
  regresssions, Journal of Financial Economics 110, 110–138.

Balduzzi, Pierluigi, Sanjiv Das, and Silverio Foresi, 1998, The central tendency: A second factor in
  bond yields, Review of Economics and Statistics 80, 62–72.

Bernanke, Ben, Vincent Reinhart, and Brian Sack, 2004, Monetary policy alternatives at the zero
  bound: An empirical assessment, Brookings Papers on Economic Activity 35, 1–100.

Chen, Lin, 1996, Stochastic Mean and Stochastic Volatility - A Three-Factor Model of the Term
  Structure of Interest Rates and its Application to the Pricing of Interest Rate Derivatives (Black-
  well Publishers: Oxford, UK).

D’Amico, Stefania, William English, David Lopez-Salido, and Edward Nelson, 2012, The Federal
  Reserve’s large-scale asset purchase programs: Rationale and effects, Economic Journal 122,
  F415–F446.

D’Amico, Stefania, and Thomas King, 2013, Flow and stock effects of large-scale Treasury pur-
  chases: Evidence on the importance of local supply, Journal of Financial Economics 108, 425–
  448.

Fawley, Brett, and Christopher Neely, 2013, Four stories of Quantitative Easing, Federal Reserve
  Bank of St. Louis Review 95, 51–88.

Gagnon, Joseph, Matthew Raskin, Julie Remache, and Brian Sack, 2011, The financial market
  effects of the Federal Reserve’s large-scale asset purchases, International Journal of Central
  Banking 7, 3–43.

Greenwood, Robin, Samuel Hanson, Joshua Rudolph, and Lawrence Summers, 2015, The opti-
  mal maturity of government debt, in David Wessel, ed.: The $13 Trillion Question . chap. 1
  (Brookings Press).

Greenwood, Robin, and Dimitri Vayanos, 2014, Bond supply and excess bond returns, Review of
  Financial Studies 27, 663–713.

Gurkaynak, Refet, Brian Sack, and Jonathan Wright, 2007, The US treasury yield curve: 1961 to
  the present, Journal of Monetary Economics 54, 2291–2304.

Hanson, Samuel, 2014, Mortgage convexity, Journal of Financial Economics 113, 270299.




                                                 45
Joyce, Michael, Ana Lasaosa, Ibrahim Stevens, and Matthew Tong, 2011, The financial market
  impact of Quantitative Easing in the United Kingdom, International Journal of Central Banking
  7, 113–161.

Joyce, Michael, David Myles, Andrew Scott, and Dimitri Vayanos, 2012, Quantitative Easing and
  unconventional monetary policy: An Introduction, Economic Journal 122, F271–F288.

Krishnamurthy, Arvind, and Annette Vissing-Jorgensen, 2011, The effects of Quantitative Easing
  on interest rates: Channels and implications for policy, Brookings Papers on Economic Activity
  43, 215–287.

Malkhozov, Aytek, Philippe Mueller, Andrea Vedolin, and Gyuri Venter, forthcoming, Mortgage
  hedging in fixed-income markets, Review of Financial Studies.

Mamaysky, Harry, 2014, The time horizon of price responses to Quantitative Easing, Working
 paper.

Modigliani, Franco, and Richard Sutch, 1966, Innovations in interest-rate policy, American Eco-
  nomic Review 56, 178–197.

Ross, Myron, 1966, “Operation Twist”: A mistaken policy?, Journal of Political Economy 74,
  195–199.

Swanson, Eric, 2011, Let’s twist again: A high-frequency event-study analysis of Operation Twist
  and its implications for QE2, Brookings Papers on Economic Activity 42, 151–207.

       , 2015, Measuring the effects of unconventional monetary policy on asset prices, Working
  paper University of California, Irvine.

Tobin, James, 1958, Liquidity preference as behavior towards risk, Review of Economic Studies 25,
  124–131.

       , 1969, A general equilibrium approach to monetary theory, Journal of Money, Credit, and
  Banking 1, 15–29.

Vayanos, Dimitri, and Jean-Luc Vila, 2009, A preferred-habitat theory of the term structure of
  interest rates, Working paper London School of Economics.

Wallace, Neil, 1967, The term-structure of interest rates and the maturity composition of the federal
  debt, Journal of Finance 22, 201–312.

Wiliams, John, 2014, Monetary Policy at the Zero Lower Bound (Hutchins Center on Fiscal and
  Monetary Policy).


                                                 46
Table 2: Reaction of U.S. Treasury yields and forwards to major QE announcements. This table shows the 2-day change in zero coupon Treasury yields and 1-
year forward rates surrounding policy announcements about the Fed’s Large Scale Asset Purchase Programs. Yields and forwards are based on the fitted
nominal Treasury curve estimated by Gürkaynak, Sack, and Wright (2007). All variables are all measured in percentage points. We classify events based on
whether the announcement indicated that the Fed would be expanding or contracting its asset purchases. We compute the totals across all expansionary and
contractionary events.

                                                                                                                   Individual announcement events
                                                                           Change in zero coupon yields (%)                                             Change in forward rates (%)
 Date       Type      Event Description                     1-yr    2-yr    3-yr    4-yr    5-yr    7-yr   10-yr   15-yr   20-yr      1-yr    2-yr    3-yr    4-yr    5-yr    7-yr   10-yr   15-yr   20-yr
11/25/08   Expand     QE1: Initial announcement: $100B     -0.12   -0.17   -0.22   -0.26   -0.29   -0.32   -0.31   -0.26   -0.22     -0.12   -0.23   -0.33   -0.38   -0.41   -0.38   -0.25   -0.11   -0.10
                           of GSE and $500B MBS
12/1/08    Expand     QE1: Bernanke QE1 speech             -0.06   -0.12   -0.18   -0.22   -0.25   -0.27   -0.25   -0.22   -0.23     -0.06   -0.19   -0.29   -0.34   -0.36   -0.30   -0.18   -0.16   -0.32
                           mentions extending to USTs
12/16/08   Expand     QE1: FOMC alludes to possibility     -0.01   0.00    -0.04   -0.10   -0.17   -0.29   -0.39   -0.37   -0.29     -0.01   0.01    -0.12   -0.30   -0.45   -0.62   -0.56   -0.21   0.01
                           of UST purchases
3/18/09    Expand     QE1: Increased size of QE1 from      -0.12   -0.20   -0.28   -0.35   -0.40   -0.48   -0.51   -0.43   -0.30     -0.12   -0.28   -0.43   -0.55   -0.63   -0.67   -0.53   -0.11   0.21
                           $600B to $1.75T.
8/10/10    Expand     QE2: Will reinvest                   -0.01   -0.03   -0.05   -0.08   -0.10   -0.14   -0.15   -0.13   -0.10     -0.01   -0.05   -0.11   -0.16   -0.20   -0.21   -0.16   -0.05   -0.01
                           coupon/principal from QE1.
9/21/10    Expand     QE2: Will continue to reinvest       -0.01   -0.03   -0.06   -0.09   -0.11   -0.15   -0.17   -0.16   -0.14     -0.01   -0.05   -0.12   -0.18   -0.22   -0.24   -0.19   -0.10   -0.07
                           coupon/principal
11/3/10    Expand     QE2: Will purchase additional        -0.01   -0.02   -0.06   -0.10   -0.13   -0.16   -0.12    0.01   0.12      -0.01   -0.03   -0.13   -0.22   -0.26   -0.21   0.06    0.40    0.42
                           $600B of USTs.
9/21/11    Expand     MEP: $400 billion Maturity           0.02    0.05    0.03    -0.01   -0.07   -0.17   -0.26   -0.33   -0.39     0.02    0.09    -0.01   -0.15   -0.28   -0.45   -0.49   -0.47   -0.62
                           Extension Program
6/20/12    Expand     MEP: Continuing MEP through          0.02    0.02    0.02    0.02    0.02    0.01    -0.01   -0.03   -0.05     0.02    0.02    0.02    0.01    0.00    -0.02   -0.05   -0.08   -0.11
                           2012
8/22/12    Expand     QE3: "Additional accommodation       -0.02   -0.04   -0.06   -0.08   -0.10   -0.13   -0.14   -0.13   -0.11     -0.02   -0.05   -0.10   -0.14   -0.17   -0.20   -0.16   -0.07   -0.07
                           may be required fairly soon."
9/13/12    Expand     QE3: Purchase $40B of MBS            0.00    0.01    0.02    0.03    0.04    0.07    0.12     0.18   0.20      0.00    0.01    0.03    0.06    0.09    0.16    0.25    0.31    0.23
                           per month
12/12/12   Expand     QE3: Purchase $40B of MBS and        0.00    0.01    0.03    0.04    0.06    0.08    0.09     0.08   0.07      0.00    0.03    0.06    0.09    0.11    0.13    0.11    0.05    0.04
                           $45B of USTs per month
11/4/09    Contract   QE1: Slowing pace of purchases to    -0.03   -0.04   -0.03   -0.02   0.00    0.03    0.07     0.09   0.08      -0.03   -0.05   -0.02   0.02    0.07    0.13    0.16    0.10    0.05
                           complete in 2010Q1
5/22/13    Contract   QE3: Taper tantrum,                  -0.01   0.02    0.04    0.06    0.07    0.09    0.10     0.07   0.05      -0.01   0.04    0.08    0.11    0.13    0.14    0.08    0.00    0.00
                           may slow pace
6/19/13    Contract   QE3: Taper tantrum,                  0.00    0.07    0.14    0.20    0.24    0.25    0.23     0.19   0.18      0.00    0.13    0.30    0.38    0.38    0.26    0.12    0.14    0.16
                           may slow pace
12/18/13   Contract   QE3: Announces tapering of           -0.01   0.02    0.05    0.09    0.11    0.12    0.09     0.04   0.02      -0.01   0.04    0.13    0.18    0.19    0.12    -0.01   -0.06   -0.02
                           QE3
                                                                                                                   Total across all announcements
                                                                           Change in zero coupon yields (%)                                             Change in forward rates (%)
                                                            1-yr    2-yr    3-yr    4-yr    5-yr    7-yr   10-yr   15-yr   20-yr      1-yr    2-yr    3-yr    4-yr    5-yr    7-yr   10-yr   15-yr   20-yr
                                                 Expand    -0.33   -0.53   -0.86   -1.21   -1.53   -1.95   -2.11   -1.79   -1.44     -0.33   -0.73   -1.52   -2.27   -2.78   -3.01   -2.14   -0.62   -0.40
                                               Contract    -0.05   0.06    0.20    0.33    0.42    0.50    0.48     0.40   0.34      -0.05   0.17    0.49    0.70    0.77    0.65    0.35    0.19    0.19
