                               NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                            IMMIGRANTS AND GENDER ROLES:
                              ASSIMILATION VS. CULTURE

                                          Francine D. Blau

                                       Working Paper 21756
                               http://www.nber.org/papers/w21756


                      NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                               1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                 Cambridge, MA 02138
                                    November 2015




This paper formed the basis of my Julian Simon Lecture, presented at the 11th IZA Annual Migration
Meeting, Bonn, May 2014 . I am deeply indebted to my collaborators on the research discussed here:
Lawrence Kahn, with whom I developed this research agenda , Albert Liu, and Kerry Papps. I would
like to thank Lawrence Kahn, Amelie Constant, and an anonymous referee for their comments on the
paper. The views expressed herein are those of the author and do not necessarily reflect the views
of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.

© 2015 by Francine D. Blau. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs,
may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to
the source.
Immigrants and Gender Roles: Assimilation vs. Culture
Francine D. Blau
NBER Working Paper No. 21756
November 2015
JEL No. J13,J16,J22,J24,J61

                                                ABSTRACT

This paper examines evidence on the role of assimilation versus source country culture in influencing
immigrant women’s behavior in the United States—looking both over time with immigrants’ residence
in the United States and across immigrant generations. It focuses particularly on labor supply but,
for the second generation, also examines fertility and education. We find considerable evidence that
immigrant source country gender roles influence immigrant and second generation women’s behavior
in the United States. This conclusion is robust to various efforts to rule out the effect of other unobservables
and to distinguish the effect of culture from that of social capital. These results support a growing
literature that suggests that culture matters for economic behavior. At the same time, the results suggest
considerable evidence of assimilation of immigrants. Immigrant women narrow the labor supply gap
with native-born women with time in the United States, and, while our results suggest an important
role for intergenerational transmission, they also indicate considerable convergence of immigrants
to native levels of schooling, fertility, and labor supply across generations.


Francine D. Blau
ILR School
Cornell University
268 Ives Hall
Ithaca, New York 14853-3901
and NBER
fdb4@cornell.edu
1 Introduction

       In this paper I examine the relationship between gender roles in immigrant source

countries and immigrant and second generation behavior in the United States. I particularly

highlight the role of assimilation, which results in immigrants becoming closer to their native

counterparts over time and across generations versus the role of culture, which is associated

with the persistence of immigrant-native differences. My consideration of these issues is based

on my recent work on this topic with Lawrence Kahn, Albert Liu, and Kerry Papps (i.e., Blau,

Kahn, and Papps 2011; Blau, Kahn, Liu, and Papps 2013; and Blau and Kahn forthcoming). I am

greatly indebted to my coauthors, most especially Lawrence Kahn, with whom I developed this

research agenda.

       Our work builds on earlier research for the United States suggesting a role of culture—

measured by source country characteristics—on the gender roles (i.e., fertility and labor supply)

of immigrants and their children. Blau (1992) found a positive effect of source country fertility

rates on immigrant women’s fertility and Antecol (2000) found that source country female

labor force participation rates were positively correlated with US labor force participation of

immigrant women. With respect to their descendants, Antecol (2000) also reported a positive,

though weaker, correlation between US and source country participation for “second and

higher generation” immigrants, defined by their answer to the 1990 Census question on

ancestry. Similarly, Fernández and Fogli (2009) found the labor supply and fertility behavior of

US-born daughters of immigrants (the second generation) to be positively associated with both

female participation and fertility rates in their parents’ countries of origin. Fernández and




                                                 1
Fogli’s work, in particular, is important in rigorously testing the importance of culture in the

context of the second generation.

         The major contribution of the line of research that I summarize here is to empirically

analyze and rigorously probe the evidence on the role of source country gender roles in

influencing the behavior and outcomes of immigrant women the United States. Further this

work sheds new light on the assimilation process, both over time in the United States and

across generations, by analyzing it in the context of the impact of source country culture. Prior

work showing positive correlations between source country gender roles on the relevant

behavior of immigrant women in the United States is highly suggestive of a role of culture. Our

work on immigrants (Blau, Kahn, and Papps 2011; Blau and Kahn forthcoming) aims to move

this research forward by its detailed and more rigorous analyses of the cultural link, comparable

to previous work on the second generation. Our findings help not only to establish a role for

culture on immigrant women’s behavior but also, in our view, provide reassurance that

immigrants can constitute a reasonable group among which to examine the possible impact of

culture on behavior in the face of concerns that immigrants are a selected group and that the

immigration process itself can impact behavior, e.g., through disruption (Fernández and Fogli

2009).

         Our richer tests of the role of culture in impacting immigrant women’s behavior

described below include the following. First, in Blau and Kahn (2011) we show that differences

in U.S. labor supply behavior between immigrant women from high versus low female labor

force participation source countries persist with time spend in the United States. While there

are alternative possible interpretations of the source of this association, it is indeed suggestive


                                                 2
of a role of culture. In addition, in contrast to most earlier work, 1 we control for a variety of

other source country characteristics which may affect immigrants’ labor supply behavior in the

United States, thus increasing the likelihood that our models estimate the true effect of source

country female labor supply rather than the impact of omitted factors that are correlated with

this variable. Second, in all the research described below for both first- and second-generation

immigrants, we employ a “falsification test” by examining male behavior. For immigrants, we

examine the relationship between source country female labor supply and male immigrants’ US

behavior and outcomes. The lack of an association for males strengthens our confidence that

we are indeed identifying the effect of gender roles in the source country on female behavior

rather than the impact of a source country factor like unmeasured productivity or work

orientation that affects men and women similarly. To the best of our knowledge we were the

first to employ this approach for immigrants and, indeed, in the published literature, for

research on the second generation as well.2 Third, in Blau and Kahn (2011), unlike previous

work on immigrants, we explore a number of specifications which distinguish the impact of

husbands’ and wives’ source country variables similar to Fernández and Fogli’s (2009) study of

the role of culture in second-generation women’s behavior. For example, for husbands and

wives from different source countries, we distinguished between the effects of a woman’s own

source country female labor supply from that of her husband’s. Consistent with a role for

culture, we find both matter, though, as one might expect intuitively, women were more




1
  Blau (1992) is an exception.
2
  After we had completed Blau, Kahn and Papps (2011), we learned that Fernández and Fogli (2005), the NBER
Working Paper version of Fernández and Fogli (2009), employs such a falsification test, which was apparently cut
from the published version of the paper.

                                                        3
responsive to their own source country’s culture than their husbands’. In addition, we

investigated the impact of source country female participation of immigrant men on the labor

supply behavior of their native-born wives and do find such an effect, a result highly suggestive

of a role for husbands’ source country culture.

        Finally in Blau and Kahn (forthcoming), we use the New Immigrant Survey to provide

evidence that further bolsters the claim that the impact of source country female labor force

participation represents in large part the effect of culture. We first show that the impact of

source country female labor supply on the US labor supply behavior and wages of immigrant

women overwhelmingly remains even when we control for the women’s own pre-migration

work experience. This demonstrates that the finding of the impact of source country female

labor supply likely reflects the effect of a community level characteristic like culture rather than

the fact that women from high labor supply source countries are more likely to have worked

themselves before migrating. As explained in more detail below, this is conceptually similar to

an approach employed in Fernández and Fogli’s (2006) examination of the impact of culture on

second generation women’s fertility. Second, by distinguishing between the impact of source

country female labor supply on the labor supply versus the wages of immigrant women in the

United States, we are able to provide evidence that suggest that the major portion of the

impact of source country female labor supply is due to its effect on culture rather than its effect

of social capital. 3 Third, we also give detailed attention in this paper to the possibility that our




3
  Fernández and Fogli (2009) also suggest that the distinction between the impact of source country variables on
labor supply vs. wages may shed light on the role of culture as opposed to social capital.

                                                        4
results are driven by immigrant selection, concluding that selection does not provide a plausible

alternative to culture in explaining the pattern of our results.

       In our work on the second generation (Blau, Kahn, Liu, and Papps), we examine the

process by which source country culture gets transmitted to future generations in the host

country by looking explicitly at intergenerational transmission from immigrants to their children

born in the United States. This stands in contrast to earlier work on the second generation

(Fernández and Fogli 2009), which focused on the impact of source country characteristics on

the behavior of second generation immigrants. One of the purposes of our paper is to shed

light on the rate of assimilation across generations and we provide explicit estimates of

intergenerational transmission rates. Our preferred, parsimonious specification includes simply

the parental generation characteristics and controls for the individuals’ age, family type

(immigrant father and native mother; immigrant mother and native father, with the omitted

category being both parents immigrants), and survey year. We exclude potentially endogenous

individual characteristics like education, location and marital status. We thereby allow parental

generation characteristics to influence respondent’s outcomes both directly and indirectly

through their effects on respondent’s education, location, and marital status. I focus on these

results below. However, I note that when we expand our basic specification to include controls

for these other individual characteristics (i.e., education, location and marital status) as in

Antecol (2000) and Fernández and Fogli (2009), the results are similar providing suggestive

evidence that parental generation characteristics do affect individuals’ preferences. In

addition, we also examine the impact of source country characteristics on second generation

behavior finding similar results to earlier studies (Antecol 2000 and Fernández and Fogli 2009).


                                                  5
This more directly tests the hypothesis that source country characteristics influence the

behavior of second generation immigrants in the United States. Finally, as in the case of our

studies of immigrants, we estimate our basic models for second-generation men. Of particular

interest is that for immigrant generation education, a plausibly gender neutral variable, we find

strikingly similar results for second-generation men and women. For immigrant women’s labor

supply, a potentially gender-linked variable, we find evidence of a stronger effect on labor

supply for second-generation women than for second-generation men; and for immigrant

men’s labor supply we find evidence of an effect on second-generation men’s labor supply but

no evidence of such an effect for second-generation women.

       Our work on the second-generation advances the literature in a number of other ways.

First, our data source, the Current Population Survey (CPS) has information on the country-of-

birth of both parents, permitting us to gauge the relative importance of the characteristics of

immigrant mothers versus immigrant women from the fathers’ source country, as well as the

strength of intergenerational transmission for individuals with two foreign-born parents

compared to those with only one. Previous studies like Fernández and Fogli (2009) are only

able to match second-generation individuals with their fathers, due to the incomplete Census

data on the birthplace of foreign-born mothers. If gender role transmission from mother to

daughter is especially strong, this omission could be particularly important for a study of the

transmission of gender roles. In fact, we find that second-generation women’s education,

fertility and labor supply are significantly positively affected by the immigrant generation’s

levels of these variables, but that the effect of mother’s source country fertility and labor

supply is generally larger than that of women from the father’s source country and the effect of


                                                 6
the education of men from the father’s source country is larger than that of women from the

mother’s source country.

       Second, our data on the second generation from the 1995–2011 CPS provides an

updated consideration of the issues of gender and culture compared to the 1970 Census data

employed by Fernández and Fogli (2009). (The 1970 Census was the last Census to collect data

on foreign parentage.) Since 1970, there have been considerable changes in the composition of

immigrant parents by source country, as well as in aggregate female labor force participation

and fertility rates in the United States that might affect the findings. US gender roles in the

1990s and 2000s were considerably different from what they were in 1970, with far higher

levels of female labor force participation, as well as lower fertility rates (Blau, Ferber and

Winkler 2014). And, immigration to the United States has shifted from being a largely North

American and European phenomenon to a largely Asian and Latin American one. Further, there

is a growing gap between the labor supply of US-born and immigrant women today than in

earlier years (see below). Thus, the process of assimilation of second generation women into

the US labor market may very well have changed since 1970.

       Before delving into the specifics of our research, it is useful to consider the context and

motivation for the work. This comes from two sources: first, the increasing importance of

immigrants and their children in the population of the economically advanced nations,

including the United States which is my focus here, and second, the increasing interest of

economists in the influence of culture on economic behavior and outcomes.

       Turning first to the growth of immigration, as in much of the economically advanced

nations, immigrants are comprising an increasing share of the population in the United States.


                                                  7
The share of the foreign-born in the population has increased from 4.8% in 1970 to 12.9% in

2012 (US Bureau of the Census web site: http://www.census.gov ). Further highlighting the

growing quantitative importance of immigrants is the growing share of US children who were

either immigrants themselves or who had at least one immigrant parent, increasing from 13

percent in 1990 to 23 percent in 2008 (Fortuny 2010).

       Not only has the immigrant population increased in size, also of importance is that there

has been a substantial shift in the source countries of immigrants: in 1970, 70.4% of the

foreign-born population came from Europe or North America, while, by 2012, 81.6% were from

Asia or Latin America (US Bureau of the Census web site: http://www.census.gov ). As the

share of the US population born abroad increases and as immigrant source countries shift

towards regions with different cultures and traditions from the predominantly European origins

of earlier arrivals, the extent of assimilation and the role of culture move increasingly to the

forefront. This has particular salience for gender roles, since immigrants increasingly come

from countries that have a more traditional division of labor by gender than the United States

in that they have, on average, lower female labor force participation rates and higher fertility

rates than the United States (Blau, Kahn and Papps 2011). Mirroring this, there has been a

growing gap between the US labor supply of native and immigrant women since 1980. This

raises a number of questions that I will address in this paper. Are immigrant-native differences

in labor supply related to source country characteristics? What happens to the time pattern of

this gap—do immigrant women assimilate to native patterns over time? Do persistent

immigrant-native gaps plausibly reflect the role of culture or are alternative explanations likely?




                                                 8
And, do immigrant generation-native differences in labor supply and other traits carry over to

the second generation or do second generation women fully assimilate to native patterns?

       Heightening the interest in examining immigrants and their descendants through the

lens of culture, is a growing attention among economists to the role that culture may play in

economic life. “Culture” may be defined as the impact of preferences, beliefs, or values

developed in a different time or space (either geographic or social) on economic behavior (e.g.,

Fernández 2008). While tastes and preferences play an important role in economic models, it is

seldom possible to observe the determinants of preference formation. Relating the behavior of

first and second generation immigrants in the United States to source country characteristics

provides a mechanism for studying the role of culture and thus getting inside the “black box” of

taste formation.

       Correlations between source country characteristics and immigrant behavior may,

however, be due to a variety of factors. Hence such correlations need to be probed to

ascertain their likely source in cultural differences and I summarize our efforts to do so below.

One particularly intuitive alternative explanation for such correlations is that, rather than

reflecting the impact of culture, they are due to the impact of “social capital.” Social capital

denotes social interactions or community-level characteristics that enhance skills or

productivity and hence wages. Social capital can, for instance, take the form of role models,

expectations, behavioral norms, and interpersonal networks (see, e.g., Dasgupta 2008; Borjas

1992; Coleman 1988; and Wilson 1987). While the mechanisms of transmission of culture and

social capital may overlap, the crucial distinction between the two is that culture operates

mainly through preferences and beliefs whereas social capital is expected to impact productivity


                                                 9
and wages. As I describe in more detail below, this distinction forms the basis of Kahn and my

effort to distinguish between the two empirically (Blau and Kahn forthcoming). In particular,

following Fernández and Fogli (2009), we assume that social capital is correlated with an impact

on wages but culture is not. In our context, this means that we test the role of culture vs. social

capital by examining the extent to which the impact of source country female supply on

immigrant women’s US labor force participation is due to its effect on wages (i.e., a movement

along the supply curve) and the extent to which it cannot be accounted for by wages (i.e., is due

to a shift in the supply curve). We acknowledge this distinction between culture and social

capital is not watertight. For example, a preference for market work could also have the

consequence of increasing productivity through its effect on increasing the amount of work

experience accumulated. And, conversely, higher wages may induce greater work experience,

which might itself affect one’s attitudes toward and preferences for market work. Nonetheless,

examining the role of wages in explaining the source country labor supply effect is likely to be

instructive.




2 The immigrant generation

       In this section, I draw on Blau, Kahn, and Papps (2011) and Blau and Kahn (forthcoming)

to examine the relationship between source country female labor supply and immigrant

women’s labor supply behavior in the United States. We focus on adult immigrants since they

are most likely to be affected by source country patterns and on married women for whom

gender roles are expected to have a greater effect. (Our results were similar, however, when




                                                10
we included all women.) Outcomes are conceptualized as reflecting the combined effect of the

assimilation process and the persistent impact of source country culture.

       Drawing on Blau, Kahn and Papps (2011), I first consider the relationship between the

assimilation of immigrant women’s labor supply and gender roles in the source country, using

the 1980-2000 US Censuses. The assimilation profiles that we estimate show the relationship

between immigrant women’s time in the United States or years since migration (YSM) and their

labor supply behavior. The assimilation profile is of interest in that it sheds light on what

happens to immigrant women’s labor supply behavior as they are exposed to US labor market

conditions and social norms. We find a strong and persistent effect of source country female

relative labor supply on immigrant women’s US labor supply behavior. I present a number of

results from Blau, Kahn and Papps (2011) that suggest these findings do indeed reflect the

impact of a community-level characteristic like culture. I provide further evidence of in support

of this interpretation from Blau and Kahn (forthcoming), which uses data from the New

Immigrant Survey (NIS) to more finely control for immigrant women’s behavior prior to

migrating, as well as to separately identify the effect of culture vs. social capital.

2.1 A Role for culture? Source country female labor supply and immigrant assimilation

       A focus on assimilation of immigrant women’s labor supply raises the question of the

shape of labor supply profile with time in the United States and how (or if) it may differ

between women from source countries with more and less traditional gender roles. The

standard expectation might be that the assimilation profile would be upward sloping for both

husbands and wives, where immigrants would start at a disadvantage relative to otherwise

similar individuals due to the disruptions of immigration that could lead to difficulty in finding a


                                                  11
job or to temporarily working positive, but less than desired, hours. The impact of such

disruptions is expected to decrease over time and immigrant labor supply is expected to

approach that of natives. A period of disruption may be even more likely for married women

than married men to the extent women are “tied movers” (Mincer 1978)—i.e., if the move is

determined primarily based on the husband’s labor market prospects rather than the wife’s. In

addition, some types of visas obtained by husbands (generally the primary earner) may not

permit their spouse to work. 4

         An intriguing alternative possibility is raised by the family migration model proposed by

Baker and Benjamin (1997) that predicts immigrant women will initially take dead-end jobs to

finance their husbands’ human capital investments and eventually drop out of the labor market

or reduce their labor supply as their husbands’ labor market outcomes improve. Rather than

convergence toward native labor supply levels, this model predicts a negatively-sloped labor

supply profile for immigrant women relative to natives, a finding that has been observed for

Canada (Baker and Benjamin 1997), but not for the United States (Blau, Kahn, Moriarty and

Souza 2003). The logic of the family migration model suggests that source country gender roles

within the family might be a factor in influencing the shape of women’s assimilation profiles,

with the family migration model perhaps holding for families coming from countries with a

more traditional division of labor by gender. Our empirical specification, described below,



4
  We do not have data on visa type in Blau, Kahn, and Papps (2011) where we focus on assimilation. However visa
type may be correlated with country of origin characteristics and, in one of our specifications in Blau, Kahn, and
Papps (2011), we control for source country fixed effects, which may absorb some of the effect of visa
requirements. Results are similar in this specification. Moreover, we are able to control for visa type in our further
probing of the impact of source country characteristics in Blau and Kahn (forthcoming) described below. The
estimated effect of source country characteristics on immigrant women’s labor supply behavior are robust to the
inclusion of controls for visa type.

                                                         12
permits us to investigate the possibility. However, in fact, we find upward sloping profiles for

all groups.

            Before turning to more detailed estimates, I first consider whether simple tabulations

suggest a relationship between gender roles in immigrant source countries and immigrant

women’s labor supply behavior in the United States. Figure 1 shows the average labor supply

behavior of (adult) immigrant women and their native counterparts in 1980 and 2000; Figure 2

present similar information for men. Recall that, over this time, there has been a shift in

immigrant source countries potentially affecting the mix of gender roles in the countries of

origin and the labor supply behavior of immigrant women in the United States.

            Figure 1 indicates that, in both years, immigrant women have lower labor supply

(measured by average annual work hours, including those with zero hours) and, moreover, that

the immigrant-native labor supply gap increased considerably between 1980 and 2000: in

1980, natives worked 66 hours (8%) more than immigrants; by 2000, the gap was 319 hours

(32%). 5 This reflects increasing labor supply for both groups of women, but a sharper increase

for native women. Figure 2 shows that immigrant men also worked fewer hours than their

native counterparts on average, but in this case the immigrant-native gap increased only

slightly, from immigrants working 8% fewer hours than native men in 1980 to working 11% less

by 2000. Thus the immigrant-native gap in labor supply increased much more for women than

for men. This suggests a gender role dimension to the trend and that impression is reinforced

by the results in Figure 3.




5
    Results are similar for participation probabilities.

                                                           13
        Figure 3 shows, for 1980 and 2000, the average across immigrant women of the female

activity rate ratio (F/M) in their source country (measured at the time of immigrant arrival to

the United States) and the corresponding means for the United States, similarly weighted by

the number of immigrants in each arrival period cell. Activity rates are obtained from United

Nations data and the sample includes 106 source countries. The activity rate is analogous to

the labor force participation rate including both the employed and the unemployed. We focus

on the male-female ratio because we are interested in the gender division of labor and also

because expressing the participation rate as a gender ratio implicitly adjusts for issues in

measuring participation in the source country, at least to the extent that they affect men and

women similarly. (I do not show a corresponding figure for men because the source countries

of immigrant men and women tend to be quite similar and hence the male figure would be

virtually identical.)

        Figure 3 indicates that, in both 1980 and 2000, the average immigrant woman came

from a country which, at the time of her arrival in the United States, had lower relative female

labor force participation than the United States had at the same time. And, although average

home country relative female labor supply at the time of arrival increased between 1980 and

2000, the corresponding US value increased by considerably more. This resulted in a growing

gap between US and source country relative female labor force participation—mirroring what

we found for immigrant-native differences in labor supply in the United States.

        In Blau, Kahn, and Papps (2011), we probe the relationship between female relative

labor supply in immigrant source countries and the labor supply behavior of immigrant women

in the United States in greater detail based on a pooled sample of three US Census years (1980,


                                                14
1990, and 2000). This enables us to follow immigrant cohorts over time and estimate

assimilation effects as in Borjas (1985). We also merge in a cross-country, time series data set

of source country characteristic, which we assembled. We control for individual and source

country characteristics that might influence labor supply behavior, apart from source country

female labor supply. As noted earlier, we focus on adult immigrants and married women. Our

source country variables (measured at time of immigrant arrival) include: relative female labor

activity rate, completed fertility, GDP per capita, refugee percentage, whether it is an English-

speaking or English-official country, gender-specific primary and secondary school enrollment

rates, and distance to the United States. Individual controls include (for women and their

spouses): age, age squared, dummies for education and race/Hispanic origin, and interactions

of the education dummies and the individual’s years since migration. We also control for

census region dummies and state dummies for the largest immigrant receiving states

(California, New York, Florida, Illinois, New Jersey, and Texas). Source country effects are

estimated by interactions between years since migration dummies and source country

characteristics, including relative female participation.

       We find that the source country relative activity rate has a positive, significant effect on

the annual hours of immigrant women in each YSM category. Thus, source country female

labor supply is strongly positively associated with immigrant women’s labor supply behavior in

the United States. Moreover, the effect is roughly stable across YSM categories, suggesting a

persistent effect of source country culture on US labor supply behavior that neither erodes or

increases with time in the United States.




                                                 15
        Our basic findings are summarized in Figure 4, which shows simulated assimilation

profiles for adult immigrant women relative to natives, controlling for individual characteristics.

Specifically we simulate the profile for adult immigrant women married to adult immigrant men

who came to the United States from the same country (or a country with the same relative

female activity rate) and at the same time. This is a reasonable way to summarize the findings

in that, pooling all Census years, 90.3% of immigrant women married to immigrant men came

from the same source country as their husband.6 The figure assumes the couple migrates from

a country with (i) a high female relative activity rate, at the 75th percentile of our sample, or (ii)

a low female activity rate, at the 25th percentile. This calculation uses individual immigrants,

not individual source countries, as the unit of analysis, thereby giving countries sending larger

numbers of immigrants more weight in computing the percentiles. The 75th percentile figure is

0.636 and roughly corresponds to the Austrian value for the relative female activity rate for

1996, while the 25th percentile is 0.368 and roughly equals the level for Pakistan in 1994. We

assume the sample averages for the cohort arrival dummies and the source country

characteristics apart from the female relative activity rate.

        As may be seen in the figure, there is a substantial and persistent gap between the

annual hours of women from high and low activity rate countries: an unweighted average of

136 hours across YSM categories. This corresponds to 14% of immigrant women’s mean hours

of 939. Both groups of women work less than comparable natives upon arrival: 279 hours less



6
  In 1980 (but not 1990 or 2000) we have information on individuals’ age at first marriage and the number of times
they have been married. We find that, among immigrant women who were married to immigrant men and were
in their first marriage, between 62.9 and 78.4% were married before arriving in the United States to a spouse who
arrived at the same time. (This range occurs because the arrival year is coded in intervals.) For both estimates,
89% of the women identified as married at arrival were from the same source country as their husband.

                                                       16
for women coming from a high female activity rate country and 403 hours less for those

migrating from a low female activity rate country. These are sizable deficits of 26% and 37%

relative to the sample average work hours (including natives) of 1093. Work hours for women

from both types of countries assimilate dramatically over time relative to comparable natives.

Women from high female labor supply countries work roughly the same number of hours as

natives after 6-10 years and work at or above the native levels thereafter. Women from low

female labor supply countries continue to work less than natives throughout their time in the

United States, but after 6-10 years their deficit is only 11-12%. These upward sloping

assimilation profiles for women from both high and low female labor supply source countries

are not consistent with the family migration model.

       The strong and persistent effect of relative female labor supply in immigrant women’s

source countries on their labor supply behavior in the United States strongly suggests a role of

culture in determining immigrant women’s US labor supply behavior, although, as we have just

seen, assimilation is also important. In the following section we push harder on these results to

provide stronger evidence that they do indeed reflect the role of culture.

2.2 Additional evidence on culture using Census data

       It is possible that the findings reported above could reflect the impact of unmeasured

source country factors associated with labor supply, rather than culture or some community-

level variable associated with gender roles. To rule out this possibility, in Blau, Kahn, and Papps

(2011), we pursued a number of additional analyses designed to further examine the

consistency of our findings with a role for culture.




                                                 17
         First, we replicated our analysis for married immigrant women on married men. If

indeed our findings for women merely reflected unmeasured source country factors affecting

men and women equally, we would expect the results for men to be similar to those for

women. Thus, the male analysis might be considered as a falsification test. We found that, in

contrast to our findings for women, the activity rate ratio interactions were not significant in

the regressions for men. As may be seen in Figure 5, the profiles for men born in high and low

female labor supply countries are virtually identical. This strongly suggests that the impact of

source country female relative labor supply is indeed capturing an impact of a community-level

characteristic in the source country that specifically affects women.

         Second, we investigated the impact of source country female participation of immigrant

men on the labor supply behavior of their native-born wives. A positive correlation between

immigrant husband’s source country female participation and the labor supply of native-born

wives may be due to immigrant men selecting marital partners with similar preferences to

theirs or to a direct impact of the husbands on the labor supply behavior of their wives, e.g., by

husbands being more or less helpful with family chores or supporting or opposing their labor

force entry or career commitment. In either case, an effect of husbands’ source characteristics

on these wives is suggestive of an effect of source country culture on US behavior.7

         Finally, we distinguished between the effects of a woman’s own source country female

labor supply from that of her husband’s source country female labor supply in the cases where

the couple migrated from different source countries. This sheds light on the relative



7
 This is similar to Fernández, Fogli, and Olivetti’s (2004) finding of a positive effect on wife’s labor supply of a
husband coming from a family in which his mother worked, a result which they interpret as evidence of an impact
of culture.

                                                         18
importance of wives’ versus husbands’ source country characteristics in influencing wives’ labor

supply, when both spouses are foreign born. Our results suggest that women are more

sensitive (responsive) to the own source country characteristics than to that of their husband.

Specifically, when we looked within couples where both spouses were immigrants, but in which

he members of the couple migrated from different countries, we found that women tended to

be more responsive to their own source country’s culture (as indexed by source country

characteristics), but also that their husbands’ source country also generally affected the

women’s labor supply in the expected direction. We view this as consistent with the culture

interpretation in that own exposure could be viewed as representing a more intense

“treatment” than living with a spouse from a particular cultural background. Similarly, we

found that the impact of a wife’s own source country female supply on the labor supply of an

immigrant woman married to a native men was larger than the impact of a husband’s source

country female supply on the labor supply of a native woman married to an immigrant man.

This again suggests that a women’s own exposure has a greater effect on her than her

husband’s cultural background.

2.3 Additional evidence on culture from the NIS: individual vs. community-level
      characteristics and culture vs. social capital

       In Blau and Kahn (forthcoming) we use a rich new data set, the New Immigrant Survey

(NIS), to explore two further issues raised in interpreting findings like those discussed above as

indicating a role of culture. The first issue is a relatively straightforward one: if a women comes

from a high female participation country, it is likely that she has more prior work experience (in

the source country) than a women from a low female participation country. It is also true that

women with prior work experience abroad (regardless of the overall female participation rate)

                                                19
are more likely to also work in the United States. Thus, results like those detailed above could

merely reflect the impact of the individual’s own prior experience, rather than the impact of a

community-level characteristic, like culture. The NIS is relatively unique in providing

information on pre-migration work experience, permitting us to address this question. Second,

as I discussed at the outset, even if one is fairly confident that a community-level characteristic

is involved it is still not clear that it represents that effect of culture, rather than social capital.

By examining the effect of source country female labor supply on US immigrant women’s labor

supply and wages, we are able to address this question.

        The NIS, is a nationally-representative survey of adult immigrants who received

admission to permanent legal residence in the United States in 2003 (Jasso, Massey,

Rosenzweig and Smith forthcoming); respondents were interviewed during 2003 or 2004.

While some had just arrived in the United States, others were already here, either under

temporary visas or illegally. Thus, the NIS is not representative of all immigrants, but it does

represent a random sample of those obtaining permanent legal status in a given year.8

        In examining the role of pre-migration work experience vs. source country overall

female participation, we employ a research design that is conceptually similar to Fernández and

Fogli (2006) to examine the impact of culture on the fertility of US-born women from different

(self-reported) ethnic backgrounds. Using General Social Survey data from 1977-1987, they

control for both the fertility of the respondent’s own parents (i.e., her number of siblings) and



8
  In Blau and Kahn (forthcoming), we compare the NIS data to samples of recent immigrants from the Census and
the American Community Survey (ACS); the Census and ACS samples are more representative of recent immigrants
(including both permanent and temporary, as well as both legal and unauthorized, immigrants). While there are
some differences, importantly, the gender gaps in work behavior and wages are very similar in the NIS compared
to the Census and ACS.

                                                     20
the 1950 fertility rate in her country of ancestry. They find that both variables positively

affected current fertility and, since the impact of the source country fertility level was still

positive, even controlling for the number of siblings, the authors conclude that the results

indicate an impact of culture beyond the behavior of one’s own family.

       In our case, we find that, as expected, a woman’s pre-migration work experience

strongly positively affects labor supply in the United States. We also find that, as in previous

work by ourselves and others, women who migrate from countries with relatively high levels of

female labor supply work more in the United States. Importantly, most of this effect remains

when we further control for each woman’s own work experience prior to migrating. This may

be viewed as consistent with an important role of culture or at least of some community-level

characteristic in influencing the relationship between source country female labor force

participation and immigrant women’s labor supply behavior in the United States.

       Also of considerable interest, we find a significantly negative interaction between pre-

migration labor supply and source country female labor supply. This means that the impact of

source country female labor supply is much stronger for those who did not themselves work

before migrating than among those with work experience in their source country, while the

impact of pre-migration work experience is larger for those from source countries with low

female labor supply than for those from high female labor supply countries. We obtain broadly

similar effects analyzing the determinants of hourly earnings among the employed in the

United States, although the effects are not always significant. This negative interaction

suggests that culture and social capital can substitute for individual job-related experience and

human capital in affecting preparedness for work and work orientation in the United States.


                                                  21
       While these findings are consistent with a role of source country environment, they

could plausibly result either from the effect of culture or social capital. To distinguish between

the two, we turn to the distinction discussed earlier that culture represents an impact of source

country environment on beliefs or preferences and social capital represents an impact on

productivity or wages. To the extent that source country female participation affects immigrant

women’s productivity and wages due to the effect of social capital, it will affect their U.S. labor

supply through movements along a given supply curve. To the extent that source country

female participation affects immigrant women’s preferences and beliefs due to the effect of

culture, it will shift their labor supply function to the right. Based on our estimates, we show

that, given plausible values of labor supply elasticities, most (86-95%) of the effect of source

country female labor supply on US labor supply operates through a shift in the labor supply

function (the rest is due to wages). This suggest that culture rather than social capital is the

primary factor accounting for the source country effect.

2.4 The possible role of selective migration

       Immigrants represent a group of individuals who have made the decision to relocate to

the United States from their country of origin. This raises the possibility that the set of findings

reported in this subsection could be due to a pattern of selection of immigration, rather than

the impact of culture or social capital. We believe this is doubtful for a number of reasons. In

both Blau, Kahn, and Papps (2011) and Blau and Kahn (forthcoming) we examine the behavior

of married women separately, either as a main or a supplementary specification and obtain

similar results as for the full sample of women. Married women are more likely than single

women to be “tied movers,” and, to the extent that is true, selection would be less of an issue


                                                 22
for them than otherwise (i.e., their husbands would have made the immigration decision).

Second, the models in both papers control for distance from the United States, which as

Chiswick’s (1978) analysis suggests, may be a proxy for the relative labor market return for

immigrants that is not captured by other variables in the model. Third, results in both papers

are similar when we control for the source country’s average emigration rate from the United

States, thus implicitly addressing the issue of selective return migration.

       Finally, it is very unlikely that selection could account for the pattern of results in Blau

and Kahn (forthcoming), specifically the negative interaction between pre-migration work

experience and source country female labor supply. First, consider the implication of the

negative interaction effect that high source country female labor supply has a smaller effect on

US labor supply and wages for women who worked prior to migration than for women who did

not work before migrating. This result could be due to selection if women workers from low

female labor supply countries are positively selected relative to women workers from high

female labor supply countries. Such a possibility is consistent with results from previous studies

showing a positive cross-country relationship between the gender pay gap and female labor

force participation rates (Blau and Kahn 2003 and Olivetti and Petrongolo 2008), although, as

Blau and Kahn (2003) argue, this finding could also be due to high female labor supply lowering

women’s relative wages through simple supply effects, as long as men and women are

imperfect substitutes in production. Nonetheless, if the selection argument is valid, then it may

be that the women from traditional (i.e., low female labor supply) source countries who had

previous work experience are an especially positively selected group.




                                                 23
       However, now consider those women who did not work before migrating. The selection

argument outlined above implies that nonparticipants from a high female labor supply country

would be more negatively selected than nonparticipants from a low female labor supply

country. So selection could not explain why we find an especially large positive effect of source

country female labor supply for those who did not work prior to migrating. Thus, while

selection could help to explain the negative interaction effect by lowering the source country

female labor supply effect for those who worked before migrating, it cannot explain the very

large source country female participation effect we obtain for those who did not work prior to

migrating. This makes it very unlikely that a reasonable selection story can account for these

findings.

       In the next section, we consider our evidence on possible cultural impacts on the second

generation. This provides additional interesting evidence on the relative role of assimilation

versus culture across immigrant generations. However, in considering the selection issue some

additional comments are in order. It has sometimes been claimed that the second generation

is a more appropriate group in which to study these types of relationships because they are not

selected. That is, they represent a group of individuals in the host country who have a similar

environment to natives but have been impacted by source country culture. However, second

generation outcomes are also impacted by selection, since the second generation consists of

children of the possibly self-selected immigrants. That is, their family environments differ from

second-generation natives not only due to the impact of immigrant culture but also due to any

unmeasured self-selection of their immigrant parents. As we see below, in Blau, Kahn, Liu and

Papps (2013), we find considerable evidence of intergenerational transmission of immigrants’


                                                24
education, labor supply and fertility to their native-born children. This is not to argue that

results for the second generation are not of interest, but rather that results for both the first

generation of immigrants and their second generation children are relevant and important.

3 The second generation

         In this section, I draw on Blau, Kahn, Liu and Papps (2013) to examine the impact of

immigrant parental behavior on the second generation (native born individuals with at least

one immigrant parent). As I noted above, some interesting previous work has examined the

second (or higher) generation with respect to the cultural transmission of gender roles (e.g.,

Antecol 2000; Fernández and Fogli 2006; and Fernández and Fogli 2009) 9—in particular looking

for associations between the behavior of second generation women and source country

characteristics in an analogous fashion to the research on immigrants discussed above. As I

noted previously, one of our contributions is to examine the process by which source country

culture gets transmitted to future generations in the host country by looking explicitly at

intergenerational transmission from immigrants to their children born in the United States,

although we also examine the impact of source country characteristics. 10 One of the purposes

of our research is to shed light on the rate of assimilation across generations and we provide

estimates of intergenerational transmission rates. In the introduction, I have noted a number

of other contributions of our work. One I have not yet mentioned is that the CPS information




9
  In a recent paper, Alesina, Giuliano and Nunn (2013) test the hypothesis that traditional agricultural practices,
namely the utilization of plough agriculture, influenced the development of this culture across societies. In one
application they find evidence of cultural transmission, based on the use of the plough in the source country, for
second-generation immigrants in the United States.
10
   Our set up is very similar to Borjas (1993) and Card, DiNardo, and Estes (2000), studies on intergenerational
transmission that do not examine gender roles.

                                                         25
on the actual birthplaces of the respondent’s parents is also an improvement on the data on

self-reported ancestry of US-born respondents used by Antecol (2000) and Fernández and Fogli

(2006). Data on self-reported ancestry are less precise in that they include information on

second and higher order generations. Further, Duncan and Trejo’s (2007) study of Mexican-

Americans suggests that the more successfully-assimilated native born may be less likely to

report a foreign ancestry.

       We focus on the intergenerational transmission of women’s labor supply, fertility and

education. While the latter is not necessarily gender linked-as we shall see, precisely because it

is not, it can help to sharpen our interpretation of the role of culture. As noted above, we

obtain data on the second generation from 1995-2011 March CPS, which began collecting

information on parental birthplace in the mid-1990s. Respondents are age 25-49. We do not

have actual data on matched parents and children, rather we look at the impact on the second

generation of the average behavior of the parental generation of immigrants from their source

country. The 1970-2000 Censuses were used to locate likely parents of the CPS second

generation women, matching on parents’ country(ies) of birth and age of CPS respondent.

(Census data are matched for when the respondent was 10 years old, interpolating across

censuses as necessary.) We employ a very parsimonious specification, controlling only for

respondent’s age, family type (immigrant father and native mother; immigrant mother and

native father, with the omitted category being both parents immigrants), and survey year, since

many variables like marital status, education, and state of residence may be regarded as

endogenous in this context. Our results are robust to these controls, however. We generally

do not control for race and ethnicity since it may be difficult to disentangle the effect of source


                                                26
country when controlling for race and ethnicity due to the strong correlation between the two.

However, again, our results are robust to such controls. As in our studies of immigrants,

discussed earlier, we include additional tests of intergenerational transmission that that may

shed light on the potential role of the intergenerational transmission of gender roles compared

to other unobservables.

3.1 Evidence on Intergenerational Transmission from the CPS

        Some of our main findings may be illustrated in Table 1, which examines the impact of

parents’ behavior on second generation women. (Average characteristics of immigrants in the

parents’ generation are age-adjusted.) Immigrant fertility and labor supply measure the effects

both of the home environment and cultural gender role attitudes. For this reason we focus on

female behavior and include the fertility and labor supply of immigrant women from both the

source country of the respondent’s mother and the source country of the respondent’s father.

Labor supply of women, in particular, is perhaps the key indicator of gender roles. In contrast

male labor supply is less variable across groups and expected to be less informative about

gender roles. We include education of women from the mother’s source country and of men

from the father’s source country as proxies for the home environment and the socio-economic

status of the respondent’s family. These six parental characteristics variables are designed to

capture the most important and relevant characteristics of the parental immigrant

generation.11 We control for all these variables at the same time in order to more sharply




11
  The very high correlation between the education of women and men from the mother’s (father’s) source
country make it difficult to include additional parental education variables and obtain meaningful results.
Moreover, as expected, we did not find parental generation male labor supply informative for female labor supply
and fertility.

                                                       27
identify the impact of each in a ceteris paribus context. The previous literature has focused

only on the father’s source country and the matching variable—e.g., source country female

labor supply in a female labor supply regression (see, Antecol 2000; Fernández and Fogli

2009). 12

           The results in Table 1 provide strong evidence of intergenerational transmission for each

of these outcomes. In the case of fertility and labor supply, it shows the effect of mother’s

source country fertility and labor supply to be generally larger than that of women from the

father’s source country—perhaps reflecting a gender roles effect. Conversely, the effect of the

education of men from the father’s source country is larger than that of women from the

mother’s source country—perhaps because it is the father who primarily determines the socio-

economic status of the family. Interestingly, second-generation women’s schooling levels are

negatively affected by immigrant mother’s fertility, suggesting a quality-quantity tradeoff for

immigrant families.

3.2 Additional evidence on culture

           As in the case of immigrants, while these findings are consistent with an effect of

culture, they could also reflect the effect of other unobservables. However, we examined a

number of pieces of evidence that suggest our findings for second generation women’s fertility

and labor supply are due at least in part to intergenerational transmission of gender roles,

rather than other unobservables.

           First, for education and labor supply, we compared our female results to analogous

results for men. (We are not able to meaningfully examine fertility for men in our data sets


12
     We report results for a matching specification in the paper; they are broadly similar to those reported in Table 1.

                                                            28
because it is measured by number of children present, and women generally retain custody of

children when a marriage breaks up or children are born out of wedlock.) For immigrant

generation education, a plausibly gender neutral variable, we find strikingly similar results for

second-generation men and women, including a larger impact of men from the father’s source

country than of women from the mother’s source country, as well as evidence of a quality-

quantity trade off. In contrast, for immigrant women’s labor supply, a potentially gender-linked

variable, we find evidence of a stronger effect on labor supply for second-generation women

than for second-generation men. And, for immigrant men’s labor supply we find evidence of an

effect on second-generation men’s labor supply but no evidence of such an effect for second-

generation women. This evidence of gender-linked effects is suggestive of a role for culture.

       Second, we expand our basic specification, which controls only for parental generation

characteristics and respondent’s age, family type, and CPS survey year, to include controls for

other individual respondent’s characteristics like education, location and marital status. We

continue to find strong, statistically significant evidence for the parental characteristics

variables, suggestive evidence that these variables have an impact through their effect on

individual preferences, rather than solely through an effect on these intermediary variables.

       Finally, as may be seen in Table 2, we examine the impact of source country

characteristics (rather than the characteristics of parental generation immigrants) on second

generation behavior. This more directly tests the hypothesis that source country characteristics

influence the behavior of second generation immigrants in the United States. Table 2 reports

results for the fertility rate and the labor force participation rate ratio (women’s labor force

participation rate divided by men’s labor force participation rate) in the parental countries of


                                                 29
origin. The regressions also control for source country GDP per capita and female primary and

secondary enrollment rates. As in the case of our analysis of parental characteristics,

respondents are matched to source country characteristics at the time they were 10 years old.

For number of children, when the labor force participation rate ratio is not included, we find a

statistically significant positive effect of fertility rates in the mother’s source country on second

generation women’s fertility; the sum of the coefficients on fertility in the mother’s and father’s

source country is also positive and significant. When the labor force participation rate ratio,

which has a significantly negative effect on fertility, is included, however, the coefficient on

mother’s source country fertility is reduced and is no longer significant, nor is the sum of

coefficients on the mother’s and father’s source country fertility rate. For annual hours, the

coefficient on the labor force participation rate ratio from the mother’s source country is

positive and significant in both specifications, as is the sum of the coefficients on mother’s and

father’s source country participation ratios. This is suggestive evidence that source country

characteristics do indeed influence the behavior of second generation immigrants. We note

too, that there is stronger evidence of source country effects for both variables for mother’s

than for father’s source country, although the differences are not significant.

3.3. What about assimilation?

       While our results suggest an important role for intergenerational transmission, they also

indicate considerable convergence of immigrants to native levels of schooling, fertility, and

labor supply across generations. For example, when we control for all parental characteristics

simultaneously, we find intergenerational transmission rates for those with both parents

foreign born of 0.30 for education, 0.40 for fertility, and 0.47 for work hours. At these


                                                 30
transmission rates, half or more of any difference in the immigrant generation has been

eliminated by the second generation.

4 Conclusion

       This paper draws on results from my research program with Lawrence Kahn to examine

the role of assimilation versus source country culture in influencing immigrant women’s

behavior in the United States—looking both over time with immigrants’ residence in the United

States and across immigrant generations. It focuses particularly on labor supply but, for the

second generation, also examines fertility and education. We find considerable evidence that

immigrant source country gender roles influence immigrant and second generation women’s

behavior in the United States. This conclusion is robust to various efforts to rule out the effect

of other unobservables and to distinguish the effect of culture from that of social capital. These

results support a growing literature that suggests that culture matters for economic behavior.

At the same time, our results suggest considerable evidence of assimilation of immigrants.

Immigrant women narrow the labor supply gap with native-born women with time in the US,

and, while our results suggest an important role for intergenerational transmission, they also

indicate considerable convergence of immigrants to native levels of schooling, fertility, and

labor supply across generations.


       Looking towards the future, it is likely that immigrant source countries will become

more similar to the United States, thus reducing the effect of source country gender roles on

immigrant and second generation women still further. This has already begun to happen with

respect to fertility. In Blau, Kahn, and Papps (2011), we find that, due to world-wide fertility

declines, the fertility of immigrant women has been rapidly falling relative to natives in the

                                                31
most recent immigrant cohorts. And, even though immigrant women’s labor supply has

decreased relative to natives, since 1995, US female labor force participation rates have

plateaued, allowing greater opportunities for female participation rates in immigrant women’s

source countries to catch up to US rates in the future.




                                               32
References

Alesina AF, Giuliano P, Nunn N (2013) On the Origins of Gender Roles: Women and the Plough.
       Quarterly Journal of Economics 128(2): 469-530.

Antecol H (2000) An Examination of Cross-Country Differences in the Gender Gap in Labor Force
      Participation Rates. Labour Economics 7(4): 409-426.

Baker M and Benjamin D (1997) The Role of the Family in Immigrants’ Labor-Market Activity:
       An Evaluation of Alternative Explanations. American Economic Review 87(4): 705-727.

Blau FD (1992) The Fertility of Immigrant Women: Evidence from High-Fertility Source
       Countries. In GJ Borjas and RB Freeman (Eds.), Immigration and the Work Force:
       Economic Consequences for the United States and Source Areas, University of Chicago
       Press, Chicago, pp. 93-133.

Blau FD, Ferber, MA, and Winkler AE (2014) The Economics of Women, Men, and Work, 7th
       edition, Prentice-Hall/Pearson, Upper Saddle River, New Jersey.

Blau FD and Kahn LM (2003) Understanding International Differences in the Gender Pay Gap.
       Journal of Labor Economics 21(1): 106-144.

Blau FD and Kahn LM (Forthcoming) Substitution between Individual and Source Country
       Characteristics: Social Capital, Culture, and US Labor Market Outcomes among
       Immigrant Women. Journal of Human Capital.

Blau FD, Kahn LM, Liu AY, and Papps KL (2013) The Transmission of Women’s Fertility, Human
       Capital, and Work Orientation Across Immigrant Generations. Journal of Population
       Economics 26(2): 405-435.

Blau FD, Kahn LM, Moriarty JY, and Souza AP (2003) The Role of the Family in Immigrants’
       Labor-Market Activity: An Evaluation of Alternative Explanations: Comment, American
       Economic Review 93(1): 429-447.

Blau FD, Kahn LM, and Papps KL. (2011) Gender, Source Country Characteristics and Labor
       Market Assimilation among Immigrants: 1980-2000. Review of Economics and Statistics
       93(1): 43-58.

Borjas GJ (1985) Assimilation, Changes in Cohort Quality, and the Earnings of Immigrants.
       Journal of Labor Economics 3(4): 463-489.

Borjas GJ (1992) Ethnic Capital and Intergenerational Mobility. Quarterly Journal of Economics
       107(1): 123-150.
Borjas GJ (1993) The Intergenerational Mobility of Immigrants. Journal of Labor Economics 11(1,
       Part 1): 113-135.


                                              33
Card D, DiNardo J, Estes E (2000) The More Things Change: Immigrants and the Children of
       Immigrants in the 1940s, the 1970s, and the 1990s. In Borjas GJ (Ed.) Issues in the
       Economics of Immigration. University of Chicago Press, Chicago, pp 227-269.

Chiswick, BR (1978) The Effect of Americanization on the Earnings of Foreign Born Men. Journal
       of Political Economy 86(5): 897-921.

Coleman JS (1988) Social Capital in the Creation of Human Capital. American Journal of
      Sociology 94 (Supplement): S95-S120.

Dasgupta P (2008) Social Capital. In SN Durlauf and LE Blume (Eds.), The New Palgrave
      Dictionary of Economics, 2nd edition, Palgrave Macmillan, Basingstoke and New York.

Duncan B, Trejo SJ (2007) Ethnic identification, intermarriage, and unmeasured progress by
      Mexican Americans. In Borjas GJ (Ed.) Mexican immigration to the United States.
      University of Chicago Press, Chicago, pp 229-267.

Fernández R (2008) Culture and Economics. In SN Durlauf and LE Blume (Eds.), The New
      Palgrave Dictionary of Economics, 2nd edition, Palgrave Macmillan, Basingstoke and
      New York, pp. 333-340.

Fernández R and Fogli A (2006) Fertility: The Role of Culture and Family Experience. Journal of
      the European Economic Association 4 (2-3): 552-561.

Fernández R and Fogli A (2005) Culture: An Empirical Investigation of Beliefs, Work, and
      Fertility. NBER Working Paper 11268.

Fernández R and Fogli A (2009) Culture: An Empirical Investigation of Beliefs, Work, and
      Fertility. American Economic Journal: Macroeconomics 1(1): 146-177.

Fernández R, Fogli A, and Olivetti C (2004) “Mothers and Sons: Preference Formation and
      Female Labor Force Dynamics” Quarterly Journal of Economics 119(4): 1249-1299.

Fortuny K (2010) Children of Immigrants: 2008 State Trends Update. The Urban Institute,
       Washington, DC, Brief 17, September.

Jasso G, Massey DS, Rosenzweig MR, and Smith JP. (Forthcoming) The U.S. New Immigrant
       Survey: Overview and Preliminary Results Based on the New-Immigrant Cohorts of 1996
       and 2003. In B Morgan and B Nicholson (Eds.), Immigration Research and Statistics
       Service Workshop on Longitudinal Surveys and Cross-Cultural Survey Design: Workshop
       Proceedings, Crown Publishing, London.
Mincer J (1978) Family Migration Decisions. Journal of Political Economy 86(5): 749–73.

Olivetti C and Petrongolo B (2008) Unequal Pay or Unequal Employment? A Cross-Country
        Analysis of Gender Gaps. Journal of Labor Economics 26(4): 621-654.


                                               34
Wilson WJ (1987) The Truly Disadvantaged: The Inner City, the Underclass, and Public Policy,
       University of Chicago Press, Chicago.




                                              35
                        Figure 1 Annual Hours, Women
                 1400
                                                                                1302
                 1300
                 1200
                 1100
  Annual Hours




                                                                  983
                 1000
                                       887
                 900     823
                 800
                 700
                 600
                 500
                                1980                                     2000

                                       Immgrants   Natives


Source: Blau, Kahn, and Papps (2011).




                         Figure 2 Annual Hours, Men
                 2300
                                                                                2053
                 2100                  1969
                         1824                                     1855
                 1900
                 1700
  Annual Hours




                 1500
                 1300
                 1100
                  900
                  700
                  500
                                1980                                     2000

                                       Immgrants   Natives


Source: Blau, Kahn, and Papps (2011).




                                                             36
                       Figure 3 Female Activity Rate Ratio F/M (%)
                                  (At Immigrant Arrival)
                  80
                                                                              72
                  70
                                                                  57
  Ratio (F/M) %




                  60
                                         51
                  50         45

                  40

                  30

                  20
                                  1980                                 2000

                                   Source Countries   United States


Source: Blau, Kahn, and Papps (2011).




                                                             37
                                                                         Figure 4 Simulated Profiles, Annual Work Hours, Married Immigrant
                                                                                            Women (Relative to Natives)
                                                     100
                                                                                                                           51
                                                                                                          21
                                                                                      9                                                          2
                                                       0
 Annual Work Hours Relative to Comparative Natives




                                                            0-5                      6-10                 11-15            16-20                 21-30



                                                     -100

                                                                                                               -114        -113               -126
                                                                                            -119

                                                     -200                                                                          Low activity rate (25th pctile)
                                                                                                                                   High activity rate (75th pctile)

                                                                  -279
                                                     -300




                                                     -400

                                                                  -403


                                                     -500

                                                                                                   Years Since Migration



Source: Blau, Kahn, and Papps (2011).




                                                                                                            38
                                                                  Figure 5 Simulated Profiles, Annual Work Hours, Married Immigrant
                                                                                       Men (Relative to Natives)
                                                   300
                                                                                                                                    244


                                                   200
                                                                                                                   132
Annual Work Hours Relative to Comparable Natives




                                                   100

                                                                               22                    67
                                                     0
                                                          0-5                  6-10                 11-15          16-20              21-30


                                                   -100                                                                       Low activity rate (25th pctile)
                                                                                                                              High activity rate (75th pctile)

                                                   -200



                                                   -300


                                                                -380
                                                   -400



                                                   -500

                                                                                           Years Since Migration




Source: Blau, Kahn, and Papps (2011).




                                                                                                          39
Table 1 Results for the Effect of Immigrant Parent Characteristics
           on Second Generation Outcomes (Women)
                               Education Fertility Annual Hours
Mother's Source Country:
Female Number of Children -0.908*** 0.324**               -27.652
                                  (0.251)    (0.132)     (81.023)
Female Years of Schooling           0.031      0.013        -9.163
                                  (0.035)    (0.016)       (9.657)
Female Annual Work Hours           0.050* -0.035***      0.314***
                                  (0.030)    (0.013)       (0.077)

Father's Source Country:
Female Number of Children         -0.258     0.079         88.788
                                 (0.350)   (0.130)       (67.338)
Male Years of Schooling        0.265*** -0.041***       22.582***
                                 (0.033)   (0.014)         (7.690)
Female Annual Work Hours          -0.016     0.005        0.157**
                                 (0.038)   (0.014)         (0.063)

r squared                         0.128        0.093        0.008
N                               34,141       34,141        34,141

Source: Blau, Kahn, Liu, and Papps (2013).

Notes: * p<.10, ** p<.05, *** p<.01. Standard errors are clustered
by parent's source country (mother then father) crossed with
which census(es) provided the data. Regressions are weighted
using CPS sampling weights adjusted so that each year receives
equal weight. Regressions include controls for age (quadratic),
family type (immigrant father and native mother; immigrant
mother and native father, with the omitted category being both
parents immigrants), and year fixed effects.




                                40
    Table 2 Results for the Effect of Immigrant Source Country Characteristics on Second Generation
                                    Women's Fertility and Annual Hours
                                                         Number of Children           Annual Hours
                                                           (1)       (2)             (3)        (4)
Mother's Source Country:
Fertility                                                  0.046*         0.016                  8.474
                                                           (0.024)      (0.021)               (14.392)
Labor Force Participation Rate Ratio                                 -0.597***    223.791** 249.033**
                                                                        (0.169)    (105.795) (111.500)

Father's Source Country:
Fertility                                                    0.009       0.003                    17.857*
                                                           (0.021)     (0.020)                   (10.042)
Labor Force Participation Rate Ratio                                    -0.112        40.763       87.191
                                                                       (0.168)      (84.811)     (86.863)

r squared                                                    0.082       0.084         0.005       0.005
N                                                          34,141      34,141        34,141       34,141

Source: Blau, Kahn, Liu, and Papps (2013).

Notes: * p<.10, ** p<.05, *** p<.01. Standard errors are clustered by parent's source country (mother
then father) crossed with which census(es) provided the data. Regressions are weighted using CPS
sampling weights adjusted so that each year receives equal weight. Regressions control for age
(quadratic), family type, and year fixed effects, and source country GDP per capita and primary and
secondary female enrollment rates.




                                                   41
