                              NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                     WAGE DISPERSION AND SEARCH BEHAVIOR:
                    THE IMPORTANCE OF NON-WAGE JOB VALUES

                                         Robert E. Hall
                                        Andreas I. Mueller

                                       Working Paper 21764
                               http://www.nber.org/papers/w21764


                     NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                              1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                Cambridge, MA 02138
                           November 2015, Revised July 2017




The Hoover Institution supported Hall's research. The paper is also part of the National Bureau of
Economic Research's Economic Fluctuations and Growth Program and its Labor Program. We
are grateful to Steven Davis, Per Krusell, Rasmus Lentz, Iourii Manovskii, Emi Nakamura,
Tamas Papp, Richard Rogerson, Robert Shimer, Isaac Sorkin, Susan Woodward, and the editor
and four referees for valuable comments. Backup materials including the public use version of the
survey are available on Mueller's website. The views expressed herein are those of the authors
and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

At least one co-author has disclosed a financial relationship of potential relevance for this
research. Further information is available online at http://www.nber.org/papers/w21764.ack

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.

© 2015 by Robert E. Hall and Andreas I. Mueller. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not
to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit,
including © notice, is given to the source.
Wage Dispersion and Search Behavior: The Importance of Non-Wage Job Values
Robert E. Hall and Andreas I. Mueller
NBER Working Paper No. 21764
November 2015, Revised July 2017
JEL No. J31,J32,J64

                                         ABSTRACT

We use a rich new body of data on the experiences of unemployed jobseekers to determine the
sources of wage dispersion and to create a search model consistent with the acceptance decisions
the jobseekers made. Heterogeneity in non-wage job values or amenities among jobseekers and
jobs is a central feature of our model. From the data and the model, we identify the distributions
of four key variables: offered wages, offered non-wage job values, the value of the jobseeker's
non-work alternative, and the jobseeker's personal productivity. We find that, conditional on
personal productivity, the standard deviation of offered log-wages is moderate, at 0.24, whereas
the dispersion of the non-wage component of offered job values is substantially larger, at 0.34.
The resulting dispersion of offered job values is 0.38. We also find high dispersion of personal
productivity, at 0.43.


Robert E. Hall
Hoover Institution
Stanford University
Stanford, CA 94305-6010
and NBER
rehall@gmail.com

Andreas I. Mueller
Columbia Business School
3022 Broadway
Uris Hall 824
New York, NY 10027
and NBER
amueller@columbia.edu
   People looking for jobs seek to earn money. But holding a job involves an opportunity
cost in terms of less time for other activities. A job also has a non-wage dimension—it
can be vexatious, fulfilling, or both. We call this dimension the non-wage value of a job.
Job-seekers consider all three dimensions in deciding whether to accept an offer. They also
judge job offers against the probability that they will be offered a nicer job or higher wage
if they decline an offer and incur the cost of continuing to search.
    We develop a model of the search process and explore its implications for the probability
distributions of key variables. Our model embodies the now-standard view that employed
people search along with the unemployed. Searchers consider the job value of an offer,
modeled as the product of the wage and the non-wage value. A member of either group
forms a reservation job value and accepts a job that offers at least that value. Wages
and non-wage values vary across workers, because some workers are more productive than
others, because workers have different opportunity costs of being employed, because there is
variation across workers in the non-wage values they receive from a given job, and because of
the randomness of job offers. Our goal is to decompose the variation across individuals into
probability distributions of four variables: (1) personal productivity, (2) the opportunity cost
of holding a job, (3) the offered wage, and (4) the offered non-wage job value. Our model
of the search process makes strong enough assumptions to identify our four probability
distributions. We introduce and defend these assumptions shortly.
   We use data from a novel panel survey of job-seekers, carried out by Alan Krueger and
Andreas Mueller (the KM survey). Respondents in the survey were selected at random from
individuals who were drawing unemployment benefits in New Jersey in the fall of 2009. The
survey reports reservation wages, wages of job offers, and the acceptance of an offer. We also
use administrative data on wages linked to the survey respondents.
   The new survey permits more refined measures of dispersion than earlier data sources.
The survey identifies the dispersion of non-wage values of jobs in the following way: Many
job-seekers accept jobs that pay less than their previously reported reservation wages. This
outcome reveals that the accepted job has an unusually high non-wage value. A smaller
fraction reject jobs that pay more than the reservation wage, a sign of a low non-wage value.
Accordingly, we can measure the distribution of the non-wage job value directly from the
acceptance frequency stated as a function of the ratio of the offered wage to the reservation
wage. The survey data also identifies the dispersion of personal productivity. Our idea is that
reservation wages and offered wages both depend on personal productivity, so the covariance
of the two variables equals the variance in personal productivity across job-seekers.
    Our measure of dispersion is the standard deviation of the log of a variable. Our estimates
imply that the overall dispersion of the log of the offered wage is 0.52. The dispersion of


                                               2
personal productivity is 0.43, so it is a strong influence in overall wage dispersion. The
dispersion of offered wages for a particular jobseeker (standardized for personal productivity)
is 0.24. Our most striking finding is that the dispersion of the non-wage job value is 0.34, so
it too is an important determinant of the dispersion of the job value. Our model considers
the possibility that offered wages embody a compensating differential, which would make
the dispersion of the total job value smaller than the dispersion of either the offered wage
or the offered non-wage value, but our results suggest that, while wage and non-wage values
are negatively correlated, the extent of compensation is small.
   We build on a rich literature on wage dispersion, non-wage job values, and job search.
We believe that our work advances knowledge in those areas in two major ways: First, we
identify and quantify the dispersion of non-wage job values and find that it is high. Earlier
researchers have found reliable a estimate of the dispersion elusive and have been skeptical
that non-wage values play much of a role in the process of matching workers to employers.
Second, we identify and quantify the dispersion of personal productivity in a way that fully
incorporates unobserved characteristics, and we find that the dispersion is large. Compared
to other studies, we find a higher dispersion of personal productivity, and by implication a
lower dispersion of the other factors that influence wages. In particular, we find that the
dispersion of offered wages conditional on personal productivity—the frictional component
of offers—is lower than other studies have found. This finding helps resolve a tension in
the literature on job search—that searchers seem willing to accept jobs quickly when the
apparent dispersion of wage offers facing a searcher is high, suggesting that patience would
be rewarding. Patience is less rewarding than thought because the dispersion of job values
is less than previously found.
   The paper and online Appendix contain numerous investigations of the robustness of our
results. We believe that our main conclusions about the relative contributions of personal
productivity, wages, and non-wage job values are quite robust. Our conclusions about the
extent that compensating variations in wages offset the values of non-wage job characteristics
is limited by moderately high sampling variation, but we believe that our conclusion is robust
that the offset is less than complete—wages do not fully offset non-wage values.
    While we recognize the challenges to generalizing to a national universe from a sample
of unemployment insurance claimants in a single state, we find that the distribution of pre-
unemployment wages in the KM data is similar to the distribution for all job losers in the
fully representative Current Population Survey, after adjustment for the generally higher
level of wages in New Jersey than in the U.S.




                                              3
1     Model
Our model focuses on the behavior of a worker in an environment with the following key
variables:

    • Randomly arriving job offers, each with log flow value v̂, which is the sum of a log
      wage ŷ and a non-wage log value n

    • Personal productivity, x, in logs

    • A personal non-work value ĥ, the opportunity cost of employment, not in logs

    We will explain the role of the hat, ˆ, shortly. Jobseekers, who may be employed or un-
employed, form a reservation job value r̂v and accept the first job offer with a value at least
as high as r̂v . Offers arrive at rate λu for the unemployed and λe for the employed jobseek-
ers. This model is an extension of the job-ladder model of a large recent literature. The
model generates equilibrium distributions of wages w and non-wage values n among workers.
Dispersion of those variables across workers arises from (1) dispersion of productivity, (2)
dispersion of non-work value, and (3) dispersion in the position of workers on the job ladder,
arising from their histories of random job offers and separations.
    The survey asks a respondent for her reservation wage r̂, not her reservation job value.
It also asks if her rejection of a job offer was for non-wage reasons. Our model makes
assumptions that enable identification of its parameters by making use of these responses.

1.1    Job offers and the interpretation of the distribution of job
       value
We use the term offer to describe a jobseeker’s encounter with a definite opportunity to take
a job. Nothing in this paper requires that employers make firm job offers and that jobseekers
then make up-or-down decisions. The jobseeker’s acceptance problem, upon finding a job
opportunity, is the same whether the employer is making a single firm offer, or they engage in
full-information alternating-offer bargaining. In the latter case, the jobseeker will participate
in the bargaining process only if she anticipates that the ultimate job value will meet the
reservation value. That said, the survey included a question about the nature of the job
offer, and in the majority of cases, the employer did make a firm offer. The distribution of
offers that we consider is the actual probability distribution of the job value v̂ of a definite
employment opportunity. It is specific to a jobseeker and reflects all of the selection of jobs
that the jobseeker investigates and all the consideration of a jobseeker’s qualification by the
employer prior to the jobseeker understanding that the opportunity is definite. We do not

                                               4
model the distribution of offered job values as the censored version of an underlying general
distribution of job values. As we describe in a later section, if a respondent receives more
than one offer in a week, the survey gathers information about the best offer. As a result,
our distribution of job values reflects the improvement that is available from running an
auction, in effect, when a jobseeker can choose among competing offers.
    We observe the wage component of an offer, ŷ, and infer a non-wage log value, n, as a
residual, defined by other observable variables. Our conclusion about the importance of the
non-wage value derives from the notion that the offered wage is a good indicator of the overall
wage value of a job. In support of the hypothesis that the offered wage is a good indicator of
earnings in the future, Kudlyak (2014) shows that initial wages are highly persistent within
the first years of a job, up to at least seven years, even in the face of substantial changes
in the wages of more recently hired workers. To the extent that a jobseeker is aware of the
magnitude of a future wage adjustment at the time she makes her acceptance decision, our
measure of the non-wage value includes that perceived magnitude.

1.2    The key role of the acceptance function
The acceptance function is a central empirical object in our model. It is the probability
that a job is accepted, as a function of d = ŷ − r̂, the difference between the offered wage
and the reported reservation wage. To demonstrate the value of the acceptance function,
we consider a special case here. Suppose that jobseekers report their reservation job values
as their reservation wages—that is, when asked for a reservation wage, they give the wage
that would be just enough to be acceptable for a job with a log non-wage value of zero. And
suppose that ŷ and n are uncorrelated. The acceptance function then satisfies:

       A(d) = Prob[v̂ ≥ r̂v ] = Prob[ŷ + n ≥ r̂v ] = Prob[ŷ − r̂ ≥ −n] = Prob[n ≥ −d]    (1)

Thus we can write
                                     A(d) = 1 − Fn (−d),                                   (2)
and we can calculate Fn directly from the acceptance function:

                                     Fn (n) = 1 − A(−n).                                   (3)

We conclude that, in this special case, the acceptance function reveals the distribution of
non-wage job values directly. If all jobs had the same non-wage value, the reservation wage
would be a perfect predictor of acceptance. The incidence of acceptances of jobs whose
wages are below the reservation wage reveals the frequency of high non-wage values and the
frequency of rejection of jobs whose wages exceed the reservation wage reveals the frequency
of low non-wage values.

                                              5
1.3    Assumptions
We make three general assumptions to support identification of the model’s parameters:

Assumption 1, Observable and private values: Jobseekers and prospective employers know
the jobseeker’s personal productivity x at the time they meet each other, but the non-work
value ĥ and the reservation job value r̂v are private to the jobseeker.

Assumption 2, Proportionality-to-productivity: The distributions of y = ŷ − x, v = v̂ − x,
r = r̂ − x and h = ĥ/ exp(x) in the population with personal log productivity x are the same
as the distributions of ŷ, v̂, r̂ and ĥ in the sub-population with x = 0.

Assumption 3, Joint distribution: Let

                                       n = η − κ(y − µy ),                                (4)

n adjusted for its correlation with y, where µy is the mean of y. The variables y, η, r, and
x are jointly normally and independently distributed.

   We make additional assumptions that support identification from specific features of the
KM survey:

Assumption 4, Reference non-wage value. The survey asks for a reservation wage, not the
reservation job value of the model. We assume that the reported reservation wage r is the
reservation wage applicable to an offer with a zero value of the non-wage value, n, so rv = r.
The mean, µn , of the non-wage value is not necessarily zero.

Assumption 5, Measurement errors. We assume that the observed values of the offered
wage and reservation wage contain measurement errors:

                                       ỹ = y + x + y                                    (5)
                                        r̃ = r + x + r                                   (6)

The measurement errors are normally distributed with mean zero and are independent of
each other and the other variables of the model.

Assumption 6, Preponderant reason for rejection: Respondents report that they rejected
a job offer for a non-wage reason if the deviation from the mean is more negative for the
non-wage value than for the wage value: n − µn < y − µy .




                                                6
1.4     Discussion of the assumptions
1.4.1   Observable and private values

With respect to personal productivity, mutual observability seems the natural starting point
for modeling employment, though we recognize that the information is not perfect on either
side. Both parties have strong incentives to track down information about the job and the
jobseeker’s fit to the job. Random future changes in productivity are consistent with the
model.
  We also assume that h and r are not observed by the employer. Unlike productivity,
the jobseeker’s work history is not very informative about flow values of non-work and of
unemployment. Even if past acceptance decisions were observed, for most jobseekers there
are too few data points to infer their reservation wages with useful precision. In the final
section of the paper, we report a robustness check where flow values are fully observed and
find that it does not materially change the results.

1.4.2   Proportionality-to-productivity

The most controversial aspect of this hypothesis is that non-market productivity is higher
by the entire amount of market productivity in the population with higher values of x.
Low-x populations are not systematically more choosy about taking jobs than are high-x
populations. While this assumption obviously fails if applied across the entire population
including those out of the labor force, it appears reasonable in a sample of workers eligible for
unemployment compensation. Moreover, we find that the average acceptance rates do not
differ systematically across different levels of educational attainment. Unemployment rates
decline with productivity, but this is largely because separation rates decline, not because of
heterogeneity in acceptance. Toward the end of the paper, we report robustness checks that
suggest that the non-proportionality in our sample is unimportant.

1.4.3   Joint distribution

The principle of compensating wage differentials suggests that the correlation between wage
offers y and non-wage values n should be negative—employers offer lower wages for jobs
with favorable non-wage values. The correlation is not perfect, however, because there is a
personal dimension to the non-wage value that the firm may ignore, under a posted-wage
policy, or respond to only partially, in a bargained-wage policy. For example, commuting
cost varies across individual workers. For this reason, we assume that the non-wage value
n comprises (1) a component η that is uncorrelated with the other fundamentals and (2) a



                                               7
component that is the negative of a fraction κ of the offered wage minus its mean:

                                     n = η − κ(y − µy ).                                  (7)

We do not restrict κ to be positive. In the presence of search frictions, wages and non-wage
values may be positively correlated, see Hwang, Mortensen and Reed (1998) and Lang and
Majumdar (2004).
   With respect to the independence or non-correlation assumption, the variables y, η, and
r are subject to the proportionality-to-productivity assumption and thus are uncorrelated
with x by definition. The correlation of η and y is zero by construction. The support for
the assumption that the correlation of y and r is zero involves issues that we take up in the
next section on the determination of the reservation wage and again in our discussion of the
results.

1.4.4      Reference non-wage value

An unemployed jobseeker decides about accepting a job offer by comparing the job value
v = y + n to a reservation value, rv . The KM survey asks about a reservation wage, not a
reservation job value. We take the reference non-wage value to be zero. This choice is only a
normalization, because we estimate the mean of the distribution of n, µn . Acceptance choices
conditional on reservation wages are the only evidence we have about non-wage values, so
we cannot distinguish between the mean of non-wage values and the reference level that
respondents use in answering the question about the reservation wage. The fact that it is
more common for an unemployed jobseeker to accept an offer below the reservation wage
than reject one above the reservation wage is equally well explained by two views, both
consistent with our treatment: (1) the distribution of non-wage values has a positive mean,
or (2) the respondents use a high reservation wage on account of answering the question with
respect to a hypothetical offer with a job value well below average.

1.4.5      Measurement errors

Many jobseekers accept wage offers below the reservation wage and a smaller fraction reject
offers above the reservation wage. Our acceptance model accounts for the acceptances and
rejections that appear contrary to the reservation wage in two ways. First, we invoke a
non-wage value that is imperfectly correlated with the offered wage. Second, we attribute
measurement errors to the reported values of the offered wage and the reservation wage. We
assume that the observed values are:

                                       ỹ = y + x + y                                    (8)
                                       r̃ = r + x + r                                    (9)

                                              8
where the measurement errors y ∼ N (0, σy ) and r ∼ N (0, σr ), and are independent.
   Let d = ỹ − r̃ be the difference between the observed offered wage and the reservation
wage. Also let m = v − rv (recall that v = y + n, the job value). As above, we write the
acceptance probability A as a function of d:

               A(d) = Prob[m ≥ 0|d] = 1 − Prob[0 ≥ m|d] = 1 − Fm (0|d),                    (10)

which differs from equation (1) because of the presence of measurement error and non-zero
correlation between y and n.

1.4.6    Preponderant reason for rejection

The shape of the acceptance function does not separately identify the dispersion of the
idiosyncratic part of non-wage values, ση , and the compensating differential parameter κ, as
higher values of either parameter imply a flatter acceptance function. The survey includes a
question for respondents who rejected a job offer if the rejection was because of a non-wage
reason. We assume that respondents report that they rejected a job offer for a non-wage
reason if the deviation from the mean is more negative for the non-wage value than for the
wage value: n − µn < y − µy .
   Let p = (η − µη ) − (y − µy )(1 + κ). The fraction of rejections for non-wage reasons for a
person with reservation wage r, denoted Jr , is:

                     Jr = P (non-wage preponderates | offer rejected)
                          = P (n − µn < y − µy |v < r)
                            P (p < 0 and v < r)
                          =
                                  P (v < r)
                            R v=r
                                  P (p < 0|v)dFv (v)
                          = −∞
                                    P (v < r)
                            Z v=r
                                   Fp (0|v)
                          =                 dFv (v),
                             −∞     Fv (r)

and integrating over the distribution of r, we get:
                                 Z ∞ Z v=r
                                            Fp (0|v)
                            J=                       dFv (v)dFr (r).                       (11)
                                  −∞ −∞      Fv (r)

2       Determination of the Reservation Job Value
In this section, we consider how a jobseeker sets her reservation job value while unemployed
or employed. If search on the job is less effective than while unemployed, the decision to take


                                                9
a job offer while unemployed includes a real-option element because it involves a sacrifice of
the superior flow of job offers. Absent that option value, the reservation job value is simply
the opportunity cost, so rv = log h if h > 0 and acceptance is automatic if h ≤ 0.
   Under the assumption of proportionality, the value functions of employed workers are
proportional to personal productivity. Our next step is to derive the Bellman equations and
associated reservation job value for an individual with x = 0. Those for individuals with
other values of x scale in proportion. The Bellman equation for an unemployed person with
non-work value h and offer rate λu adjusts the reservation job value rv to include the lost
option value associated with accepting a job offer while unemployed:
                                  Z                                                          
               1
 U (h) = h +       max (1 − s)λu       W (h, ṽ)dFv (ṽ) + (1 − (1 − s)λu (1 − Fv (rv )))U (h) .
             1 + ρ rv               rv
                                                                                              (12)
   On the left is the value of being unemployed, U (h). On the right, the individual receives
the non-work flow value h and finds the best reservation job value to maximize the discounted
asset value arising from the optimal choice of the reservation value, rv . A higher rv raises
the capital gain upon re-employment but lowers the probability of receiving it.
   The Bellman equation for an employee with non-work value h and offer rate λe is
                            Z                                                        
            v   1
W (h, v) = e +      (1 − s) λe W (h, ṽ)dFv (ṽ) + (1 − λe + λe Fv (v))W (h, v) + sU (h)
               1+ρ              v
                                                                                      (13)
The worker automatically accepts any job with a value greater than the current job value,
v, because there is no loss of option value. There is a flow value from the probability of
finding a better job with capital gain W (h, ṽ) − W (h, v). There is also a flow probability s,
the separation rate, of suffering the capital loss W (h, v) − U (h).
   If employed jobseeking is just as effective as unemployed jobseeking, the reservation job
value for the unemployed is the non-work value h. If there is an option value, it remains
the case that unemployed jobseekers with higher non-work values have higher reservation
job values. Our assumption of zero correlation of the reservation value and the offered value
will fail if the jobseeker knows something about the possible job offer before contacting an
employer, because the jobseeker will contact only the more promising employers. Choosier
jobseekers with higher non-work values will get better job offers, though less often than
other jobseekers. The correlation between the reservation value and the offered value will be
positive, not zero. The issue of how much a jobseeker knows about job prospects is important
in search theory. Models of the search process range on a spectrum from directed search
to random search. With strictly directed search, the jobseeker knows the terms of a job
prior to contacting an employer. The jobseeker visits only one employer and automatically
accepts the job. With strictly random search, the jobseeker meets employers at random and

                                               10
lacks any ability to target a favorable employer. In reality, the jobseeking environment is
somewhere in between. In Appendix D.1, we consider a model of partially directed search as
an alternative to our main specification of random search, and find fairly small differences
between the two.


3     The KM Survey
Alan Krueger and Andreas Mueller (KM) carried out the survey that underlies this paper—
see Krueger and Mueller (2011) and Krueger and Mueller (2016). The KM survey enrolled
roughly 6,000 jobseekers in New Jersey who were receiving unemployment insurance benefits
in September 2009. The survey collected weekly data from them for several months up to
April 2010. The sampling frame of the survey was based on a stratified random sample of all
unemployment insurance recipients in New Jersey. The survey was conducted online and was
administered by the Cornell Survey Research Institute in collaboration with the Princeton
Survey Research Center. Individuals were initially invited to participate in the survey for
12 consecutive weeks, but the survey was extended for an additional 12 weeks for the very
long-term unemployed—those with a duration of unemployment of 60 weeks or more at the
start of the survey.
    The KM survey is a novel data source on unemployed workers’ search behavior and
outcomes. It is unique in several dimensions: First, the survey provides a unique combination
of information on reservation wages, job offers, and job acceptance decisions. Second, the
data were collected for a large cross-section of unemployed workers, representative of the
population of unemployment insurance recipients in New Jersey. Data sets that have some
of the same information usually have substantially smaller samples and often are focused
on particular segments of the population, such as the youth in the NLYS79. Third, the
data have a weekly panel dimension, which is unprecedented. This feature is important
for the research in this paper, because it allows us to relate the acceptance decisions to the
reservation wage prior to the receipt of the job offer. Finally, the survey data can be matched
to administrative records for the respondents, notably their wages on the jobs they held just
prior to becoming unemployed.
    The overall response rate in the survey was 9.7 percent and respondents completed on
average about 5 interviews over the first 12 weeks of the survey. While the relatively low
response rate may be a concern, there are several reasons to believe that the non-response
should not lead to a major bias in the results in this paper: First, the public-use survey
data include survey weights, which adjust both for sampling probability and non-response.
Krueger and Mueller (2011) provide a detailed analysis of non-response and show that re-


                                              11
spondents were more likely to be female, white, and older and have a college degree, compared
to the sample frame. After adjusting for survey weights, however, the characteristics of the
sample of respondents closely match the characteristics of the sample frame. Second, Krueger
and Mueller (2011) provide additional evidence based on updated UI records that the weekly
hazards of UI exit do not differ significantly between respondents and non-respondents dur-
ing and after the survey. This finding suggests that search behavior of respondents and
non-respondents did not differ markedly over the period of the survey. There is a significant
difference in the first week of the unemployment spell, which is probably because some un-
employed found a job by the time they were invited to the survey two weeks after the date
when they were sampled. Finally, Krueger and Mueller (2016) provide evidence that the
ratio of weekly re-employment wages to weekly prior wages in New Jersey administrative
wage data were similar between respondents and non-respondents. This finding is particu-
larly relevant for this paper, as it shows that the unemployed workers in our sample did not
differ significantly from non-respondents in their accepted wage distributions, and thus are
unlikely to differ in their reservation wage choices and job offer distributions.
   We follow Krueger and Mueller (2011) by restricting the sample to survey participants
of ages 20 to 65, and exclude outlier observations of reservation and offered wages. Outliers
are defined as observations where the wage expressed in weekly terms exceeded $8000 or
was below $100 or where the wage in hourly terms was greater than $100 or below $5. In
addition, following Feldstein and Poterba (1984), we trimmed reservation wages if the ratio
of the reservation wage over the prior wage exceeded 3 or was below one third. All major
results in the paper are robust to not trimming outlier observations of reservation wages and
offered wages—see Appendix Table 6.

3.1    Job offers
The KM survey asked respondents each week: “In the last 7 days, did you receive any job
offers? If yes, how many?” The respondents in our sample received a total of 2,174 job offers
in 37,609 reported weeks of job search. The ratio of the two, 0.058, is a reasonable estimate
of the overall weekly rate of receipt of job offers.
   For respondents who indicated that they received at least one job offer, the KM survey
asked respondents: “What was the wage or salary offered (before deductions)? Is that per
year, per month, bi-weekly, weekly or per hour?” In cases where respondents reported that
they received more than one offer in a given week, the survey asked the offered wage only
for the best offer. Among the individuals who reported at least one job offer, 86.3 percent
reported that they received one offer in the last 7 days, 8.6 percent reported receiving two



                                               12
                .8
                                                                 m = 2.75
                .6                                               s = 0.52
             Density
             .4 .2
                0




                       1          2               3              4              5
                                           Offered Wage, y



                  Figure 1: Kernel Density of the Log Hourly Offered Wage, y

offers in the last 7 days, 2.4 percent received 3 offers and the remaining 2.7 percent received
between 4 and 10 offers in the last 7 days.
   Figure 1 reports the kernel density of the hourly offered wage for our sample of 1,153
job offers. In cases, where the wage was not reported on an hourly basis, to measure of the
hourly offered wage, we divided the salary by the number of weeks in the reference period
(if yearly, 52, and if monthly, 4.33) times the hours on the job. The sample is restricted to
cases where details of the offer (including the wage) and a reservation wage from a previous
interview were available. We use the same sample below when we compute the acceptance
frequency conditional on the difference between the log of the offered wage and the log of
the reservation wage from a previous interview.
   The model interprets this distribution as the mixture of the distribution of wage offers
for a worker with standardized personal productivity and the distribution of productivity
across workers—by mixture, we mean the weighted average of the offer distribution for given
productivity, with the weights taken as the distribution of productivity.

3.2    Reservation wage
Each week, the respondents in the KM survey answered a question about their reservation
wages: “Suppose someone offered you a job today. What is the lowest wage or salary you


                                              13
                .8
                                                                 m = 2.82
                .6                                               s = 0.47
             Density
             .4 .2
                0




                       1         2                3             4              5
                                         Reservation Wage, r



              Figure 2: Kernel Density of the Log Hourly Reservation Wage, r

would accept (before deductions) for the type of work you are looking for?” We only use the
first reservation wage observation available for each person in the survey so that the sample
is representative of the cross-section of unemployed workers. We apply the same sample
restrictions as Krueger and Mueller (2011)—we exclude survey participants who reported
working in the last seven days or already accepted a job offer at the time of the interview.
Figure 2 shows the kernel density of the hourly reservation wage for our sample of 4,138
unemployed workers. We calculated the reservation in the same way as we calculated the
offered wage. Not all unemployed workers in our sample received job offers during the survey
period, but the mean and the standard deviations of the reservation wage are nearly identical
for the full sample and the sample restricted to those who received job offers. The mean of
the log reservation wage is 2.83 in the restricted sample compared to 2.82 in the full sample,
and the standard deviation is 0.47 in both samples. In the estimation of our model, we rely
on the restricted sample to estimate the acceptance function and the covariance of the wage
offer and the reservation wage.
    The model infers the value of the non-work option from the reservation wage of a job-
seeker. The survey reveals the distribution of the reservation wage among all respondents.
The model interprets this distribution as the mixture of the distribution of the reservation
wage for a worker with standardized personal productivity and the distribution of produc-
tivity across workers.

                                              14
3.3    Acceptance
Many respondents accept job offers that pay less than the respondent’s previously reported
reservation wage. Some do the reverse, rejecting an offer that pays more than the reservation
wage. Our model posits that jobs have non-wage values, to explain why the offered wage does
not control the acceptance decision—jobseekers accept jobs paying less than the reservation
wage because these jobs have favorable non-wage values that offset the low wage. The model
accounts for the bias toward acceptance by treating the reported reservation wage as referring
to a job with below-normal non-wage value.
   We study the acceptance probability as a function of the difference between the log of
the offered wage and the log of the reservation wage. To avoid possible bias from cognitive
dissonance among the respondents, we exploit the longitudinal structure of the survey, and
use the reservation wage value reported in the week prior to the receipt of a job offer. Krueger
and Mueller (2016) give a detailed analysis of the acceptance frequency in the survey. The
job acceptance frequency rises with d = y − r. The average frequency of job acceptance in
our sample is 71.9 percent. In 20.9 percent of the cases, respondents indicated that they had
not yet decided whether to accept the job offer or not.
   To deal with the problem of missing data for acceptance of some job offers, we make
use of administrative data on exit from unemployment insurance. UI exit is a potentially
useful but imperfect indicator of acceptance, for four reasons: (1) A delay occurs between job
acceptance and UI exit. (2) An exit from the UI system may relate to a different offer from
the one reported in the survey. (3) UI exit data are censored at the point of UI exhaustion,
as the data do not track recipients after they exhaust benefits. (4) An unemployed worker
may perform limited part-time work while receiving benefits and thus acceptances of such
offers will not be reflected in an exit from the UI system. Krueger and Mueller (2016) show
that the rate of UI exit for those who were undecided was almost exactly halfway between
the rate of UI exit for those who accepted the offer and the rate of UI exit for those who
rejected the offer. We believe that this estimate is the best available. Notwithstanding the
imperfect relation between exits and acceptances of offers, we believe it is the best way to
handle the problem of missing data, so we create an indicator variable A that takes on the
value zero for a rejected offer, 0.5 for an offer for which the respondent was undecided, and
1 for an accepted offer.
    Figure 3 shows the acceptance frequency smoothed in two ways: (1) as the fitted values
from a regression of A on a 6th-order polynomial in y − r and (2) as the fitted values from
a locally weighted regression (LOWESS) with bandwidth 0.3. The figure runs from first-
percentile value of d to the 99th percentile value. Values outside that range are inherently
unreliable for any smoothing method.

                                              15
                         .9
             Acceptance Frequency, A
                   .5           .7




                                                                                     Polynomial
                                                                                     Lowess
                         .3




                                       -1      -.5              0                .5               1
                                            Offered Wage - Reservation Wage, d = y - r



Figure 3: Smoothed Acceptance Frequency, A, as a Function of the Difference between the
Log Hourly Offered Wage and the Log Hourly Reservation Wage, d = y − r

   The survey also asked a question about reasons for rejecting a job offer: 32.3 percent
indicated that they rejected because of “inadequate pay/benefits” and the remaining 67.7
percent indicated another reason for rejecting such as unsuitable working conditions, in-
sufficient hours/too many hours, transportation issues, insufficient use of skills/experience.
Consistent with our principle that the offer distribution includes the advantage of multiple
competing offers, we exclude from the sample the 5.0 percent of offers that respondents re-
jected because they accepted another job offer. Unfortunately, the survey did not distinguish
between inadequate pay and inadequate benefits, but in response to a similar question in
the National Longitudinal Survey of Youth (NLSY) in 1986-87, 36.8 percent of respondents
mentioned “inadequate pay” as the reason for rejecting a job offer, indicating that the inad-
equate pay is the most common reason for rejecting the job offer, not inadequate benefits.
Moreover, as reported in Krueger and Mueller (2016), 40 percent of offers below the reser-
vation wage were rejected for inadequate pay or benefits, whereas only 1 percent of offers
above the reservation wage was rejected for the same reason. This evidence suggests that
either benefits are not an important factor in the acceptance-rejection decision or that ben-
efits are quite positively correlated with the offered wage, as otherwise we would expect at
least some rejections for the reason of inadequate benefits for job offers with wages above the



                                                            16
reservation wage. As explained later in the paper, our model allows for correlation between
wage offers and non-wage amenities.
   In our approach to estimation, the shape of the acceptance function and the fraction of
rejections for non-wage reasons together identify the dispersion of the non-wage value and
the correlation of wages and non-wage values. The fact that many jobs are accepted that
pay well below the reported reservation shows that fairly large positive non-wage values are
common. We characterize the function by the acceptance rate at five values of d. Together
with the fraction of offers rejected for non-wage reasons, these moments identify the mean
and standard deviation of the log of the non-wage job value, as well as the correlation of
wages and non-wage values in job offers.

3.4    Prior wage
Our model views the prior wage in terms of the job-ladder model. A respondent searched
during an earlier spell of unemployment and accepted the first job offered that exceeded the
reservation job value (combining wage and non-wage components). While employed, the
worker received offers, and accepted the ones that exceeded the job value of the prior job.
The distribution of the observed wage on the job the respondent held just before the current
spell of unemployment is the stationary distribution of the process defined by the job ladder,
starting from unemployment, making successive improvements, and occasionally suffering
job loss and dropping back to the bottom of the ladder in a new spell of unemployment.
   Figure 4 shows the kernel density of the hourly wage on the prior job. The wage is
computed from administrative data on weekly earnings during the base year, which typically
comprises the first four of the five quarters before the date of the UI claim, and from survey
data on weekly hours for the previous employment. Hours on the previous job may not
perfectly overlap with the period of the base year. Roughly 15 percent of the respondents
answered that hours varied on their previous jobs. We imputed their hours based on de-
mographic characteristics as in Krueger and Mueller (2011). For these reasons, the hourly
previous wage includes some measurement error despite the fact that weekly earnings are
taken from administrative data.
   In the model, the distribution of the prior wage depends on all four unobserved distribu-
tions. We carry out a rather complicated calculation of the distribution and match it to the
observed one. We update the wage by 2.75 percent to adjust for the time elapsed between
the measurement of the respondents’ earnings in March 2008 to the median survey month,
November 2009, based on the Bureau of Labor Statistics’ Employment Cost Index for the
metro area including New Jersey. This index is adjusted for changes in the composition of
employment.

                                             17
                .8
                                                                 m = 2.87
                .6                                               s = 0.58
             Density
             .4 .2
                0




                       1         2                3             4              5
                                          Previous Wage, w



           Figure 4: Kernel Density of the Log Hourly Wage at the Prior Job, w

4    Estimation
The model is overidentified. We estimate its parameters from a sub-model that is conditional
on the reservation wage, rather than incorporating the part of the model dealing with the
optimal reservation wage. The moments we omit from estimation are the means and standard
deviation of the log of the wage earned on the job prior to the current spell of unemployment
and the covariances of the prior wage and the offered and reservation wages (mw , sw , cy,w ,
and cr,w ). The reasons for not matching those moments are: (1) no parameter values can
actually match the standard deviation of the prior log-wage, though the parameter values
from the sub-model estimation come quite close, as we show in a later section; (2) we lack
evidence about the process of on-the-job search, where the KM survey is silent because all of
its respondents are unemployed; and (3) the KM survey sampled unemployed jobseekers, so
its distribution of prior wages is not directly comparable to the distribution of wages among
the employed. Nonetheless, we believe it is useful to calculate the implied distribution among
the employed and compare it to the distribution of past wages among the survey respondents.




                                             18
            Moment                                                                      Symbol                Value

            Mean offered wage                                                              mŷ                     2.75
            Mean reservation wage                                                          mȓ                     2.82
            Standard deviation of offered wage                                              sŷ                0.525
            Standard deviation of reservation wage                                          sȓ                0.474
            Covariance of offered wage and reservation wage                                c ŷ,ȓ              0.183
            Acceptance frequency at d1 = -1.0                                              Â1                 0.262
            Acceptance frequency at d2 = -0.5                                              Â2                 0.576
            Acceptance frequency at d3 = 0.0                                               Â3                 0.780
            Acceptance frequency at d4 = 0.5                                               Â4                 0.856
            Acceptance frequency at d5 = 1.0                                               Â5                 0.618
            Fraction of rejections for non-wage reasons                                     Ĵ                 0.677
            Note : d i refers to the difference between the log offered wage ŷ and the log reservation wage ȓ .


                                               Table 1: Target Moments

4.1     Moments
Table 1 shows the moments of the data that are the targets for matching with the sub-
model. The moments for the acceptance frequency are taken from the predicted values of
the polynomial of degree 6 evaluated at five values of d.

4.2     Matching the model’s moments to the observed moments
We estimate the parameters of the distributions of the four variables y, r, η, and x, and the
compensating-difference parameter κ. As described earlier, we take the distributions of the
variables to be log-normal and independent. We normalize the mean of x to zero. The other
three means, µy , µr and µη ; the standard deviations, σy , σr , ση , and σx ; and κ (the relation
of the non-wage value n to the offered wage y,), are parameters to estimate, for a total of
8. We target the following 11 data moments: the means mŷ and mr̂ , standard deviations sŷ
and sr̂ of the two directly observed variables, the covariance cŷ,r̂ , the five values Â1 -Â5 of the
acceptance frequency, and the fraction of rejections for non-wage reasons, J.       ˆ We minimize
the sum of squares of the deviation of the model from the data moments, with appropriate
weights for each moment. The weights correspond to the inverse of the variance of each
moment, bootstrapped with 2000 repetitions. We omit the covariances of the moments for




                                                                  19
simplicity; bootstrap sampling properties take full account of the omission. We believe that
the improvement in efficiency from using the covariances would be minimal.
   Because the minimization is computationally demanding, we also used a different and
much easier approach, by setting the weights for the moment conditions apart from the
acceptance function and the rejection frequency to infinity—that is, we required that the
estimates solve the first five moment conditions exactly. For our baseline specification, we
found that the results of this approach were identical to those for the estimation using weights
derived from the sampling variances of the the means, standard deviations, and covariance
of ŷ and r̂. Accordingly, we used the streamlined approach for estimating the alternative
specifications later in the paper. The reasons that the streamlined approach gives identical
results are that the sampling weights for the moments related to the acceptance function are
smaller than the other weights, and that the parameters related to the distribution of y and
r yield little or no gain in improving the fit of the acceptance function.
   We allow for measurement error in the reservation wage and the offered wage, by using
the finding of Bound and Krueger (1991) that 13 percent of the total variation in wages
is due to measurement error. They obtained the estimate by comparing survey data to
administrative data.
   To sum up, the moment-matching conditions are:

                 mŷ = µy                                                                    (14)
                 mr̂ = µr                                                                    (15)
                       q
                 sŷ =    σy2 + σx2 + σ2ŷ                                                  (16)
                       q
                 sr̂ =    σr2 + σx2 + σ2r̂                                                  (17)
                 cŷ,r̂ = σx2                                                                (18)
                  Âi = 1 − Φ(0, µm|di , σm|di ), i = 1, 2, 3, 4, 5                          (19)
                        Z ∞Z r
                                  Φ(0, µp|v , σp|v )
                   Jˆ =                              φ(v, µv , σv )dvφ(r, µr , σr )dr.       (20)
                         −∞ −∞ Φ(r, µv , σv )

Here Φ(x, µ, σ) is the normal cdf and φ(x, µ, σ) is the normal pdf. Note that the functions
µm|d , σm|d , µp|v , and σp|v ; and the values µv , and σv are functions of the 8 parameters to be
estimated—see Appendix A for details.
    To measure sampling variation, we calculate the bootstrap distribution of the estimates.
In our actual estimation procedure, we compute our moments from two different samples:
We take the moments mr̂ and sr̂ from the first interview for all unemployed workers in the
survey who were not working or had not yet accepted a job offer, whereas we take mŷ , sŷ ,
cŷ,r̂ and Â1 -Â5 from the sample of 1,153 job offers with information on the offered wage and


                                                  20
on the lagged reservation wage. The standard bootstrap strategy applies to single samples.
Accordingly, we use only the smaller sample. This smaller sample appears not to be biased,
as mr̂ = 2.83 and sr̂ = 0.47, which are almost identical to the estimates in the bigger
sample. For the bootstrap, we thus sample with replacement from the 1,153 job offers, and
compute the moments in the data and in the model for 100 draws. The resulting bootstrap
distribution provides an upper bound on the dispersion of our actual sampling distribution.

4.3    Estimation results
Table 2 shows the estimation results. Our main findings are:

  1. The dispersion in the offered wage among people with the same personal productivity
      is moderate but not small: σy = 0.24.

  2. The dispersion in the reservation wage among people with the same personal produc-
     tivity is small: σr = 0.11.

  3. The dispersion of the independent component of the non-wage job value is substantial:
      ση = 0.34.

  4. The dispersion of personal productivity is substantial: σx = 0.43.

  5. There is a moderate amount of compensating wage differentials: κ = 0.25.

  6. The mean value of the non-wage value of a job offer is positive: µn = µη = 0.31.

   The variance of observed offered wages decomposes as

                    s2ŷ = 0.28 = σy2 + σx2 + 0.13s2ŷ = 0.06 + 0.18 + 0.04.            (21)

Thus 0.18/0.28 = 66 percent of the cross-sectional variance in offered wages is explained
by dispersion in personal productivity x, and only 0.06/0.28 = 21 percent is explained by
differences in wage offers among workers with the same productivity, y. The remaining 13
percent is explained by measurement error. Our results, however, also show that there is
substantial dispersion in the non-wage job values, with the dispersion of non-wage job values
being larger than the dispersion in offered wages. Our estimates imply that the standard
deviation of job values v = y + n is 0.38, which is much larger than the standard deviation
for offered wages y alone.
    Our data do not identify the amount of measurement error—we rely on extrinsic evidence
from Bound and Krueger (1991) about measurement errors in actual wages. Measurement
error in reservation wages is potentially higher than measurement error in actual wages,

                                              21
              Parameter Explanation                                   Estimate   (s.e.)

                  μr    Mean of reservation wages                       2.82     (0.02)

                  μy    Mean of wage offers                             2.75     (0.02)

                        Mean of the independent component of non-
                  μη                                                    0.31     (0.06)
                        wage value of wage offer

                  σx    Standard deviation of personal productivity     0.43     (0.02)

                  σr    Standard deviation of the reservation wage      0.11     (0.05)

                  σy    Standard deviation of the offered wage          0.24     (0.02)

                        Standard deviation of the independent
                  ση                                                    0.34     (0.07)
                        component of non-wage value of wage offer

                       Compensating differential                       0.25     (0.30)

                        Standard deviation of offered job values
                  σv                                                    0.38     (0.09)
                        (v = y + n )


                                Table 2: Parameter Estimates

if unemployed workers do not understand the intended meaning of the reservation-wage
question or have different reference levels in mind when they express the reservation wage.
   Another source of information about measurement errors in the reservation wage is based
on the fact that many respondents in the survey reported their reservation wages more
than once. The within-person variance of reservation wages among these respondents has
a standard deviation of 0.0974 (if controlling for duration) and 0.0975 (if not controlling
for duration). The tiny difference between these two figures is consistent with the results
in Krueger and Mueller (2016) who find only a modest negative relationship between the
reservation wage and unemployment duration.
   The low within-person variance of reservation wages supports our conclusion about the
extent of measurement error in that variable. The within-person variance of reservation
wages is 4.2 percent of the total variance of reservation wages, which is below our baseline
calibration (13 percent). Of course, some part of the measurement error in the reservation
wage is persistent across interviews and does not show up in the within-person measure.
Accordingly, we believe that our calibration with 13 percent of measurement error is a
reasonable baseline.




                                                    22
   Our moment conditions for sr̂ and cŷ,r̂ imply an upper bound on measurement error.
According to the model, the difference between these two moments is:

                                                   s2r̂ − cŷ,r̂ = σr2 + σ2r̂ .                      (22)

                   σ2         s2r̂ −cŷ,r̂
Because σr2 ≥ 0,      r̂
                   s2r̂
                           ≤        s2r̂
                                              = 18.4 percent, from Table 1. This bound is relatively tight.
Note that it arises from the high correlation of ŷ and r̂.
   To illustrate the sensitivity of our main results to the extent of measurement error, Table
3 shows the share of the variance in the offered job value v accounted for by dispersion in
non-wage values. Panel A reports the share for the idiosyncratic part η and panel B reports
the share for the entire non-wage value n. The rows are for alternative values of the variance
of the measurement error in the reservation wage as a ratio to the variance of the true
reservation wage. The columns are for alternative values of the measurement error in the
offered wage as a ratio to the variance of the true offered wage. The highest value for both
rows and columns is 0.184, the upper bound discussed above. For the baseline calibration (in
bold), more than three-quarters of the dispersion in job values is accounted for by dispersion
in non-wage values. In general, this share is declining in the extent of measurement error, but
still more than one half for the maximum degree of measurement error at 0.184 of the total
variation in offered wage and the reservation wage. For lower amounts of measurement error,
the dispersion of non-wage values is even more important, as the model can only generate the
shape of the acceptance function with higher values of κ, that is, a higher correlation between
offered wages y and offered non-wage values n. Appendix Table 7 gives the estimates of κ
and other parameters. Higher values of κ are also the reason that the variance of n is larger
than the variance of v for low amounts of measurement error. This finding suggests that one
should be careful in interpreting the estimate of the parameter κ as evidence of compensating
differentials, as it appears to be a substitute for measurement error in explaining the shape
of the acceptance function. However, the substantial contribution of non-wage values to the
dispersion in job values v remains a strong result for all the calibrations of measurement
error considered here.
   Figure 5 shows the smooth acceptance frequency from the data (solid line) with a boot-
strapped confidence interval and the acceptance frequency implied by the estimated param-
eter. The range of the x-axis is restricted to the 1st to the 99th percentile of d. The fit of
the model to the data appears to be quite good, except towards the extreme values of d,
especially for values of d > 0.5. Note our model imposes that the the acceptance frequency
converges to 1 as d increases, whereas the data shows a decline. Non-classical measurement
error due to outliers could account for the apparent decline the acceptance frequency in the
data. Less than 5 percent of our sample of offers has d > 0.5 and less than 1 percent of offers

                                                               23
                                                           σεy2 / σy2
                               2   2
                      A: σɳ / σv
                                           0.000    0.065          0.130   0.184
                                   0.000   1.00         1.00        1.00   0.99
                      2    2       0.065   0.93         0.93        0.92   0.92
                    σεr / σr
                                   0.130   0.86         0.83        0.78   0.71
                                   0.184   0.80         0.75        0.67   0.55

                                                           σεy2 / σy2
                               2   2
                      B: σn / σv
                                           0.000    0.065          0.130   0.184
                                   0.000   2.55         2.26        1.96   1.70
                      2    2       0.065   1.23         1.20        1.17   1.16
                    σεr / σr
                                   0.130   0.95         0.89        0.81   0.72
                                   0.184   0.83         0.76        0.67   0.57


Table 3: The Contribution of Non-Wage Values to the Variance of Job Value for Alternative
Amounts of Measurement Error

has d > 0.9. This sparsity accounts for the widening of the confidence interval for high and
low values of d.
   Figure 6 shows the kernel density of the log of the offered wage and the reservation wage,
along with the normal distributions with the same mean and standard deviation. Both plots
show departures from the normal density, mostly in the form of right-skewness. The offered
wage distribution has a skewness of 0.79 and an excess kurtosis of 0.30. The reservation
wage distribution has a skewness of 0.59 and an excess kurtosis of 0.06. Skewness-kurtosis
and Shapiro-Wilk tests rejected normality with a p-values of less than 0.001.
   The fact that both distributions are right-skewed in a similar way suggests that it is
the underlying distribution of x rather than the distributions of y and r that are right-
skewed. The two figures show that the log-normal framework of this paper is not completely
successful at matching the two observed distributions. More flexible functional forms could
improve the fit, at a considerable cost in complexity. See Appendix D.9 for results based on
distributions with non-zero skewness and excess kurtosis. These results give improved fits to
the distributions but do not change our main conclusions about the dispersions of the key
variables.




                                                   24
                                          1

                                         0.9

                                         0.8
               Acceptance Frequency, A




                                         0.7

                                         0.6

                                         0.5

                                         0.4

                                         0.3

                                         0.2

                                         0.1

                                          0
                                               -1        -0.8         -0.6        -0.4   -0.2          0         0.2   0.4     0.6         0.8
                                                                Offered Wage - Reservation Wage, d = y - r

Figure 5: Acceptance Function: Model (Dashed Line) and Data (Solid Line, with 95 Percent
Confidence Interval)
    .8




                                                                                                      .8




                                                                              m = 2.75                                                                   m = 2.82
                                                                              s = 0.52                                                                   s = 0.47
    .6




                                                                                                      .6
 Density




                                                                                                   Density
 .4




                                                                                                   .4
    .2




                                                                                                      .2
    0




                                                                                                      0




           1                              2                3                  4           5                  1         2              3                  4          5
                                                    Offered Wage, y                                                          Reservation Wage, r

                                                    Kernel density estimate                                                    Kernel density estimate
                                                    Normal density                                                             Normal density




Figure 6: Kernel Density of the Log Hourly Offered Wage, y, and the Log Hourly Reservation
Wage, r, Compared to Normal Distribution



                                                                                              25
5     The Model’s Implications for the Distribution of Wages
      among Workers
We now turn to the implications of jobseekers’ choices of reservation job values and the
stochastic equilibrium of the job-ladder process. In this section, we consider the optimal
reservation wage for unemployed jobseekers as derived from the system of Bellman equations.
Recall that an employed jobseeker’s reservation job value is just the value of the current
job and the reservation wage of a jobseeker whose job-finding efficiency is at least as high
while working as while unemployed is just the opportunity cost—the value of non-market
activities. The hard part is finding the elevated reservation wage for unemployed jobseekers
who sacrifice option value by taking a job.

5.1    The distribution of values in non-market activities
The reservation value condition U (h) = W (h, r), defines a function h = H(r) that relates
the value of non-market activities h to the reported reservation wage r—see Appendix E for
details. The cdf of the distribution of values in non-market activities, Fh (h), satisfies

                                        Fr (r) = Fh (H(r)),                                  (23)

so, from the estimated parameters of the distribution of reported reservation wage values,
F (r), and the function H(r), we can compute the implied distribution of values in non-
market activities, Fh (h). Note that in the case where search on the job is equally effective
as when unemployed, λe = λu , the model simplifies to H(r) = er and thus Fr (r) = Fh (er ).

5.2    The stationary distribution of wages
We let Fw (w) be the cdf of wages among workers with x = 0. An individual draws a non-work
value h at the outset, associated with a reservation wage r through h = H(r). A personal
state variable records whether the individual is unemployed or employed. The flow value of
the current job, v = w + n, is a second personal state variable for the employed. Jobs end
because of the arrival of a better offer or through exogenous separation and a drop to the
bottom of the ladder. The latter occurs with fixed probability s and sends the worker into
unemployment at the bottom of the ladder.
    Define                                                           
                                                       v − η − κµy
                                        Z
                             Fv (v) =       fy,η                   , η dη,                   (24)
                                                          1−κ
the cdf of a job offer with value v. Here fy,η (y, η) is the joint density of y and η. The
probability in one week that an unemployed worker with a reservation value r will remain

                                                       26
unemployed in the next week is

                             Tuu (r) = 1 − (1 − s)λu (1 − Fv (r)).                       (25)

The probability that an unemployed individual will be at work in the succeeding week with
a job value not greater than v 0 is

                           Tue (v 0 |r) = (1 − s)λu (Fv (v 0 ) − Fv (r)).                (26)

The probability that an employed worker will be unemployed in the next week is

                                             Teu = s.                                    (27)

The probability that an employed individual will remain employed at the same job value
with value v is
                           Tee (v|v) = (1 − s)[1 − λe (1 − Fv (v))].                     (28)
The probability that an employed individual will move to a better job with value v 0 > v is

                           Tee (v 0 |v) = (1 − s)λe (Fv (v 0 ) − Fv (v)).                (29)

   Let q be the compound state variable combining a binary indicator for unemployment/
employment and the job value v and let T (q 0 |q, r) be its transition cdf derived above. The
stationary distribution of q, Fq (q|r) satisfies the invariance condition,
                                            Z
                               Fq (q |r) = T (q 0 |q, r)dFq (q|r).
                                     0
                                                                                          (30)

Throughout, an integral without limits of integration is over the support of the integrand.
The ergodic distribution of the job value for employed workers, Fv (v|r), is the conditional
distribution of v for values of q for employed workers.
   The cdf of the wage, w, conditional on the job value v, is
                                  Rw
                                     fy,η (y, v − y(1 − κ) − κµy )dy
                      Fw (w|v) = R                                   .                   (31)
                                    fy,η (y, v − y(1 − κ) − κµy )dy
The implied ergodic distribution for the wage is
                                         Z
                              Fw (w|r) = Fw (w|v)dFv (v|r).                              (32)

Finally, the distribution in the population with x = 0 is the mixture,
                                           Z
                                  Fw (w) = Fw (w|r)dFr (r)                               (33)

and the distribution in the overall population is the mixture,
                                         Z
                               Fŵ (ŵ) = Fw (ŵ − x)dFx (x).                            (34)


                                                27
5.3    Parameter values
The weekly offer arrival rate in the survey is λu = 0.058 and the average acceptance rate is
a = 0.72. We calculate the entry rate to unemployment, s, as
                                   u
                        s=                  λu a = 0.0041 per week,                      (35)
                            1 − u(1 − λu a)
the weekly rate consistent in stationary stochastic equilibrium with an unemployment rate
of u = 0.09 and the observed job-finding rate. This calculation omits job-finding from out-
of-the-labor force and exits from unemployment and employment to out-of-the-labor force.
   We calibrate the offer rate for employed jobseekers, λe , as half the rate, λu , found in
our survey. While we do not have a direct estimate of the job offer rate while employed,
this calibration matches the rate of job-to-job transitions in the data. We compute the
monthly job-to-job transition rate from the CPS monthly files for the years 2009 and 2010.
Following Fallick and Fleischman (2004), we measure job-to-job transitions in the CPS using
information from a question that asked whether a person worked at the same employer as
in the previous month and compute the job-to-job transition rate as the fraction of workers
changing employers between two consecutive monthly CPS interviews.
   We adjust the moments from the model for time aggregation. To make the weekly job-to-
job transition rates in the model comparable to the monthly job-to-job transition rates in the
CPS data, we aggregate the weekly job-to-job transition rates to monthly rates, taking into
account that short unemployment spells of duration less than a month may be misleadingly
counted as job-to-job transitions. See the Appendix G for details.
   We set the weekly discount rate ρ = 0.001, equivalent to an annual discount factor of
0.949.

5.4    Results
The full model including the distribution of the actual wage has no new estimated parameters.
We solve it with the estimated parameters reported in Table 2 and the calibrated values of
λu , λe , s and ρ. We ask, what are the estimates of the distribution of the value of non-
market activities h, and how well does the calibrated model match the additional moments
not included in Table 1 such as the prior wage? Recall that we do not expect a perfect match
for the reasons we listed earlier. Table 4 describes the match:
  1. The model nearly matches the mean of the wage on the previous job, mŵ , in the case
      of the moderate amount of measurement error.

  2. The model is not capable of matching the standard deviation of the prior wage, sŵ .
      The fitted value is about 0.06 log points below the actual value of the moment for

                                             28
                                                                   Actual
                    Parameter Explanation                                   Estimate   (s.e.)
                                                                   Values

                       μh     Mean of non-work values                        $2.41     ($5.23)

                              Standard deviation of non-work
                       σh                                                    $3.36     ($1.56)
                              values
                              Mean previous wage, adjusted for
                       mŵ                                           2.90      2.91     (0.05)
                              intervening wage growth
                              Standard deviation of previous
                       σŵ                                           0.58      0.52     (0.02)
                              wage
                              Monthly job-to-job transition rate
                       T ee                                        0.019     0.022     (0.00)
                              (adjusted for time aggregation)


                    Table 4: Actual and Fitted Values of the Job-Ladder Model

       both values of measurement error. The job-ladder model implies that the dispersion of
       offered wages is larger than the dispersion of wages on the prior job, which is violated
       in the data. We abstract here from any other sources of wage dispersion that may arise
       during an employment spell, such as heterogeneous job tenure effects or variation in
       wages due to changes in job- and firm-specific productivity, which may account for the
       shortfall.

    3. The model does well in matching the job-to-job transition rates in the CPS data in
       2009 and 2010.

    4. The mean of non-work values is positive but relatively small. Recall that it is stated in
       dollars per hour, not log points. Figure 7 shows the pdf of h implied by our calibrated
       job ladder model for our baseline calibration. While the dispersion in h is rather small,
       there is a substantial fraction of h’s with negative values, supporting our choice to
       express the non-work values in dollars rather than logs.

    5. The bootstrap dispersion of the fitted values is quite small in all cases.

    The model’s covariance of ŷ and ŵ is 0.183, the same as in the data.


6      The Flow Value of Non-Work
Hornstein, Krusell and Violante (2011) take earlier authors to task for failing to observe that
search models imply an extremely low, even negative, value of non-work. The essential point
is that the dispersion of offered wages is high enough to justify sampling a large number of
offers before picking the best, so that the observed time to acceptance only makes sense if

                                                      29
                              0.2

                             0.18

                             0.16

                             0.14

                             0.12

                   Density    0.1

                             0.08

                             0.06

                             0.04

                             0.02

                               0
                                -6   -4   -2   0       2     4        6   8   10   12
                                                   Dollars per hour


                 Figure 7: The Density of the Value of Non-Work Time, h

waiting to go to work is painful. They note that the problem remains, though less acute,
with on-the-job search.
   In the search-and-matching literature, whose canon is Mortensen and Pissarides (1994),
a variable often called z describes the relation between the flow value of remaining out of
the labor market and the flow value of participating in the market. z is often taken as a
parameter in these models. It is the ratio of the flow value of non-work to the mean of the
marginal product of labor.

6.1    The implied value of z
In the presence of non-wage job values, the calculation of z depends on how much of the
benefit of an amenity is a cost to the employer. If the amenity is incidental to employment
and comes at no cost to the employer, the marginal product of labor is the observed wage
plus the part of the surplus accruing to the employer. For a typical calibration of a DMP-
type model, as in Hall and Milgrom (2008), the ratio of the wage to the marginal product
is 0.985, so the marginal product is the wage divided by 0.985. On the other hand, if the
job value n generates an equal cost to the employer, the job value is effectively an element
of the wage. The marginal product of labor is the wage plus the non-wage value, divided by
0.985. We find that the mean of the non-wage value, µn , is fairly large and positive, so the
adjustment is materially upward.
   Table 5 shows the calculation of z for the baseline calibration of the model. Line 1 shows
the value of non-work as estimated in that table, expressed in dollars per hour at the median

                                                     30
                Step Explanation                                           Values

                 1   Value of non-work at median for x=0, μh            2.41    2.41


                 2a Earnings while employed, median for x=0, exp(mw)    17.90


                 2b Job value while employed, median for x=0, exp(mv)           34.34

                 3   Implied marginal product                           18.17   34.86

                 4   Ratio of value of non-work to marginal product     0.13    0.07



     Table 5: Ratio of the Flow Value of Non-Work to the Marginal Product of Labor

of the distribution of h. Line 2a shows the median wage, whereas line 2b shows the median
flow value of work. Line 3 gives an estimate of the marginal product, which is computed by
dividing the estimates in lines 2a and 2b by 0.985. Line 4 reports the resulting value of z,
the ratio of the value of non-work to the marginal product. The values are robustly positive,
but considerably smaller than in the Hall-Milgrom calibration.
   Outside information about the value of z is scant. Chodorow-Reich and Karabarbounis
(2016), a deep investigation of the time-series properties of z, is agnostic about its level.
Hall and Milgrom (2008) finds a value of 0.71 based on an assumed functional form that
satisfies certain elasticity conditions. If the Frisch constant-marginal-utility-of-consumption
labor supply function is not a smooth curve in the hours-wage space, but has zero hours
until the wage nears a reservation level and then shoots up, the value of z is much lower
than Hall and Milgrom calculated.
   Another important consideration is that the formula for z in Hall-Milgrom and Chodorow-
Reich-Karabarbounis includes the replacement rate for unemployment insurance with a co-
efficient of one. Our sample is drawn from workers who receive benefits, so the replacement
rate is likely to be higher than the 25 percent that Hall and Milgrom assume. The corre-
sponding value of z is much higher— about equal to the median wage—with the 50-percent
replacement rate we believe is more realistic. We do not believe that z could possibly be that
high. Rather, it shows that the calibration does not give reasonable results with a higher
replacement rate. This observation supports the proposition that Hall-Milgrom probably
overstated z by choosing an unrealistic functional form for the Frisch supply function.
   As discussed in detail in HKV, the crucial parameter for the estimate of z is the offer
rate while employed, λe , as it determines the option value of remaining unemployed in the
event of receiving a job offer. For example, if we calibrated λe = 0.7λu , our estimate of z lies

                                                   31
                                                                                  1


                                    0.03
                                                                                0.5
      Job-To-Job Transition Rate


                                   0.025

                                                                                  0
                                    0.02




                                                                            z
                                   0.015                                        -0.5


                                    0.01
                                                                                 -1

                                   0.005
                                                                                                    z (bargaining over y only)
                                                                                -1.5                z (bargaining over v=y+n)
                                      0
                                           0.2   0.4       0.6   0.8   1               0.2   0.4       0.6         0.8           1
                                                       6e / 6u                                     6e / 6u


  Figure 8: The Efficiency of Search on the Job and the Flow Value of Non-Market Time

in the range of 0.28 to 0.53 instead of 0.07 to 0.13, while yielding a job-to-job transition rate
of 2.4 percent, which is somewhat larger than in the CPS data at the time of the survey.
                                                                                                                                     λe
See Figure 8, which shows the job-to-job transition rates and values of z for values of                                              λu
ranging from 0.1 to 1. Blau and Robins (1990) find that offer rates are, if anything, higher
for employed jobseekers, suggesting a value of z closer to the one calculated by Hall and
Milgrom.

6.2                                Re-employment wages
Job-ladder models focus on employment spells—chains of jobs linked by job-to-job transi-
tions. One feature that is common to most job-ladder models is that the combination of
high wage dispersion and high offer rates while employed leads to substantial wage growth
during an employment spell, as employed workers move from lower- to higher-paying jobs.
This feature implies a substantial drop in the wage when a worker falls off the job ladder and
resumes employment at the bottom of the ladder after an unemployment spell. Our results
suggest an important but not overwhelming drop in wages of 9 percent—the mean accepted
log wage is 2.81 compared to the mean log wage on the prior job of 2.90, adjusted for wage
growth as in Table 4. Research has demonstrated that substantial earnings shortfalls occur
after job loss. Reconciling the difference in detail is beyond the scope of this paper, but we
are aware of a number of differences. First, a major component of the earnings loss is from
unemployment rather than declines in wage rates. The KM survey, with a low jobfinding

                                                                       32
rate, confirms earnings loss from unemployment. Second, research on earnings losses from
displacement usually focuses on the losses of higher-tenure (often three years or more) work-
ers, and these tend to be greater than the losses of low-tenure workers, who make up the
great majority of jobseekers who have lost previous jobs.
    Our model perfectly matches the mean wage on the prior job as wages do not grow
much during a spell of employment despite the job-to-job transitions. The reason is that
the dispersion in the idiosyncratic part of non-wage values is larger than the dispersion in
offered wages alone, and thus non-wage values tend to dominate wages in the acceptance
decision. In other words, employed workers in our model transition frequently from one job
to the next, but mostly because new jobs offer higher non-wage values rather than higher
wages, and while there is little growth in wages over the course of an employment spell,
non-wage values grow substantially, as can be seen from comparing lines 2a and 2b in Table
5. As emphasized earlier in the paper, we think of non-wage values not only as comprising
employee benefits such as health insurance, but also preferences over other characteristics
of the job, such as commuting distance, relationships with co-workers, and the flexibility of
the work schedule. What we label as non-wage values may also capture differences in the
chances of promotion and pay raises at a future date within the same firm, as in the models
of Cahuc, Postel-Vinay and Robin (2006) and Jarosch (2015).


7     Extensions, Robustness Checks, and Further Discus-
      sion
In this section, we test the sensitivity of our results to a number of alternative identification
assumptions and estimation procedures. In particular, an important identification assump-
tion is that y, r, and x are independently distributed. We investigate the plausibility of these
assumptions and test the robustness of the main results to deviations from them.

7.1    Directed search
Unemployed jobseekers with higher non-work values have higher reservation job values. Our
assumption of zero correlation of the reservation value and the offered value will fail if
the jobseeker knows something about the possible job offer before contacting an employer,
because the jobseeker will contact only the more promising employers. Choosier jobseekers
with higher non-work values will get better job offers, though less often than other jobseekers.
The correlation between the reservation value and the offered value will be positive, not zero.
    To illustrate the importance of the issue, suppose that the jobseeking process works the
way we describe, with one exception. Instead of seeing all the offers that jobseekers receive,

                                               33
there is a probability χ that the jobseeker knows the offer’s terms without contacting the
employer. If the job value falls short of the reservation wage, we never learn about the
offer, whereas if the offer is acceptable, it goes into our data. This setup induces a positive
correlation between r and y because of the truncation of observations with low values of y.
   Table 11 in Appendix D.1 shows the estimation results for different calibrations of χ in
the range between 0 and 0.74. The results show that the mean of the wage offer distribution
is somewhat smaller for higher values of χ, but the estimated dispersion of y, r and x
remains unchanged. This finding may be somewhat surprising, as the censoring of offers
should introduce a correlation between y and r and thus lower the estimated dispersion of
x and increase the estimated dispersion of y and r. The main reason that the estimates of
σy , σr , and σx remain unchanged is that the dispersion of non-wage amenities, ση , is more
important than the dispersion in wages, σy , and thus most of the censoring of offers occurs
due to low values of η rather than low values of y. Moreover, the estimated ση increases with
higher values of χ, which implies that little censoring occurs based on low values of y at any
reasonable value of χ.

7.2     Independence of y and r
As we noted earlier, one important assumption in our estimation strategy is that—conditional
on personal productivity x—offered wages and reservation wages are uncorrelated, that is,
cov(ŷ, r̂|x) = 0, as it implies that cov(ŷ, r̂) = σx2 . One possible concern with this assumption
is that it may not hold if the employer knows the outside option of the jobseeker and thus
tailors the job offer accordingly. Evidence against this is that 76 percent of the survey
respondents indicated that the offer was a take-it-or leave-it offer as opposed to 24 percent
who said that some bargaining was involved over pay. In any case, our estimate of σy changed
little when we restricted the sample to take-it-or leave-it offers only— σy = 0.21 as opposed
to 0.24 in the baseline case.
   A model where the employer knows the reservation wage of the job applicant also implies
that cov(ŷ, r̂) > cov(ŷ, ŵ), as the correlation between wages and the values of non-market ac-
tivities will be dissipated through the process of on-the-job search and job-to-job transitions.
The reason is that, while for an unemployed jobseeker the value of non-market activities may,
through bargaining, directly influence the final wage offered, for an employed jobseeker, the
value of non-market activities is less relevant for the bargaining outcome as the employed
worker’s outside option is the value of the current job (it still matters to the extent that the
value of non-market activities affected the current wage, but less so). However, as mentioned
in 5.4, in the data cov(ŷ, ŵ) = cov(ŷ, r̂) = 0.183.



                                                 34
   Finally, in Appendix D.2, we study a model with Nash bargaining and find that our main
results do not change in this case. The main reason for this result is that the variance of r
is small, so it would require a high correlation of y and r to have a meaningful impact on
the overall covariance of ŷ and r̂. In other words, as long as the worker’s bargaining share
α is not too close to 0, the estimate of σr will be small and thus the estimate of σx large, as
in our baseline model.
    A related concern with our estimation strategy may be that measurement error in y
and r are correlated, which would also violate our assumption that cov(ŷ, r̂|x) = 0. Recall
that we exploit the longitudinal structure of the survey and use the reservation wage value
reported in a week prior to the receipt of the job offer. In addition, in the presence of
correlated measurement error, we would expect this correlation to be much larger for the
pair (y, r) than for the pair (y, w). The reason is that the prior hourly wage is computed
from administrative data on weekly wages and hours on last job reported in the first week
of the survey. Thus, we gain confidence from the finding that cov(ŷ, r̂) = cov(ŷ, ŵ) = 0.183.

7.3    Proportionality-to-productivity
As explained earlier, we make the assumption that the distributions of ŷ − x and r̂ − x in
the population with personal productivity x are the same as the distributions of y and r.
The most controversial aspect of this hypothesis is that non-market productivity is higher
by the entire amount of market productivity in the population with higher values of x.
One can test for the presence of non-proportionality in reservation wages by looking at the
acceptance rates of job offers across different education levels. Under the proportionality-to-
productivity assumption, the average acceptance rate should be the same across workers with
characteristics associated with different market productivity x, as these workers should all be
equally picky about accepting a job offer. We find that the average acceptance rates do not
differ systematically across different levels of educational attainment: The acceptance rate for
those with a high-school diploma or less is 72.6 percent, for those with some college education
is 67.4 percent and for those with a college degree is 74.9 percent, and the differences are
not statistically significant. These results are not consistent with a major deviation from the
proportionality-to-productivity assumption.
   In addition, we estimated the model with a set of moments based on deviations from
a model relating wages to their determinants instead of the moments reported in Table 1
based on the wages themselves. More precisely, we ran a Mincer-type regression of the log
reservation and offered wage on years of schooling, potential experience, potential experience
squared, and dummies for gender, marital status, race and ethnicity, and used the residuals
of these regressions to compute the same moments as in Table 1 (except for the means,

                                              35
which we left unchanged from Table 1). One would expect the estimation results to change
if the proportionality-to-productivity assumption does not hold in the data. To see this,
consider the extreme case where the observable characteristics capture all the variance in
productivity x. In this case, the proportionality-to-productivity assumption is not necessary
for identification as the residualized moments of ŷ and r̂ are independent of x and thus
directly capture the moments of interest (plus some measurement error). The results in
Appendix Table 6, however, show that all estimated parameters are similar to the results
in Table 2 except for the variance of x, which, as expected, is estimated to be substantially
smaller, and the compensating differential parameter κ. Appendix Table 6 also shows sub-
sample results for those with some college education and less as well as those with a college
degree. The mean of the job offer distribution is 38 log points higher for those with a college
degree compared to those with some college education or less, whereas the mean of the
reservation wage is 47 log points higher (the difference of 38 log points is within sampling
variation). The standard deviation of offered wages y is also similar across the two groups,
though there is a big difference in terms of the compensating differential parameters κ. The
reason is that the sample used to estimate the shape of the acceptance function is quite
small and thus, the estimated parameters κ, µη and ση , which are identified of the shape of
the acceptance function, have to be taken with caution in the sub-sample analysis. Overall,
these results suggest that proportionality-to-productivity is a reasonable assumption.
   Finally, we extend the model by allowing for non-proportionality in the reservation wage
variable. This enables us to analyse whether deviations from the assumption of proportion-
ality have an impact on the estimation results. We assume that r̂ = (1 + κr )x + r + r̂ and
use the same moment conditions to re-estimate the model (see Appendix D.4 for details) for
different values of κr . The sub-sample analysis by education group gives some indication of
the potential magnitude of the non-proportionality parameter κr . The point estimates of µy
and µr for the two education groups imply that κr = 0.2, because the difference in µr is 0.47,
which is slightly larger than the difference in µy of 0.38. Results in the Appendix show that
the non-proportionality tends to raise the dispersions of y and η slightly, but the differences
from the estimates of the baseline model where κr = 0 are small.

7.4    Identification of ση and κ
As discussed earlier, the shape of the acceptance function, A(ŷ − r̂), does not separately
identify ση and κ. The reason is that both parameters increase the likelihood that a high-
wage offer is associated with a low non-wage value and thus both parameters increase the
probability that a high-wage offer is rejected. ση raises the probability of rejection of a high-
wage offer because it increases the variance of the non-wage values n, whereas κ raises the

                                               36
probability of rejection of a high-wage offer mainly because positive values lead to a negative
correlation between the wage value y and the non-wage value n. For these reasons, we use
                                                 ˆ as an additional moment to estimate the
the fraction of rejections for non-wage reasons, J,
model in our base specification. To make sure that the model is identified, for a given ση , we
estimated the 7 parameters µy , µr , σx , σy , σr , µη and κ by using the first 7 moment conditions
above but not the moment condition for J. In Appendix Figure 10, we plot the fraction of
rejections for non-wage reasons, J, for various values of the parameter ση . The figure shows
that the value of J is strongly increasing in ση , demonstrating that the 8 parameters of the
model are fully identified with this additional moment. The main reason that the fraction
of rejections for non-wage reasons adds valuable information for separately identifying ση
and κ is that, while higher values of both ση and κ make the acceptance functions flatter,
the fraction of rejections for non-wage reasons depends mainly on ση , because it depends
strongly on the relative importance of the idiosyncratic variance of y and n, but is not much
affected by the correlation between y and n (and thus κ).

7.5    The acceptance function
For the baseline estimation of the model, we target the acceptance frequency at the following
values of d:
                                d = ŷ − r̂ = [−1, −0.5, 0, 0.5, 1].                          (36)

In additional results reported in Appendix Table 8, we target the acceptance frequency at
two, four, seven, eight and nine points at equidistant on the intervals [−1, 0.5], [−1, 0.75] or
[−1, 1]. We minimize the weighted sum of squared differences of the acceptance frequency
at these points, along with the fraction of rejections for non-wage reasons, where the weights
correspond to the inverse of the variance of each moment, which was bootstrapped with
2000 repetitions. Table 8 shows that the estimated parameters are similar to the ones in the
baseline estimation.
   We also take a different estimation approach: Instead of the points on the acceptance
function, we match the coefficients of a probit model that was estimated on the KM data.
The specification of the probit model is: Ai = α + βdi . One can show that matching the
two probit coefficients is equivalent to the maximum likelihood estimator of µη and ση given
κ. Together with the fraction of rejections for non-wage reasons, the model is therefore
identified. The advantage of this approach is that it takes into account the information
contained in all observations in the sample, but we could not impose A = 0.5 in the probit
estimation for the undecided and had to drop these observations. For this reason, we prefer




                                                37
our approach of matching points on the acceptance function. In any event, the estimated
parameters are similar to the ones in the baseline estimation.
   Figure 9 in the Appendix shows the fit of the acceptance function for the baseline calibra-
tion and for alternative specification where match different points or the probit coefficients.
The fit appears to be similar across all specifications and within the 95 percent confidence
interval for nearly the entire interval except at the very top near d = 1. As we noted earlier,
it is possible or even likely that non-classical measurement error involving outliers explains
the deviation of the model from the data for values of d > 0.5.

7.6    Non-stationarity
In our baseline model, we assume a stationary environment for the unemployed jobseeker
and thus abstract from forces that lead to changes in the reservation wages over the spell
of unemployment. The limited duration of unemployment benefits, declining savings, or
changes in the wage offer distribution throughout the spell of unemployment could lead to
declining reservation wages over the spell of unemployment. However, as shown in Krueger
and Mueller (2016), reservation wages for a given unemployed worker decline only a little
over a spell of unemployment, with point estimates ranging from 1.4 to 3.4 percentage points
over a 25 week period. Moreover, a tendency for the flow value of non-work to change over
the spell of unemployment should be reflected in the dispersion of non-work values, but our
estimates show little dispersion in non-work values and thus are consistent with close to
constant reservation wages over unemployment spells.

7.7    Flow versus stock sampling
Our sample is representative of the stock of unemployed workers in New Jersey in 2009, but
it may be preferable to estimate the model on a sample representative of the inflow of un-
employed individuals, as those with low reservation wages or characteristics associated with
higher job-offer rates find jobs and thus leave the sample more quickly than those with high
reservation wages and low job-offer rates. To assess this issue, we divided our sample into
short- and long-term unemployed individuals, using a cutoff duration of unemployment of
26 weeks at the start of the survey. While the short-term unemployed tend to be individuals
with higher personal productivity, we find that the point estimates of our main parameters of
interest are similar across the two groups and the differences are statistically ambiguous. We
find that σy is 0.23 for the short-term unemployed and 0.25 for the long-term unemployed,
σr is 0.08 for the short-term unemployed and 0.20 for the long-term unemployed, and ση is
0.31 for the short-term unemployed and 0.32 for the long-term unemployed. Appendix Table


                                              38
6 provides the details. An alternative way to investigate this issue would be to reweight the
sample based on observable demographic characteristics, to make it representative of the
inflow, but this would not account for the role of selection based on unobservable character-
istics and, in any event, the sub-sample results provided here suggest that reweighting would
make little difference.


8     Related Literature
The challenge of reconciling the wide dispersion of offered wages to the limited number
of job offers considered by most jobseekers came into sharp focus in an influential article,
Hornstein et al. (2011) (HKV). HKV, Section II, discuss the challenges in detail. They
note that most empirical search models that appear to rationalize observed unemployment-
to-employment flows imply an implausibly low flow value of unemployment. The value is
frequently negative. These models generally infer the value of job search from estimates
of the dispersion of wage offers derived from cross-sectional data, where dispersion is high.
Sampling from that distribution is highly valuable activity, which implies that people must
truly hate unemployment to take the first job that comes along as frequently as they do in
practice. HKV has an extensive discussion of the literature on wage dispersion, with many
cites, notably Mortensen (2003), Rogerson, Shimer and Wright (2005), Bontemps, Robin
and Berg (2000), Postel-Vinay and Robin (2002), Jolivet, Postel-Vinay and Robin (2006),
and Jolivet (2009).
    Abowd, Kramarz and Margolis (1999) (AKM) introduced the use of matched employee-
employer data to study dispersion. In an equation with the log of the wage of a worker as
the left-hand variable, they estimated fixed effects for workers and for firms. A reasonably
consistent finding in the resulting line of research has been that the firm effects account for
a little over 20 percent of the dispersion of the log wage. Although non-wage job values may
be one of the determinants of the firm effect, rents from search frictions or other sources
may be another, so the dispersion of the firm effects cannot be taken as a measure of the
dispersion of non-wage component of job values. Further, the dispersion of worker effects
includes any persistent tendency for a worker to pick jobs with high non-wage values, and
presumably somewhat lower wages. Thus AKM does not provide a direct measure of the
dispersion of non-wage job values. Rather, the line of research it inspired is an advance
in the topics of how much wage dispersion arises from employers, with a full adjustment
for worker heterogeneity, and how much from workers, with a full adjustment for employer
heterogeneity.



                                              39
   Our use of data on rejection of offers with wages above the previously measured reser-
vation wage and acceptance of those paying less than the reservation wage to infer the role
of non-wage job values is a cousin of research that infers an improvement in the non-wage
job value when a worker moves voluntarily to a lower-wage job from a higher-wage one. The
papers in this literature closest to ours are Becker (2011) and Sullivan and To (2014), who
infer the dispersion of non-wage amenities from the fraction of job-to-job transitions that
result in a wage decrease. Both of these papers assume that wage and non-wage values are
independent of each other, which precludes investigation of an important strand of the wage-
dispersion literature, compensating variation in wages. Their estimates of the dispersion of
the non-wage value are similar to ours.
   Sorkin (2015) is an ambitious application of the idea that voluntary job-to-job transitions
reveal information about non-wage values. He uses a gigantic longitudinal body of data on
the identity of the employers of many millions of workers. Sorkin does not answer the
question considered in this paper, of the dispersion of the non-wage value irrespective of its
accompaniment by a compensating wage difference. His contribution is to show that the
dispersion of non-wage job values that are accompanied by offsetting wage differences is 15
percent of the total dispersion of wages.
  Jarosch (2015) builds a model in which job security is a non-wage job value. The frictional
Mortensen component of the wage distribution is substantial. Workers suffering involuntary
job loss face large and persistent earnings losses, consistent with evidence about displaced
workers in U.S. and German data. The paper has a thorough treatment of wage determina-
tion with two-dimensional job values, a topic we sidestep by an assumption that employers
post wages and non-wage job characteristics.
   Hagedorn and Manovskii (2010), Low, Meghir and Pistaferri (2010), and Tjaden and
Wellschmied (2014), have estimated the extent of wage dispersion arising through search
frictions. These papers infer the extent of wage dispersion arising from differences in match
quality from the higher volatility of wage growth of those who switch jobs compared to those
who stay on their jobs. With this approach, estimates of wage dispersion depend critically
on how the process of on-the-job search is modeled. If the efficiency of on-the-job search
is high, workers move up the job ladder relatively fast, and most job-to-job transitions are
associated with small wage gains as workers continue to search for new jobs even when
they are far up on the ladder. This process implies that, for a given observed variance of
wage changes, the inferred dispersion in offered wages is increasing in the search efficiency
of on-the-job search—see Tjaden and Wellschmied. We estimate the dispersion in wages
arising from search frictions with a different identification strategy from these papers. Our
estimates of the dispersion in wage offers are closest to those of Low and co-authors, who


                                             40
find a standard deviation of match-specific wage shocks of 0.23, but are substantially larger
than the estimates in Tjaden and Wellschmied and Hagedorn and Manovskii.
   An important challenge for many of the papers discussed in this section is to distinguish
job-to-job transitions that are value increasing—movements up the job ladder—from transi-
tions that arise from layoffs or other involuntary separations. The conclusions emerging from
this literature depend on whether one interprets wage decreases as compensated for by higher
non-wage characteristics or as falling off the job ladder. We use direct information on job
acceptance decisions of unemployed workers, so the main parameters in our approach do not
rest on properties about the process of on-the-job search, notably the relative probabilities
of receiving offers while working and while unemployed.


9     Concluding Remarks
The KM data provide a novel view of unemployed workers’ search behavior and the dispersion
in potential wage offers they face when looking for a job. The data are unique—they contain
direct information on reservation wages, job offers, and job acceptance decisions. The data on
reservation wages permit identification of the variation in job offers that is due to differences
in personal productivity. We use the jobseeker’s acceptance decisions to infer the dispersion
in non-wage values and to account for the asymmetry in acceptance frequencies of offers
above and below the previously reported reservation wage.
   We find that the dispersion of the wage offer distribution is moderate, but larger than
what HKV associate with the search model without on-the-job search. We find that the
dispersion of the non-wage value in job offers is at least as large as the dispersion of wages.
The implied overall dispersion in job values for a jobseeker relative to the jobseeker’s produc-
tivity is substantial. A related finding is that the implied value of non-market time, though
not negative, is quite low—around 10 percent of a worker’s productivity. We believe that
this finding does not contradict other evidence about labor supply. We study an alterna-
tive specification of the job ladder model with lower job-finding efficiency among employed
searchers, but find that the specification implies even lower values of non-work. We think
these findings point in the direction of equal job-finding efficiency for on-the-job search. The
pronounced tendency for jobseekers to accept the first job offer they receive is inconsistent
with the sacrifice of option value that occurs when a worker takes a job that interferes with
subsequent on-the-job search.
    Our model has the property that the offered wage remains in effect for the duration of
a job. In fact, wage rates do adjust as a worker accumulates tenure. Kudlyak (2014) shows
that initial wages are strongly persistent; her evidence supports our assumption. HKV noted


                                               41
that job-ladder models with sequential auctions, such as in Cahuc et al. (2006) weaken the
link between the offer rate while employed and the estimate of z, as in these models firms
may make counter-offers if a worker receives an outside offer. Outside offers lead to job-
to-job transitions only if the outside offer comes from a more productive firm, which can
outbid the employee’s current firm. See also Papp (2013) who provides a detailed analysis of
this issue. Similarly, Christensen, Lentz, Mortensen, Neumann and Werwatz’s (2005) model
with endogenous search effort implies that workers further up the wage ladder search less
and thus transition less frequently to other jobs. Therefore, these models can accommodate
larger dispersion in wage offers with higher values of z, as the data on job-to-job transitions
do not imply a large option value of unemployment in these models.
   We believe that our assumption that the distributions of key observed and latent variables
are log-normal or normal is reasonable as a starting point for research on the multiple
dimensions of wage dispersion, but the methods of this paper could be extended to other
more flexible parametric distributions, such as mixtures of log-normal distributions. We also
believe that our finding of high dispersion in non-wage job values shows the potential value
of new surveys that collect data on the non-wage characteristics of job offers such as benefits,
commuting time, hours, flexibility, job security, firm size, and promotion prospects.




                                              42
References
Abowd, John M., Francis Kramarz, and David N. Margolis, “High Wage Workers and High
   Wage Firms,” Econometrica, 1999, 67 (2), 251–333.

Becker, Dan, “Non-Wage Job Characteristics and the Case of the Missing Margin,” April
    2011. http://ssrn.com/abstract=1805761.

Blau, David M. and Philip K. Robins, “Job Search Outcomes for the Employed and Unem-
    ployed,” Journal of Political Economy, 1990, 98 (3), 637–655.

Bontemps, Christian, Jean-Marc Robin, and Gerard J. van den Berg, “Equilibrium Search
    with Continuous Productivity Dispersion: Theory and Nonparametric Estimation,”
    International Economic Review, 2000, 41 (2), 305–358.

Bound, John and Alan B. Krueger, “The Extent of Measurement Error in Longitudinal
    Earnings Data: Do Two Wrongs Make a Right?,” Journal of Labor Economics, January
    1991, 9 (1), 1–24.

Cahuc, Pierre, Fabien Postel-Vinay, and Jean-Marc Robin, “Wage Bargaining with On-the-
    Job Search: Theory and Evidence,” Econometrica, March 2006, 74 (2), 323–364.

Chodorow-Reich, Gabriel and Loukas Karabarbounis, “The Cyclicality of the Opportunity
    Cost of Employment,” Journal of Political Economy, 2016. Forthcoming.

Christensen, Bent Jesper, Rasmus Lentz, Dale T. Mortensen, George R. Neumann, and Axel
    Werwatz, “On-the-Job Search and the Wage Distribution,” Journal of Labor Economics,
    2005, 23 (1), 31–58.

Fallick, Bruce and Charles A. Fleischman, “Employer-to-Employer-to-Flows in the U.S.
    Labor Market: the Complete Picture of Gross Worker Flow,” 2004. Finance and Eco-
    nomics Discussion Series 2004-34.

Feldstein, Martin and James Poterba, “UnemploymenI Insurance and Reservation Wages,”
    Journal of Public Economics, 1984, 23 (1-2), 141–167.

Hagedorn, Marcus and Iourii Manovskii, “Search Frictions and Wage Dispersion,”
    Manuscript, University of Zurich and University of Pennsylvania, October 2010.

Hall, Robert E. and Paul R. Milgrom, “The Limited Influence of Unemployment on the
    Wage Bargain,” American Economic Review, September 2008, 98 (4), 1653–1674.


                                           43
Hornstein, Andreas, Per Krusell, and Giovanni L. Violante, “Frictional Wage Dispersion in
    Search Models: A Quantitative Assessment,” American Economic Review, 2011, 101
    (7), 2873–98.

Hwang, Hae Shin, Dale T. Mortensen, and W. Robert Reed, “Hedonic Wages and Labor
    Market Search,” Journal of Labor Economics, 1998, 16 (4), 815–847.

Jarosch, Gregor, “Searching for Job Security and the Consequences of Job Loss,” December
    2015. Department of Econmics, Stanford University.

Jolivet, Grégory, “A Longitudinal Analysis of Search Frictions and Matching in the
    U.S.Labor Market,” Labour Economics, 2009, 16 (2), 121–134.

    , Fabien Postel-Vinay, and Jean-Marc Robin, “The Empirical Content of the Job Search
    Model: Labor Mobility and Wage Distributions in Europe and the US,” European
    Economic Review, 2006, 50 (4), 877–907.

Krueger, Alan B. and Andreas I. Mueller, “Job Search, Emotional Well-Being, and Job Find-
    ing in a Period of Mass Unemployment: Evidence from High-Frequency Longitudinal
    Data,” Brookings Papers on Economic Activity, Spring 2011, (1), 1–70.

     and      , “A Contribution to the Empirics of Reservation Wages,” American Eco-
    nomic Journal: Economic Policy, February 2016, 8 (1), 142–179.

Kudlyak, Marianna, “The Cyclicality of the User Cost of Labor,” Journal of Monetary
    Economics, 2014, 68, 53 – 67.

Lang, Kevin and Sumon Majumdar, “The Pricing of Job Characteristics When Markets
    Do Not Clear: Theory and Implications,” International Economic Review, 2004, 45 (4),
    1111–1128.

Low, Hamish, Costas Meghir, and Luigi Pistaferri, “Wage Risk and Employment Risk over
    the Life Cycle,” American Economic Review, 2010, 100 (4), 1432–67.

Mortensen, Dale T., Wage Dispersion: Why Are Similar Workers Paid Differently?, Cam-
   bridge, Massachusetts: MIT Press: Zeuthen Lecture Book Series, 2003.

      and Christopher Pissarides, “Job Creation and Job Destruction in the Theory of
    Unemployment,” Review of Economic Studies, 1994, 61, 397–415.

Mueller, Andreas I., “Separations, Sorting and Cyclical Unemployment,” September 2015.
    Columbia University.

                                           44
Papp, Tamas, “Frictional Wage Dispersion with Bertrand Competition: an Assessment,”
   Review of Economic Dynamics, July 2013, 16 (3), 540–552.

Postel-Vinay, Fabien and Jean-Marc Robin, “Equilibrium Wage Dispersion with Worker
   and Employer Heterogeneity,” Econometrica, 2002, 70 (6), 2295–2350.

Rogerson, Richard, Robert Shimer, and Randall Wright, “Search-Theoretic Models of the
   Labor Market: A Survey,” Journal of Economic Literature, December 2005, 43, 959–
   988.

Sorkin, Isaac, “Ranking Firms Using Revealed Preference,” October 2015. University of
   Michigan.

Sullivan, Paul and Ted To, “Search and Nonwage Job Characteristics,” The Journal of
   Human Resources, 2014, 49 (2), 472–507.

Tjaden, Volker and Felix Wellschmied, “Quantifying the Contribution of Search to Wage
   Inequality,” American Economic Journal: Macroeconomics, 2014, 6 (1), 134–161.




                                         45
Appendixes

Note: The appendixes are for online distribution. They repeat some text from the body of
the paper for clarity.




A      Details on the Moment Conditions
The observed moments and their counterparts in the model are:

                   mŷ = µy                                                                        (37)
                    mr̂ = µr                                                                       (38)
                          q
                    sŷ =    σy2 + σx2 + σ2ŷ                                                     (39)
                          q
                    sr̂ =    σr2 + σx2 + σ2r̂                                                     (40)
                   cŷ,r̂ = σx2                                                                    (41)
                 A(di ) = 1 − Φ(0, µm|di , σm|di ), i = 1, 2, 3, 4, 5                              (42)
                          Z Z r                                      
                                                    φ(v, µv , σv )
                    J =          Φ(0, µp|v , σp|v )                dv φ(r, µr , σr )dr.            (43)
                                                    Φ(r, µv , σv )

where m = v − r, d = ŷ − r̂ and p = (η − µη ) − (y − µy )(1 + κ). The functions µm|d , σm|d , µp|v
and σp|v are determined by the parameters µy , µr , σy , σr , µη , ση , κ, σ2ŷ and σ2r̂ , as follows:


                                       σm,d
                     µm|d = µm +            (d − µd )                                              (44)
                                        σd2
                                        2
                      2          2
                                       σm,d
                     σm|d    = σm   − 2                                                            (45)
                                        σd
                               ση − (1 − κ)(1 + κ)σy2
                                 2
                      µp|v   =                            (v − µv )                                (46)
                                            σv2
                       2
                                                     (ση2 − (1 − κ)(1 + κ)σy2 )2
                      σp|v   = σy2 (1 + κ)2 + ση2 −                              .                 (47)
                                                                  σv2




                                                   46
where

                                 µd = µy − µr                                            (48)
                                µm = µy + µη − µr                                        (49)
                                 σd2 = σy2 + σ2ŷ + σr2 + σ2r̂                         (50)
                                 2
                                σm = (1 − κ)2 σy2 + ση2 + σr2                            (51)
                               σm,d = (1 − κ)σy2 + σr2                                   (52)
                                 µv = µy + µη                                            (53)
                                 σv2 = (1 − κ)2 σy2 + ση2 .                              (54)


B       Additional Results
B.1     Moments calculated from regression residuals
Column 2 of Table 6 shows the estimation results using residualized data instead of the raw
data for the moment conditions. To be precise, we ran Mincer-type wage regressions of the
log hourly offered wage ŷ and the log hourly reservation wage r̂ on observable character-
istics (years of schooling, potential experience, potential experience squared, and dummies
for gender, marital status, race and ethinicity) and used the residuals of these regressions
to compute the same moments as in Table 1 (except of course for the means, which we
left unchanged from Table 1). One would expect the estimation results to change if the
proportionality-to-productivity assumption does not hold in the data. To see this, consider
the extreme case where the observable characteristics capture all the variance in produc-
tivity x. In this case, the proportionality-to-productivity assumption is not necessary for
identification as the residualized moments of ŷ and r̂ are independent of x and thus directly
capture the moments of interest (plus some measurement error). The results in Table 6,
however, show that all estimated parameters are similar to the results in Table 2 except for
the variance of x, which as expected is estimated to be substantially lower, and the com-
pensating differential parameter κ, which is estimated with a lot of sampling error. Overall,
these results suggest that proportionality-to-productivity is a reasonable assumption.




                                               47
                                                                                                                                                            Excluding those                 Only observations
                                                                                                                                                              with date to                  where reservation
                                                                             Residualized     Some college      College degree    Short-term    Long-term
     Parameter   Explanation                                   Baseline                                                                                        return to      No trimming   and offered wages
                                                                                 data       education or less      or more       unemployed    unemployed
                                                                                                                                                               previous                      reported in same
                                                                                                                                                               employer                            units

         μr      Mean of reservation wages                       2.82            2.82             2.70               3.17           2.87          2.78           2.83            2.84             2.82

         μy      Mean of wage offers                             2.75            2.75             2.60               2.98           2.85          2.62           2.74            2.75             2.70
                 Mean of the independent component of non-
         μη                                                      0.31            0.26             0.32               0.38           0.25          0.35           0.31            0.33             0.31
                 wage value of wage offer
         σx      Standard deviation of personal productivity     0.43            0.32             0.33               0.46           0.44          0.38           0.43            0.47             0.45
48




         σr      Standard deviation of the reservation wage      0.11            0.07             0.18               0.00           0.08          0.20           0.10            0.08             0.00

         σy      Standard deviation of the offered wage          0.24            0.22             0.25               0.26           0.23          0.25           0.24            0.26             0.18
                 Standard deviation of the independent
         ση                                                      0.34            0.31             0.38               0.25           0.31          0.32           0.34            0.36             0.26
                 component of non-wage value of wage offer
                Compensating differential                       0.25            0.38             0.89               0.11           0.27          0.70           0.30            0.43             -0.14
                 Standard deviation of offered job values
         σv                                                      0.38            0.34             0.38               0.34           0.35          0.33           0.38            0.39             0.33
                 (v = y + n )



                                                                          Table 6: Additional Estimation Results
B.2     Results for education groups
The results in columns 3 and 4 of Table 6 show results for respondents with some college
education or less and for those with a college degree or more. The standard deviation of
offered wages is similar across the two samples, whereas the mean is about 39 log points
higher (or 48 percent higher). The standard deviation of the reservation wage is somewhat
higher in the sample of those with some college education or less, and the differences in the
means of the reservation wage is 47 log points (or 60 percent). The remaining parameters
differ more substantially across the two samples. In particular, the parameter κ differs
between the two sub-samples, but sampling error was big even in the full sample and thus
the sub-sample results with respect to this parameter are noisy.

B.3     Results for groups by unemployment duration
The results in columns 5 and 6 show the sub-sample results for short-term and long-term
unemployed workers, where short-term unemployed was defined as any individual who was
unemployed for less than 26 weeks at the start of the survey. The results show that the
results are very similar across the two samples.

B.4     Sensitivity of additional parameter estimates to measurement
        error
Table 7 shows the parameter estimates underlying Table 3 in the paper. As discussed in the
body of the paper, the parameter estimate that changes materially with different amounts
of measurement error is κ. Note that this finding is asymmetric, and more important for
measurement error in r̂, because κ interacts with σy in the acceptance model, where we
defined n = η − κ(y − µy ).

B.5     Sensitivity to the choice of matching points for the acceptance
        function
Table 8 shows results with the acceptance frequency targeted at two points (d = −1 and
d = 0.5), four points (d = −1, d = −0.5, d = 0.0, d = 0.5), seven points equidistant
on the interval [−1, 0.5], eight points equidistant on the interval [−1, 0.75] and nine points
equidistant on the interval [−1, 1]. The baseline specification targets 5 points (d = −1,
d = −0.5, d = 0.0, d = 0.5, d = 1). The estimated parameters are similar to the ones
in the baseline estimation for all of these and the fit of the acceptance function shown in
Figure 9 appears to be about the same, except the estimation with two points, which tends
to underpredict acceptance around d = 0.

                                             49
                                                              σεy2 / σy2
                              A: σv
                                              0.000    0.065          0.130    0.184
                                      0.000   0.24         0.23        0.23    0.22
                        2       2     0.065   0.38         0.34        0.30    0.26
                      σεr / σr
                                      0.130   0.45         0.42        0.38    0.35
                                      0.184   0.49         0.46        0.43    0.39

                                                              σεy2 / σy2
                              B: σy
                                              0.000    0.065          0.130    0.184
                                      0.000   0.30         0.27        0.24    0.20
                        2       2     0.065   0.30         0.27        0.24    0.20
                      σεr / σr
                                      0.130   0.30         0.27        0.24    0.20
                                      0.184   0.30         0.27        0.24    0.20

                                                              σεy2 / σy2
                              C: σɳ
                                              0.000    0.065          0.130    0.184
                                      0.000   0.24         0.23        0.23    0.22
                        2       2     0.065   0.37         0.33        0.29    0.25
                      σεr / σr
                                      0.130   0.41         0.38        0.34    0.30
                                      0.184   0.43         0.40        0.35    0.29

                                                              σεy2 / σy2
                              D: κ
                                              0.000    0.065          0.130    0.184
                                      0.000   0.98         0.96        0.94    0.90
                         2      2     0.065   0.68         0.66        0.64    0.63
                      σεr /   σr
                                      0.130   0.45         0.37        0.25    0.08
                                      0.184   0.28         0.15        -0.03   -0.30


Table 7: Estimates for Additional Parameters and Different Amounts of Measurement Error




                                                      50
                                                                            A(d i )     A(d i )      A(d i )      A(d i )      A(d i )                     Matching
                                                                        evaluated at evaluated at evaluated at evaluated at evaluated at    Matching         probit
     Parameter Explanation                                   Baseline    2 points on 4 points on 7 points on 8 points on 9 points on         probit       coefficients
                                                                           interval    interval     interval     interval     interval     coefficients    (trimmed
                                                                         [-1.0, 0.5]  [-1.0, 0.5]  [-1.0, 0.5] [-1.0, 0.75] [-1.0, 1.0]                     sample)

        μr     Mean of reservation wages                      2.82         2.82         2.82         2.82          2.82         2.82          2.82           2.82

        μy     Mean of wage offers                            2.75         2.75         2.75         2.75          2.75         2.75          2.75           2.75

        σx     Standard deviation of personal productivity    0.43         0.43         0.43         0.43          0.43         0.43          0.43           0.43

        σr     Standard deviation of the reservation wage     0.11         0.11         0.11         0.11          0.11         0.11          0.11           0.11
51




        σy     Standard deviation of the offered wage         0.24         0.24         0.24         0.24          0.24         0.24          0.24           0.24
               Mean of the independent component of non-
        μη                                                    0.31         0.24         0.32         0.32          0.31         0.31          0.35           0.38
               wage value of wage offer
               Standard deviation of the independent
        ση                                                    0.34         0.36         0.34         0.34          0.34         0.34          0.32           0.33
               component of non-wage value of wage offer
              Compensating differential                      0.25         0.15         0.20         0.19          0.26         0.29          0.38           0.21

        σv     Standard deviation of offered job values       0.38         0.42         0.39         0.39          0.38         0.38          0.35           0.38


                                            Table 8: Robustness Checks for Acceptance Function
B.6     Matching a probit specification for the acceptance function
In an alternative estimation approach, we match the coefficients of a probit model estimated
on the KM data. The specification of the probit model is: A = α + βd. Matching the two
probit coefficient is equivalent to the maximum likelihood estimator of µη and ση given κ (or
more generally, two of these parameters given the value of the third parameter). Together
with the fraction of rejections for non-wage reasons, therefore the model is identified. See
the next section for the details of the moment conditions. The advantage of this approach is
that it takes into account the information contained in all observations in the sample, but we
could not impose A = 0.5 in the probit estimation for the undecided and had to drop these
observations. For this reason, we prefer our approach of matching points on the acceptance
function. In any event, the estimated parameters in columns (7) and (8) are similar to the
ones in the baseline. Note that the results in column (8) are based on probit model estimates
where we trimmed the sample below -1.0 and above 0.89 of d = ŷ − r̂, which correspond to
the 1st respectively the 99th percentile of the distribution of d. As shown in Figure 9, the
fit of the acceptance function is somewhat worse than for the other specifications where we
match points on the acceptance function, because we had to drop the undecided from the
sample for this estimation procedure.




                                             52
                                                       Baseline                                                   2 points on interval [-1,0.5]                                          4 points on interval [-1,0.5]                                          7 points on interval [-1,0.5]
                                 1                                                                      1                                                                      1                                                                      1


                                0.8                                                                    0.8                                                                    0.8                                                                    0.8
      Acceptance Frequency, A




                                                                             Acceptance Frequency, A




                                                                                                                                                    Acceptance Frequency, A




                                                                                                                                                                                                                           Acceptance Frequency, A
                                0.6                                                                    0.6                                                                    0.6                                                                    0.6


                                0.4                                                                    0.4                                                                    0.4                                                                    0.4


                                0.2                                                                    0.2                                                                    0.2                                                                    0.2


                                 0                                                                      0                                                                      0                                                                      0
                                      -1        -0.5       0        0.5                                      -1       -0.5       0        0.5                                       -1       -0.5       0        0.5                                       -1       -0.5       0        0.5
                                Offered Wage - Reservation Wage, d = y - r                             Offered Wage - Reservation Wage, d = y - r                             Offered Wage - Reservation Wage, d = y - r                             Offered Wage - Reservation Wage, d = y - r


                                           8 points on interval [-1,0.75]                                          9 points on interval [-1,1]                                           Matching probit coefficients           Matching probit coefficients (trimmed sample)
53




                                 1                                                                      1                                                                      1                                                                      1


                                0.8                                                                    0.8                                                                    0.8                                                                    0.8
      Acceptance Frequency, A




                                                                             Acceptance Frequency, A




                                                                                                                                                    Acceptance Frequency, A




                                                                                                                                                                                                                           Acceptance Frequency, A
                                0.6                                                                    0.6                                                                    0.6                                                                    0.6


                                0.4                                                                    0.4                                                                    0.4                                                                    0.4


                                0.2                                                                    0.2                                                                    0.2                                                                    0.2


                                 0                                                                      0                                                                      0                                                                      0
                                      -1        -0.5       0        0.5                                      -1       -0.5       0        0.5                                       -1       -0.5       0        0.5                                       -1       -0.5       0        0.5
                                Offered Wage - Reservation Wage, d = y - r                             Offered Wage - Reservation Wage, d = y - r                             Offered Wage - Reservation Wage, d = y - r                             Offered Wage - Reservation Wage, d = y - r



     Figure 9: Alternative Specifications for the Acceptance Function: Model (Dashed Line) and Data (Solid Line, with 95 Percent
     Confidence Interval)
B.7     Identifying power of the frequency of rejection for non-wage
        reasons
As explained in the body of the paper, the shape of the acceptance function does not sepa-
rately identify ση and κ. We achieve identification by matching the fraction of rejections for
non-wage reasons, J. ˆ To demonstrate how the model is identified by this moment, Figure
10 plots the model’s calculated fraction of rejections for non-wage reasons, J, for various
values of the parameter ση . To perform this calculation for a given ση , we estimate the 7
parameters µy , µr , σx , σy , σr , µη and κ by targeting the first 7 moments in the data (the
moment conditions 37-42 above). The figure shows that the value of J is strongly increas-
ing in ση , demonstrating that the 8 parameters of the model are fully identified with this
additional moment. The main reason that the fraction of rejections for non-wage reasons
adds valuable information for identifying ση and κ separately is the following: On the one
hand, higher values of both ση and κ make the acceptance functions flatter, because they
both increase the likelihood that a high-wage offer is associated with a low non-wage value.
On the other hand, the fraction of rejections for non-wage reasons mainly depends on ση ,
because it strongly depends on the relative importance of the idiosyncratic variance of y and
n, but is not much affected by the correlation between y and n (and thus κ).

B.8     An empirical analysis of the determinants of the job-offer rate
        and the acceptance probability
Table 9 reports the results of linear regressions for the probability of receiving a job offer
(columns 1 to 3) and accepting a job offer (columns 4 to 6). Columns 1 to 3 show that the
receipt of a job offer is not correlated with the reservation wage, which we lagged by one
interview to address concerns of reverse causality. Columns 4 to 6 show regression results
of job acceptance conditional on the receipt of a job offer. As expected, the likelihood of
accepting a job offer is positively correlated with the offered wage and negatively correlated
with the reservation wage. Observable characteristics have little influence on the likelihood
of receipt or acceptance of a job offer. In particular, the likelihood of receipt or acceptance
of a job offer does not appear to be correlated with years of school, indirectly supporting
our assumption of proportionality in productivity. In other words, the results in this table
suggest that (1) more highly educated unemployed workers are equally likely to be in our
sample of job offers, and (2) more highly educated unemployed workers are equally picky
when it comes to accepting these offers.




                                              54
     0.9



    0.85


     0.8


    0.75



     0.7
J




    0.65



     0.6


    0.55


     0.5

       0.2   0.25   0.3   0.35   0.4   0.45   0.5    0.55   0.6   0.65   0.7
                                        ση



    Figure 10: The Fraction of Rejections for Non-Wage Reasons for a Given ση




                                       55
                                                                        Dependent variable:                                               Dependent variable:
     Variable                                                 Received at least one offer in last 7 days                                  Accepted job offer
     log(lagged hourly reservation wage)                       0.002                                    0.003                 -0.187                                   -0.199
                                                              (0.006)                                   (0.008)              (0.086)**                                (0.084)**
     log(hourly offered wage)                                                                                                 0.236                                     0.218
                                                                                                                            (0.068)***                                (0.067)***
     Years of school                                                               0.002                0.002                                      0.010                0.01
                                                                                   (0.002)              (0.002)                                    (0.013)             (0.013)
     Potential experience, in years                                                -0.001               -0.001                                     0.001                0.001
                                                                                  (0.000)**            (0.000)**                                   (0.002)             (0.002)
     Female                                                                        -0.003               -0.003                                    -0.015               -0.007
                                                                                   (0.007)              (0.007)                                    (0.052)             (0.050)
     Married                                                                       -0.002               -0.002                                    -0.070               -0.062
                                                                                   (0.007)              (0.007)                                    (0.055)             (0.055)
     Black                                                                         0.001                0.002                                      0.032                0.050
                                                                                   (0.009)              (0.009)                                    (0.056)             (0.056)
56




     Asian or other                                                                0.004                0.004                                      0.107                0.073
                                                                                   (0.016)              (0.016)                                    (0.076)             (0.061)
     Race not available                                                            0.015                0.015                                     -0.120               -0.146
                                                                                   (0.012)              (0.012)                                    (0.118)             (0.117)
     Hispanic                                                                      0.000                0.000                                     -0.034               -0.003
                                                                                   (0.010)              (0.010)                                    (0.083)             (0.078)
     Ethnicity not available                                                       -0.021               -0.021                                     0.211                0.204
                                                                                  (0.009)**            (0.009)**                                  (0.117)*             (0.120)*
     Constant                                                  0.035               0.027                0.023                 0.627                0.627                0.594
                                                              (0.019)*             (0.026)              (0.027)             (0.140)***           (0.204)***           (0.206)***
     N                                                        21,515               21,491              21,491                 1,153                1,150                1,150
     R-squared                                                 0.000                0.005               0.005                 0.050                0.052                0.092
     Notes : Robust standard errors in parentheses (clustered at the inidividual level in columns 1-3); * p<0.1, ** p<0.05, *** p<0.01. The sample for the regressions in columns 1-
     3 consists of all interviews, where a reservation wage was available in the previous interview and the respondent was unemployed and had not accepted a job offer prior to the
     interview. The sample for columns 4-6 is the baseline sample of job offers in the paper.


       Table 9: Linear Regressions of Job Offer and Job Acceptance on Reservation Wage and Observed Characteristics
B.9     Unemployment, separation rate, and job-finding rate
Table 10 reports the average unemployment rate (u), monthly separation rate (s), and
monthly job-finding rate (f ), from matched Current Population Survey (CPS) micro data by
educational attainment. To be more precise, s and f are measured as the rate of transitions
between employment and unemployment and vice versa. The table shows that unemploy-
ment rates differ strongly by educational attainment. Most of the variation in unemployment
is attributable to differences in the separation rate rather than differences in the job-finding
rates. The job-finding rate hardly varies by educational attainment. To assess this more for-
                                                                                 s
mally, we compute the flow steady-state unemployment rate, uss (s, f ) =        s+f
                                                                                    ,   as well as two
counterfactual unemployment rates: (1) The steady-state unemployment rate, holding con-
stant the job-finding rate across groups, uss (s, favg ) = s+fsavg . This counterfactual shows how
much of the variation in unemployment rates across education groups is driven by the separa-
tion margin. (2) The steady-state unemployment rate, holding constant the separation rate
                                    savg
across groups, uss (savg , f ) =   savg +f
                                           .   This counterfactual shows how much of the variation
in unemployment rates across education groups is driven by the job-finding margin. Nearly
all of the variation in unemployment rates across educational attainment is driven by the
separation margin. This finding suggests that the fact that unemployment rates differ across
education groups is not at odds with the assumption of proportionality-in-productivity. In-
stead, it supports the evidence from the KM survey in Table 9 that more highly educated
unemployed workers are equally likely to generate and accept offers as unemployed workers
with fewer years of school.




                                                     57
     A. Sample: U.S. (2009-2010)                                   u                 s                  f                u ss (s,f)   u ss (s,f avg )   u ss (s avg ,f)
     Less than high school                                       0.167             0.035             0.180                 0.164          0.170             0.083
     High school degree                                          0.113             0.021             0.164                 0.112          0.106             0.090
     Some college or associate degree                            0.087             0.016             0.170                 0.084          0.083             0.087
     Undergraduate degree                                        0.056             0.010             0.190                 0.050          0.054             0.079
     Graduate degree                                             0.035             0.006             0.187                 0.033          0.035             0.080
     Total                                                       0.090             0.016             0.173                 0.086          0.086             0.086
     Variance of group averages*100                              0.269             0.013             0.012                 0.273          0.275             0.002
58




     B. Sample: New Jersey (2009-2010)                             u                 s                  f                u ss (s,f)   u ss (s,f avg )   u ss (s avg ,f)
     Less than high school                                       0.137             0.030             0.190                 0.138          0.149             0.079
     High school degree                                          0.112             0.019             0.147                 0.115          0.099             0.100
     Some college or associate degree                            0.094             0.016             0.152                 0.097          0.086             0.097
     Undergraduate degree                                        0.074             0.011             0.166                 0.064          0.062             0.090
     Graduate degree                                             0.039             0.006             0.201                 0.028          0.032             0.075
     Total                                                       0.089             0.015             0.160                 0.086          0.080             0.092
     Variance of group averages*100                              0.140             0.009             0.056                 0.186          0.192             0.012
     Source: The authors' estimates with matched CPS monthly data for the years 2009 and 2010 for individuals of age 20 to 65.


                        Table 10: Unemployment, Separation and Job-Finding Rates, by Educational Attainment
B.10     Distributions of wages in the CPS and in the KM survey’s
         data on prior wage
Figure 11 shows the kernel density of the log hourly wage for the currently employed and
the log hourly prior wage for the currently unemployed. We use the CPS Outgoing Rotation
Group data and follow Mueller (2015) to compute the distribution of prior wages for those
currently unemployed in New Jersey in the years 2009 and 2010. The densities show that
on average unemployed workers tend to be predominantly low-wage workers, which is the
consequence of higher separation rates, as Mueller shows.
    Figure 12 compares the distribution of the hourly prior wage in the CPS data and the
KM administrative data. The mean in the CPS data is 2.88, which nearly matches the 2.87
in the KM data—see Figure 4. The standard deviation of prior wages in the CPS data is
0.68, which is quite a bit higher than the standard deviation in the KM administrative data,
0.58. The likely reason is that—while the KM data is representative of the UI recipient
population in New Jersey in 2009—the CPS unemployed include a substantial fraction of
UI-ineligibles (those who quit their jobs, new and re-entrants in the labor force and other
unemployed not satisfying the earnings criteria for being eligible for UI). The UI recipient
population is consequently likely to have lower dispersion of productivity x than the popula-
tion of unemployed in general. Another consideration is that there are only 60 unemployed
workers in the New Jersey CPS sample with information on prior wages and, thus, fairly high
sampling error. The standard deviation of log hourly prior wages in the national sample is
0.55, close to the standard deviation of prior wages in the KM data (0.58).

B.11     Distributions of prior wages in the model and the data
Figure 13 compares the distribution of the log hourly prior wage in the KM data and the
stationary distribution in the model, which was simulated for 50,000 individuals. We dis-
cussed in the main text why a perfect fit is not to be expected. As Figure 11 and Table 10
suggest, high-wage/high-skill workers have lower separation rates and thus are less likely to
be unemployed.


C      The Likelihood Function
We can write the acceptance frequency A as a function of d = ŷ − r̂:

                               A(d) = Prob[m ≥ 0|d]                                     (55)
                                      = 1 − Prob[0 ≥ m|d]                               (56)
                                      = 1 − Fm (0|d)                                    (57)

                                             59
                        0.8
                                                                       All wages (NJ only)
                        0.7                                            Prior wages (NJ only)


                        0.6


                        0.5
              Density




                        0.4


                        0.3


                        0.2


                        0.1


                         0
                              1   1.5   2      2.5        3   3.5         4        4.5         5
                                               Log Hourly Wage


       Figure 11: Kernel Density of the Log Hourly Wage in the CPS (2009-2010)



                        0.8
                                                                         KM data
                                                                         CPS data (NJ only)
                        0.7


                        0.6


                        0.5
              Density




                        0.4


                        0.3


                        0.2


                        0.1


                         0
                              1   1.5   2      2.5        3   3.5         4        4.5         5
                                            Log Hourly Prior Wage, w


Figure 12: Kernel Density of the Log Hourly Prior Wage in the KM Data and the CPS Data


                                                     60
                         0.8
                                                                                KM Data
                         0.7                                                    Model


                         0.6


                         0.5
               Density




                         0.4


                         0.3


                         0.2


                         0.1


                          0
                               1   1.5      2       2.5        3   3.5      4   4.5       5
                                                 Log Hourly Prior Wage, w


 Figure 13: Kernel Density of the Log Hourly Prior Wage in the KM Data and the Model

where m = v − rv = κµy + (1 − κ)y + η − r.
   If we assume that all variables are log normally distributed then m|d is log normally
distributed with mean and variance as follows:
                                                       σm,d
                                         µm|d = µm +        (d − µd )                         (58)
                                                        σd2
                                                        2
                                           2        2
                                                       σm,d
                                          σm|d   = σm − 2 ,                                   (59)
                                                        σd

   where

                                          µd = µy − µr                                        (60)
                                          µm = µy + µη − µr                                   (61)
                                           2
                                          σm = (1 − κ)2 σy2 + ση2 + σr2                       (62)
                                          σd2 = σy2 + σ2ŷ + σr2 + σ2r̂                     (63)
                                         σm,d = (1 − κ)σy2 + σr2 .                            (64)




                                                          61
   Given the estimates for µy , µr , σy , σr and σx and the calibrated values of σŷ and σr̂ ,
there are 3 unknowns: µη , ση , κ. The log likelihood function for the acceptance model can
be written as:

                                      N
                                      X
                ln L(µη , ση , κ) =         [(Ai ln(1 − Fm (0|di ))) + (1 − Ai ) ln Fm (0|di )].     (65)
                                      i=1


C.1       Equivalence to probit model
The log likelihood function of a Probit model for the latent variable y ∗ = α + βd is:

                             N
                             X
              ln L(α, β) =         [(Ai ln(1 − G(−α − βdi ))) + (1 − Ai )G(−α − βdi )].              (66)
                             i=1

From the formula of the cdf of the normal distribution it is apparent then, that this likelihood
function is equal to the likelihood function in (65) if and only if:
                                                                      µm|d
                                                    α + βd =               .                         (67)
                                                                      σm|d
µm|d
σm|d
       is a linear function of d and thus the likelihood functions (65) and (66) are identical for:
                                                "                                           #
                                            1    (1 − κ)σy2 + σr2
                             α =       µd + µη −                  µd                                 (68)
                                 σm|d                   σd2
                                      "              #
                                  1 (1 − κ)σy2 + σr2
                             β =                       ,                                             (69)
                                 σm|d        σd2

where
                          2
                                                                            ((1 − κ)σy2 + σr2 )2
                         σm|d   = (1 −      κ)2 σy2   +   ση2   +   σr2   −                      .   (70)
                                                                                   σd2
   Therefore, the moment conditions α and β together with the moment conditions (37)-
(41) and the condition for the fraction of rejections for non-wage reasons (43) identify the 8
parameters of the model.
   To summarize, the following are the 8 moment conditions that are used for the estimation
results reported in Columns (7) and (8) in Table 8:




                                                                62
                 mŷ = µy                                                                  (71)
                 mr̂ = µr                                                                  (72)
                       q
                 sŷ =    σy2 + σx2 + σ2ŷ                                                (73)
                       q
                 sr̂ =    σr2 + σx2 + σ2r̂                                                (74)
                cŷ,r̂ = σx2                                                               (75)
                                 "                                             #
                            1                    (1 −   κ)σy2   +   σr2
                  α =                µd + µη −                            µd               (76)
                          σm|d                           σd2
                                 "             #
                                     2      2
                       1   (1 − κ)σ  y +  σ r
                  β =              2
                                                                                           (77)
                      σm|d        σd
                      Z Z r                                     
                                                φ(v, µv , σv )
                  J =        Φ(0, µp|v , σp|v )                dv φ(r, µr , σr )dr.        (78)
                                                Φ(r, µv , σv )

D      Model Extensions
D.1     Model with directed search
Unemployed jobseekers with higher non-work values have higher reservation job values. Our
assumption of zero correlation of the reservation value and the offered value will fail if
the jobseeker knows something about the possible job offer before contacting an employer,
because the jobseeker will contact only the more promising employers. Choosier jobseekers
with higher non-work values will get better job offers, though less often than other jobseekers.
The correlation between the reservation value and the offered value will be positive, not zero.
    To illustrate the importance of the issue, suppose that the jobseeking process works the
way we describe, with one exception. Instead of seeing all the offers that jobseekers receive,
there is a probability χ that the jobseeker knows the offer’s terms without contacting the
employer. If the job value falls short of the reservation wage, we never learn about the
offer, whereas if the offer is acceptable, it goes into our data. This setup induces a positive
correlation between r and y because of the truncation of observations with low values of y.
    The observed offer rate for unemployed workers with reservation wage r is:

                                 λ̃(r) = λ(χA(r) + (1 − χ))

where A(r) = 1 − Fv (r) is the acceptance frequency given r and λ is the true underlying
offer rate (or contact rate). The share of accepted offers where the unemployed worker knew
                                        χA(r)
the terms beforehand is π(r) =       χA(r)+(1−χ)
                                                 .

                                                     63
   The observed acceptance rate for unemployed workers with reservation wage r is:

                      Ã(r) = π(r) + (1 − π(r))A(r)
                                   χA(r)            1−χ
                            =                  +              A(r)
                              χA(r) + (1 − χ) χA(r) + (1 − χ)
                                      1
                            =                 A(r)
                              χA(r) + (1 − χ)
                               1 − Fv (r)
                            =             .
                              1 − χFv (r)
   The observed acceptance rate for unemployed workers with d = ŷ − r̂:

                                Ã(d) = π(d) + (1 − π(d))A(d)

where
                                           Z
                                π(d) =         π(r)dF (r|d)
                                        χ(1 − Fv (r))
                                           Z
                                       =              dF (r|d)
                                         1 − χFv (r)
                               A(d) = P(v ≥ r|d)
                                       = 1 − P(v < r|d)
                                       = 1 − Fm (0|d),

   where m = v − r. The key issue here is that d = ŷ − r̂ is not normally distributed and
thus it is not possible to derive an expression for Fm (m|d).

D.1.1    Simulated moments

In view of the difficulty of deriving an expression for Fm (m|d), we calculate moments from
draws from that distribution, targeting the same moments as in the baseline estimation:
mŷ , mr̂ , sŷ , sr̂ , cŷ,r̂ , Ã(d) for d = [−1, −0.5, 0, 0.5, 1] and J. We use a weighting matrix
with the inverse of the variance of each moment on the diagonal (bootstrapped with 2000
repetitions). We generate a million observations from the model and solve for the best fitting
8 parameters, conditional on a range of values of χ.

D.1.2    Results

Table 11 shows the estimation results for the baseline where χ = 0 together with a range of
positive values of χ. The mean of the wage-offer distribution is somewhat lower for higher
values of χ, but the estimated dispersions of y, r, and x remain unchanged. This finding may
be somewhat surprising, as the censoring of offers should introduce a correlation between y

                                                 64
and r, and thus lower the estimated dispersion of x and increase the estimated dispersion of
y and r. The main reason that the estimates of σy , σr , and σx remain unchanged is that the
dispersion of non-wage amenities, ση , exceeds the dispersion in wages, σy , and thus most of
the censoring of offers occurs from low values of η rather than low values of y. Moreover,
the estimated ση increases with higher values of χ, which implies that little censoring occurs
based on low values of y at any reasonable value of χ.




                                             65
                                                                                     Value of parameter χ

     Parameter Explanation                                   Baseline       χ=0.25         χ=0.50           χ=0.74
               Fraction of offers where v is observed
         χ                                                     0.00          0.25            0.50            0.74
               before offer stage
        μr     Mean of reservation wages                       2.82          2.82            2.83            2.82

        μy     Mean of wage offers                             2.75          2.74            2.72            2.69
               Mean of the independent component of non-
        μη                                                     0.31          0.27            0.19            0.00
               wage value of wage offer
        σx
66




               Standard deviation of personal productivity     0.43          0.43            0.43            0.43

        σr     Standard deviation of the reservation wage      0.11          0.12            0.12            0.11

        σy     Standard deviation of the offered wage          0.24          0.24            0.25            0.24
               Standard deviation of the independent
        ση                                                     0.34          0.38            0.43            0.50
               component of non-wage value of wage offer
              Compensating differential                       0.25          0.14            0.02            -0.20

               Standard deviation of offered job values
        σv                                                     0.38          0.43            0.49            0.57
               (v = y + n )


                                      Table 11: Results for Model with Directed Search
   The reason that ση increases with higher values of χ is that the censoring raises the
observed acceptance rate, Ã, as offers where the unemployed worker observed the value of
the offer before the offer stage, the acceptance rate of offers made is one by definition. The
model also generates a natural asymmetry in the acceptance function A(d) and thus relies
less on positive values µη to account for it. In particular, for χ = 0.74 the model returns
an estimate of µη = 0, which implies that the asymmetry in A(d) is accounted for by the
censoring of offers alone. Figure 14 shows that the fit of A(d) is equally good for each value
of χ.

D.2     Nash bargaining with observable values of non-market activ-
        ities
Our main model assumes that the value of non-market activities h is not known to the firm
when making the wage offer and thus wage offers are independent of the reservation wage r.
This assumption does not hold in the standard search-and-matching framework with Nash
bargaining if the value of non-market activities h is known to the employer. In that case,
the Nash bargaining solution implies that:

                                    ey = αepf + (1 − α)er ,                               (79)

where all variables are expressed in natural logarithms, pf is the firm- or match-specific
productivity, and α is the worker’s bargaining share, taken to be 0.5. It is difficult to model
rejections of offers in this environment, but we assume here that firms make wage offers even
if pf < r and thus the offer is going to be rejected by the worker. Note also that we start
here with a model where we assume that there are no non-wage amenities and thus only
match the first five moments in equations 37-41 (see the next section for Nash bargaining
with non-wage amenities). We also assume that there is no on-the-job search. In this model,
the moment conditions are:

                             mŷ = E(y(pf , r))                                           (80)
                             mr̂ = µr                                                     (81)
                                   q
                             sŷ =    V ar(y(pf , r)) + σx2 + σ2ŷ                       (82)
                                   q
                             sr̂ =    σr2 + σx2 + σ2r̂                                   (83)
                             cŷ,r̂ = σx2 + cov(y(pf , r), r).                            (84)

There are two new parameters to be estimated in this model (µpf and σpf , instead of µy
and σy in the baseline model). The most important change relative to the estimation of
the baseline model is that now the covariance of ŷ and r̂ not only depends on the variance

                                               67
                                                   Baseline                                                                     χ =0.25
                                 1                                                                            1
      Acceptance Frequency, A




                                                                                   Acceptance Frequency, A
                                0.8                                                                          0.8


                                0.6                                                                          0.6


                                0.4                                                                          0.4


                                0.2                                                                          0.2


                                 0                                                                            0
                                      -1    -0.5       0        0.5                                                -1    -0.5       0        0.5
                                 Offered Wage - Reservation Wage, d = y - r                                   Offered Wage - Reservation Wage, d = y - r

                                                   χ =0.50                                                                      χ =0.74
                                 1                                                                            1
      Acceptance Frequency, A




                                                                                   Acceptance Frequency, A




                                0.8                                                                          0.8


                                0.6                                                                          0.6


                                0.4                                                                          0.4


                                0.2                                                                          0.2


                                 0                                                                            0
                                      -1    -0.5       0        0.5                                                -1    -0.5       0        0.5
                                 Offered Wage - Reservation Wage, d = y - r                                   Offered Wage - Reservation Wage, d = y - r




Figure 14: Acceptance Functions for Alternative Values of χ: Model (Dashed Line) and
Data (Solid Line, with 95 Percent Confidence Interval)




                                                                              68
of x but also on the covariance of the bargained wage y and the reservation wage r. The
estimation of the model yields a value of σx = 0.42, which is only slightly below the baseline
estimate, and thus the remaining parameter estimates of the model are affected only to a
minor degree. The main reason for this result is that the variance of r is small, thus it would
require a high correlation of y and r to have a meaningful impact on the overall covariance
of ŷ and r̂. More precisely, one can reformulate the moment conditions such that


                           s2r̂ − cŷ,r̂ − σ2r̂ = σr2 − cov(y(pf , r), r)                (85)
                                                                σy
                                                 = σr2 (1 − ρy,r ).                       (86)
                                                                σr
Given that the right hand side is relatively small and as long as the correlation coefficient
ρy,r (which is determined mainly by the worker’s bargaining share α) is not too close to 1,
the estimate of σr will be small and thus the estimate of σx large, as in our baseline model.

D.3     Nash bargaining with non-wage amenities
This sub-section extends the Nash-bargaining to a model with non-wage amenities in the total
compensation package v. The Nash-bargained compensation package satisfies the following
equation:
                                     ev = αepf + (1 − α)er .                              (87)

Note that the Nash-bargain outcome v does not provide any guidance into whether y and n
are positively or negative correlated. On the one hand, predetermined aspects of n would
lead y and n to be negatively correlated (as the offered wage should compensate for non-
wage values), whereas more productive employers may offer more of both and thus y and
n may be positively correlated. We let χ be the predetermined part of the non-wage value
and ψ be the part of the non-wage value that is determined in the Nash bargain (note that
the notation here deviates from the main text; the variance of χ and ψ is captured in our
baseline model by the parameters κ and ση ). We further assume that employers use the
following simple rule y = γy (v − ψ) and χ = (1 − γy )(v − ψ) such that v = y + χ + ψ. In
this case:
                              y = γy (ln(αepf + (1 − α)er ) − ψ).                         (88)

As mentioned, the model’s parameters γy and ψ do not directly map into the parameters of
the baseline model and thus we would have to derive slightly different moment conditions for
the moments involving acceptance and rejection. As a short cut, we calibrate the dispersion
of non-wage values and investigate how the remaining parameters of the model are affected
by the presence of non-wage amenities. To do this, we estimate the five parameters of the

                                                 69
model µpf , σpf , µr , σr and σx , for a given γy and a given σψ , matching the moment conditions
80-84 above. Our main estimation results are:

   1. For γy = 1 and σψ = 0 (i.e., the baseline from Section D.2 above), we obtain the values
      µpf = 2.56, σpf = 0.58, µr = 2.83, σr = 0.13 and σx = 0.42.

   2. For γy = 0.5 and σψ = 0, we obtain the values µpf = 6.15, σpf = 0.53, µr = 2.83,
      σr = 0.09 and σx = 0.43.

   3. For γy = 1 and σψ = 0.2, we obtain the values µpf = 2.61, σpf = 0.37, µr = 2.83,
      σr = 0.13 and σx = 0.42.

   4. For γy = 0.5 and σψ = 0.2, we obtain the values µpf = 6.15, σpf = 0.48, µr = 2.83,
      σr = 0.09 and σx = 0.43.

These results indicate that adding non-wage amenities to the model in Section D.2 leaves
our conclusion unchanged that Nash bargaining has little effect on the estimated level of σx .
The reason is that a higher variance of non-wage amenities will lead to a lower estimated
variance of pf but the total variance of the offered wage y(pf , r, ψ) as well as the covariance
of y(pf , r, ψ) and r is hardly affected.

D.4     Non-proportionality
In this exercise, we drop the assumption that reservation wages are fully proportional to
personal productivity x. Instead, we assume that

                                            r̂ = x + r(x) + r̂                                (89)
                                      r(x) = κr x + r.                                         (90)

   The moment conditions are:


             mŷ = µy                                                                          (91)
             mr̂ = µr                                                                          (92)
                   q
             sŷ =    σy2 + σx2 + σ2ŷ                                                        (93)
                   q
             sr̂ =    σr2 + (1 + κr )2 σx2 + σ2r̂                                             (94)
             cŷ,r̂ = (1 + κr )σx2                                                             (95)
           A(di ) = 1 − Φ(0, µm|di , σm|di ), i = 1, 2, 3, 4, 5                                (96)
                    Z Z r                                      
                                              φ(v, µv , σv )             p
              J =          Φ(0, µp|v , σp|v )                dv φ(r, µr , σr2 + κ2r σx2 )dr,   (97)
                                              Φ(r, µv , σv )

                                                  70
where Φ(x, µ, σ) and φ(x, µ, σ) are the cdf and the pdf of the normal distribution with mean µ
and standard deviation σ, evaluated at x, and where m = v−r(x), d = ŷ−r̂ = y−r(x)+ŷ −r̂
and p = (η − µη ) − (y − µy )(1 + κ). The parameters µm|d , σm|d , µp|v and σp|v are determined
by the parameters µy , µr , σy , σr , µη , ση , κ, κr , σ2ŷ and σ2r̂ , as follows:

                                        σm,d
                      µm|d = µm +            (d − µd )                                    (98)
                                         σd2
                                         2
                        2         2
                                        σm,d
                       σm|d   = σm   − 2                                                  (99)
                                         σd
                                ση2 − (1 − κ)(1 + κ)σy2
                       µp|v   =                            (v − µv )                     (100)
                                             σv2
                        2
                                                      (ση2 − (1 − κ)(1 + κ)σy2 )2
                       σp|v   = σy2 (1 + κ)2 + ση2 −                              ,      (101)
                                                                   σv2
where

                                  µd = µy − µr                                           (102)
                                  µm = µy + µη − µr                                      (103)
                                  σd2 = σy2 + σ2ŷ + σr2 + σ2r̂ + κ2r σx2              (104)
                                   2
                                  σm = (1 − κ)2 σy2 + ση2 + σr2 + κ2r σx2                (105)
                                σm,d = (1 − κ)σy2 + σr2 + κ2r σx2                        (106)
                                  µv = µy + µη                                           (107)
                                  σv2 = (1 − κ)2 σy2 + ση2 .                             (108)

    We estimate the model for different values of κr . The sub-sample analysis by education
group gives some indication of the potential magnitude of the non-proportionality parameter.
The point estimates in Appendix Table 6 of µy and µr for the two education groups imply
that κr = 0.205, since the difference in µr between the two education groups is 0.47, which
is slightly larger than the difference in µy of 0.39. The results for the model with κr = 0.2
in Table 12 show that the standard deviation of y and η are somewhat larger than in the
baseline model with κr = 0 but the differences in estimates are relatively small.
   It is important to note that there is a natural upper bound on κr as the moment conditions
imply that
                                            s2r̂ − σr2 − σ2r̂
                                       κr =                    − 1.
                                                   cŷ,r̂
The upper bound occurs at σr = 0 and, for σ2r̂ = 0.13s2r̂ , we get an upper bound of
                                             0.87s2r̂
                                      κr =            − 1 = 0.07.
                                              cŷ,r̂

                                                      71
                                                                             Value of non-proportionality parameter

        Parameter Explanation                                        r =0           r = 0.1       r = 0.2           r = 0.3

           μr     Mean of reservation wages                          2.82             2.82           2.82               2.82

           μy     Mean of wage offers                                2.75             2.75           2.75               2.75
                  Mean of the independent component of non-
           μη                                                        0.31             0.34           0.35               0.35
                  wage value of wage offer
           σx     Standard deviation of personal productivity        0.43             0.41           0.39               0.38

           σr     Standard deviation of the reservation wage         0.11             0.00           0.00               0.00

           σy     Standard deviation of the offered wage             0.24             0.27           0.30               0.31
                  Standard deviation of the independent
           ση                                                        0.34             0.39           0.42               0.42
                  component of non-wage value of wage offer
                 Compensating differential                          0.25             0.17           0.34               0.48
                  Standard deviation of offered job values
           σv                                                        0.38             0.45           0.46               0.45
                  (v = y + n )


           Table 12: Estimation Results for the Model with Non-Proportionality

   For the calibrations in Table 12 where we assumed that κr > 0.07, we assumed that the
measurement error was smaller so as to meet the moment condition for s2r̂ .

D.5     A model with endogenous search effort
Here we develop a job-ladder model with endogenous job-search effort, similar to Christensen,
Lentz, Mortensen, Neumann and Werwatz’s (2005), but with the addition of non-wage char-
acteristics of job offers. We generate simulated data from the model and re-estimate our
baseline specification using the simulations to investigate the potential effects of endogenous
effort on our parameter estimates. We use this approach because not all the parameters of
the extended model are identified by our survey data.
   The value functions are:

                                                                                                    Z
                     n                                         1      
       U (h, x) = max hex − cu (x, q) +                           max (1 − s)λu (q)
                                                                           W (h, x, ṽ)dFv (ṽ)
                          q                                  1 + ρ rv                                 rv
                                                                                o
                + ((1 − λu (q) + λu (q)Fv (rv ) + sλu (q)(1 − Fv (rv )))U (h, x)
                                                                  Z
                       n
                         v+x                   1 
    W (h, x, v) = max e       − ce (x, q) +         (1 − s)λe (q) W (h, x, ṽ)dFv (ṽ)
                    q                       1+ρ                    v
                                                                              o
                + (1 − s)(1 − λe (q) + λe (q)Fv (v))W (h, x, v) + sU (h, x) ,




                                                                72
where
                                                                                1
                                                      ci (q, x) = c(x)q 1+ γ
                                                        λi (q) = bi q,

and the FOCs are:
                               1 − s
                                       Z                                     
        cuq (x, qu∗ )   =   bu             (W (h, x, ṽ) − U (h, x))dFv (ṽ)
                               1 + ρ rv
                               1 − s
                                       Z                                       
      ceq (x, q(v)) =       be            (W (h, x, ṽ) − W (h, x, v))dFv (ṽ)
                               1+ρ v
                                                                               Z
                               x           ∗         1      
                                                                            ∗
                            he − cu (x, qu ) +          max (1 − s)λu (qu )         W (h, x, ṽ)dFv (ṽ)
                                                  1 + ρ rv                       rv
                                                                               
                        +   ((1 − (1 − s)λu (qu∗ )(1 − Fv (rv )))W (h, x, rv )
                                                                                    Z
                             rv +x           ∗           1                ∗
                        =   e      − ce (x, qe (rv )) +        (1 − s)λe (qe (rv ))     W (h, x, ṽ)dFv (ṽ)
                                                        1+ρ                          rv
                                                                                   
                        +   (1 − (1 − s)λe (qe∗ (rv ))(1 − Fv (rv )))W (h, x, rv ) ,

    Rearranging, using the functional form assumptions from above, and assuming propor-
tionality in search costs (c(x) = c0 ex ), gives
                                                           1
                                      c0 (1 + γ1 )(qu∗ ) γ       1−s
                                                                           Z
                                                               =                    (W (h, ṽ) − W (h, rv ))dFv (ṽ)
                                                 bu              1+ρ        rv
                                                           1
                                 c0 (1 + γ1 )qe∗ (v) γ           1−s
                                                                           Z
                                                               =                (W (h, ṽ) − W (h, v))dFv (ṽ)
                                              be                 1+ρ        v
                                  1                        1
          erv − h + c0 (qu∗ )1+ γ − c0 qe∗ (rv )1+ γ             1−s
                                                                           Z
                                                               =                    (W (h, ṽ) − W (h, rv ))dFv (ṽ)
                   bu qu∗ − be qe∗ (rv )                         1+ρ        rv

We follow HKV by assuming a finite upper bound v̄ to the offer distribution. Integrating by
parts, as in the online Appendix of HKV, and differentiating W (h, v), we get
                                                                  eṽ
                             Wv (h, ṽ) =             1−s                                ,
                                                  1 − 1+ρ (1 − be qe∗ (ṽ)(1 − Fv (ṽ)))

and
                                                                 Z v̄
                                            1           bu γ                 (1 − s)(1 − Fv (ṽ))
                                  qu∗ (rv ) γ         =                                                         eṽ dF(109)
                                                                                                                       v (ṽ)
                                                        c0 1 + γ rv ρ + s + (1 − s)be qe∗ (ṽ)(1 − Fv (ṽ)))
                                                                 Z v̄
                                              1         be γ                 (1 − s)(1 − Fv (ṽ))
                                      qe∗ (v) γ       =                                                         eṽ dF(110)
                                                                                                                       v (ṽ)
                                                        c0 1 + γ v ρ + s + (1 − s)be qe∗ (ṽ)(1 − Fv (ṽ)))
                        1                    1
erv − h + c0 (qu∗ )1+ γ − c0 qe∗ (rv )1+ γ
                                                        Z v̄
                                                                        1 − Fv (ṽ)
                                                      =                                             eṽ dFv (ṽ). (111)
     (1 − s)(bu qu∗ − be qe∗ (rv ))                                            ∗
                                                         rv ρ + s + (1 − s)be qe (ṽ)(1 − Fv (ṽ)))


                                                                73
D.5.1    Solution

To solve for the search effort of the employed and unemployed, we start with qe∗ (v̄) = 0 and
then use equation 110 to solve backwards from the top to the bottom of the job-ladder. We
solve for qu∗ (rv ) by combining equations 110 and 109.

D.5.2    Calibration

We use the parameter estimates from Table 2 and calibrate the parameters specific to the
model here the following way: Following Christensen, Lentz, Mortensen, Neumann and
Werwatz (2005), we set γ = 1.18, bu = be and target a weekly offer rate for an unemployed
worker at the median reservation wage of 0.058. Note that c0 is not separately identified
from bu and be , so we normalize them to 1, and choose c0 to match the offer rate of the media
unemployed worker. We also explore a calibration with bu = 1 and be = 0.5. The remaining
parameters are calibrated as for the main model in the paper.

D.5.3    Results

We simulate the model based on the calibration above and generate the 11 moments that go
into the estimation. Then we use the generated moments to estimate the 8 parameters of the
baseline model without search intensity. To the extent that the estimated parameters differ
from the true data generating process, this indicates that the results in Table 2 are biased
in the presence of endogenous search intensity. However, as the results in Table 13 show,
the estimated parameters are similar to the baseline estimates in the paper, suggesting that
endogenous search intensity does not lead to meaningful biases in our estimates. The main
reason for this result is that there is little dispersion in reservation wages and thus search
intensity, so almost no endogenous selection of job offers occurs based on the reservation
wage of the job seeker.

D.6     Multiple offers
We noted earlier that our concept of the offer distribution includes the effect of the auc-
tion that benefits a jobseeker who receives multiple simultaneous job offers. This appendix
explores the differences in our results when we adopt the alternative definition of the offer
distribution as describing all offers, including the ones that are excluded by the auction.
   In the survey, among those who received at least one offer in a given week, 86.3 percent
received exactly 1 offer, whereas 8.6 percent received 2 offers, 2.4 percent received 3 offers,
0.6 percent received 4 offers, and the remaining 2.1 percent received between 4 and 10 offers.
Because the survey only asked about the terms of the best offer, the occurrence of multiple


                                              74
                                                                         Data generated by model with
                                                                          endogenous search intensity

    Parameter Explanation                                     Baseline     be = bu       b e = 0.5b u

        μr    Mean of reservation wages                        2.825        2.825           2.825

        μy    Mean of wage offers                              2.747        2.747           2.747
              Mean of the independent component of non-
        μη                                                     0.312        0.312           0.315
              wage value of wage offer
        σx    Standard deviation of personal productivity      0.428        0.428           0.428

        σr    Standard deviation of the reservation wage       0.110        0.108           0.107

        σy    Standard deviation of the offered wage           0.238        0.237           0.237
              Standard deviation of the independent
        ση                                                     0.339        0.330           0.331
              component of non-wage value of wage offer
             Compensating differential                        0.247        0.269           0.270

              Standard deviation of offered job values
        σv                                                     0.384        0.373           0.374
              (v = y + n )


Table 13: Estimates Using Simulated Data from Model with Endogenous Search Intensity

offers may bias the estimates of our baseline model, which allows only one offer at a time.
To address this issue, we extend the baseline model and allow multiple offers in a given week
and then use only the best offer, the one with the highest value of v, to compute the moment
conditions. We use the probabilities of multiple offers from the survey (see above). Because
it is not possible to solve the moment conditions analytically, we estimated the model by
matching simulated moments.
   The results in the second column of Table 14 show that the estimated parameters are
similar to the ones in the baseline model. The dispersion of η is slightly higher, because of
the censoring of offers with low values of v. The estimated κ is slightly lower, to compensate
the effect of the the higher value of ση on the shape of the acceptance function.




                                                         75
                                                                                                             Model extensions


                                                                                                                                               Skew-normal x, y
     Parameter Explanation                                   Baseline   Multiple offers   v=log(e y +e n )   σ μη = σ εr        σ μη = 2σ εr
                                                                                                                                                    and r

        μr     Mean of reservation wages                       2.82          2.82              2.82              2.82               2.82             2.82

        μy     Mean of wage offers                             2.75          2.75              2.74              2.75               2.75             2.75
               Mean of the independent component of non-
        μη                                                     0.31          0.31              1.18              0.36               0.40             0.31
               wage value of wage offer
        σx     Standard deviation of personal productivity     0.43          0.43              0.44              0.43               0.43             0.43
76




        σr     Standard deviation of the reservation wage      0.11          0.11              0.07              0.11               0.11             0.11

        σy     Standard deviation of the offered wage          0.24          0.24              0.15              0.24               0.24             0.24
               Standard deviation of the independent
        ση                                                     0.34          0.37              1.44              0.38               0.40             0.32
               component of non-wage value of wage offer
              Compensating differential                       0.25          -0.01             0.05              0.04              -0.12             0.17

               Standard deviation of offered job values
        σv                                                     0.38          0.44              0.25              0.44               0.48             0.37
               (v = y + n )


                                Table 14: Results of Estimates of Further Extensions of the Baseline Model
   We also simulated the job-ladder model with multiple offers and found that the moments
of the prior wage distribution were similar to the ones in the baseline estimation: the mean
of the prior wage distribution was 2.88, compared to 2.91 in the baseline, and the standard
deviation remained unaffected at 0.52. The slightly lower mean of the prior wage distribution
is due to the fact that in the face of multiple job offers, selection of job offers based on n
rather than y becomes somewhat more pronounced.

D.7     Log-additivity of y and n
Our specification of multiplicative interaction of wage and non-wage job values, with v =
y + n, implies that the non-wage value n is more important for high-y jobs. In this extension,
we consider the alternative of additive interaction, with v = log(exp(y) + exp(n)), and
estimate the model by matching simulated moments. The results in the third column of
Table 14 show that the estimates of µη and ση differ from our baseline values because of
their different interpretations. The other parameters tend to be similar, though not exactly:
σy and σr is smaller, whereas σx is slightly larger in the modified model, and κ is slightly
smaller, too. The implied dispersion of v is quite a bit smaller, which is in part due to the
lower dispersion in y.
   The fit of the model is substantially worse compared to the baseline model. With the
weighted squared sum of deviations of the model moments from the data moments as a
measure of goodness of fit, the baseline model yields a value of 5.46, whereas this model
extension a value of 11.06. The additive model does not only in worse in fitting the shape of
the acceptance function, but also the moments related to the distributions of y and r. The
reason is that it is more difficult to fit the acceptance function for high values of σy and thus
the estimation trades off lower values of σy for a better fit of the moments related to the
job acceptance decision. We conclude that log-additivity of y and n is a better specification
than additivity.

D.8     Dispersion in µη
We extend our baseline model by allowing for heterogeneity among jobseekers in the mean
of the non-wage values, µη . We model the dispersion by specifying that µη is normally
distributed with mean µµη and standard deviation σµη :



                                    µη ∼ N (µµη , σµ2 η ),                                 (112)




                                               77
which implies that

                                         η ∼ N (µµη , ση2 + σµ2 η )                               (113)
                                   η − µη ∼ N (0, ση2 ).                                          (114)

D.8.1    Moment conditions

The first five moment conditions regarding the distribution of ŷ and r̂ remain the same, but
the moment conditions regarding the acceptance decision change to:



                 A(di ) = 1 − Φ(0, µm|di , σm|di ), i = 1, 2, 3, 4, 5                             (115)
                          Z Z r                                      
                                                    φ(v, µv , σv )
                    J =          Φ(0, µp|v , σp|v )                dv φ(r, µr , σr )dr,           (116)
                                                    Φ(r, µv , σv )

where m = v − r, d = ŷ − r̂ and p = (η − µη ) − (y − µy )(1 + κ). The functions µm|d , σm|d ,
µp|v and σp|v are determined by the parameters µy , µr , σy , σr , µµη , ση , σµη , κ, σ2ŷ and σ2r̂ ,
as follows:


                                       σm,d
                     µm|d = µm +            (d − µd )                                             (117)
                                        σd2
                                        2
                      2          2
                                       σm,d
                     σm|d    = σm   − 2                                                           (118)
                                        σd
                               ση − (1 − κ)(1 + κ)σy2
                                 2
                      µp|v   =                            (v − µv )                               (119)
                                            σv2
                       2
                                                     (ση2 − (1 − κ)(1 + κ)σy2 )2
                      σp|v   = σy2 (1 + κ)2 + ση2 −                              ,                (120)
                                                                  σv2

where

                                 µd = µy − µr                                                     (121)
                                 µm = µy + µµ η − µr                                              (122)
                                 σd2 = σy2 + σ2ŷ + σr2 + σ2r̂                                  (123)
                                  2
                                 σm = (1 − κ)2 σy2 + ση2 + σµ2 η + σr2                            (124)
                               σm,d = (1 − κ)σy2 + σr2                                            (125)
                                 µv = µy + µµ η                                                   (126)
                                 σv2 = (1 − κ)2 σy2 + ση2 + σµ2 η .                               (127)




                                                  78
D.8.2    Estimation and results

The model does not identify the dispersion of µη , as this would require a large sample of
multiple job offers per person, which the survey lacks. Instead, we perform a sensitivity
check, where we calibrate σµη to (1) the same and (2) twice as large as the measurement
error in r̂. The results in the Table 14 show that similar to measurement error the dispersion
µη tends to lead to lower values of κ. The estimated dispersion of η at the individual level,
ση , is slightly larger. The reason is that the lower value of κ not only affects the shape
of the acceptance function, but also tends to lower the fraction of rejections for non-wage
reasons. Therefore, higher values of ση compensate for the latter in the estimation. All other
parameters are essentially unaffected by the dispersion in µη .

D.9      Normality of x, y and r
As described in Section 4, the model misses the skewness (especially, of ŷ), and excess kur-
tosis, of ŷ and r̂. To achieve a better fit, we estimate a model whose distributions of x,
y and r follow the skew-normal distribution, which has three parameters: ξ (location), ω
(scale) and α (shape). The location parameter identifies the mean of the distribution, the
scale parameter identifies the variance, and the shape parameter the skewness and kurto-
sis. Compared to the baseline model with normal distributions, we have three additional
parameters in the estimation. We identify these additional parameters in the estimation, by
targeting the skewness and the kurtosis for r̂ and ŷ as additional moments from the data.
We estimate the model by matching simulated moments.
   We impose an upper limit of 50 for the αs—the relevant parameter for skewness and
kurtosis is δ̃ =   √ α   ,   which converges to 1 for high values of α. A value of α = 50 implies
                    1+α2
δ̃ = 0.9998, very close to the maximum skewness with the skew-normal distribution. Because
of this property, the estimate and sampling distribution of α are meaningless. Instead, we
report the value and standard error of δ and the corresponding values of the skewness and
excess kurtosis, with standard errors.
    As shown in Table 15, our estimates for the shape parameter δ are 0.969 for the distribu-
tion of x, 0.9998 for the distribution of y, and 0.922 for the distribution of r. Bootstrapped
standard errors, based on 10 repetitions, for the δs are 0.016, 0.000, and 0.658, respectively.
δr has a relatively high standard error, but with limited impact on the standard error of the
skewness of r̂, because the distribution of r̂ is dominated by the moments of x rather than
r due to x’s much higher variance. The standard errors of the model’s fitted skewness and
kurtosis were in the range of 0.05-0.06 for the distributions of both ŷ and r̂, which is rather
small.


                                                  79
                   Parameters                Estimate            S.e.
                         δx                   0.969             0.016
                            δy                0.9998            0.000
                            δr                 0.922            0.658

                   Fitted moments            Estimate            S.e.
                     Skewness of ŷ             0.51              0.06
                     Skweness of ȓ             0.58              0.05
                      Kurtosis of ŷ            3.30              0.05
                      Kurtosis of ȓ            3.41              0.05

      Table 15: Parameter Estimates of δ and Additional Fitted Moments of ŷ and r̂

   For consistency with the results for other extensions in Table 14, the column for the
extension to skew-normal distributions does not show the estimated parameter values of the
those distributions (ξ, ω, and α), but rather shows the fitted values of the moments that
correspond to the parameters in the baseline estimation (means and standard deviations).
These moments are µy , µr , σx , σy and σr , which are all the means and standard deviations
of the skew-normal distributions. The results show that these 5 fitted moments as well as
the parameters µη , ση and κ are similar to the baseline parameter estimates. Therefore,
we conclude that assuming normality in x, y and r does not lead to meaningful biases in
the estimated parameters. For example, our key conclusion that non-wage job values have
greater dispersion than the offered wage, conditional on personal productivity, applies with
equal force in the model extended to skew-normal distributions of x, y and r.
   The skew-normal distributions do a substantially better job of fitting the skewness and
kurtosis of the distributions of ŷ and r̂. The skewness of ŷ is 0.51 and the skewness of r̂ is
0.57 in the model, compared to 0.79 and 0.59 in the data. The excess kurtosis in the model
is 0.30 for ŷ and 0.41 for r̂, compared to 0.30 and 0.06 in the data. In the baseline model, the
skewness and excess kurtosis are zero for both variables, as they are taken to be normal. The
extended model cannot match both the skewness and kurtosis of these distributions, as those
moments are controlled by the single parameter α. A second reason is that the skew-normal
distribution has an upper bound in skewness, which is binding for y. The model could fit
the skewness in ŷ better by allowing for more skewness in x but this would lead to too much
skewness in r̂.


                                               80
E     The Distribution of Values in Non-Market Activities
This section presents the details of the job-ladder model where search on the job is less
effective than search while unemployed, and derives the implied distribution of values in
non-market activities h for a given distribution of reported reservation wages r. We start by
defining the value functions of the unemployed and employed worker of type (h, x), where h
stands for the flow value of non-work and x for personal productivity. The value functions
in discrete time become:

                                                                    Z
                                      1
              U (h, x) = ĥ(h, x) +      max (1 − s)λu                      W (h, x, ṽ)dFv (ṽ|x)
                                    1 + ρ rv                           rv
                                                                                           !
                        + ((1 − λu + λu Fv (rv ) + sλu (1 − Fv (rv |x)))U (h, x)
                                                         Z
                             v̂(v,x)      1
           W (h, x, v) = e             +     (1 − s)λe       W (h, x, ṽ)dFv (ṽ|x)
                                         1+ρ             v
                                                                                           !
                        + (1 − s)(1 − λe + λe Fv (v|x))W (h, x, v) + sU (h, x) ,


where ρ is the discount rate, λu the offer rate while unemployed, λe the offer rate while
employed, s the separation rate, U (h, x) the value of being unemployed for type (h, x),
W (h, x, v) the value of being employed with flow value ev̂(v,x) for type (h, x). Note that
v̂(v, x) is the log of the flow value during employment, whereas ĥ(h, x) is the flow value during
unemployment, which is expressed in absolute values in order to allow for negative values.
Under the assumption of proportionality, ĥ(h, x) = hex , v̂(v, x) = v + x and dFv (v|x) =
dFv (v), and thus:
                                                                   Z
                                  x1
                 U (h, x) = he +      max (1 − s)λu                      W (h, x, ṽ)dFv (ṽ)
                                 1 + ρ rv                           rv
                                                                                           !
                           + ((1 − λu + λu Fv (rv ) + sλu (1 − Fv (rv )))U (h, x)
                                                         Z
                                v+x       1
              W (h, x, v) = e          +     (1 − s)λe           W (h, x, ṽ)dFv (ṽ)
                                         1+ρ                 v
                                                                                            !
                           + (1 − s)(1 − λe + λe Fv (v))W (h, x, v) + sU (h, x) ,


The reservation value rv satisfies U (h, x) = W (h, x, rv (h, x)) and thus:


                                                81
                                                  Z
                    x1
    U (h, x) = he +     (1 − s)λu                               W (h, x, ṽ)dFv (ṽ)
                    1+ρ                             rv (h,x)
                                                                                                              !
             + ((1 − λu + λu Fv (rv (h, x)) + sλu (1 − Fv (rv (h, x))))W (h, x, rv (h, x))
                                                            Z
                   rv (h,x)+x      1
             = e                +     (1 − s)λe                         W (h, x, ṽ)dFv (ṽ)
                                  1+ρ                        rv (h,x)
                                                                                                                  !
             + (1 − s)(1 − λe + λe Fv (rv (h, x)))W (h, x, rv (h, x)) + sW (h, x, rv (h, x)) ,


which can be simplified to

                                                                  Z
                              1  x
             U (h, x) = he +     (1 − s)λu                                     W (h, x, ṽ)dFv (ṽ)
                             1+ρ                                    rv (h,x)
                                                                                                        !
                        + ((1 − (1 − s)λu (1 − Fv (rv (h, x))))W (h, x, rv (h, x))
                                                                          Z
                                rv (h,x)+x      1
                        = e                  +     (1 − s)λe                           W (h, x, ṽ)dFv (ṽ)
                                               1+ρ                          rv (h,x)
                                                                                                       !
                        + ((1 − (1 − s)λe (1 − Fv (rv (h, x))))W (h, x, rv (h, x))


and solving for h, we get

                                                                                                                       !
                               1−s
                                              Z
h = erv (h,x) − e−x (λu − λe )                            W (h, x, ṽ)dFv (ṽ) − (1 − Fv (rv (h, x)))W (h, x, rv (h, x))
                               1+ρ             rv (h,x)
                                                                                                              !
                                1−s
                                              Z
   = erv (h,x) − e−x (λu − λe )                           (W (h, x, ṽ) − W (h, x, rv (h, x)))dFv (ṽ) .
                                1+ρ            rv (h,x)


We follow HKV and assume that there is a finite upper bound v̄ to the offer distribution.
Integrating by parts, as in the online Appendix of HKV, we get




                                                           82
                                    1 − s v̄
                                             Z
                rv (h,x)       −x
     h = e         − e (λu − λe )                  (W (h, x, ṽ) − W (h, x, (rv (h, x))))dFv (ṽ)
                                    1 + ρ rv (h,x)
                                    1−s
       = erv (h,x) − e−x (λu − λe )         [[(W (h, x, ṽ) − W (h, x, rv (h, x)))Fv (ṽ)]v̄rv (h,x)
                                    1+ρ
            Z v̄
         −           Wv (h, x, ṽ)dFv (ṽ)]
                    rv (h,x)
                                                              v̄
                                          1−s
                                                          Z
                rv (h,x)       −x
         = e               − e (λu − λe )                                Wv (h, x, ṽ)(1 − Fv (ṽ))dṽ,
                                          1+ρ              rv (h,x)

and differentiating W (h, x, v), we get

                                                             eṽ+x
                               Wv (h, x, ṽ) =       1−s                        ,
                                                 1 − 1+ρ (1 − λe (1 − Fv (ṽ)))

and, therefore,
                                                                   "                                  #
                                                      v̄
                                    1−s                                         1 − Fv (ṽ)
                                                 Z
         h = erv (h,x) − (λu − λe )                                        1−s                          eṽ dṽ,
                                    1+ρ              rv (h,x)          1 − 1+ρ (1 − λe (1 − Fv (ṽ)))

   which can be simplified to

                                                     v̄                                               
                                                                                 1 − Fv (ṽ)
                                                 Z
              rv (h,x)
        h=e              − (λu − λe )(1 − s)                                                             eṽ dṽ.   (128)
                                                 rv (h,x)              ρ + s + (1 − s)λe (1 − Fv (ṽ))

and thus rv (h, x) = rv (h), which implies that one can define value functions U (h) and W (h, v)
such that:

                                             U (h, x) = U (h)ex
                                         W (h, x, v) = W (h, v)ex .

   As explained in the main text, we treat the reported reservation wage as the lowest wage
a jobseeker will accept for a job with a reference level of its non-wage value of zero, and
thus the reservation wage function is r(h) = rv (h). The inverse function H(r) = r−1 (h), will
give the value of non-market activities implied by the job-ladder model for a given observed
reservation wage r, and is defined by:
                                         Z v̄                                   
                    r                                    1 − Fv (ṽ)
           H(r) = e − (λu − λe )(1 − s)                                            eṽ dṽ, (129)
                                          r     ρ + σ + (1 − s)λ e (1 − Fv (ṽ))
where                                                                           1 − Fv (r)            
                 H 0 (r) = er 1 + (λu − λe )(1 − s)                                                      .          (130)
                                                                        ρ + σ + (1 − s)λe (1 − Fv (r))

                                                                   83
    Therefore, given the distribution of reported reservation wages r, one can find the distri-
bution of values of non-market activities h, by solving:

                                            Fr (r) = Fh (H(r)),                                          (131)


                                        fr (r) = fh (H(r))H 0 (r).                                       (132)


F         The Distribution of Wages in the Job-Ladder Model
Let u be the fraction of the labor force unemployed and let Fe (v|h) be the fraction of the
labor force employed at a job value not higher than v. Note that Fe (v|h) is not a cdf;
rather, Fe (∞|h) = 1 − u(h), the fraction employed among those with non-work value h. The
transition equation for the unemployment rate is

                    u(h)0 = s(1 − u(h)) + [1 − (1 − s)λu (1 − Fv (rv (h)))]u(h),                         (133)

so the ergodic unemployment rate is
                                                         s
                                u∗ (h) =                                   .                             (134)
                                           s + (1 − s)λu (1 − Fv (rv (h)))
The transition equation for the value distribution is
                                                              Z   v0
      0                        0
 Fe (v |h) = (1 − s)λu (Fv (v ) − Fv (rv (h)))u + (1 − s)               (1 − λe + λe Fv (v 0 ))dFe (v|h), (135)
                                                               rv (h)

The first term says that a fraction (1 − s)λu (Fv (v 0 ) − Fv (rv (h))) of the unemployed find jobs
with values not greater than v 0 . The second term says that a fraction 1 − s of those currently
employed at value no greater than v do not suffer an exogenous shock sending them into
unemployment. Among the survivors, a fraction 1 − λe receive no offer and remain at value
v 0 = v. A fraction λe Fv (v) receive an offer no better than the current job and a fraction
λe (Fv (v 0 ) − Fv (v)) take a better job with value no greater than v 0 . Then

     Fe (v 0 |h) = (1 − s)λu (Fv (v 0 ) − Fv (h))u(h) + (1 − s)(1 − λe + λe Fv (v 0 ))Fe (v 0 |h),       (136)

because Fe (rv (h)|h) = 0.
    The ergodic distribution Fe satisfies

    Fe (v|h) = (1 − s)λu (Fv (v) − Fv (rv (h)))u∗ (h) + (1 − s)(1 − λe + λe Fv (v))Fe (v|h).             (137)

Integrating over h, we have
          Z v
 Fe (v) =     (1 − s)λu (Fv (v) − Fv (rv (h)))u∗ (h)dFh (h) + (1 − s)(1 − λe + λe Fv (v))Fe (v). (138)

                                                     84
where                                               Z   v
                                         Fe (v) =           Fe (v|h)dFh (h).                 (139)

Finally,                        Rv
                                     (1 − s)λu (Fv (v) − Fv (rv (h)))u∗ (h)dFh (h)
                     Fe (v) =                                                      .         (140)
                                         1 − (1 − s)(1 − λe + λe Fv (v))

F.1        Fv and dFv
The distribution of job values among job offers is
                                        Z
                                Fv (v) = Fy (v − n)dFn (n).                                  (141)

and its differential is                           Z
                                    dFv (v) =           dFy (v − n)dFn (n).                  (142)


F.2        Fe
The distribution of job values among the employed is

                                                                 N (v)
                                                Fe (v) =               ,                     (143)
                                                                 D(v)

where                           Z   v
                     N (v) =            (1 − s)λu (Fv (v) − Fv (rv (h)))u∗ (h)dFh (h),       (144)


                            D(v) = 1 − (1 − s)(1 − λe + λe Fv (v)),                          (145)

and
                                                           s
                               u∗ (h) =                                      .               (146)
                                             s + (1 − s)λu (1 − Fv (rv (h)))
Then                                                                 Z   v
                          dN (v) = (1 − s)λu dFv (v)                         u∗ (h)dFh (h)   (147)

and
                                         dD(v) = −(1 − s)λe dFv (v).                         (148)

Finally,
                                                  dN (v) N (v)dD(v)
                                    dFe (v) =           −           .                        (149)
                                                   D(v)     D(v)2




                                                            85
F.3    Fw (w)
                                                Z Rw
                                    1                 fn (v − y)dFy (y)
                         Fw (w) =                 R−∞
                                                   ∞                    dFe (v),      (150)
                                  1 − u∗              f (v − y)dFy (y)
                                                   −∞ n

where u∗ =       u∗ (h)dFh (h). Note that
             R

                                                          Z
                                             1
                                  Fw (w) =                    Fy (w|v)dFe (v),        (151)
                                           1 − u∗

and thus with log-normal distributed variables, Fy (y|v) is the cdf of a normal distribution
with the following mean and variance:

                                            (1 − κ)σy2
                           µy|v   = µy +                    (v − µy − µη )            (152)
                                         (1 − κ)2 σy2 + ση2
                            2
                                            σy2 ση2
                           σy|v =                         .                           (153)
                                       (1 − κ)2 σy2 + ση2

F.4    Fr̂ (r̂), Fŷ (ŷ), Fw (ŵ)
                                                Z
                                   Fr̂ (r̂) =       Fh (H(r̂ − x))dFx (x),            (154)

                                                    Z
                                     Fŷ (ŷ) =         Fy (ŷ − x)dFx (x),           (155)

and                                                 Z
                                    Fŵ (ŵ) =          Fw (ŵ − x)dFx (x).           (156)


G     Measuring the Job-to-Job Transition Rate
G.1     The rate in the CPS data
Following Fallick and Fleischman (2004), we measure job-to-job transitions in the CPS data
using information from a question that asked whether a person worked at the same employer
as last month for those who were employed both this and last month (the variable puiodp1 ).
We compute the job-to-job transition rate as the fraction of workers changing employers be-
tween two consecutive monthly CPS interviews, excluding the 1st and 5th interview because
no information on previous employer is available in these interviews. We restrict our sample
to those of age 20 to 65 and compute the average monthly job-to-job transition rate in the
years 2009 and 2010, which is 0.019.




                                                         86
G.2     Computing the monthly transition rate in the model
In the model, we compute the monthly job-to-job transition rate as measured in the CPS,
  CP S
Tee    , as:

                                       CP S     P1m    1m
                                                 ee + Peue
                                      Tee   =                                               (157)
                                                   P1m
                                                    e

where P1m
       ee is the probability of at least one job-to-job transition over the period of 1 month,
P1m
 eue is the probability of at least one intermittent spell of unemployment over the period
of 1 month, and P1m
                 e  is the probability of being employed in the next CPS interview in one
month from now. We compute the monthly probabilities as a weighted average of a 4-week
probability and a 5-week probability, given that the average month in a year has a duration
of 4.33 weeks, that is,



                                 P1m
                                  ee = 0.67P4w        5w
                                            ee + 0.33Pee

                                 P1m
                                  ee = 0.67P4w         5w
                                            eue + 0.33Peue

                                 P1m
                                  ee = 0.67P4w       5w
                                            e + 0.33Pe .


    The probability of at least one job-to-job transition, P4w
                                                            ee , is the probability of not sepa-
rating in the next 4 weeks multiplied by one minus the probability of no job-to-job transition
in the next 4 weeks:

                             P4w          4               4
                              ee = (1 − s) (1 − (1 − Tee ) ),


and analogously for the 5-week period.
   The probability of at least one intermittent spell of unemployment, P4w
                                                                        eue , is


          P4w          2
           eue =(1 − s) sf + (1 − s)s(f (1 − s)

                 + f (1 − f )) + sf ((1 − s)2 + sf ) + s(1 − f )(f (1 − s) + f (1 − f )),

and analogously for the 5-week period.
   The probability of being employed in 4 weeks from now, P4w
                                                           e , is the sum of the probability
of not being separated in the next 4 weeks and the probability of at least one intermittent
spell of unemployment in the next 4 weeks:

                                  P4w         4   4w
                                   e = (1 − s) + Peue ,


and analogously for the 5 week period.


                                                87
   We take the weekly separation rate, s = 0.0041, and compute the average weekly job-
finding rate and job-to-job transition rate in the model,
                                                Z
                             f = λu (1 − s) (1 − Fv (r))dF (r)                        (158)
                                     Z
                            Tee =       Tee (v)dF (v),                                (159)

and then compute the monthly rate as explained above. For the baseline specification, we
get P1m            1m                1m                    CP S
     ee = 0.0200, Peue = 0.0012 and Pe = 0.9836, and thus Tee   = 0.0216. This estimate
implies that time aggregation bias accounts only for 0.12 percentage points (or 5.6 percent)
of the job-to-job transition rate measured in the CPS data.




                                            88
